 
19 
 
 NINETEEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2006-07) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on  
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Textiles for the year 2006-2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 December 2006 
  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  13 December 2006 
 
 
 
            
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December   2006/ Agrahayana,1928 (Saka) 

 1
  
CONTENTS 
 
       
    P A G E    
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE   (iii) 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N           
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………    
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
accepted by the Government………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s reply…………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration…………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
which  replies of the Government  are interim  
in nature    …………. 
 
APPENDIX-I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 6.12.2006  
 
APPENDIX-II Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 3
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
      (2006-2007) 
  
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Subrata Bose    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot    
6. Shri Munawar Hassan    
7. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
9. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan   
10. Shri Virendra Kumar     
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
12. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil   
13. Shri Devidas Pingle  
14. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
15. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat   
    16. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat   
17. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
  18. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  19. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam 
  20. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  21. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
22.       Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
23.       Shri Gandhi Azad 
24.       Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
25.       Shri Dilip Ray 
      26.       Shri Rahul Bajaj 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri S.K. Sharma  -           Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri N.K. Sapra   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.S. Misra   - Director  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
 

 2
   
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been authorised  by the 
Committee to submit the  Report on their behalf, present this Nineteenth Report on the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants-2006-2007 
relating to Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The  Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also  laid in  Rajya Sabha on  17 May 2006.  
The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies indicating action taken on the recommendations 
contained in that Report on  11 September 2006.   The report was considered and adopted by the 
Standing Committee on Labour at their sitting held on  6 December 2006 . 
 
3. The Report has been divided into the following chapters:- 
 
I. Report. 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by Government. 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government’s reply. 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration. 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respec t of which replies of the Government 
are interim in nature. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the  Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix. 
 
5. For the facility of reference recommendations/observations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;             SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY   
6 December, 2006                          CHAIRMAN  
15 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
   

 4
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants for the year 2006-2007. 
 
1.2 The Fourteenth Report was presented to Lok Sa bha and was also laid in Rajya Sabha on  
17 May 2006.  It contained 15 reco mmendations.  Replies of Govern ment in respect of all the 
recommendations have been examined and are categorised as under: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos. 1, 3, 9, 10 and 15. (Total 5 – Chapter-II). 
  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire  to  pursue  in 
view of the  replies  of  the Government: 
 
Paragraph  Sl.  Nos. 2, 6 and  11 (Total 3 - Chapter  III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos. 4, 5, 7,  12, 14 (Total 5 - Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which replies are of interim in 
nature: 
  
Paragraph Sl. Nos. 8 and 13 (Total 2- Chapter V)  
 
1.3 The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the recommendation as 
indicated at (iv) above, for which only interim replies have been given by the 
Government should be furnished to th e Committee within three months of the 
presentation of the Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of these 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Textile Workers’ Rehabilitation Fund Scheme (TWRFS)  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para 3.16) 
 
1.5 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that  32,668 workers of 78 Mills, which 
were closed during the last 3 years, have not received any re lief under Textile Workers Relief 

 5
Fund Scheme even though they are eligible to r eceive relief under the Scheme. To seek benefits 
under the Scheme State Governments have to give  approval for closure of units under Section 
25(O) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or an Official Liquidator has to be appointed under 
Companies Act, 1956 for the purpose of windi ng up the unit. As the State Governments are 
reluctant to give approval to the closure of units since they  do not want to be judged as 
unfriendly to workers and due to prolonged proceedings in BIFR/High Courts before the 
appointment of Official Liquidator, the workers have to wait very long for receiving benefits 
under the Scheme. Only 6,864 workers of 23 Mills,  which were closed between 1985 and 1998 
have been given relief under the Scheme. The Comm ittee take a serious view of this as the very 
purpose of the TWRFS is defeated due to such inordinate delay in pr oviding relief to the 
workers. The Committee strongly feel that re lief to workers should be provided immediately 
after the closure of the Mills to enable them to run their families without difficulty while 
switching over to a new job or for making alte rnate arrangement for livelihood. The Committee, 
therefore, recommended that guidelines of the TWRFS should be amended and the requirements 
of permission under Section 25(O) and appointment of Official Liquidator under Companies Act, 
1956 should be done away with. Instead, the job should be entrusted to a very senior officer of 
the Office of the Textile Commissioner who should visit the mill and after due verification give 
approval for the disbursement of relief to the eligible workers immediately but within three 
months positively. The Committee further recommended that for und ue delay in the process, 
personal responsibility of the concerned office r should be fixed. The st eps taken and progress 
achieved should be intimated to the Committee within a period of three months. 
 
 1.6 In response to the above recommendation, the Ministry of Textiles in its action taken 
reply has stated as follows:- 
  
“To ensure the fairness of the Scheme and effectively control malpractices, the 
involvement of  the State Governments and  requirements of permission under Section 
25(O) and appointment of Offi cial Liquidator under Companie s Act, 1956 are essential. 
Government is also concerned to note that the workers get relief after a long time. Since 
the textile mills are a subject matter for the  State Governments, their  involvement  
cannot be by-passed”.  

 6
 
1.7 The Committee are not convinced with th e reply furnished by the Government 
insofar as the approval of State Governments for closure of mills under section 25 (O) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is required.  They are of the view  that some relaxation 
should be made in the presen t Act in the larger interest of  textile workers so that the 
benefits of the Textile Workers Relief Fund Scheme (TWRFS) reach   the needy workers 
and the objective of the TWRFS are fulfille d without any procedural hindrance.  The 
contention of the Government that “to ensu re the fairness of the Scheme and effectively 
control malpractices, the involvement of  the State Governments and  requirements of 
permission under Section 25(O) and appointment of Official Liquidator under Companies 
Act, 1956 are essential” is not sustainable.  Under the garb of the fairness and involvement 
of State Governments, disbur sement of relief to workers cannot and should not be 
procrastinated indefinitely. The Committee are least satisfied with the reply given by the 
Government to their recommendation.  When the Government is not in a position to 
provide relief in time to the affected workers even though they are e ligible to receive the 
same, the very purpose of the Textile Work ers Relief Fund Scheme is defeated.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Government to 
take immediate steps as recomme nded by them earlier.  The steps taken and the progress 
achieved should be intimated to the Co mmittee within a period of three months.

 7
B. National Textile Corporation Limited 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5 Para No.3.28) 
 
 1.8 The Committee have noted that out of 52 viable NTC mills, 22 mills are proposed to be 
modernized in two phases and the remaining 29 mills are proposed to be modernized through 
joint venture with private entrepreneurs.  In this regard, a draft modified revival scheme has been 
submitted to BIFR for its approval.   All the mills are proposed to be modernized before the end  
of financial year 2007-08.  In the first phase 15  mills have been taken up for modernization.  
However, the order has been placed for purchasing new machinery for the modernization of only 
5 mills.  As such, it is to be seen whether NTC would be able to complete the modernization of 
the 15 mills before the end of 2007-08.  The Co mmittee are least satisfied of the manner in 
which the entire programme of modernization is  being tackled.  The Committee, therefore,  
recommended that a realistic time-table should  be prepared by the Mi nistry for the early 
modernization of all viable mills and prompt a nd concrete steps should be taken accordingly for 
the expeditious approval of modified Revival Scheme by BIFR.  The steps taken and the 
progress achieved in this rega rd should be communicated to th e Committee within a period of 
three months positively. 
 
 1.9 Reply of the Government to the above recommendation is as follows:- 
 
“For the 22 mills to be modernized by NTC itself, a phased, mill-wise negotiated 
schedule of implementation has been prepared and the work is projected to be completed 
by December, 2007 for all  22 mills.  Orders are being placed accordingly for all the 22 
mills in respect of all the preparatory machin ery after finalization of rates and suppliers.  
Pre-requisite civil, electrical and humidification work will be completed  before arrival of 
new machinery in the mills as per the schedule of implementation.  For two items of 
machinery, viz. Ring Frames and Simplex Frames, orders have been placed for 5 mills on 
trial run basis, while for the preparatory machines of 12 mills order placement has 
already been completed in June, 2006 itself.  For a few items of machinery where rates 
and suppliers could not be fina lized due to constraints, fres h tenders have already been 
received and are being finalized immediately. 
 
The Modified Revival Scheme of NTC ha s been approved by the BIFR in its 
hearing held on 28th March, 2006, envisaging the following : 
 
(a)  Merger of all the 9 subsidiaries with the Holding Company w.e.f. 
01.04.2005. 
(b) Investment in Handicraft Plaza at  Ahmedabad and India International 
Trade Tower in Mumbai with condition that the capital expenditure for 
these items shall be met out of funds from sale of surplus assets.  
(c)  NTC’s proposal for Joint Venture is  permitted after proper procedure of 
approvals from the Government. 
(d)  Implementation of Revival Sc heme has been extended upto 31.03.2008. 
(e)   Govt. of India will consider convert ing unsecured loans into equity to the 
extent required in order to make the net worth positive as early as possible, 
besides considering waiver of intere st on the unsecured loans provided by 
it as per the sanctioned Scheme. 
 

 8
Action is being taken by NTC/GOI to im plement the Modified Rehabilitation 
Scheme within the stipulated time frame”. 
  
1.10 While noting the reply of the Ministry for mo dernization of NTC mills, the Committee observe 
that the Ministry has not furnished any comment in respect of the modernization of 29 mills which are 
proposed to be modernized through joint venture with private entrepreneurs.  They, while appreciating 
the Government for preparation of millwise negotiated schedule of implementation in respect of 22 mills 
in a phased manner, recommend that such a time fr ame should also be proposed in respect of the 29 
mills as well  in consultation with private entreprene urs. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge upon the Mi nistry to chalk out a realistic time bound sc hedule but not more 
than a year, to modernize all the 52 viable NTC mills  by taking definite steps in that direction including 
the implementation of the modified revival scheme of NTC by BIFR.  

 9
C. Decentralised Powerloom Sector 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 7 PARA – 3.44) 
 
1.11 The Committee are constrained to note that  powerloom sector has not received the due 
attention of the Government it deserves, even though this sector constitutes 68% of the total cloth 
production of the country and provides empl oyment to about 48.15 lakh persons.  The 
Government has introduced 20% Credit Link ed Capital Subsidy Sc heme (CLCS) since 
November,2003.  Only 522 powerloom units have availed the subsidy so far out of 4,30,718 
units in the country.  Since  2003-04 only Rs.23.90 crore have been availed by Powerloom sector  
out of  Rs.9564.86 crore disbursed to the entire  textile sector throug h TUFS.  The reasons 
identified for the backwardness of powerloom sect or are lack of awareness of programmes, lack 
of confidence in approaching lending agencies, unfamiliarity with rules and paper work, shortage 
of margin money, insufficiency of collateral, et c.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should take urgent steps to e ducate the entrepreneurs of Powe rlooms through its field offices 
about the latest developments in the field, be nefits of the development schemes including 20% 
CLCS and means of approaching lending agencies. Lending agencies should be instructed to take 
proactive steps to go to powerloom units and explain to them the features and utility of lending 
facilities.  The Committee are of  the view that modernisation of powerloom sector is very 
essential for achieving the future target set for the textile sector and to be competitive at the 
international level particularly to defeat import penetration du e to globalization.   Therefore, the 
Committee recommended that an Integrated  Sche me should be formulated for the development 
of the powerloom sector and its financial interv ention should take care of needs of Powerloom 
units with regard to margin money, collateral, etc. 
 
  
 1.12 In response to the above recommendation, the Ministry of Textiles in its action taken 
reply has stated as follows:- 
  
“It is true that only 522 powerloom units availed the benefit of 20% CLCS till 31-3-2006.  
However, it may be stated that there is encouraging response si nce inception of this 
scheme. While only 4 units availed the subsidy during 2003-04, the figure has risen to 
150 units during 2004-05 and 368 units during 2005-06. The entire fund allocated for this 
scheme has been utilised fully during these year s. During the current year it is expected 
that the number of applications will be much more and the total subsidy may reach 
around  Rs.70-80 crores. 
 
In the 21 st IMSC meeting held  on  21 st July,  2006 under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (Textiles), the request of the powerloom industry for raising the project limit of 
the powerloom units from th e existing level of Rs. 1.00 crore to Rs. 2.00 crore and 
providing of 20% capital subs idy on the same was considered. The committee approved 
this request and recommended to enhance the project limit to Rs. 2.00 crore from the 
existing limit of Rs. 1.00 crore and further approved the 20% capital subsidy on the same.  
The Office of Textile Commissioner has been taking various measures to educate the 
powerloom entrepreneurs through their field offices (Regional Offices of the Office of 
the Textile Commissioner & Powerloom Se rvice Centres) by conducting seminars, 
workshops and through personal visits to th e powerloom units to explain the latest 
developments, various schemes available fo r the industry and assisting them in 
preparation of project report, application for Bank loan, etc.  The representatives of the 

 10
institutions, Banks, etc. are also being invited to atte nd the seminar and workshops. 
Model projects have also been prepared by Regional Offices of Textile Commissioner for 
the benefit of Powerloom sector.  Recen tly, “Handbook on Powerlooms” has also been 
published by the O/o the Text ile Commissioner to cover all topics related to the 
Powerlooms sector. 
 
The problems of the decentralised Powe rlooms sector and the schemes being 
implemented were discussed in the meeting of the AIPB under the Chairmanship of the 
Hon’ble Ministry of Textiles, in which o fficials of different State Governments, 
representatives of the industry and the officials of Ministry of Textiles, Financial 
Institutions and Planning Commission participated. Sugge stions of the members are 
examined and necessary action is taken therea fter. Government is more sympathetic to 
and  concerned about the problems of the sm all-scale powerloom units and, therefore, 
several modifications have been effected to  the TUF Scheme to suit the needs of small-
scale units. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 11
 
1.13 The Committee having been constrained to note that powerloom sector has not received   
attention of the Government it deserves, even though this sector constitutes 68% of the total cloth 
production of the country and provides employment to  about 48.15 lakh persons had recommended that 
an Integrated Scheme should be formulated for the development of the pow erloom sector and its 
financial intervention should take ca re of needs of the Powerloom units  with regard to margin money, 
collateral, etc.  The Committee are dismayed to note that the Government has not taken due cognizance 
of the recommendation of the Committee as its repl y is silent on the Integrated Scheme for the 
development of the Powerloom Sector.  Since Powerl ooms play a pivotal role in the production of cloth 
and are a great contributor in the process of nati onal development, it is imperative to activate its 
modernisation and growth.  The Committee, therefor e, reiterate their earlier recommendation that an 
Integrated Scheme should be ch alked out and implemented for th e development of the Powerloom 
Sector.  Steps taken in this direction may be intimated to the Committee at the earliest. 
 
D.   Jute Textile Industry 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 12 PARA – 3.58) 
 
 
1.14 The Committee note that Jute Industry supports 4 million farm families besides providing 
direct employment to about 2.6 lakh industrial workers and livelihood to another 1.4 lakh people.  
However, actual potential of the jute sector is yet to be realized.  In this regard, the Ministry has 
proposed four major steps, viz. creation of Natural Jute Board, se tting up of National Institute of 
Jute Fibre, launching of Jute Technology Mi ssion and opening a Jute Museum.  Among these 
proposals, Jute Technology Mission is at the proposal stage for quite sometime now which 
speaks volumes about the sincerity of the purpose.  The Committee recommended that 
expeditious steps should   be taken now fo r launching of Technology Mission without any 
further delay. The urgent steps should as well be initiated for the implementation of other 
proposals for the development of the Jute Industry.   
   
1.15 In response to the above recommendation, the Ministry of Textiles in its action taken 
reply has stated as follows:- 
  
“For the purpose of creation of a National Jute  Board, as envisaged in the National Jute 
Policy, 2005, the National Jute Board Bill, 2006 was prepared in consultation with the 
M/o Law & Justice, Legislative Deptt.  The said Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 
22.5.2006.  The Bill has been referred by the Lok Sabha Sectt. to the Standing Committee 
on Labour for examination.  The Committee made field visits to Kolkata, Guwahati etc. 
during 19
th to 25th July, 2006 and held meetings with va rious Associations/Stakeholders.  
The Committee desired the comments/views of  this Ministry on va rious representations 
received by them and same have been fu rnished by the Ministry of Textiles.  The 
recommendations of the Standing Committee on Labour is awaited.  On receipt of the 
same, the National Jute Board Bill, 2006 is likely to be discussed in the Parliament during 
its forthcoming Winter Session, 2006.  
 
As regards the creation of National Institute of Natural Fibres  (NINF) it has been 
decided to establish NINF on a vacant plot under the possession of Ministry of Textiles at 
Noida.  The Jute Manufactures Development Council (JMDC) has been entrusted the task 
of completing the modalities for establishing the NINF.  In this regard, the JMDC has 

 12
appointed WEBCON, a consultancy firm to fo rmulate the detailed Project Report for the 
same. 
 
As regards the establishment of National Jute & Jute Textile Museum is 
concerned, it has been proposed by Ministry  of Textiles that the vacant accommodation 
available in Indian Jute Indus tries Research Association (IJI RA) premises is suitable for 
establishing the proposed Museum.  Moreove r, it has been proposed  that the Museum 
may be established under the Public-Private Partnership mode by involving the Ministry 
of Textiles, the Indian Jute Industries Re search Association and Indian Jute Mill 
Associations.  The draft MOU has been prep ared and sent to the IJIRA and IJMA for 
their acceptance. 
 
Regarding Jute Technology Mission the same has been approved by the 
Competent Authority and further follow up action is being taken to formally launch the 
Scheme”. 
 
  

 13
 
1.16 The Committee fail  to understand that despite their several recommendations made 
earlier regarding development of the Jute Sect or, including expeditious steps for launching 
of Jute Technology Mission, it is still at the proposal stage for quite sometime.  Even after a 
lapse of six months,   the Mission has only been approved by the Competent Authority and 
the follow-up steps are reportedly being taken to launch the Mission.  This demonstrates 
the lack of  will in this regard.  The Co mmittee take a serious view of delays in 
implementation of such an important developmental scheme which result in loss of  
competitiveness of the Indian industry at the international level.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that immediate and concrete steps should 
be taken for the launch of the Jute Techno logy Mission.  The Committee desire  the 
Ministry to report the progress made within three months of presentation of this Report. 

 14
E. Central Cottage Industries Corpor ation of India Limited, New Delhi 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15  Para No.3.79) 
 
1.17 During the study visit of the Committee to CC IC at Mumbai, it was learnt that its 
showroom at Mumbai has been functioning fr om a rented accommodation.  The owner of the 
building wants to get the accommodation vacated by CCIC despite the fact that a huge amount is 
being deposited / given as rent.  The matter has been taken to Court by the owner of the building, 
CCIC has requested the Ministry to  take up the matter with the ot her Ministries like Defence, 
Civil Aviation, Railways etc. to provide them e ither a piece of land or any building owned by 
them in a prime location at Mumbai to set up a showroom and thus facilitate easy access of 
tourists and others.  The Committee   strongly urged upon the Government to take up the issue 
on a priority basis with the other Ministries  to arrange a new accommodation for the Mumbai 
Branch so that its financial position does not suffer any more.  
  
 1.18 Reply of the Government to the above recommendation is as follows:- 
 
Setting up of a showroom in Mumbai 
 
“In view of the court cases in respect of Mumbai showroom, the Ministry of Textiles 
have taken up the matter with other Ministries viz. Defence, Civil Aviation, Railways and 
Tourism.  The MOT has also written to  Shilpi Kendra Trust, Mumbai, Trimurti 
Emporium (A Government of Maharashtra Undertaking) and the National Textiles 
Corporation to provide either  land or building owned by th em in a prime location at 
Mumbai to enable CCIC to set up a showroom”. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 15
 
1.19. The Committee note with concern that Emporium of Central Cottage Industries 
Corporation (CCIC) is housed in a rented accommodation and the matter is sub judice due 
to the dispute between the landlord and the CCIC.   They are  further  constrained to note 
that despite their observations during a St udy Tour which were later incorporated in a 
report of the Committee, nothing concrete has been done to accomm odate CCIC which is 
the major revenue earner as it attracts   Indi an and foreign tourists.  The Committee feel 
that merely writing letters to various Minist ries would not solve the problem.  The matter 
needs to be pursued zealously at the highest level with other Ministries.  The Committee  
would further like to recommend that Govern ment should better provide one of its own 
buildings to CCIC ,    as such a step woul d not only eradicate the problem of litigation 
which generally occurs in rented accommodations but also save huge sum of money which 
is incurred on rent. 
 

 16
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS WHIC H HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1  PARA - 3.7) 
 
2.1 The Committee note with concern that often new schemes are launched without proper 
study about their feasibility an d utility.  This leads to th eir improper implementation and 
numerous modifications later on.  Many schemes were withdrawn prematurely and replaced by 
new schemes.  There are many instances of withdr awals, modifications and additions of schemes 
in the sectors of textiles, handlooms sericulture and handicrafts.  As a result, intended benefits do 
not reach the target population.  Moreover, huge amount of budgetary allocations remain 
unutilized every year due to such uncertainties  in the implementation of the schemes.  The 
Committee find that Rs.112.55 crore, 148.13 crore and Rs. 313.39 crore were left unutilized 
during 2002-03,2003-04,2004-05 and 2005- 06 respectively.  Thus, the unutilized amount 
increased in ascending order every year totaling to Rs.695.41 crore in the last four years, which 
is very high by any reckoning.  An ambitious target of US$ 85 billion by 2010 has been fixed for 
the textile sector to remain co mpetitive at the international le vel.  However, the pace of 
implementation of development and welfare sc hemes does not indicate the growth of the 
industry towards achieving this ta rget.  It is therefore necessa ry that a thorough field study 
should be conducted regarding needs of the indus try, feasibility of the schemes, difficulties 
ahead in their implementation, regional imbalances in the acceptance of the schemes, etc. before 
launching of the schemes.  Otherwise this may lead to improper implementation and result in 
locking of several crores of rupees.  The Co mmittee recommend that preparations for the next 
Five Year Plan should start at the right earne st.  Developmental and welfare schemes for the 
textile sector should be select ed carefully after a thorough study based on th e past experiences, 
ground realities and the future need.  Instead of lo ading the sector with a plethora of half-baked 
schemes, a few effective and well planned sche mes should be devised to assist the textile 
industry, to achieve the desired growth of the sector and to make it globally competitive. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 Ministry of Textiles has s ponsored many evaluation studies to  assess the effectiveness of 
the on-going schemes for future planning. Sect or-wise information for the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Labour regarding evaluation studies is as follows: 
 
1. Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) 
 
     In respect of Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS), which is the flagship scheme of 
Ministry of Textiles, a study has already b een assigned to a reputed agency. Certain 
modifications in TUFS were carried out in the pa st keeping in view the needs of the industry. 
Continuation of various schemes of cotton sector during next Five Year Plan will be decided on 
the basis of past experiences, gr ound realities and future need of  the sector. Government would 
pay adequate care to the recommendations/obs ervations of the Committee while formulating 
schemes for 11th Five Year Plan.  

 17
 
2 Technology Mission for Cotton 
 
A study has also been assigned to  a reputed agency for evalua tion of Technology Mission on 
Cotton (TMC). Government would pay adequate care to the recommendations/ observations of 
the Committee while formulating schemes for XI  Five Year Plan. And continuation of the 
scheme during 11th Five Year Plan will be decided accordingly. 
 
3 Handlooms 
 
Currently, an evaluation study is  under way for various handloom  sector schemes such as 
Workshed-Cum-Housing Scheme, Weavers Welfar e Scheme, Handloom Export Scheme, Deen 
Dayal Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana and Mark eting Promotion Programme for studying the 
effectiveness of these schemes for future planning. Based on the recommendation of the 
Evaluation Study,  changes in the Schemes would be considered during 11th Five Year Plan. 
 
Moreover, in case of Centrally S ponsored Schemes (CSS), assistan ce for the handloom sector is 
required to be shared by the co ncerned State Governments. Financ ial constraints in the States 
have been the major bottleneck in submission of adequate proposals under CSS. However, due to 
active persuasion and follow-up with the State Governments, including field visits by officers to 
the States, there has been considerable improvement  in the utilization of funds from a level of 
Rs. 130.83 crore during 2002-03 to Rs. 190.41 crore during 2005-06.  
 
4. Powerlooms 
  
 To conceive the plan for XIth Five Y ear Plan, a study has conducted by SASMIRA on 
the working and implementation of the schemes relating to Powerlooms sector. The All India 
Powerloom Board also discusses schemes for the  Powerlooms sector.  The Hon’ble Minister of 
Textiles is the Chairman of the Board,  and members include State Governments as well as 
entrepreneurs and financial institutions.  Tex tile Commissioner has also brought to notice the 
difficulties of the Powerlooms sector,  based on the field information. Th e suggestions received 
have been discussed by the Sub Group on Powe rlooms Sector in the Ministry of Textiles 
constituted for the 11 th Five Year Plan. As suggested by the Committee, formulation and 
implementation of the schemes during 11th plan will need revamping.  
 
5. Wool Sector 
       
 The suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee th at there should be a thorough field study 
before launching a scheme has been noted for compliance and the schemes in the 11 th Five Year 
Plan would be launched only after a thorough study regarding the needs of the industry, 
feasibility of the scheme, difficulties faced in implementation etc. have been studied properly. 
The number of schemes will also be kept to the bare minimum as advised by the Committee.  
 
6 Handicrafts   
 
In order to conducts stud ies to determine the feasibility of the scheme s under implementation in 
the Handicrafts, a mid-term evaluation of major schemes has been conducted,  and initiatives 
have been taken on the recommendations. Further,  terminal evaluation of  the schemes for their 
improvement, acceptance and continuance has b een ordered. The sub-group on Handicrafts 

 18
formed for preparation of next Five Year Plan  is deliberating the need for a  road map for 
development of Handicrafts in the 11th Plan.  
 
7 Sericulture 
 
The Central Silk Board (CSB)   commissione d an independent Study during September 2005, to 
undertake an  evaluation of the Catalytic De velopment Programme (CDP) to assess the 
performance/impact of the programme in the field. The Study was entrusted to The Energy and 
Resources Institute (TERI), Bangalore to eval uate the performance of CDP  in all the 
implementing States,  and they were requested to submit reports in two phases.  TERI have made 
a presentation on their findings during the revi ew meeting of the Catalytic Development 
Programme held at Bangalore during 22nd and 23rd May, 2006. The final Report is awaited.  
 
 Based on the experience gained by implemen ting the developmental schemes, it has been 
felt that there are certain gaps in  the development of sericulture at the field level. Keeping these 
aspects in view, the Ministry has decided to  formulate the Schemes/components under CDP for 
the  XI Plan through a “bottom-up” approach,  rather than a “top-down” approach. In this regard, 
the approach will be to associate the stakehol ders, field level implementing agencies, and the 
State Departments of Sericulture. This will contri bute to the Planning Process, and assist in the 
effort to formulate practical, effective, Stat e-specific and need-based Schemes. Accordingly, 
CSB organized  Workshops at diff erent locations/Seri-zones from the third week of June to the 
second week of July 2006, wherein  CSB Scien tists, State Department Officers, Progressive 
Farmers, Reelers, Weavers, NGOs, etc. participat ed  and offered  suggestions. The proceedings 
of these Workshops are being consolidated and would be taken into consideration while 
formulating the Plan document for the XI Plan period. 
 
8 Textile Related Schemes  in North Eastern Region 
 
 The North Eastern Industrial and Techni cal Consultancy Organisation (NEITCO), 
Guwahati is conducting an evaluatio n study of the textiles related schemes in the North Eastern 
Region and studying the effectiveness of these schemes for future planning. Based on the 
recommendations of this evaluation study, changes in the schemes will be considered during 11 th  
Five Year Plan.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. dated   11.9.2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 3  PARA - 3.9) 
 
2.3  The Committee are also concerned to  note that two important schemes viz.,  Apparel Park 
Export Scheme and Textile Centre Infrastr ucture Development Scheme could not be 
implemented properly even though an amount of  Rs.120.90 crore has been spent out of Rs.150 
crore allocated for them.  Apparel Park for Export Scheme was inte nded for setting up of apparel 
manufacturing units of international standards at potential growth centres for exports and Textile 
Centre Infrastructure Developm ent Scheme was for upgrading infrastructure facilities at 
important textile centres.   While  in the first scheme, i.e. APES the amount invested was too 
small and only small clusters were coming up, the second was dependent on State Governments 
for land, which did not have funds .  As a result, the schemes we re given-up and a new scheme 
for Integrated Textile Park has been launched in their place.  An amount of Rs.209 crore has 

 19
been allocated for this new scheme for the year 2006-2007.  The Committ ee are skeptical about 
the success of this scheme too in view of the failure of the earlier schemes.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a thorough study should be conducted on the caus es of failure of the 
earlier schemes and accordingly effective steps shoul d be taken to ensure the success of this new 
scheme. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.4  The Apparel Parks for Exports Scheme (APES) and the Textile Centers 
Infrastructure Development Scheme (TCIDS) we re launched in the year 2002. It was observed 
that even after 3 years of implementation, these schemes did not  make much progress. A 
detailed review of the implementation of the Schemes reflected the following shortcomings: 
Lack of proper targeting, as the project proposals were driven by the State Governments. In 
many cases, there was no involvement of the industry at the planning an d implementation stages. 
Surprisingly, proposals were received from many of  the identified textile clusters. Shortage of 
resources with the State Government to provid e advance money as required under the scheme. 
Protracted delays in acquisition/purchase of la nd. The urgency of developing the infrastructure 
before 2005 was not  appreciated, resulting in de lays. Funding was totally based on Government 
of India subsidy; virtually no effort was made for leveraging of market funds. 
 
2.5 Taking into consideration the shortcomings  in the APES/TCIDS, these schemes were 
merged into the new scheme viz. Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks (SITP).  Under the new 
Scheme, the Ministry of Textiles (MOT) would im plement the Scheme through Special Purpose 
Vehicles (SPVs). Industry Associations/Groups w ould be the main promoters of the ITPs. The 
SPVs shall have operational autono my so that they do not become surrogate Public Sector 
Enterprises or be controlled by  Central/State Governments.  Further a Project Management 
Consultant (PMC) has been engages  for implementing the Scheme. The PMC will be 
responsible for the speedy implem entation of the Projects in a transparent and professional 
manner right from  the formulation of project report to the execution of the project. 
 
2.6 The project proposal is formulated by the  PMC after conducting a diagnostic study of the 
requirements for common facility and infrastructu re at the specific lo cation,  based on demand 
and potential.  
  
 
2.7 The Government of India’s (GOI) support under the Scheme by way of Grant or Equity 
will be limited to 40% of the project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs. 40 crore. This could be given 
as grant or equity to the SPV. However, the combined equity stake of GOI/State 
Government/State Industrial Development Corpor ation, if any, should not exceed 49%. 30% of 
the total GOI share in advance immediately after approval of the project by PAC. However, 
before the 1
st instalment is released, it would be ensure d that the project ha s been appraised by 
the Financial Institution as a ba nkable project and the land for the ITP has been procured by the 
SPV.  
         
2.8 The Scheme for Integrated Textile Park envi sages the  establishmen t of 25 Textile Parks 
of international standard at potential growth  centers of India by 2007-08. Twenty Six (26) 
Integrated Textile Park projects have already been sanctioned at a total project cost of 
Rs.2428.23 crore, of which Government of Indi a assistance would be Rs.866 crore.  The 
estimated investment in thes e parks would be Rs.13,445 crore and estimated annual production 

 20
would be Rs.19,200 crore.  Estimated employme nt generation would be 5.29 lakh (1.93 lakh 
direct and 3.36 indirect).  These projects are expected to be completed by the end of 2007-2008. 
 
 Apart from the Project Approval Comm ittee, a High Level Committee under the  
Chairmanship of Minister of Textiles has be en constituted to monitor and review the 
implementation of the Scheme periodically  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. dated   11.9.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 9 PARA – 3.46) 
 
2.9 The Committee regret to note that only 30,000 looms are shuttleless out of 19,34,064 
looms in the country.  At present a target for on ly 20,000 more shuttleless looms has been fixed.  
Considering the size of the powerloom sector, the target set for modernisat ion of looms is very 
insignificant.  At such a pace of modernisation, it is doubtful wh ether the country would be able 
to catch up with countries like Chine.  The Co mmittee, therefore, recommend that an annual 
target fixed for the modernisation of looms in  the country should take into account the global 
competition and provide necessary assistance accordingly to the powerloom sector in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.10 As on 30 th June 2006, the number of Shuttleless looms installed in the country was 
48,421, out of which 32,000 looms were installed in the powerloom sector. Towards the end of 
the IXth Plan there were only 5000 shuttleless loom s in the decentralised sector. The progress in 
the Xth Plan has been better compared to the earlier period.  This has mainly been due to the 
implementation of TUFS and the various awar eness programmes being organised continuously. 
The Regional Offices of the Textile Commissioner have been given a target to instal  around 
25,000 shuttleless looms during the current year. They have been asked to take necessary steps to 
ensure the achievements of this target in their region. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. dated   11.9.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 10 PARA – 3.53) 
 
2.11 The Committee note that 3,723 units have be nefited from the Technology Upgradation 
Fund Scheme and an amount of Rs. 9,564 crore was disbursed to them since 1999. “Textile 
Vision 2010” envisages additional i nvestments in the textile sector to the tune of Rs. 1,40,000 
crore by the year 2010. The Committee, therefor e, recommended that Technology Upgradation 
Fund Scheme should either be extended to the Elev enth Five Year Plan or a similar and better 
formulated Scheme be initiated for the next Five Year Plan to attract further investment in the 
textile sector. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
   
2.12 Presently, the Scheme is scheduled to continue upto 31 st March 2007. The Scheme is also 
under evaluation by a reputed agency. On the basi s of the evaluation, Government will take a 
suitable decision at appropriate time. Government will also take into consideration the 
recommendations of the Committee in this regard. 

 21
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. dated  11.9.2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15  Para No.3.79) 
 
2.13 During the study visit of the Committee to CC IC at Mumbai, it was learnt that its 
showroom at Mumbai has been functioning fr om a rented accommodation.  The owner of the 
building wants to get the accommodation vacated by CCIC despite the fact that a huge amount is 
being deposited / given as rent.  The matter has been taken to Court by the owner of the building, 
CCIC has requested the Ministry to  take up the matter with the ot her Ministries like Defence, 
Civil Aviation, Railways etc. to provide them e ither a piece of land or any building owned by 
them in a prime location at Mumbai to set up a showroom and thus facilitate easy access of 
tourists and others.  The Committee strongly urge upon the Government to take up the issue on a 
priority basis with the other Ministries to arrange a new accommodation for the Mumbai Branch 
so that its financial position does not suffer any more.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Setting up of a showroom in Mumbai 
 
2.14 In view of the court cases in respect of Mu mbai showroom, the Ministry of Textiles have 
taken up the matter with other Ministries viz. Defence, Civil Aviation, Railways and Tourism.  
The MOT has also written to Shilpi Kendra Trus t, Mumbai, Trimurti Emporium (A Government 
of Maharashtra Undertaking) and the National Textiles Corporation to provide either land or 
building owned by them in a prime location at Mumbai to enable CCIC to set up a showroom. 
 
 
( Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. Dated       11.09.2006 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 22
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2 PARA – 3.8) 
 
3.1 The Committee find that a Budget estimate of Rs.1,349.50 crore has been fixed for the 
plan expenditure of the Ministry of Textiles for the year 2006-07.   This is Rs. 164.29 crore more 
than  the last year.  Keeping in view the performance of the Ministry, it appears doubtful whether 
the Ministry would be able to spend this amount  for the implementation of Plan schemes in the 
year 2006-07.  During the entire Tenth Plan a peri od, hundreds of crores of rupees were left 
unutilized in every plan year.  As a result of this , there is slow progress in the implementation of 
plan schemes and benefits of the schemes do not reach the targeted groups properly.  The 
Committee hope that the Ministry w ould make all out efforts to sp end the entire plan allocation 
and thereby implement the plan schemes eff ectively at least duri ng 2006-07.  The Committee 
recommend that a monthly review meeting should be conducted by the Ministry at the highest 
level to discuss the progress being made in the implementation of the Schemes and in spending 
the amount allocated for them.  State Governme nts and the Implementing agencies should also 
be involved in this process. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
3.2 During 2005-06, the approved outlay for the Mi nistry of Textiles was Rs. 1150 crores. 
The utilisation is 95 percent of  the approved outlay (R s. 1094.39).The utilisa tion is more than 
100 percent in case of Handlooms, Sericulture,  NIFT, TUFS, etc. The approved outlay during 
2006-07 is Rs. 1349.50 crores. The expenditure so far (till 18.08.06) is Rs. 517.58 crores (38.35 
% of the approved outlay). The current pace of e xpenditure indicates that  the approved outlay 
would be fully utilised during 2006-07. 
 
3.3 The details are given in the Annexure.   
 
 A review of the progress of physical and fi nancial targets in resp ect of the schemes is 
normally held at the meetings of the Senior Officers (SOM) of the Ministry chaired by the 
Secretary (Textiles). These are generally organise d  weekly. These meetings are in addition to  
various fora  at which the review of the Plan scheme s is undertaken. For example, periodical 
review reports are furnished to the Planni ng Commission. State Governments and implementing 
agencies are also called for discussions from time to time.  
 
 In addition to that,  the progress of implem entation of schemes is also reviewed at the 
meetings of the Executive Comm ittee/ Governing Body of the vari ous Boards such as Central 
Wool Development Board (CWDB) and Centra l Silk Board (CSB). These bodies include 
representatives of the State Governments as well as those of the implementing agencies.  
 
 A Project Management Consultant (PMC) ha s been engaged for the implementation of 
the Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks (SITP). The PMC will submit a monthly progress report 

 23
to the Ministry of Textiles. Moreover, a High Level Committee under the Chairmanship of 
Minister of Textiles has been constituted to monitor and review the implementation of the 
scheme periodically.   
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. dated  11.9.2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.6 Para No.3.29) 
 
3.4  The Committee were informed that NTC does not have adequate resources for 
modernization of all the viable mills.  In orde r to hasten the process of modernization, it was 
decided by the Government to modernize and run 29 mills by forming joint venture with private 
partnership.  In this regard, it is pertinent to note that the sale of surplus lands of Mumbai fetched 
NTC about Rs. 2,500 crore.  Perm ission from some State Governments for sale of land and 
change of land use in respect of other mills is awaited.  As such, if expeditious steps are taken at 
the highest level in the Ministry, sale of land in other States may also materialize soon.  
Moreover, viable mills which are located in prim e locations of cities may be shifted to suburban 
areas and a huge amount may be mobilized thr ough sale of such lands.  If the Ministry 
implements the above suggestions, NTC would itself be in a position to modernize its remaining 
29 mills.  The Committee are of the view that floa ting joint venture with private sector should be 
the last option before the Govern ment as NTC itself had emerged from the graveyard of failed 
private mills.  It is, therefore, recommended that  the feasibility of above suggestions should be 
examined and suitable steps taken to modernize those mills in a time bound manner.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.5 BIFR, in its sanctioned scheme, has already la id down certain directions for utilization of 
funds generated through sale of surplus assets. As per the direc tions, the amount generated is to 
be utilised in revival/moderniza tion of viable mills, repayment of  bonds, settlement of claims of 
secured creditors and payment to workers u nder Modified Voluntary Retirement Scheme 
(MVRS). The redemption of Bonds floated by  NTC worth Rs.2028 crores to give MVRS 
compensation will also start from January 2007.  The money realized so far from the sale of land 
will be utilized in the modernization of 22 mills and redemption of bonds, etc.   
 
3.6 In view of these facts, since NTC is not le ft with adequate resources for modernization 
after meeting the above costs, it has been d ecided to modernize and run 29 mills through the  
joint venture route with private strategic partners hip as the last option available. This has been 
approved by the BIFR as a part of Modified Rehabilitation Scheme in the hearing held on 28 th 
March, 2006. Also, in line with the suggestion of Standing Committee, Minerva Mills presently 
situated in a  prime location at Bangalore is proposed to be shifted to the suburban area of 
Hassan.   
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. dated   11.9.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 11 PARA – 3.54) 
 
3.7 The Committee find that there are regional imbalances in availing TUFS. While there has 
been overwhelming response from the States of  Gujarat and Tamil Nadu performance in the 
States of Punjab, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Haryana and Karnataka is  moderate. Other States, viz. 

 24
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, A ndhra Pradesh performed poorly. Some of the 
States viz. Bihar, Jharkhand, C hhattisgarh, etc. do not figure in the list at all. Development of 
textile sector, even if it is not on an equal footing, should be encouraged in States where 
development is quite low at present. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take suitable 
steps in this regard so as to ensure proper and equal development to the possible extent by 
spreading the benefits available under TUFS, among all the States.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
3.8 In this regard it may be mentioned that Gujarat and Tamilnadu are amongst the major 
textile centers of the nation.   Similarly, the states with moderate performance are medium 
level textile centers of the nation.    The states of Bihar, Jh arkhand, Chhattisgarh, North East, 
Kashmir, Kerala etc., which do not figure in the list of beneficiaries, have hardly any presence of 
the textile industry in the region.  Since the TUFS beneficiaries are in proportion to the presence 
of textile industry in respective states, it can be safely said that there is no effective interstate 
disparity. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. dated   11.9.2006) 
 

 25
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4 Para No.3.16) 
 
4.1 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that 32,668 workers of 78 Mills, which 
were closed during the last 3 years, have not received any re lief under Textile Workers Relief 
Fund Scheme even though they are eligible to r eceive relief under the Scheme. To seek benefits 
under the Scheme State Governments have to give  approval for closure of units under Section 
25(O) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or an Official Liquidator has to be appointed under 
Companies Act, 1956 for the purpose of windi ng up the unit. As the State Governments are 
reluctant to give approval to the closure of units since they  do not want to be judged as 
unfriendly to workers and due to prolonged proceedings in BIFR/High Courts before the 
appointment of Official Liquidator, the workers have to wait very long for receiving benefits 
under the Scheme. Only 6,864 workers of 23 Mills,  which were closed between 1985 and 1998 
have been given relief under the Scheme. The Comm ittee take a serious view of this as the very 
purpose of the TWRFS is defeated due to such inordinate delay in pr oviding relief to the 
workers. The Committee strongly feels that relief to workers should be provided immediately 
after the closure of the Mills to enable them to run their families without difficulty while 
switching over to a new job or for making alte rnate arrangement for livelihood. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that guidelines of the TWRFS should be amended and the requirements 
of permission under Section 25(O) and appointment of Official Liquidator under Companies Act, 
1956 should be done away with. Instead, the job should be entrusted to a very senior officer of 
the Office of the Textile Commissioner who should visit the mill and after due verification give 
approval for the disbursement of relief to the eligible workers immediately but within three 
months positively. The Committee further recommended that for und ue delay in the process, 
personal responsibility of the concerned office r should be fixed. The st eps taken and progress 
achieved should be intimated to the Committee within a period of three months. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
4.2 To ensure the fairness of the Scheme and effectively control malpractices, the 
involvement of  the State Governments and  requirements of permission under Section 25(O) and 
appointment of Official Liquidator under Companies Act, 1956 are essential. Government is also 
concerned to note that the workers get relief after a long time. Since the textile mills are a subject 
matter for the  State Governments, their  involvement  cannot be by-passed.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. dated   11.9.2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 26
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5 Para No.3.28) 
 
4.3  The Committee have noted that out of 52 viable NTC mills, 22 mills are proposed to be 
modernized in two phases and the remaining 29 mills are proposed to be modernized through 
joint venture with private entrepreneurs.  In this regard, a draft modified revival scheme has been 
submitted to BIFR for its approval.   All the mills are proposed to be modernized before the end  
of financial year 2007-08.  In the first phase 15  mills have been taken up for modernization.  
However, the order has been placed for purchasing new machinery for the modernization of only 
5 mills.  As such, it is to be seen whether NTC would be able to complete the modernization of 
the 15 mills before the end of 2007-08.  The Co mmittee are least satisfied of the manner in 
which the entire programme of modernization is  being tackled.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that a realistic time-table should be prepared by the Ministry for the early 
modernization of all viable mills and prompt a nd concrete steps should be taken accordingly for 
the expeditious approval of modified Revival Scheme by BIFR.  The steps taken and the 
progress achieved in this rega rd should be communicated to th e Committee within a period of 
three months positively. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.4 For the 22 mills to be modernized by NTC itself, a phased, mill-wise negotiated schedule 
of implementation has been prepared and the work is projected to be completed by December, 
2007 for all  22 mills.  Orders are being placed accord ingly for all the 22 mills in respect of all 
the preparatory machinery after fina lization of rates and suppliers.  Pre-requisite civil, electrical 
and humidification work will be completed  before  arrival of new machinery in the mills as per 
the schedule of implementation.  For two items of machinery, viz. Ring Frames and Simplex 
Frames, orders have been placed for 5 mills on trial run basis, while for the preparatory machines 
of 12 mills order placement has already been completed in June, 2006 itself.  For a few items of 
machinery where rates and suppliers could not be fi nalized due to constraints, fresh tenders have 
already been received and are being finalized immediately. 
 
4.5 The Modified Revival Scheme of NTC has been approved by the BIFR in its hearing held 
on 28
th March, 2006, envisaging the following : 
 
(a)  Merger of all the 9 subsidiaries  with the Holding Company w.e.f. 01.04.2005. 
 Investment in Handicraft Plaza at Ahmedabad and India International Trade Tower in Mumbai 
with condition that the capital expenditure for thes e items shall be met out of funds from sale of 
surplus assets.  
(c)  NTC’s proposal for Joint Venture is perm itted after proper procedure of approvals from 
the Government. 
(d)  Implementation of Revival Sc heme has been extended upto 31.03.2008. 
(e)   Govt. of India will consider converting uns ecured loans into equity to the extent required 
in order to make the net worth positive as early as possible, besides considering waiver of 
interest on the unsecured loans provided by it as per the sanctioned Scheme. 
 
  Action is being taken by NTC/GOI to implement the Modified Rehabilitation 
Scheme within the stipulated time frame. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. dated   11.9.2006) 

 27
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 7 PARA – 3.44) 
 
4.6 The Committee are constrained to note that  powerloom sector has not received the due 
attention of the Government it deserves, even though this sector constitutes 68% of the total cloth 
production of the country and provides empl oyment to about 48.15 lakh persons.  The 
Government has introduced 20% Credit Link ed Capital Subsidy Sc heme (CLCS) since 
November,2003.  Only 522 powerloom units have availed the subsidy so far out of 4,30,718 
units in the country.  Since  2003-04 only Rs.23.90 crore have been availed by Powerloom sector  
out of  Rs.9564.86 crore disbursed to the entire  textile sector throug h TUFS.  The reasons 
identified for the backwardness of powerloom sect or are lack of awareness of programmes, lack 
of confidence in approaching lending agencies, unfamiliarity with rules and paper work, shortage 
of margin money and insufficiency of collat eral etc.  The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should take urgent steps to educate the entrepreneurs of Powerlooms through its field 
offices about the latest developments in the fiel d, benefits of the development schemes including 
20% CLCS and means of approaching lending ag encies. Lending agencies should be instructed 
to take proactive steps to go to powerloom units and explain to them the features and utility of 
lending facilities.  The Committee are of the view that modernis ation of powerloom sector is 
very essential for achieving the future target set for the textile sector and to be competitive at the 
international level particularly to defeat import penetration due to globalization.  Therefore the 
Committee recommend that an Integrated  Scheme should be formulated for the development of 
the powerloom sector and its financial intervention should take care of needs of Powerloom units 
with regard to margin money, collateral, etc. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
4.7 It is true that only 522 powerloom units availed the benefit of 20% CLCS till 31-3-2006.  
However, it may be stated that there is encour aging response since inception of this scheme. 
While only 4 units availed the subsidy during 2 003-04, the figure has rise n to 150 units during 
2004-05 and 368 units during 2005-06. The entire fund allocated fo r this scheme has been 
utilised fully during these years.  During the current year it is expected that the number of 
applications will be much more and the total subsidy may reach around  Rs.70-80 crores. 
 
4.8 In the 21 st IMSC meeting held  on  21 st July, 2006 under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(Textiles), the request of the powerloom industr y for raising the project limit of the powerloom 
units from the existing level of Rs. 1.00 crore to Rs. 2.00 crore and providing of 20% capital 
subsidy on the same was considered. The committee approved this request and recommended to 
enhance the project limit to Rs. 2.00 crore from the existing limit of Rs . 1.00 crore and further 
approved the 20% capital subsidy on the same.  The Office of Textile Commissioner has been 
taking various measures to educate the powerlo om entrepreneurs through their field offices 
(Regional Offices of the Office of the Textil e Commissioner & Powerloom Service Centres) by 
conducting seminars, workshops and through personal visits to the powerloom units to explain 
the latest developments, various schemes ava ilable for the industry and assisting them in 
preparation of project report, application for Bank loan, etc.  The representatives of the 
institutions, Banks, etc. are also being invited to attend the seminar and workshops. Model 
projects have also been prepared by Regional Offices of Textile Commissioner for the benefit of 
Powerloom sector.  Recently, “Handbook on Powerlooms” has also been published by the O/o 
the Textile Commissioner to cover all topics related to the Powerlooms sector. 

 28
 
4.9 The problems of the decentralised Powe rlooms sector and the schemes being 
implemented were discussed in the meeting of th e AIPB under the Chairmanship of the Hon’ble 
Ministry of Textiles, in which officials of different State Gove rnments, representatives of the 
industry and the officials of Ministry of Textiles, Financial Institutions and Planning 
Commission participated. Sugges tions of the members are examined and necessary action is 
taken thereafter. Government is more sympathetic to and  concerned about the problems of the 
small-scale powerloom units and, therefore, several modifications have been effected to the TUF 
Scheme to suit the needs of small-scale units. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. dated   11.9.2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 12 PARA – 3.58) 
 
 
4.10 The Committee note that Jute Industry supports 4 million farm families besides providing 
direct employment to about 2.6 lakh industrial workers and livelihood to another 1.4 lakh people.  
However, actual potential of the jute sector is yet to be realized.  In this regard, the Ministry has 
proposed four major steps, viz. creation of Natura l Jute Board, setting up of National Institute of 
Jute Fibre, launching of Jute Technology Mi ssion and opening a Jute Museum.  Among these 
proposals, Jute Technology Mission is at the proposal stage for quite sometime now which 
speaks volumes about the sincerity of the purpo se.  The Committee recommend that expeditious 
steps should at least be take n now for launching of Technology Mission without any further 
delay.  The urgent steps should as well be initia ted for the implementation of other proposals for 
the development of the Jute Industry..  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
4.11 For the purpose of creation of a National Jute  Board, as envisaged in the National Jute 
Policy, 2005, the National Jute Board Bill, 2006 was prepared in consultation with the M/o Law 
& Justice, Legislative Deptt.  The said Bill was introdu ced in the Lok Sabha on 22.5.2006.  The 
Bill has been referred by the Lok Sabha Sec tt. to the Standing Committee on Labour for 
examination.  The Committee made field visits to Kolkata, Guwahati etc. during 19th to 25th July, 
2006 and held meetings with various Associations/Stakeholders.  The Committee desired the 
comments/views of this Ministry on various representations received by them and same have 
been furnished by the Ministry of Textiles.  The recommendations of the Standing Committee on 
Labour is awaited.  On receipt of the same, the National Jute Board Bill, 2006 is likely to be 
discussed in the Parliament during its forthcoming Winter Session, 2006.  
 
4.12 As regards the creation of National Instit ute of Natural Fibres, (NINF) it has been 
decided to establish NINF on a vacant plot under the possession of Ministry of Textiles at Noida.  
The Jute Manufactures Development Council (JMDC) has been entr usted the task of completing 
the modalities for establishing the NINF.  In this regard, the JMDC has appointed WEBCON, a 
consultancy firm to formulate the detailed Project Report for the same. 
 
 
 

 29
 
 
 
4.13 As regards the establishment of National Jute & Jute Textile Museum is concerned, it has 
been proposed by Ministry of Textiles that the vacant accommodation available in Indian Jute 
Industries Research Association (IJIRA) premis es is suitable for establishing the proposed 
Museum.  Moreover, it has been proposed that the Museum may be established under the Public-
Private Partnership mode by involving the Minist ry of Textiles, the Indian Jute Industries 
Research Association and Indian Jute Mill Asso ciations.  The draft MOU has been prepared and 
sent to the IJIRA and IJMA for their acceptance. 
 
 Regarding Jute Technology Mission the sa me has been approved by the Competent 
Authority and further follow up action is being taken to formally launch the Scheme. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. dated   11.9.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14  Para No.3.78) 
 
 4.14 The Committee note that CCIC has six showrooms at present at Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, 
Bangalore, Secunderabad and Chennai.  CCIC al so propose to open franchise showrooms in 
various cities and an advertisement has been given for the purpose.  The Committee are of the 
view that private participation in the marketing of  handicrafts may effect the interests of artisans 
as profit would be their main motive rather th an promotion of Handicrafts.  Moreover, the 
handicrafts being sold by CCIC bear a mark of authenticity and reliability.  The Committee feel 
that the image of CCIC may be affected by opening franchise showrooms.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should examine the feasibility of providing financial 
assistance to CCIC to open more showrooms of their own in major cities, tourist/pilgrimage 
centres, major airports, railway stations and bus terminals in the country.  Steps should also be 
taken to utilize the occasions like 2010 Commonwealth Games and other International Events for 
the sale promotion by CCIC.  To achieve the a bove objective, the Committee  are of the view 
that industrial sheds available with CCIC at  Noida, which is in the vicinity of 2010 
Commonwealth Games Complex, may be utilized as  retail showroom to attract sportspersons 
and other visitors /tourists coming to Delhi.  Hence, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should take up the issue with the Government of Uttar Pradesh in the ri ght earnest so as to 
accomplish the task well before the beginning of the event.      
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
                                                                                                                      
4.15 The Central Cottage Industries Corporation of  India Ltd. (CCIC) has an expansion plan to 
open showroom in major cities / tourist centres under its market  operation programmes.  Owing 
to large investments involved in land and buildings at prime commercial locations in cities, it 
may not be commercially prudent for the CCI C to open more showrooms on their own, CCIC 
would prefer opening retail showrooms on a fran chise basis on a Public – Private Partnership 
Model, whereby the strengths of private parties can  be leveraged to substantially increase sales 
of handicrafts / handlooms, a nd provide a larger market for products of small artisans / 
craftsmen. 
 

 30
CCIC is making efforts to open more showrooms in various cities on a franchise basis, 
whereby procurement / purchase of products would be done by CCIC, to enable craftsmen / 
artisans to get good prices for their products. 
 
 
 
2010 Commonwealth Games and other International events 
 
 
The Corporation has supplied gift items and souvenirs during Asian Games and Afro-Asian 
Games, and shall get in touch with the appropriate authority for the 2010 Commonwealth Games 
for the supply of gifts and souvenirs. 
 
The CCIC has already started supplying gi ft items to the 2010 Commonwealth Games 
Committee. 
 
 
Opening of Showroom in CCIC’s Industrial Sheds at Noida UP. 
 
 
The matter has been taken up with Uttar Prad esh Government for opening a showroom at 
CCIC’s Industrial Sheds at Noida, UP. 
 
 
 
( Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. Dated       11.09.2006 ) 
 

 31
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 8 PARA – 3.45) 
 
5.1 The Committee are concerned to note that the funds allocated for the Powerloom sector 
could not be fully utilised as none of the projects under Group Workshed Scheme has been 
implemented so far.  The Committee  take a serious view of such lapses in the implementation of 
development schemes and recommend that and immediate review should be undertaken on the 
Scheme and its deficiencies rectified to make it implementable. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 The Group Workshed Scheme was announ ced during 2003-04 (July 2003). The budget 
allocation for the scheme during the current plan was only Rs. 6.19 crore.  
 
5.3 The fund for this scheme coul d not be utilized, since none of the project approved under 
this scheme by the Project Appraisal & Approv al Committee could take  off as Group strength 
was not defined clearly, smaller groups were not  encouraged; and the subsidy was back-ended.  
Convergence with the TCIDS  also discouraged the sector to come forward to take benefit due to 
the State Govt. share under TCIDS.  The sc heme is further being modified for the 
implementation in XIth five-year plan with some new elements, and is under active 
consideration. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(7)/2006-Parl. dated   11.9.2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 13 PARA – 3.70) 
 
5.4 The Committee note that the paid up capit al of the Handicrafts  and Handlooms Exports 
Corporation is only Rs.13.82 crore which is subscribed by the Government.  It has been informed 
that Corporation is earning operating prof its since 1997-98 and has made a cumulative 
contribution of Rs.208.24 crore to the Excheq uer from 1997-98 to 2004-05.  The Committee 
were informed that there is a move to disinve st HHEC.  The performan ce of HHEC with regard 
to export of handicrafts and handlooms ha s declined from Rs.103.83 crore in 2002-2003 to 
Rs.78.18 crore in the year 2004-2005.  The Committ ee are of the opinion that the proposal of 
disinvestment of HHEC may be the one reason behind the dismal export performance and expect 
the Government to take utmo st care to put a check on spreading of rumours regarding 
disinvestment of HHEC particularly amongst the fore ign buyers so that th e financial position of 
the Corporation does not suffer for want of fr esh orders.  The Committee feel that besides 
checking negative publicity, the Government shoul d act proactively in publicizing the factual 
position from time to time.  The Committee strongl y feel that disinvestment of the Corporation 
will jeopardize the interests of a large number of artisans, weavers and craftsmen and their 
families who are generally from weaker sections of the society.  Moreover, the logic of selling 
such a profit-making small Public Sector U ndertaking is beyond the comprehension of the 
Committee since it would in no way benefit the Government.  The Committee therefore, 
recommend that the Government should give up the plans to disinvest HHEC and instead take 
steps to strengthen the organization so as to protect the interests of  poor artisans, weavers, etc.  

 32
The steps taken in this regard should be intim ated to the Committee within a period of three 
months positively. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.5 The Handicrafts and Handlooms Exports Corp oration of India Lim ited (HHEC) was set 
up in June 1962 with the twin objectives of export promotion and trade development of 
handicrafts and handloom products.  HHEC is a two star export hous e engaged in the  export of 
handicrafts and handlooms products (including hand-knotted woolen carpets and ready- made 
garments).  
 
5.6 The Disinvestment Commission in its report , published in the year 2003, recommended 
that Government of India should disinvest its entire shareholding in HHE C to a strategic buyer 
through the competitive bidding route.  The comments on the Report of the Disinvestment 
Commission were sought.  Later the Report of th e Disinvestment Commission was examined in 
the Ministry.  While agreeing to  the report of the Disinvestment  Commission, orders of Hon’ble 
Minister for Textiles (HMOT) were sought.  HMOT  had directed  that since  HHEC was set up 
to help the handloom and handicrafts produc ts, the comments of Development Commissioner 
(Handlooms) [DC(HL)] and Development Commi ssioner (Handicrafts) [DC(HC)] may be 
sought in order to ascertain if the Corporation ha d served its purpose, and what would be its role 
in the near future. 
 
 DC(HL) had analysed the i ssue in detail with reference to the primary objectives for 
which HHEC was set up, and  made the following observations:- 
 
Over the years, the exports of handlooms and handicrafts, which is the core activity of the 
Corporation, has taken a back seat vis-à-vis the total turnover of the Corporation. 
 
It is apparent that the expor t objective of the Corporation is not being served at the 
expected level. 
 
The export of handlooms and handicrafts has not been performing well vis-à-vis total 
turnover or the total export turnover of the Corporation. 
 
5.7 Handloom exports by HHEC constitute only 2% of the country’s total handloom exports 
of Rs.2300. At this level, it beco mes difficult to assert that the Corporation’s role in the 
promotion of handlooms or handicrafts export s is essential to the handlooms policy for 
promotion and growth of handlooms. 
 
5.8 As export of handloom grows in the private se ctor, the organization has to shed more and 
more of its developmental or social orientation for a commercial and competitive one. Therefore, 
there is at present no developmental role th at HHEC performs on behalf of or for the 
Government and its trading in this socio-economic sector is therefore of no particular relevance.  
 
5.9 That HHEC is able to show pr ofits and pay dividends is of credit to its management, but 
as a factor of its commercial orientation, is also an impediment in its usefulness for 
developmental goals of policy. Where HHEC was a no profit organization, or of a size that 
affected the export turnover of th e sector, a case could be  built up for its con tinuance as an area 
of Government. In the present macro economic policy atmosphere however, in which handloom 

 33
sector is pursuing a policy of facilitation, produ ct planning, product excellence and direct export 
market linkages, its role is as good or as us eful as any other trading body whose aim is to 
compete for its own survival and profit. It is anachronistic to Policy. 
 
5.10 In their comments, DC(HC) has observed th at over the years the HHEC’s role in the 
product and market development of handicrafts has diminished and has become insignificant. 
They have further observed that the exports of Indian handicrafts including carpets growing at an 
average rate while the performa nce of HHEC being only the only National Apex agency with a 
mandate for the  export of handicrafts is not encouraging. The export of  handicrafts items by 
some State Handicrafts Development Corpor ations, like Karnataka State Handicrafts 
Development Corporation is quite comparable or even better than HHEC. In view of the this 
scenario, DC(HC) has concluded th at the relevance of the Corporat ion for the handicrafts sector 
is extremely marginal. 
 
5.11 On the basis of the examination and co mments received from DC(HL) and DC(HC), 
Ministry conveyed its agreement with the Report of the Disinvestment Commission to Ministry 
of Disinvestment.  Later, variou s communications from different MPs had been received for re-
consideration of the decision taken by the Ministry.  However, the decision taken by the Ministry 
was maintained.  Moreover, Cabinet Secretariat in the  46 th meeting of the Core Group of 
Secretaries on Disinvestment held on 17 th October 2003 stated that the proposal was discussed 
and the  Committee recommended the disinvestment of   HHEC.   
 
  
5.12 As per National Common Minimum Program me (CMP) of the UPA Government the 
Government is pledged to devolve full managerial and commercial autonomy to successful, 
profit-making companies operating in a competi tive environment.  Ge nerally, profit-making 
companies will not be privatized. 
 
5.13 Since HHEC is a profit making Corporation, the  Ministry of  Disinvestment  has been 
conveyed  the recommendations/observations cont ained in the  Report of   Standing Committee 
on Labour (14 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (200 6-07) with a request to intimate the 
action taken in the matter on the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
5.14 The recommendations made by the Committee will be  accepted / implemented by the 
Government subject to approval by the Ministry of Disinvestment. 
 
5.15 The reply to the recommendation is an interi m reply.  The final reply would be submitted 
after receiving information from the Ministry of Disinvestment. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(7)/2006-Parl. dated    11.9.2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                     SURAVARAM SUDHAK AR REDDY       
                                       Chairman 

 34
6 December, 2006          Standing Committee on Labour 
15  Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

 35
APPENDIX I 
 
EXTRACTS OF MINUTES OF THE FIFTH   SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON LABOUR HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 6 DECEMBER,   2006 
 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1700 hours in Committee Room `E’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Subrata Bose 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
4.         Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
5.       Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan 
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7.         Smt. C.S. Sujatha   
            
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
9. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
10. Shri Rahul Bajaj 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
 2.     Shri R.S. Misra  - Director 
           
           
    
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them about 
two draft reports on the action taken replies received from the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and the Ministry of Textiles on the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Reports on the 
Demands for Grants for the year 2006-2007. 
 
 
3.  XX   XX    XX 
 
   
4. The Committee then considered the draft Nine teenth  Report on   the Action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fourteenth Report of the 

 36
Standing Committee on Labour on   Demands for Gr ants for the year 2006-2007 of the Ministry 
of Textiles for consideration and adoption.  The Committee adopted the report with the following 
modifications: 
  
Page No.5  Para No.1.10  Line No.8 Insert the words, ‘time bound 
schedule 
but not more than a year’ in place 
of ‘realistic time-table’   
     
Page No.10  Para. No.1.16  Line No.6 Replace the words `sincerity’ by 
the  
Word,‘will’ 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to  finalise the Reports by incorporating the 
above amendments and present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
6 .   X X     X X     X X  
   
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 

 37
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
FOURTEENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
         Total Percentage  
 
I. Total number of Recommendations   15  
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have   33.3%  
been accepted by Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1,3,9,10  & 15) (Total-5)  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the      20.0%  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s  replies 
(Sl. Nos. 2,6 and 11) (Total-3)  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of   33.3%  
which  Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration 
(Sl. Nos. 4,5,7,12 and 14)(Total-5)       
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of    13.5%  
 which final replies of Government are of interim 
 in  nature 
(Sl. Nos. 8 and 13)(Total –2)      -----------  
           100%  
                              -----------  
  
 
 
 