 
 
 
  
     26 
 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2007-08) 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
 THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007  
 
  
 
 
      TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
      
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
February/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) 
 

 2
 
  
 
 
  TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2007-08) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT  
 
 
 
  THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007  
 
 
  
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 26.2.2008 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 26.2.2008 
 
       
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
        
          February/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) 
 

 3
 
CONTENTS 
          
                                                                         PAGE (s)  
  
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………...     (iii) 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N     … … … … … …     ( i v )  
 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                      ………………    1  
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 
 
II JUDGEMENT OF THE HON’BLE SUPREME COURT  
  
III MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON   
 LABOUR HELD ON 28.12.2007 AND 19.2.2008 
 
    

 4
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (2007-2008) 
  
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Subrata Bose    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot    
6. Shri Munawar Hasan    
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
8. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar     
10. Shri Basangouda R. Patil   
11. Shri Devidas Pingle  
12. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar 
13. Shri Mohan Rawale  
14. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat   
    15. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat   
16. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
17. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
                         *18. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
 19. Vacant 
 20. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
  21. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam 
  22.  Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  23.  Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
24.         Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
25.         Shri Gandhi Azad 
26.         Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
27.         Shri Dilip Ray 
   **28.          Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
29.         Vacant 
30. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri S.K.  Sharma  -  Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri N.K. Sapra   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
  5.    Ms. Mili George  - Senior Executive Assistant 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*  Changed the nomination from Committee on Railways to                                     
Committee on Labour w.e.f. 21 August 2007. 
                            ** Nominated w.e.f. 14.9.2007 

 5
 I N T R O D U C T I O N 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this T wenty-sixth Report on 
“The Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Bill, 2007” of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment.   
 
2. The Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Bill, 2007 as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 
26.11.2007 was referred to the Standing Committee on Labour by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok 
Sabha under Rule 331E (b) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha for examination and report within three months from the date of publication of the 
reference of the Bill in the Bulletin Part- II of Lok Sabha dated 10.12.2007.    
 
3. The Bill seeks to extend the benefits of gratuity to the teachers in the country by 
amending the definition of ‘employee’ under Section 2(e) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 
1972.   
 
4. The Committee sought written information re garding the origin of this Bill from the 
nodal Ministry, i.e. the Ministry of Labour and Employment.  They submitted that the 
Central Government through a no tification in the year 1997 extended the benefits of the 
Act to all educational institutions employing ten or more persons.  However, subsequent 
to the Apex Court ruling in 2004, the teache rs were excluded from the purview of the 
definition of the term ‘employee’ as enshrine d  i n  t h e  A c t .   I n  o r d e r  t o  o v e r c o m e  t h i s  
situation, the Government propose to amend th e Act and broad base the definition of the 
term ‘employee’ so as to bring the teachers of the private educationa l institutions within 
the purview of the Act.    
 
5. The Committee took oral evidence of the re presentatives of the Ministries of Labour 
and Employment and Law and Justice on 28.12.2007 in connection with examination of the 
subject.  
 
6. Taking into account the depositions ma de by the representatives of both the 
Ministries and the replies furnished, th e Committee arrived on certain conclusions 
regarding various aspects of the proposed  amendment in the B ill.  The same are 
reproduced in the Report in the form of observations/recommendations of the Committee. 
 
7. The Committee considered and adopted the draft report on the Bill at their sitting 
held on 19.02.2008.  
 
8. The Committee wish to express their thanks  to the representatives of the Ministries 
of Labour and Employment and Law and Just ice for placing their views/comments on the 
Bill and also for making available valuable material and information which the Committee 
desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.  
 

 6
9. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
of the commitment, dedication and valuable assistance rendered to them from time to time 
by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
10. For facility of reference and convenience,  the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;              SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY, 
        C H A I R M A N ,  
19 February, 2008                                    STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
30 Phalguna, 1929 (SAKA) 

 7
 
REPORT 
 
PAYMENT OF GRATUITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 
 
 
Background  
  
1.      Before the enactment of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, there were two State Laws 
providing for payment of gratuity.  These were the Kerala Industrial Employees ‘Payment of 
Gratuity Act, 1970 and the West Bengal Employees’ Payment of Gratuity Act, 1971.  The question 
of having a Central Legislation on the subject was discussed in the Labour Ministers’ Conference 
held in New Delhi on 24 and 25 August, 1971 as also the Indian Labour Conference held on 22 and 
23 October 1971 and general consensus was reached for enacting a Central Legislation on payment 
of gratuity.  Accordingly, a Central Law mode led largely on the pattern of West Bengal 
Employees’ Payment of Gratuity Act, 1971 was enacted and is known as the Payment of Gratuity 
Act, 1972.  It was brought into forc e with effect from the 16.9.1972 vide S.O. No.601 (E) dated 
16.9.1972 and it extends to whole of India.  The Act has been recently extended to the State of 
Sikkim w.e.f. 1.11.1995. 
 
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE ACT: 
 
2. (i) OBJECT: 
 
The Act provides for scheme for payment of  gratuity to the employees employed in 
factories, mines, oilfields, plantations, ports, railway companies, shops and other 
establishments and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto; 
 
 
(ii) EXTENT AND APPLICATION: 
 
The Act extends to whole of India except plantations in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir.  It applies at present to: 
 
(a) every factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port and railway company; 
 
(b) every shop or establishm ent within the meaning of any law for the time being in 
force in relation  to shops and establis hments in a State in which ten or more 
persons are employed or were employed, on any day of the preceding twelve 
months; and 
 
(c) such other establishments or class of  establishments in which ten or more 
employees are employed, or were employed  on any day of the preceding twelve 
months, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.  In 
exercise of these powers, the Central Government have so far extended the 
provisions of the Act to the following cla sses of establishments, where ten or more 
persons are employed or were employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months with effect from the dates indicated against each:- 
 
 

 8
 
 
Sl.No. Particular of establishment Date of effect 
 
 
1. Motor Transport Undertakings 20.04.1974 
2. Clubs 06.10.1979 
3. Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
and Associated/Federation of Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry 
15.11.1980 
4. Inland Water Transport Establishments 10.01.1981 
5. Solicitor’s Office 09.01.1982 
6. Local Bodies 23.01.1982 
7. Companies, Societies, Associations or 
troupes which give any circus 
performance in any area and require 
payment for admission into such 
exhibition or spectators or audience. 
15.01.1983 
8. Educational Institutions 19.04.1997 
9. Societies & Trusts 06.09.1997 
 
 
EXCLUDED CATEGORIES OF EMPLOYEES: 
 
 
3. The definition of employee in Section 2(e) spec ifically excludes from the purview of the Act, 
any person who holds a post under the Centra l Government or a State Government and is 
governed by any other Act or by any rules providing for payment of gratuity. 
 
 
 
ELIGIBILITY CONDITIONS: 
 
4. Gratuity is payable to every employee, othe r than an apprentice, in an establishment to 
which the provisions of the Act applies, on termination of his employment either due to 
superannuation or retirement or resignation, subj ect to completion of co ntinuous service for not 
less than five years, Gratuity is also payable in  case of termination of service due to death or 
disablement, due to accident or disease and there is no condition of service in these two 
contingencies. 
 
 
QUANTUM OF GRATUITY:- 
 
5.    For every completed year of service or pa rt thereof in excess of six months, the employees, 
other than the seasonal employees are entitled to gratuity at the rate of fifteen days’ wages based 
on the rate of wages last drawn.  The employ ees of seasonal establishment who do not work 
throughout the year are entitled to gratuity at th e rate of seven days’ wages for each season.  These 
provisions do not, however, affect the right of  an employee to receive better terms of gratuity 
under any award or agreement of contract with the employer. 
 

 9
 
LIMIT FOR PAYMENT OF GRATUITY:- 
 
6. The employers have to pay the gratuity within thirty days from the date it becomes due, if 
the gratuity is not paid within the prescribed time limit, the employer is required to pay the 
amount of gratuity with interest as specified by the Government from time to time. 
 
GRANT OF EXEMPTION: 
 
7. Section 5(1) of the Payment of Gratuity Act gives power to the appropriate Government to 
exempt any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop from 
the operation of the provisions of this Act, if  in the opinion of the appropriate Government, 
employees of such shop etc. are in receipt of gr atuity or pensionary benefits not less favourable 
than the benefits conferred under this Act.  There is a similar provision for grant of exemption to a 
class of employees in Section 5 (2) of the Act.  
 
ADMINISTRATION OF THE ACT 
 
8. The Central Government is responsible for ad ministration of the Act in relation to the 
following:- 
 
(a) factories or establishments belonging to or under the control of the Central 
Government; 
(b) establishments having branches in more than one State; and 
(c) major ports, mine oilfields or railway companies. 
 
The State Government is responsible for administration of the Act in all other cases. 
 
The Central Government have appointed Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) and 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) and A ssistant Labour Commissioners (Central) as the 
Controlling/Appellate Authorities under the Act for their respective areas. 
 
PROCEDURE FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTE, RELATING TO PAYMENT OF 
GRATUITY: 
 
9. If there is any dispute abou t the amount of gratuity payabl e to an employee, the employee 
may make an application to the Controlling Authority  of the area for taking necessary action.  The 
Controlling Authority shall issue a certificate for th e amount of gratuity dues to the Collector who 
shall recover the same as arrears of land revenue and pay the same to the person entitled to receive 
the gratuity.  Any person aggrieved by the order passed by the Controlling Authority can prefer an 
appeal to the Appellate Authority. 
 
PENALTIES FOR NON-PAYMENT OF GRATUITY: 
 
10. Where the offence relates to non-payment of gratuity payable under the Act, the employer 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a te rm which shall not be less than three months but 
which may extend to one year or fine which sha ll not be less than 10 thousand rupees but extend 
to twenty thousand rupees or both. 
 
 

 10
 
 
AMENDMENTS IN THE ACT: 
 
11. Mainly, the Act has been amended five times so far.  The amendments made are as given 
below:- 
 
(i) The first amendment made by the Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Act, 1984 
inter alia  provides for raising the wage limit for coverage from Rs.1000/- to 
Rs.1600/- per month and appointment of Inspectors.  This amendment was brought 
into force w.e.f. 1.7.1984. 
 
 
 
(ii) The second amendment made by the Payment of Gratuity (Second Amendment) 
Act, 1984 inter alia re-defined the term ‘continuous service’ and provided for grant 
of exemption to a class of employees fr om the operation of the Act.  This 
amendment came into force from 18.5.1984. 
 
(iii) The third amendment made by the Pa yment of Gratuity (Amendment) Act, 1987 
inter alia provided for:- 
 
(a) raising the wage limit fo r coverage from Rs.1,600/-  to Rs.2,500/- per month, 
which was further raised to Rs.3,500/- p.m. w.e.f. 1.12.1992. 
(b) replacing the ceiling of twenty month’ s wages for payment of gratuity by a 
monetary ceiling of Rs.50,000/- 
(c) making it obligatory for the employers to pay simple interest at a specified 
rate if the gratuity is not paid within 30 days from the date it falls due. 
(d) Compulsory insurance/setting of gr atuity fund for payment of gratuity. 
 
The amendments at (a) to (c) above were  brought into force w.e.f. 1.10.1987.  
The amendment at (d) has not been brough t into force so far.  In fact, this 
particular provision is being review ed in view of certain subsequent 
developments.  The rate of simple interest mentioned at (c) above has been 
fixed at 10% per annum w.e.f. 1.10.1987. 
 
(iv) The fourth amendment made by the Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Act, 1994 
inter alia provided for:- 
 
(a) Doing away with the wage ceiling  altogether for coverage under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972; 
(b) Enhancing the ceiling of the maximum am ount of gratuity from Rs.50,000/- 
to Rs. one lakh. 
 
This amendment came into force w.e.f. 24.5.1994. 
 
(v) The Fifth Amendment made by the Paym ent of Gratuity (Amendment) Act, 1998 
has enhanced the ceiling on maximum amount of gratuity from Rs. one lakh to 
Rs.3.50 lakh with effect from 24.9.1997. 
 

 11
 
 
 
 
 
BACKGROUND OF THE PRESENT PROPOSAL 
 
12.     The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (No.39 of 1972) was enacted and brought into force from 
16 September 1972.  The Act provides for payment of gratuity to employees employed in any 
factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, Rail way Company and in any shop or establishment 
employing ten or more workers.  It has also been extended to motor transport undertakings 
employing ten or more workers. 
 
13. Under the Act, gratuity is payable at the rate of fifteen days’ wages for every completed 
year of service or part thereof in excess of six mo nths subject to a monetary ceiling of Rs.3.50 lakh.  
In case of employees’ employed in seasonal establis hments, gratuity is payable at the rate of seven 
days’ wages.  A worker is entitled to gratuity in the contingency of superannuation, retirement, 
resignation, death or disablement due to accident or disease, subject to completion of five years 
continuous service.  The condition of five years is however, not applicable in case of death or 
disablement.  Further, it does not make any discrimination between casu al, contract, temporary 
and permanent worker who has completed the prescr ibed period of five years continuous service 
as defined in section 2A of the Act.  The liability  for payment of gratuity vests in the employer.  
Gratuity is payable in addition to pension or contributory provident fund, if any. 
 
14. The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 was made applicable to local bodies with effect from 
8.1.1982.  Therefore, the schools under the control of local bodies were covered under the Act with 
effect from 8.1.1982 itself.  However, the employees  of other educational institutions were facing 
denial of gratuity as they were not covered un der the Act.  The employees of the Government 
schools are already entitled to gratuity under the extant rules of the Government governing 
gratuity and pension but the employees of the priv ate schools were having no legal entitlement to 
gratuity.  As gratuity is an old age retiral social security benefit, it was considered desirable to 
extend the benefit of the Payment of Gratuity  Act, 1972 to all employees employed in all 
educational institutions having ten or more persons. 
 
  
15. Accordingly, the Central Government extended  the provisions of Payment of Gratuity Act, 
1972 to the educational institutions employing 10 or more persons vide the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment Notification No. S.O. 1080 dated 3 Apr il 1997.  The Notification came into force w.e.f 
19.4.1997, date when it was published in the Gazette of India. 
 
16. In its judgment dated 13.1.2004 in Civil Appeal No.6369 of 2001 filed by Ahmedabad 
Private Primary Teachers’ Association, Hon’ble Supreme Court of In dia ruled that teachers are not 
entitled to gratuity under the payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 in view of the fact that teachers do not 
answer description of definition of “employee” unde r section 2 (e) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 
1972.  The ruling also, 
inter alia,  states that non-use of wide language similar to definition of 
“employee” as is contained in section 2(f) of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952 reinforces the conclusion that teachers are not covered in the definition. 
 
 
 

 12
 
17. In this context ,  para 26 of the said judgment is quoted as follows:- 
 
“Our conclusion should not be misunderstood th at teachers although engaged in very noble 
profession of educating our young generation should  not be given any gratuity benefit.  There are 
already in several States separate statutes, rules and regulations granting gratuity benefits to 
teachers in educational institutions which are more  or less beneficial than the gratuity benefits 
provided under the Act.  It is for the Legislature to take cognizance of situation of such teachers in 
various establishments where gratuity benefits are no t available and think of a separate legislation 
for them in this regard.  That is the subject matter solely of the Legislature to consider and decide”. 
 
18. Keeping in view the observations of the Su preme Court as mentione d above the definition 
of “employee” under section 2(e) in the existing Act has been proposed to be widened in keeping 
with the spirit of the Act. 
 
EXISTING DEFINITION OF SECTION 2 (E) OF THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972: 
 
19. ‘2(e) “employee” means any person (other than an apprentice) employed on wages in any 
establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantatio n, port, railway company or shop, to do any 
skilled, semi-skilled, or unskilled, manual, supe rvisory, technical or clerical work, whether 
the terms of such employment are express or implied, and whether or not such person is 
employed in a managerial or administrative ca pacity, but does not include any such person 
who holds a post under the Central Government or a State Government and is governed by 
any other Act or by any rules providing for payment of gratuity’. 
 
20. The Ministry of Labour and Employment in formed the Committee that it is proposed to 
retain the basic features of the definition of the term “employee” as given in the Payment of 
Gratuity Act, 1972, while widening its scope and adopt the definition of “employee” as follows:- 
 
 
PROPOSED DEFINITION:- 
 
‘2 (e) “employee” means any persons (other than an apprentice) who is employed for 
wages, whether the terms of such employment ar e express or implied, in any kind of work, 
manual or otherwise, in or in connection wi th the work of a factory, mine, oilfield, 
plantation, port, railway company, shop or othe r establishment to whic h this Act applies, 
but does not include any such person who holds a post under the Central Government or a 
State Government and is governed by any othe r Act or by any rules providing for payment 
of gratuity’.  
  
21. The Act is applicable to factories and other establishments employing 10 or more persons.  
The coverage of the Act with respect to the privat e schools is wide as th ere are large number of 
schools in the private sector employing 10 or more  persons.  The responsibility for administration 
of the Act vests mainly in the State Governments.  The liability for payment of gratuity vests in the 
employer.  The employees of the Central Gove rnment and State Governments who are getting 
gratuity under any other Act/rules are not covered under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. 
 
 
 
 

 13
 
 
22. Views of all the State Governments/Union Territories were called for on the proposed 
amendment.  All the States/Union Territories ex cept Haryana have agreed to the proposal.  State 
Government of Haryana has not indicated any reason for its disagreement with the proposal. 
 
23. The Committee, upon examining “The Paym ent of Gratuity (Ame ndment) Bill, 2007”, 
express agreement with the broad objectives envisaged by the amendment.  However, some of the 
amendments proposed/observations made by th e Committee during the deliberations with the 
Ministries of Labour and Employment and Law and Justice are discussed in the subsequent 
paragraphs of the Report. 
 
 
Definition of ‘employee’ 
  
 
24. During the course of evidence when the Committee desired to know the reasons for not 
laying down clear and unambiguous term to co ver the teachers of the private educational 
institutions, as the term establishment in the new definition would leave the scope for ambiguity in 
interpretation because it also incl uded other institutions, the repres entative of the Ministry replied 
as under:-  
 
“This Act has been introduced for the whole educational institutions.  What has happened 
was that categories of employees in the educat ional institutions, like clerks and others are 
already covered, but this particular category w a s  b e i n g  l e f t  o u t .   I f  y o u  w e r e  t o  s e e  t h e  
proposed new definition, it is so wide ranging that it covers a whole lot of other employees 
also. …….There is no challenge to the educational institutions and the employees thereto.  
The only question that arose was with respect to teachers that too a limited thing and the 
Hon’ble Court itself gave a solution to the problem saying from a comparison of this 
definition as well as the EPF definition this appears to be narrow.  Teaching profession is an 
extremely noble profession and it should be covered.  Indirectly, they did say that and they 
said it is not for the courts to remedy it but for the legislatures to remedy it and so kindly 
go to the legislature.  …….that only a narrow margin had been left out, that is teachers as 
such, whomsoever had been defined.  The Co urt went to great length to find out how 
teachers could neither be defined as skilled or un-skilled because they are imparting 
knowledge.  In a manner of speaking, it created confusion and that has to be repaired and 
that is why the legislation has come”.  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 14
 
25. To the same question, the Ministry in th eir post evidence reply furnished as under:- 
 
“There will not be any ambiguity in interpre tation of the term ‘establishment’. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in its ruling dated 13-1-2004, inter alia, has observed that if it is intended to 
cover in the definition of ‘employee’ all kind  of employees, it could have as well used such 
wide language as is contained in sect ion 2(f) of Employees' Provident Funds & 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 which defi nes ‘employee’ to mean ‘any person who is 
employed for wages in any kind of work, manual  or otherwise, in or in connection with the 
work of an establishment.   The judgment further pronounces that non-use of wide 
language similar to definition of “employ ee” as is contained in section 2(f) of the 
Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellane ous Provisions Act, 1952 reinforces the 
conclusion that teachers are not covered in the definition. Keeping in view these 
observations of the Supreme Court, it is desi rable that the definition of “employee” under 
section 2(e) in the existing Act is widened in keeping with the spirit of the Act. Further, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court has not excluded non- teaching staff from the purview of the 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 and has not obje cted to the applicability of ‘place of work’ 
which means that existing term ‘establishment’ covers schools and other educational 
institutions also.  On the other hand, beside the schools and other educational institutions, 
the proposed amendment can cover other similarly placed organizations”. 
 

 15
 
26. The Committee observe that the extant amendment to the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 
has been necessitated following the verdict of the Supreme Court adjudicating that teachers of 
private educational institutions do not answer  description of definition of ‘employee’ under 
Section 2 (e) of the Payment of Gratuity Act,  1972.  The connotation of ‘employee’ in the 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 is not akin to the one given in Section 2(f) of the Employees’ 
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952.  Therefore, it was essential to widen 
the definition of ‘employee’ in order to extend th e benefits of gratuity to teachers of private 
educational institutions.  To achieve the above objective, the amendment has been proposed in 
the Bill.  Although the Committee are broadly in  agreement with the proposed amendment of 
Section 2 (e),   they are apprehensive that the replacement of some portion of definition of 2(e) 
of the Payment of Gratuity Act with another portion of 2(f) of EPF & MP Act, 1952 is likely to 
leave some lacuna therein. The Committee, therefore, call upon the Government to ensure that 
the new definition of the ‘employee’ being proposed in the Bill, should be unambiguous, 
encompassing with clear reference to the targetted group, i.e. teachers of the private educational 
institutions in the definition itself so as to avoid any misinterpretation in future.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 16
Applicability of Act 
  
27. As per Section 3 of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, it is applicable to all those 
establishments, which are employing ten or more persons.   
 
28. When asked whether the Government have given any thought to the idea of implementing 
the Act on establishments which are employin g less than ten workers keeping in view the 
advancement in technology and changing employment pattern, the representative of the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment replied during evidence as follows:- 
 
“….we are having problems with implementation of the Act even if there are more than 10 
workers involved.  It is perceived that inst itutions, which are having at least 10 workers, 
will be easy and tangible to spot.  If better methods of evaluation and better methods of 
detection are there, we may perhaps be going to that at that point of time.  Right now, we 
are trying to take up a practical view as to cover establishments that are tangible in size and 
not to hurt very small establishments, which may be of a transient nature.  That is what we 
are trying to do”. 
 
29. On being further asked to explain the possib ility of extending the benefits under the Act to 
as many people as possible in the phase of reduci ng number of workers in establishments due to 
changed type of work on account of computerization etc., the representative from the Ministry 
commented:    
 
“….would like to present a counter view for your kind consideration.  The counter view is 
that if you were to reduce it to 5, then they will try to reduce it even further.  What happens 
as a result of that is that the establishment be comes invisible.  If they become invisible and 
they are not within the screen, then we are unable to implement various other measures 
also ”. 
 
30. Questioned by the Committee on the same, the Ministry in their post evidence reply 
submitted as under:- 
 
“At present, the Payment of Gratuity Ac t, 1972 is applicable o establishments 
having ten or more persons. Other major Acts viz. the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, 
Employees' Provident Funds & Miscellane ous Provisions Act, 1952, Employees' 
State Insurance Act, 1948 cover the establishments having twenty or more 
employees. At the time of introduction of the Payment of Gratuity Act in 1971 
coverage of even ten employees were opposed by the employers.  It may also be 
stated that before extending the provisions  of the Act to establishments having less 
than 10 persons, we have to consider variou s aspects of the employers, viz., (i) the 
financial condition of the employer (ii) his profit making capacity and profit earned 
in the past (iii) extent of his reserves etc. Small employers have, therefore, been 
excluded from the purview of most of the labour and social legislations. Also, it 
may attract adverse implications on other labour acts. Hence, there is no proposal to 
extend the benefits of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 to establishments having 
employees below ten”. 
 

 17
 
31. The Committee take note of the fact that the Central Government had extended the 
provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 under Sub-Clause (c) of Clause (3) of Section 1 
of the Act to the educational institutions empl oying ten or more persons through a Notification 
No.S-42013/1/95-58 II dated 3 April 1997.  However, subsequent to a decision of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court, the teachers of private schools are being  denied the benefits of gratuity in view 
of the fact that teachers were not covered in accordance with the definition of ‘employee’ under 
Section 2 (e) of the Act.   To restore the status quo ante , the amendment has been proposed in 
the Act, for extending again the benefits to the teachers who were deprived of it due to the court 
ruling.  However, the Committee find that nowadays, most of the educational institutions and 
other establishments are being manned by less than  ten persons.  Hence the cap of ten or more 
persons will deprive most of the school teac hers and other employees of the benefit the 
government proposes to extend to them.  The Co mmittee are not convinced with the plea of the 
Ministry that inclusion of less than 10 em ployees would be opposed by the employers and may 
attract adverse implications on other labour acts.  In view of the advancement in technology and 
change in the employment pattern, the Committee, therefore, recommend that the ceiling of ten 
or more persons be done away with and the gratuity should be payable to all irrespective of the 
number of persons employed.  The Government may suitably amend other labour laws, if need 
be. 

 18
 
Application of Act with retrospective effect 
 
 
32. When the Committee enquired whether the benefi t proposed to be given to the teachers in 
private educational institutions will be retrospective in nature to be effective from the date of 
enactment of the original Act or from 08.01.1982, when the Act was made applicable to local bodies 
and how the Government proposes to compensate the teachers who are divested of the benefits 
following the judgment of the Supreme Court, the representative of the Mi nistry of Labour and 
Employment during evidence stated as under: 
 
“…..I have a suspicion about the retrospective effect.  I am not a legal expert.  If you were to 
enact it with a retrospective effect, the courts  may strike it down for the simple reason 
saying that the entire responsibility for paymen t of gratuity is reserved with that of the 
employers”. 
 
33. When asked to comment on the views of Law Ministry, Additional Government Counsel 
during evidence stated as under:- 
 
 
“Since no date has been fixed for the commencem ent of this Act, it will be prospective from 
the date it is assented to by the President of India.  Whether it should be given prospective 
effect or not is clear from this.  Retrospective policy decision should be taken by the 
Ministry concerned.  Since it is social welfar e legislation, it is for the policy makers to 
decide whether it should be given retrospective effect or not”. 
 
34. When the Committee enquired regarding the le gal reaction of the Courts if the proposed 
amendment to the Act is to be implemented with retrospective effect, the Law Ministry 
representative further added:- 
 
“…..courts cannot go against us unless it is se riously challenged by the affected person’s 
employers”. 
  
35. In their written post evidence reply to the qu estion on this aspect, the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment submitted as follows:  
  
“The Central Government extended the provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 to 
the educational institutions employing 10 or more persons w.e.f. 3-4-1997 and Hon’ble 
Supreme Court delivered its judgment on 13-1-2004 ruling that teachers are not entitled to 
gratuity under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. However, the present Payment of 
Gratuity (Amendment) Bill, 2007 does not mention any date implying that the amendment 
will have a prospective effect. With a view to compensate the teachers who were divested 
of the benefits following the judgment of the Supreme Court it has been decided that this 
amendment may be given effect from the date of judgment of the Apex Court i.e. w.e.f. 13-
1-2004 itself since educational institutions were covered by the Government w.e.f. 3-4-1997 
under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972”. 
 

 19
 
36. The Committee find that the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 was made applicable to local 
bodies w.e.f 08.01.1982 thereby bringing all school s under the control of local bodies within the 
purview of the Act.  But the employees of private educational institutions were facing denial of 
gratuity as they had not been covered under the Act. With a view to provide benefit of the Act to 
all employees in all educational institutions em ploying ten or more persons, the provisions of 
the Act were extended through a notification w.e.f. 19.04.1997 i.e. date when it was published in 
Gazette of India.  However, the objective of providing the desired coverage under the Act was 
annulled following the judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the year 2004 excluding 
teachers from the ambit of the term ‘employee’ as given in the Act.  To nullify the effect of the 
verdict of the Apex Court, it has been proposed to widen the definition of ‘employee’ in order to 
extend the benefits of gratuity to the teachers by amending the same.  However, the amendment 
has been proposed to be made effective from the date of the judgement of the Apex Court, i.e., 
13.01.2004 so as to compensate the teachers who were divested of the benefits.  The Committee 
appreciate the steps taken by the Government, yet express their concern over the inadequacy of 
efforts in providing relief to teachers. The Comm ittee note that the teachers in question were 
deprived of the benefits right from the beginni ng as the High Court of Gujarat was seized of 
the issue and delivered its judgement on 04.05.2 001 in a Special Civil Application No.5272 of 
1987 that teachers as a class do not fall within the definition of the term ‘employee’.  The 
Committee feel that implementing the law from the year 2004 will cause irreparable loss to a 
large number of teachers of the country, particul arly to those who have already retired.  The 
Committee, therefore, call upon the Government to make the law applicable with retrospective 
effect, i.e. from the date of notification in the year 1997.  This will provide the needed succour as 
well as justice to all those affected persons who were denied their rightful benefits due to some 
technical flaw/legal lacuna in the definition of th e term ‘employee’ as contained in Section 2 (e) 
of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.     

 20
Covering of Contract Workers under the Act 
 
37. During the evidence, when the Committee desired to know whether the contract workers 
are also covered under the Act, a representative  of the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
commented on the issue as under:- 
   
“……if a person is contract labour,….. and the number exceeds ten, he would be included 
which includes teaching and non-teaching also.  They shall be covered because contract 
workers are also to be covered.  There is no doubt about this.  The interpretation of the Act 
is fairly clear about this”.     
 
  

 21
 
38. The Committee find that the contract labour system is prevalent virtually in every 
organization of the Government.  The Committee further note that this system might perhaps 
be beneficial to the organisation and management, but definitely highly prejudicial to the 
workers as their basic rights, i.e. minimum wages, working conditions, social security, 
continuity of service, etc are systematically de nied to them.  Although the Payment of Gratuity 
Act per se  does not make any discrimination among casual, contract, temporary and regular 
workers who have completed five years of conti nuous service,  it is an established fact that 
contract workers are seldom given any social secu rity coverage as is available to the regular 
workers.  It has also come to the notice of the Committee that due to the practice of giving break 
in service, a contract labour can never be reckoned as having worked continuously for five years 
in an organization.  Hence, he is deprived of payment of gratuity under the Act.  The Committee 
are pained to note that the contract labour system may be a necessary evil today.  They however, 
strongly feel that the genuine rights and interests of the contract labour should not continue to 
suffer.  The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that these workers must be brought within 
the purview of the Act by laying down specific provisions in the Act itself.  The Committee 
recommend that if a contract worker has rendered  five years of service, whether continuous or 
otherwise, in an organization be made entitled for Gratuity under the Act.  The Committee, 
further recommend that the Government should not only make an overall assessment of the 
contract labour system but also review the systemic flaws and carry the possible reforms in the 
legislation.   
       
 
NEW DELHI;                                          SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY, 
            C H A I R M A N ,  
19 February, 2008                                                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
30 Phalguna, 1929 (SAKA) 
 

 22
Annexure-I 
 
Bill No.90 of 2007 
 
 
Short title. 
 
THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
further to amend the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. 
 
       BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Act, 2007. 
 
2. In the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, in section 2, for clause (e), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
 
'(e) "employee" means any person (other than an apprentice) who is 
employed for wages, whether the terms of such em ployment are express or implied, in any kind 
of work, manual or otherwise, in or in connection with the work of a factory, mine, oilfield, 
plantation, port, railway company, shop or other establishment, to which this Act applies, but 
does not include any such person who holds a post under the Central Government or a State 
Government and is governed by any other Act or by any rules providing for payment of 
gratuity;'. 
 
 
Amendment of section 2. 
39 of 1972. 
  

 23
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (the Ac t) provides for payment of gratuity to 
employees employed in any establishment, factor y, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway 
company or shop employing 10 or more workers. 
 
2. The Central Government had extended the provis ions of the Act to the educational institutions 
employing 10 or more persons vide this Ministry's notification No. S.O. 1080 dated 3rd April, 1997. 
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in its judgment date d 13th January, 2004, in Ahmedabad Private 
Primary Teachers Association Vs Administrative Officer [AIR 2004 (SC) 1426] held that teachers 
are not entitled to gratuity under the Act, in view of the fact that teachers do not answer 
description of "employee" who are "skilled", "s emi-skilled" or "unskilled". The Supreme Court 
observed that non-use of wide language similar to  definition of "employee" as is contained in 
section 2(f) of the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, reinforces 
the conclusion that teachers are not covered 
in that definition. Para 26 of the said judgment reads as follows:— 
 
"Our conclusion should not be misunderstoo d that teachers although engaged in very 
noble profession of educating our young generation should not be given any gratuity 
benefit. There are already in several States se parate statutes, rules and regulations granting 
gratuity benefits to teachers in educational institutions which are more or less beneficial 
than the gratuity benefits provided under th e Act. It is for the Legislature to take 
cognizance of situation of such teachers in va rious establishments where gratuity benefits 
are not available and think of a separate legisl ation for them in this regard. That is the 
subject matter solely of the Legislature to consider and decide.". 
 
3. Keeping in view the observations of the Hon' ble Supreme Court, it is proposed to widen the 
definition of "employee", in order to extend the be nefits of gratuity to the teachers, by amending 
the same. 
 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                        OSCAR FERNANDES. 
The 7th September, 2007. 

 24
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
 
The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (the Act) pr ovides for payment of gratuity to employees 
employed in any establishment, factory, mine, o ilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop 
employing ten or more workers. The Bill amends the definition of "employee" in section 2(e) of the 
Act so that teachers shall also be entitled for payment of gratuity. 
 
2. The responsibility for administration of the Ac t vests mainly in the State Governments and the 
liability for payment of gratuity vests in the employer. The employees of the Central Government 
and State Governments who are getting gratuity under any other Act or rules are not covered 
under the Act. However, as respects teachers employed by institutions aided by the Central 
Government, the liability on employers may involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. The exact expenditure to be incurred on this account cannot be estimated at this stage. 
 
3. Apart from the above, no other expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature from the 
Consolidated Fund of India is envisaged. 

 25
ANNEXURE 
 
 
EXTRACT FROM THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY A CT, 1972 
 
(39 OF 1972) 
 
*    *    *    *   * 
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 
*    *    *    *   * 
 
(e) "employee" means any person (other than an apprentice) employed on wages in any 
establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop, to do any skilled, 
semi-skilled, or un-skilled, manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work, whether the terms of 
such employment are express or implied and wh ether or not such person is employed in a 
managerial or administrative capacity, but does not include 
any such person who holds a post under the Cent ral Government or a State Government and is 
governed by any other Act or by any rules providing for payment of gratuity; 
 
 
*    *    *    *   * 
  

 26
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
 
 
further to amend the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
( Shri Oscar Fernandes, Minister of Labour and Employment) 
 
 
 
 
 
MGIPMRND—4594LS(S5)—19.11.2007. 

 27
ANNEXURE-II 
 
Hon’ble Supreme Court’ Judgement dated 13.1.2004 
 
AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 1426 
 
SHIVARAJ V. PATIL AND D.M. DHARMADHIKARI, JJ. 
Civil Appeal No.6369 of 2001 
Date of Judgement 13.1.2004 
Ahmedabad Pvt. Primary Teachers’ Association….. Appellant 
V/s 
Administrative Officer and others……….Respondents 
 
DHARMADHIKARI, J:- This appeal has been  preferred by Ahmedabad Private Primary 
Teachers’ Association.  The Association complain s that in the petition filed by an individual 
teacher (respondent No.2 herein) employed in a school run by Ahmedabad Municipal 
Corporation, the Full Bench of the High Court of Gujarat by impugned judgment dated 4.5.2001 in 
Special civil Application No.5272 of 1987 not only rejected the claim of the teacher for payment of 
gratuity under the provisions of Payment of Grat uity Act, 1972 (for short the Act) but has decided 
an important questions of law against the teachers as a class that they do not fall within the 
definition of ‘employee’ as contained in Section 2 (e) of the Act and hence can raise no claim to 
gratuity under the Act.  
 
2. The definition of employee contained in Section 2 (e) of 1972 reads as under:- 
 
‘2 (e), ‘employee’ means any person (other than an apprentice) employed on wages, in any 
establishment, factory mine, oilfield, plantation, port railway company or shop 
to do any skilled, 
semi-skilled, or unskilled manual, supe rvisory, technical or clerical work , whether the terms of 
such employment are express or implied, and wh ether or not such person in employed in a  
managerial or administrative capacity, but does not include any such person who holds a post 
under the Central Government or a State Government  and is governed by any other Act or by any 
rules providing for payment of gratuity.’         
      (Underlining giving emphasis) 
 
3. One of the learned Judges of the High Court in his separate concurring opinion held that as 
gratuity payable to teachers employed in sc hools of Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation are 
governed by statutory regulations known as ‘Gratuity Regulations of the Municipal Corporation of 
the city of Ahmedabad’ framed by the Corporation under Section 465 (i) (h) of the Bombay 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1949, such teachers ev en if held to be covered by main part of 
definition of ‘employee’ are expressly excluded by the last exclusionary clause of definition shown 
by underlying it as above. 
 
4. As all the learned  Judges have unanimously  held that teachers are not covered by the 
definition of ‘employee’ under Section 2(e) of th e Act, it has become necessary for this Court to 
consider the correctness of the view with regard to  the applicability of the Act to the teachers as a 
class. 
 
 
 
 

 28
5. We have heard the learned counsel appearing for all contesting parties.  As the legal 
question involved is general in nature affecting teachers as a class, on our request, senior advocate, 
Dr. Rajeev Dhawan appeared as Amicus Curiae. We are immensely benefited by his able assistance 
which we thankfully acknowledge. 
 
6. The Act is a piece of social welfare legislation and deals with the payment of gratuity which 
is a kind of retrial benefit like pension, provident fund etc.  As has been explained in the  
concurring opinion of one of the learned Judges of  the High Court ‘gratuity in its etymological 
sense is a gift, especially for services rendered, or  return for favours received.’  It has now been 
universally recognized that all pe rsons in society need protection against loss of income due to 
unemployment arising out of incapacity to work due to invalidity, old age etc.  For the wage 
earning population, security of income, when the worker becomes old or infirm, is of 
consequential importance.  The provisions contained in the Act are in the nature of social security 
measures like employment insurance,  provident fund and pension.  The Act accepts, in principle, 
compulsory payment of gratuity as a social security measure to wage earning population in 
industries, factories and establishments. 
 
7. Thus, the main purpose and concept of gratui ty is to help the workman after retirement, 
whether, retirement is a result of rules of supe rannuation, or physical di sablement or impairment 
of vital part of the body.  The expression, ‘gratuit y’ itself suggests that it is a gratuitous payment 
given to an employee or discharge, superannuati on or death.  Gratuity is a amount paid 
unconnected with any consideration and not resting upon it, and has to be considered as 
something given freely, voluntarily or without recomp ense.  It is sort of financial assistance to tide 
over post-retiral hardships and inconveniences. 
 
8. The following important words and expressions in the definition clause 2(e), are before us 
for consideration and interpretation in the light of the arguments advances which project different 
points of view:- 
 
2)e). ‘employee’ means any person (other than an apprentice) employed on wages, in any 
establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop, to do any skilled, 
semi-skilled  or unskilled, manual, supervisory, te chnical or clerical work… whether or not such 
person is employed in a  managerial or administrative capacity. 
 
(Underlining given emphasis) 
 
9. The learned counsel appearing for the Teache rs’ Association and also the learned Amicus 
Curiae very strenuously urged th at a beneficial, purposeful and wide interpretation should be 
placed on the definition of employee in Section 2(e)  of the Act particularly in the light of the fact 
that earlier in the definition clause, there was an  income limit of wages being not more than Rs. 
2300/- per month, for extending coverage of gratuity benefit to the employees.  That wages or 
salary limit has, however, been done away with  by introducing amendment to the definition 
clause 2(e) of the Act.  Now gratuity is payable to all employees irrespective of the quantum of 
salary or wages paid to them.  It is, further, po inted out that in the unamended definition clause, 
employees working in managerial or administrative capacity were excluded from the definition of 
an ‘employee’ but after the amendment introduced with effect from 1-7-1984, even employees in 
managerial or administrative capacity and without any bar or limit or their salaries or wages are 
brought within the definition of ‘employee’ to ex tend the benefit of gratuity to them.  Learned 
counsel appearing for the appellant and the learne d Amicus Curiae, therefore, contended that a 

 29
very wide meaning has to be given to the work ‘employee’ in the definition contained in Section 
2(e) of the Act. 
 
10. On the other hand, learned senior counsel Shri R. F. Nariman contends that the Act is one 
of the labour welfare legislations.  The words and  expressions used in the provision of the Act 
should be considered in the light of the provisio ns contained in other labour legislations where 
similar expressions and definitions have been used.  He has referred to the definition of ‘employee’ 
in Section 2(i) of the Minimum Wages Act, Se ction 2(13) of the Payment of Bonus Act and 
compared those provisions with definition of ‘employee’ in Se ction 2(f) of the Provident Funds 
A c t .   R e f e r e n c e  i s  a l s o  m a d e  t o  d e f i n i t i o n  o f ‘workman’ under Section 2(s) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act. Thus, on comparative reading of the various definitions in different enactments in 
the field of labour legislation, the learned coun sel appearing for the respondent argues that a 
teacher cannot be said to be employed eith er for skilled, semi-skilled, unskilled, manual, 
supervisory, technical or cleric al work.  He/She is also not employed in any managerial or 
administrative capacity.  The teacher is engaged in imparting education for intellectual or moral 
development of students.  He/She does not answer any of the above mentioned descriptions in the 
definition clause with regard to the nature of work. 
 
11. The learned Amicus Curiae, in his counter re ply, submitted that the words ‘skilled’, ‘semi-
skilled’ or unskilled’ do not qualify the worlds ‘manual ’, ‘supervisory’ ‘technical’ or ‘clerical’.  It is 
contended that all the worlds ‘skilled’, ‘semi-skilled’, ‘unskilled’, ‘manual’, ‘supervisory’, 
‘technical’, or ‘clerical’, because of the commas in  between them have to be read disjunctively and 
they all qualify the word ‘work’ which is mentioned at the end of all these words. 
 
12. We have critically examined the definition clause in the light of the arguments advanced on 
either side and have compared it with the defini tions given in other labour enactments.  On the 
doctrine of ‘pari materia’, reference to other statut es dealing with the same subject of forming part 
of the same system is a permissible aid to the co nstruction of provisions in statute.  See the 
following observations contained in Principles of Statutory Interpretation by G. P. Singh (8 th Ed.) 
Synopsis 4 at pp. 235 to 239:- 
 
“Statues in pari material:- It has been already been  seen that a statute must be read as a whole as 
works are to be understood in their context.  Extension off this rule of context permits reference to 
other statues in pari material, i.e. statutes dealing with the same subject matter or forming part of 
the same system.  Viscount Simonds in a passage already noticed conceived it to be a right and 
duty to construe every world of a statute in its co ntext and he used the world context in its widest 
sense including ‘other statues in pari material.  As stated by Lord Mansfield, ‘where there are 
different statues in pari material though made at different times, or even expired, and not referring 
to each other, they shall be taken and construed together, as one system and as explanatory of each 
other…… 
 
The application of this rule of construction has the merit of avoiding any apparent contradiction 
between a series of statues dealing with the same su bject, it allows the use of an earlier statue to 
throw light on the meaning of a phrase used in a later statue in the same context, it permits the 
raining of a presumption, in the absence of any co ntext indicating a contrary intention, that the 
same meaning attaches to the same words in a late r statute as in an earlier statue if the words are 
used in similar connection in the two statutes, and it enables the use of a later statue as 
parliamentary exposition of the meaning of ambiguous expressions in an earlier statute.’ 
 

 30
13. The definition of ‘workman’ contained in sect ion 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
meaning ‘any person employed in any industry to do any skilled or unskilled, manual, 
supervisory, technical, operational, manual, superv isory, technical, operat ional, or clerical work’ 
came up for consideration before this Court when  teachers claimed that they are covered by the 
definition of the industr ial disputes Act.  In the case of A Sundarambal v. Govt. of Goa, Daman 
and Die {1988 (4) SCC42}, this Court negatived the claim of teachers that they are covered by the 
definition of ‘workman,’ under Industrial Disputes Act thus:- 
 
“Even though an educational institution has to be treated as an in ‘industry,’ teachers in an 
educational institution cannot be considered as workman. 
 
The teachers employed by educational institutio ns whether the said inst itutions are imparting 
primary, secondary, graduate or post-graduate education cannot be called as ‘workman’ within the 
meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act.  Imparting of education which is the main function of teachers 
cannot be considered as skilled or unskilled, manual  work or supervisory work or technical work 
or clerical work.  Imparting of education is in the nature of a mission or a noble vacation.  The 
clerical work, if any, they may do, is only incidental to their principal work of teaching.” 
 
14. The definition of ‘employees’ as contained in Section 2(i) of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
came up for consideration before this Court in the case of  Haryana Unrecognized Schools’ 
Association Vs. State of Haryana {1996 (4) SCC 255}.  In Section 2(i) of the Minimum Wages Act, 
the word ‘employees’ is defined to mean: ‘any pers on who is employed for hire or reward to do 
any work skilled or unskilled, manual or clerical, in a scheduled employment  in respect of which 
minimum rates of wages have been fixed.’  This Court held that as teachers are not employed for 
any skilled or unskilled, manual or clerical work, it  is not open to the State Government to include 
their employment as a scheduled employment under the Minimum Wages Act.  The relevant 
observations need to be quoted:- 
 
“A combined reading of Ss. 3, 2(i) and 27 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 and the Statement of 
Objects and reasons of the legislation makes it explicitly clear that the State Government can add to 
either part of the Schedule any employment where person are employed for hire or reward to do 
any work skilled or unskilled, manual or clerical.  If the persons employed do not do the work of 
any skilled or unskilled or of a manual or clerical nature then it would not be possible for the State 
Government to include such an employment in the Schedule in exercise of power under S. 27 of 
the Act.  
Since the teachers of an educational institution are not employed to do any skilled or 
unskilled or manual or clerical work and therefore, could not be held to an employee under S. 2(i) 
of the Act, it is beyond the competence of the State Government to bring them under the purview 
of the Act by adding the employment in education institution in the Schedule in exercise of power 
under S. 27 of the Act.   Hence, the State Government in exer cise of powers under the Act is not 
entitled to fix the minimum wage of such teachers.  The impugned notifications so far as the 
teachers of the educational institution are concerned are accordingly quashed.”  
(Emphasis added by underlining) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 31
 
15. The definitions of ‘employee’ in other labour  legislations which need to be considered for 
comparison are first S. 2(13) of the Payment of  Bonus Act, 1965 where the definition reads as 
under:- 
 
‘2(13). ‘Employee’ means any person (other then an  apprentice) employed on a salary or wage not 
exceeding (three thousand and five hundred rupees) per mensem in any industry to do any skilled 
or unskilled manual, supervisory, managerial, administ rative, technical or clerical work for hire or 
reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied.’ 
(Emphasis added) 
 
16. Section 2(f) of the Employees’ Provident Funds Act, 1952 defines ‘employee’ as under:- 
 
‘2(f). “employee” means any person who is employed for wages in any kind of work manual or 
otherwise, in or in connections with the work of  an establishment and who gets his wages directly 
or indirectly from the employer.’  (Emphasis added) 
 
17. Learned counsel appearing for the Corporat ion does not dispute that definition of 
employee under the Employees’ Provident Fund Act, 1952 is very wide and may include even a 
teacher in an educational establishment because the ex pression in the definition clause used is ‘any 
person who is employed for wages in any kind of work, manual or otherwise , in or in connection 
with the work of (an establishment) and who gets his wages directly or indirectly from the 
employer.’ 
 
18. It is submitted that since such language of wide import inn defining ‘employee’ is not used 
in the Payment of Gratuity Act of 1972, the definition  is restrictive and not expansive.  It has to be 
understood as excluding ‘teachers’ who are not doing any kind of skilled or unskilled, manual, 
supervisory, managerial, administrative, technical or clerical work. 
 
19. It is not disputed that by Notification dated 3 rd April, 1997, 1997, issued in exercise of 
powers under s. 1(3) (c) of the Payment of Grat uity Act, 1972 the Gratuity Act is extended to 
educational institutions in which ten or more pe rsons are employed or we re employed on any day 
preceding 12 months.  The relevant part of the Notification reads as under:- 
 
APPLICABILITY OF THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972 
IN 
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 
 
 
‘NOTIFICATION NO. 5-42013/1/95-ss.ii dated 3 RD APRIL, 1997.-In exercise of the powers 
conferred by Cl. (c) of sub-clause (3) of S. 1 of  the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (39 of 1972), the 
Central Government hereby specifies the educational institutions in which ten or more persons are 
employed or were employed on any day preceding 12 month as a class of establishments to which 
the said Act shall apply with effect form the date of publication of this Notification. 
 
Provided that nothing contained in this Notification  shall affect the operation of the Notification of 
the Ministry of Labour S. O. 239  dated 8thh January, 1982.’ 
 
 
 

 32
 
20. An educational institution, therefore, is an ‘establishment’ notified under S. 1(3) (c) of the 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.  On behalf of the Municipal Corporation, it is contended that the 
only beneficial effect of the Notification issued under S. 1(3) (c) of the Act of 1972, is that such non-
teaching staff of educational institutions as answer the description of any of the employments 
contained in the definition Cl. 2(e), would be covere d by provisions of the Act.  The teaching staff 
being not covered by the definition of ‘emplo yee’ can get no advantage merely because by 
Notification ‘educational institutions’ as establishments are covered by the provisions of the Act. 
 
21. Having thus compared the various definiti o n  c l a u s e  o f  w o r k  ‘ e m p l o y e e ’  i n  d i f f e r e n t  
enactments, with due regard to the different aims and  objects of the various labour legislations, we 
are of the view that even on plai n construction of the words and ex pression used in definition Cl. 
2(e) of the Act, ‘teachers’ who are mainly employ ed for imparting education are not intended to be 
covered for extending gratuity benefits under the Act.  Teachers do not answer description of 
being employees who are ‘skilled,’ ‘semi-skilled’ or unskilled.’  These three word use in association 
with each other intend to convey that a person  who is unskilled is one who is not ‘skilled’ and 
person who is ‘semi-skilled’ may be one who falls between two categories meaning he is neither 
fully skilled nor unskilled.  The Black’s Law Dictionary defines these three words as under:- 
 
 “Semi-skilled work.  Work that may require some alertness and close attention such as 
inspecting items or machinery for irregularities, or guarding property or people against loss or 
injury. 
 
 Skilled work.  Work requiring the worker to use judgement, deal with  the public, analyses 
facts and figures, or work with abstract ideas at a high level of complexity. 
 
 Unskilled work.  Work requiring little or no judgement, and involving simple tasks that can 
be learned quickly on the job. 
 
 
22. In construing the above mentioned three wo rd which are used in association with each 
other, the rule of construction noscitur a sociis may be applied.  The meaning of each of these work 
i s  t o  b e  u n d e r s t o o d  b y  t h e  c o m p a n y  i t  k e e p s .   I t  is a legitimate rule of construction to construe 
words in an Act of Parliament with reference to words fund in immediate connection with them.  
The actual order of these three words in juxtaposition indicates that meaning of one takes colour 
from the other.  The rule is explained different ly:  ‘ that meaning of doubtful world may be 
ascertained be reference to the meaning of words a ssociated with it.’  (See principle of Statutory 
Interpretation of Justice G. P. Singh (8
th Ed.)’ Syn. 8 at pg. 379). 
 
23. The world ‘unskilled’ is opposite of the world ‘skilled’ and the word ‘semi-skilled’ seems to 
describe a person who falls between the two categori es i.e. he is not fully skilled and also is not 
completely unskilled but has some amount of skill for the work for which he is employed.  The 
words ‘unskilled’ cannot, therefore, be understood  dissociated from the word ‘skilled’ and ‘semi-
skilled’ to read and construe it to include in it all categories of employee irrespective of the nature 
of employment.  If the Legislature intended to cover all categories of employees for extending 
benefit of gratuity under the Act, specific mentio n of categories of employment in the definition 
clause was no necessary at all.  Any construction of definition clause whic h renders it superfluous 
or otiose has to be avoided. 
 
 

 33
 
 
24. The contention advanced that teachers sh ould be treated as included in expression 
‘unskilled’ or ‘skilled’ cannot’ therefore’ be accepted. The teachers might have been imparted 
training for teaching or there may be cases wher e teachers who are employed in primary schools 
are untrained.  A trained teacher is not described in industrial field or se rvice jurisprudence as a 
‘skilled employee’.  Such adjective generally is us ed for employee doing manual or technical work.  
Similarly, the words ‘semi-skilled’ and ‘uns killed’ are not understood in educational 
establishments as describing nature of job of untrained teachers.  We do not attach much 
importance to the argument advanced on the ques tion as to whether ‘skilled’, ‘semi-skilled’ and 
‘unskilled’ qualify the words ‘manual,’ ‘supervisory , ‘technical,’ or ‘clerical’ or the above words 
qualify the word ‘work’.  Even if all the words are read disjunctively or in any other manner, 
trained or untrained teachers do not plainly answer any of the descriptions of the nature of various 
employments given in the definition clause.  Trai ned or untrained teachers are not ‘skilled,’ ‘semi-
skilled,’ ‘unskilled,’ ‘manual,’ ‘supervisory,’ ‘technical’ or ‘clerical’ employees.  They are also not 
employed in  ‘managerial’ or ‘administrative’ ca pacity.  Occasionally, even if they do some 
administrative work as part of their duty wi th teaching, since their main job is imparting 
education, they cannot be held employed in ‘managerial’ or ‘administrative’ capacity.  The teachers 
are clearly not intended to be covered by the definition of ‘employee.’ 
 
25. The Legislature was alive to various kinds of  definitions of word ‘employee’ contained in 
various previous labour enactments when the Act was passed in 1972.  If it intended to cover in the 
definition of ‘employee’ all kinds of employees, it  could have as well used such wide language as 
is contained in S. 2(f) the Employees Provident Funds Act 1952 which defines ‘employee’ to mean 
‘any per son who is employed for wages in any kind of work, manual or otherwise, in or in 
connection with the work of (an establishment)…. Non-use of such wide language in the definition 
of ‘employee’ in S. 2(e) of the Act of 1972 reinfo rces our conclusion that teachers are clearly not 
covered in the definition. 
 
26. Our conclusion should not be misunderstood that teachers although engaged in very noble 
profession of educating our young generation should not be given any  gratuity benefit.  There are 
already in several States separa te statutes, rules and regulations granting gratuity benefits to 
teachers in educational institutions which are mo re or less beneficial than the gratuity benefits 
provided under the Act.  It is for the Legislature to  take cognizance of situation of such teachers in 
various establishments where gratuity benefits are not available and think or a separate legislation 
for them in this regard.  That is the subject-matter solely of the Legislature to consider and decide. 
 
27. In conclusion, we find no merit in this appeal.  It is, hereby, dismissed but without any 
order as to costs. 
 
 Appeal dismissed. 

 34
 
NOTIFICATION ON APPLICABILITY OF THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972 TO LOCAL 
BODIES 
 
 
{PUBLISHED IN THE GAZETTE OF INDIA, PART- II, SECTION3, SUB-SECTION (ii) ON 23 RD 
JANUARY 1982} 
 
 
Government of India/Bharat Sarkar 
 
Ministry of Labour/Shram Mantralaya 
 
**** 
 
New Delhi, The 8th January, 1982. 
 
 
NOTIFICATION 
 
 
 
 
S. O. No. 239…..-In exercise of the powers conferre d by clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 1 
of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (39 of 1972), the Central Government hereby specified 
‘local bodies’ in which ten or more persons are employed, or were employed, on any day 
preceding twelve months, as a class of establishments to which the said Act shall apply with 
effect from the date of publication of this notification in the Official Gazette. 
 
 
 
  Sd/. 
 
(R. K. A. Subrahmanya) 
Additional Secretary 
 
(F. No. S-70020/16/77-FPG) 
 
To, 
 The Manager, 
 Government of India Press, 
 Ring Road, Mayapuri Industrial Area, 
 New Delhi 
 

 35
 
 
NOTIFICATION OF APPLICABILITY OF TH E PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972 TO 
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 
 
 
{PUBLISHED IN THE GAZETTE OF INDIA, PART-II SECTION 3(i) OF THE GAZETTE OF 
INDIA ON 19TH APRIL 1997} 
 
Government of India/Bharat Sarkar 
Ministry of Labour/Shram Mantralaya 
 
New Delhi, the 3rd April, 1997. 
 
NOTIFICATION 
 
 
S.O. 1080….-In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 1 of the 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (39 of 1972), the Central Government hereby specifies the 
educational institutions in which ten or more pe rsons are employed or we re employed on any day 
preceding 12 months as a class of establishments to  which the said Act shall apply with effect from 
the date of publication of this notification. 
 
Provided that nothing contained in this notification shall affect the operation of the notification of 
the Ministry of Labour  S.O. 239 dated 8th January, 1982.’ 
 
 
 
(F. No. S-42013/1/95-SS.II) 
 
Sd/. 
(J. P. Shukla) 
UNDER SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
To 
 
 The Manager, 
 Government of India Press, 
 Ring Road, Mayapuri, 
 New Delhi 
 

 36
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
 
The Committee sat on  28 December 2007 from 140 0 hrs. to  1600 hrs.   in Committee 
Room `C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
5. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan 
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil 
8. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
9. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
10. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
  
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
11. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
12. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
13. Shri K.Chandran Pillai 
14. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1. Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri N. K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director 
4. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Deputy  Secretary-II 
        
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

 37
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer   Designation 
1. Shri S. Krishnan  Additional Secretary (L&E) 
 
2. Ms. Gurjot Kaur Joint Secretary (SS) 
 
3. Shri S. K. Mukhopadhyay CLC (C) 
 
4. 
 
Shri N.K. Prasad Dy. CLC (C) 
5. Shri S. K. Verma Director (SS) 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE (DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL 
AFFAIRS) 
       
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer   Designation 
1. Shri M. K. Sharma Additional Government 
Counsel 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the repr esentatives of the Ministries of Labour and 
Employment and the Ministry of Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)   to the sitting and 
drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.     
 
3. The Committee was then briefed by the repr esentatives of the Ministries of Labour & 
Employment and Law & Justice  on the proposed amendment sought by “The Payment of Gratuity 
(Amendment) Bill, 2007”  which was referred to the  Standing Committee on Labour for 
examination and report within three months as per notification in Bulletin Part-II dated 10.12.2007.  
  
4. Thereafter, the Members raised queries which were replied to by the witnesses.  The 
Chairman then directed the  officials of the Ministries  of Labour & Employment and Law & Justice 
to furnish  replies to questions for which the rep lies were not readily available with them during 
the briefing within  a week to the Committee. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
   A verbatim record of the briefing has been kept.  
   
The Committee then adjourned.  
 

 38
  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
 
The Committee sat on  19 February 2008 from 1430 hrs. to 1530  hrs. in Committee Room 
`B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
4. Shri Virendra Kumar 
5. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil 
6. Shri Devidas Pingle 
7. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
8. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
9. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
10. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
11. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
12. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
13. Shri K.Chandran Pillai 
14. Shri Gandhi Azad 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1. Shri N. K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director 
3. Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
4. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Deputy  Secretary-II    
    
 
  

 39
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting  and apprised 
them about the draft Twenty-sixth report on “The Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Bill, 2007”.   
 
3. The Committee then took up the draft Twenty-sixth report for consideration and adoption.  
After detailed discussion on all the recommendat ions, the Committee adopted the report with the 
following modifications: 
 
(i) Page No.19, Para No.38, Line 5 from bottom: Insert “ continuously” after 
“worked”. 
 
(ii) Page No.20, Para No.38,  Line 3 from the top: Insert “The Committee recommend 
that if a contract worker has rendered five years of service, whether continuous or 
otherwise, in an organization be made entitled for Gratuity under the Act” after 
“itself”. 
  
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the above Report and present the 
same to the Parliament on their behalf. 
 
  
  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 