18 
 
  EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2006-07) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on   Demands for 
Grants for the year 2006-2007 of the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
 
 
 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 December 2006 
  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  12 December 2006 
 
 
 
            
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
December   2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

  
CONTENTS 
 
       
    P A G E    
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE   (iii) 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N           
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………    
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
accepted by the Government………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s reply…………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration…………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
which  replies of the Government  are interim  
in nature    …………. 
 
APPENDIX-I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 6.12.2006  
   
APPENDIX-II Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
      (2006-2007) 
  
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Subrata Bose    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot    
6. Shri Munawar Hassan    
7. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
9. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan   
10. Shri Virendra Kumar     
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
12. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil   
13. Shri Devidas Pingle  
14. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
15. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat   
    16. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat   
17. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
  18. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  19. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam 
  20. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  21. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
22.       Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
23.       Shri Gandhi Azad 
24.       Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
25.       Shri Dilip Ray 
      26.       Shri Rahul Bajaj 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri S.K. Sharma  -           Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri N.K. Sapra   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.S. Misra   - Director  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
5.    Smt. Lalita Khanna - Committee Officer  
 

   
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been authorised  by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Eighteenth Report on the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations contai ned in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants-2006-2007 relating to 
Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
 
2. The  Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also  laid in  Rajya Sabha on 17 May 2006.  
The Ministry of Labour and Employment furnishe d their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on  7 August 2006.   The report was considered and 
adopted by the Standing Committee on Labour at their sitting held on  6 December, 2006. 
 
3. The Report has been divided into the following chapters:- 
 
I. Report. 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by Government. 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply. 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration. 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Thirteenth  Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix. 
 
5. For the facility of reference recommendat ions/observations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                     SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY   
6 December, 2006                          CHAIRMAN  
15 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
   

  
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirteenth  Report on Demands for Grants (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) for the year 2006-2007. 
 
1.2 The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and was laid in Rajya Sabha on 17 May  
2006.  It contained 24 recommendations.  Replies of Government in respect of all the 
recommendations have been examined and are considered as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government--
Paragraph Sl. Nos. 2,4,5,7,9,17 and 23. 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply --Paragraph Sl. Nos. 1 and 11. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 
3,6,15,16,22 and 24. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect  of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 5,7,8,9,10,12,13,14,18,19,21 and 23. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5,9 and 23 have been included in two chapters (II & V) as the replies 
furnished by Government are interim in natu re although these recommendations have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken note s in respect of recommendations contained 
in Chapter I and final action taken notes in respect of recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V for which only interim replies have  been given by the Government may be 
furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later than 3 months of the 
presentation of the Report.  The Committee will now deal with 
recommendations/observations in respect of which the replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by Committee and which require  reiteration. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
A General Performance of Minist ry of Labour & Employment  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3,  para no. 2.21) 
 
1.4   The Committee had noted with distress that a large part of funds allocated for the Scheme--
Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour--had lapsed , as the State Governments did not come 
forward with their proposals for rehabil itation of bonded labour identified by them. The 
Committee also noted that the Mini stry had not been ab le to get utilization certificates from 
the States, viz. Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu which were allocated money under the 
Scheme in previous years. During the cour se of evidence on Demands-for-Grants, the 
Committee felt that because of the very title, viz. “Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour 
Scheme” due to which the State Governments were not coming forward with their proposals 
because it was stigma on the society and no State Government wanted to become a part to it. 
The Committee were deeply concerned to note that even after a period of over  60 years of 
Independence, the country was still following the footsteps of  the British. The Committee, 
therefore, desired that the Mini stry should make vigorous efforts to eradicate this prevailing 
stigma on society and for that matter, if felt necessary the nomenclature of the Scheme be 
changed so that bonded labour were rehabilita ted effectively. The Committee also desired 
that the Ministry should strengthen its mon itoring mechanism with the State Governments 
so that the utilization certificates were receiv ed from them in time. In the opinion of the 
Committee failure to rehabilitate the bonded labour may lead to social, economic and 
political problems in the country. They, theref ore, strongly recomme nded that the Ministry 
should take steps for conducting survey with regard to iden tification of bonded labour by a 
Central team in order to ascertain the actua l number of bonded labour and then come out 
with their rehabilitation package in a phased manner. 
 
1.5 In response to the above recommendation, the Ministry of Labour & Employment in its 
action taken reply has stated as follows:- 
 
“The Ministry has taken a proa ctive approach towards elimination of bonded labour system. 
Poverty, unemployment/under-employment and illiteracy are the most important factors that 
contribute to bonded labour. Given the complex socio-economic dimensions of the 
problems, improvement in the living and working conditions of the working people and their 
economic condition is crucial to the elimin ation of bonded labour. The support of various 
Ministries has been enlisted with a view to adopting a multi-dimensional strategy to ensure 
that the benefit of development programmes percolates to this group. Bonded Labour is a 
dynamic problem which may occur/reoccur at any poi nt of time as it is generally linked to 
socio-economic condition of the working people. Engaging labour as ‘bonded’ is an offence 
and punishable under the Act. Bonded Labour  is not a sector of employment continuing on 
regular basis. The Ministry is  providing grants to States/UTs. for conducting district wise 
survey of bonded labour and aw areness generation. In view of above, no purpose would be 
served by undertaking survey of bonded labour at the Central level. So far recommendation 
relating to monitoring the implementation of  the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 

1976 and Centrally Sponsored Plan Scheme is concerned, reply of the Ministry has already 
been mentioned against Pare No. 2.19.” 
 
 
 
 
1.6          The Committee are least satisf ied with the reply of the Government as the 
Government has not cared to pay any heed to th eir suggestions.  Instead of making efforts in 
the light of Committee’s recomme ndation, the Government has furnished the similar reply 
which was furnished by them in the past on di fferent occasions.  The Ministry has not even 
bothered to convene a State Labour Ministers’ Conference to address the issue forcefully.  
While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee are of strong view that this 
stigma on the society needs to be dispensed with  urgently and for that matter the issue should 
have been taken up at the highest level.  The Committee are further of the opinion that the 
Cabinet may also be taken into confidence so that immediate re medial measures are taken to 
identify and rehabilitate the bonded labour in coordination with  the concerned State 
Governments.  The Committee may be apprised  of the concrete steps taken and progress 
achieved  within a period of three months of presentation of this Report to Parliament.  
  

  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, para no. 2.24) 
 
1.7 The Committee regretted to note that so far only 4 hospitals and 206 dispensaries 
had been working for 44 lakh beedi workers in the country, which was obviously 
quite inadequate to provide proper Medica re for them.  The Committee also note 
that only OPD was functioning at Bihar Sharief hospital and the construction and 
electrical work was still in process in Sagar (Madhya Pradesh) and Mukkadal (Tamil 
Nadu).  Further, these hospitals had not  been provided with medical and para 
medical staff.  The Committee noted wit h deep concern that there had been an 
inordinate delay in making these hospitals   functional.  The Co mmittee, therefore, 
desired that these hospitals should be made functional by providing adequate 
medical and para medical staff and equipm ents within a set time frame.  The 
Committee were also of the view that as  an interim measure, the Ministry may 
engage ESIC or some similar agency to administer these hospitals and Beedi 
Workers Welfare Cess fund may be utilized for the purpose.  The Committee also 
desired that a 50 - bedded hospital should be set up at Orissa, particularly in 
Sambalpur region which is highly concentrated zone of beedi workers. 
 
1.8 Reply of the Government to the above recommendation is as follows:- 
 
“The Civil construction work at Sagar has already been completed, while both civil 
and electrical work at Mukkudal are over.  Necessary orders for creation of posts of 
Doctors and paramedical staff for all the three hospitals have been issued.  For 
appointment of Medical Officers, the Heal th and Family Welfare Department has 
already been requested.  After the Ministry of Health fills up the posts of doctors, 
other paramedical staff may be posted and the Hospitals will be made fully 
functional.    
 
With regard to setting up of a new Hospital fo r beedi workers, it is reiterated that no 
new project for setting up of Hospitals /Dispe nsaries can be considered, in the light 
of the recommendation of the Committee on Non Plan Expenditure.  Further, the 
fund position under the Beedi Workers Welfare Fund and also the difficulties faced 
in getting doctors in our existing Hospit als/Dispensaries, restrain us to move 
towards setting up of more Hospitals/Dispensar ies. It is also re iterated that a new 
pilot scheme has already been launched to provide one time grant of Rs.2.00 crore 
to State Governments/Employees State Insurance Corporation/Reputed NGOs/Beedi 
Workers Group Housing Cooperative Soci ety/Central or State Government 
recognized Private Hosp itals/Dispensaries intending to construct new 
Hospitals/Dispensaries or to expand the existing Hospitals/Di spensaries so as to 
provide medical facilities to beedi workers and their dependents.” 

 
1.9 The Committee had, while noting that only 4 hospitals and 206 dispensaries have been 
established to cater to the need of 44 lakh beedi workers, observed that these were quite 
inadequate in view of a large number of beedi wo rkers in different part of the country .  They 
had, therefore,  recommended that two hospitals i.e Sagar (M.P.) and Mukkudal (T.N.) should 
be made fully functional without any delay.  In this regard, the Committee were informed that 
electrical work was yet to be taken up in S agar (M.P.) whereas civil & electrical work of 
Mukkudal (T.N.) has since been completed, but both the hospitals have not yet been made 
fully functional.    The Committee take a seri ous view of avoidable and inordinate delay and 
feel  dismayed that sanction for establishing these two hospitals were issued in October 2001 
as stated in Demands for Grants for the year 2003-2004 (32 nd Report) but these hospitals 
could not be made functional even after 5 ye ars.  The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Government to sort out the problems coming in  the way of making these hospitals   fully 
functional and report the progress to the Committee within two months of presentation of this 
report positively.   
                        
1.10      Further, the Committee are not satisf ied with the reply of the Government with 
regard to the setting up of a 50 bedded hospital in Sambalpur region of Orissa, that no project 
for setting up of hospitals/dispensaries can be considered owing to recommendations by 
Committee on Non-Plan Expenditure.  The Commi ttee deplore that instead of exploring the 
possibilities under the ‘pilot scheme’ for setti ng up the hospital for beedi workers of 
Sambalpur Region, the Government has take n the shield of a recommendation of the 
Committee which does not have any bearing on  beedi workers. The Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and urge upon the Governme nt  that a  50 - bedded hospital whether 
under the ‘pilot scheme’ wherein a one time gr ant of Rs.2 crore is provided or under any 
other plan/scheme, should be set-up immediatel y in District Sambalpur   (Orissa) which is a 
highly concentrated zone of beedi workers to provide better medical facilities to them and 
their dependents. 
 

 
B. Minimum Wages:- 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15, para no. 3.83) 
 
1.11 The Committee had noted with concern that there was a widespread disparity in the 
minimum wages across the country, i.e.  Rs. 55.00 – 57.00 in Arunachal Pradesh 
and Rs. 54.00 – 150.00 in Tamil Nadu. In so me of the States, the minimum wages 
were even below the National Floor Level Wages fixed by  the Central Government. 
The Committee note that 26 State Governm ents/Union Territory Administrations 
had been able to link minimum wages with variable dearness allowance (VDA). The 
Committee, therefore, desired that the Ministry should ta ke up the issue with the 
State Governments/Union Territory Admini strations and ensure that the minimum 
wages for any scheduled employment fix ed by them was kept at least at the 
National Floor Level Minimum Wages, which was Rs. 66.00 per day. The 
Committee also desired that the minimum wages should be revised where these 
had not been revised so far. Also vigorou s efforts should be made to pursue the 
State Governments/UTs to link the mini mum wages to the Consumer Price Index 
(CPI) and to revise the variable dearness allo wance after every six months or when 
CPI increases by 50 points,  which ever was earlier. Further, the Committee noted 
that with the passage of time, new employ ments such as security workers, Safai 
Karamcharis and other similar employments had come up. They, therefore, desired 
that the parent Act should be suitably am ended to cover these new employments 
both in the Central and State spheres at the earliest. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
1.12 The States / Union Territories are request ed from time to time to fix minimum wages 
in the scheduled employment not less than the National Floor Level Minimum Wage 
of Rs.66/- per day, which is a non statutory measure. Revision of wages is a 
continuous process; the Appropriate Governm ents revise it as per the provisions of 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948. Further State Governments have been forwarded the 
recommendations of the Par liamentary Committee for necessary action in their 
respective jurisdiction.  
 

 
1.13 The Committee having been concerned that there exists a widespread disparity in the 
minimum wages across the country in different States/UTs, i.e. Rs. 55.00-57.00 in Arunachal 
Pradesh and Rs. 54.00-150.00 in Tamil Nadu and in  some of the States the minimum wages 
are below the National Floor Level Wage fixe d by the Central Gov ernment,  recommended 
that the Ministry should take up the matter wi th the State Government s/UT administrations 
to ensure that minimum wages fixed by them sh ould be at least as per the National Floor 
Level Minimum Wages, i.e Rs.66/- for unskilled labourers.  The Committee also 
recommended that the Parent Act should be suitably amended to cover   new employments, 
such as Security Workers, Safai Karamcharis a nd others both in the Central & State spheres 
at the earliest.   
 
1.14 The Committee take a serious note of the Government’s stereotyped reply that revision 
of wages is a continuous process; the appropriate Governments revise it as per the provisions 
of  Minimum Wages Act, 1948.  Further State Governments have been forwarded the 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee for necessary action in their respective 
jurisdiction.  The Central Gov ernment cannot shun its responsibi lity by merely forwarding 
the recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee for necessary action to State 
Governments and then go into a deep slumb er.  The Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation   that vigorous efforts should be  made by the Ministry to pursue the State 
Governments/UTs to link the minimum wages to the Consumer Price Index & release the 
variable DA after every six months or when Consumer Price Index increases by 50 points, 
whichever is earlier.   

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, para no. 3.84) 
 
1.15 The Committee were surprised to note t hat though the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
was enacted for statutorily fixing the mi nimum remuneration payable to workers 
employed in industries where the payment was substantia lly lower than in similar 
industries, but has failed to  define the term “minimum wages” or to lay down any 
norms/criteria for fixation of  minimum wages in the Act. The Committee also noted 
that there were several concepts in vogu e. The Committee, t herefore, desired that 
the Ministry should bring out an amendment in the Minimum Wages Act to define 
the term “minimum Wages” or criteria/norms for fixing the minimum wages so that 
the employers were legally bound to pay the prescribed wages. 
 
 
1.16 Reply of the Government to t he above recommendation is as follows:- 
 
 
“Well-defined norms as decided by 15 th Session of Indian Labour Conference and 
the guidelines issued by Supreme Court in  the Reptakos Brett and Company Vs its 
workers are in existence, which are being  taken into account by the appropriate 
Governments while fixing/revising mini mum wages. The system is working 
reasonably well.” 
 
 
1.17 The Committee are constrained to not e that despite the guidelines issued by 
the Apex Court being in force,   various  Governments have not taken up the matter 
of fixing/revising the Mini mum wages.  The Committee recommended that the 
Government should bring out an Amendment to the existing ”Minimum Wages Act, 
1948” to define the term ‘Minimum Wages’ and criteria/norms for fixing the minimum 
wages so that the employers are lega lly bound to pay minimum wages at the 
National Floor Level i.e Rs.66/- at present.  The Committee are dismayed at the reply 
of the Government that the system is wo rking reasonably well in States.  The 
Committee, reiterating their earlier recomme ndation, urge the Government to bring 
out an amendment in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 so that the labour are not 
deprived of their legitimate rights of minimum wages.  They also strongly 
recommend that the State Governments be relentlessly persuaded to ensure that 
minimum wages are paid to the workers, till an amendment in the Act is carried out. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
C. Employees Provident Fund Organisation 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22, para no. 3.138) 
 
1.18 The Committee had regretted to note th at the outstanding Provident Fund arrears as 
on 31.03.2005 were to the tune of Rs. 2, 144.82 crore while a la rge number of cases 
were pending under Sections 7A and 14B of  the EPF & MP Act, 1952 and also under 
section 406/409 of the IPC for quite a l ong time.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the Government should strengthen and gear up its machinery to 
recover the outstanding dues  by taking appropriate legal action against the 
defaulting establishments besides taking urgent steps for early disposal of pending 
cases under the EPF & MP Act, 1952. 
 
 
1.19  Reply of the Government to the above recommendation is as follows:- 
 
 
“It is submitted that out of  Rs.2144.82 crore an amount of Rs.1,586.66 crore (73.97%) 
is not immediately realizable on account of the following reasons: 
¾ Stays granted by courts/Tribunal. 
¾ Establishments having gone into liquidation/closure/lock-outs. 
¾ Sanction of Installments by courts/higher authorities. 
¾ Establishment in respect of which Rehabilitation Scheme had been 
sanctioned by the BIFR. 
 
Nonetheless, for recovery of outstanding dues, necessary actions as provided in the 
Act are taken and a substantia l amount of old arrears is recovered.  However, the 
amount of arrears keeps on increasing on account of fresh default.  Hence, 
recovery of arrears is a continuous proc ess.  As the proc edure prescribed for 
recovery calls for series steps to be taken for recovery of dues, it has some impact 
on timelines.   
 
With a view to liquidate the arrears and to gear up the recovery machinery targets 
for recovery are set each year.” 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
1.20 The Committee having noted that th e outstanding Provident Fund arrears as 
on 31.3.2005 is an alarming figure to the tune of Rs. 2,144.82 crore and 
recommended that the Government should strengthen and gear up its machinery to 
recover the outstanding dues by taking appropriate legal action against the 
defaulting establishments under the EPF & MP Act, 1952 and also under section 
406/409 of the IPC.  The Committee are not  satisfied with the reply of the 
Government that an amount of Rs. 1,586.66 crore is not realizable because of certain 
reasons.  The reasons adduced for non-realiz ation of arrears, though appear to be 
plausible,   arrears can not be left unrecovered notwithstanding such reasons.  
Appropriate conciliatory administrative/quasi-judicial/judicial ways including setting 
up of Fast Track Court for speedy dispo sal of cases  have to be explored for 
expeditious realization of the arrears.   The Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that for st aggering outstanding amount, appropriate 
stringent legal action against the defaulting establishments, including 
establishments which had gone into liquidati on/closure/lockout may be initiated in 
appropriate courts of law in  a time bound manner.  At the same time, disposal of 
pending cases under EPF & MP Act, 1952 may be taken up with top priority. 
 
 

 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 24, para no. 3.140) 
 
1.21 The Committee had noted that unde r the Employees’ Provident Fund and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, the rate  of interest was determined by the 
Central Government in consultation with th e Central Board of Trustees, Employees’ 
Provident Fund, which was a tripartite bod y consisting of the representatives of the 
employers, employees and Central/State  Governments.  The Committee had been 
apprised that the Central Government sh all satisfy itself that there was no 
overdrawal on the Interest Suspense Account as a result of debi t thereto, of the 
interest credited to the accounts of the Members.  The Committee expressed their 
deep concern on lowering the rate of inte rest which was affecting nearly 4 crore 
subscribers.  In the opinion of the Committee, while taking any decision on 
important issues concerning  workers, the Government should always evolve a 
consensus.  The Committee, therefore, urged the Government that while taking a 
decision in deciding the rate of interest , the trade unions representing employees’ 
side must invariably be consulted.  The Committee also desired that the rate of 
interest from 2005-2006 onwards should be at a realistic level, which may be at least 
@9.5% so that the interest of subscribers could be safeguarded. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.22 In accordance with the provisions cont ained in Para 60(1) of the Employees’ 
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Ac t, 1952, the rate of interest to be 
credited to the account of members is declared by the Government in consultation 
with the Central Board, which is a tripar tite body consisting of representatives of 
employees, employers as well as the Government.  It is therefore submitted that any 
decision including the rate of interest, taken  by the Board is invariably arrived at, 
only after taking into due consideration, views of members of the Board, including 
Trade Union representatives.   
 
 
The Central Board of Trustees, Employees’ Provident Fund recommends the 
rate of interest as per provisions cont ained in Para 60(4) of the Employees' 
Provident Fund Scheme, 1952 which reads as “in determining the rate of interest, 
the Central Government shall satisfy itself that there is no overdrawal on the Interest 
Suspense Account as a result of debit th ereto of the interest credited to the 
accounts of members”.  Thus, the rate of in terest, which is recommended by CBT is 
purely based on the estimates of the inco mes likely to be earned during the next 
year and the corresponding liability during th is period in paying the interest to 
members.  In view of this, the question of providing unrealistic rate of interest does 
not arise.  The interest rate is always linked to the income of the Fund.   
 

 
 
 
1.23 The Committee had noted that since lowering the rate of EPF interest  
adversely affected nearly 4 crore subscr ibers and as such the Government should, 
before taking any decision on important  issues concerning workers, evolve a 
consensus.  The Committee had also  reco mmended that the rate of interest from 
2005-2006 onwards should be at  a realistic level,  i.e. 9.5 per cent.  The Committee  
are aware of  the limitations within which th e rate of interest on EPF is determined.  
However, 9.5% interest is not  unreasonabl e  in the prevailing scenario, particularly 
when the overall prices are rising rapidly.  The Committee, theref ore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and urge the Government that whatever be the parameter in 
fixing the rate of interest,  the inte rests of the EPF subscribers should be 
safeguarded by providing them the interest at  the rate of  9.5 per cent .  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHIC H HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 2, Para 2.20) 
 
2.1 The Committee also note that the Ministry ’s Budget Estimates (BE) have been 
reduced considerably at the Revised Estimates stage (RE) by Rs.19.48 crore during 
the year 2005-06. The Committee further note that the percentage expenditure over 
BE in the first and second quarters is 13.79 and 37,64 respectively.  The Committee 
note that the BE are approved through the Parliament through Annual Budget of the 
Government of India usually  in the month of April / May which are subsequently 
reduced or enhanced by the Ministry of Fi nance at the RE Sta ge on the basis of 
expenditure incurred during the first si x months of the y ear i.e. upto 30th September 
or on pro rata basis. The Committee, theref ore, recommend that the Ministry should 
improve their planning and t one up their monitoring over the schemes so that 
reduction at RE stage could be minimal and their expenditure remains at even pace 
throughout the year to avoid reduction at RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 The reasons for less expenditure during 1 st and 2nd quarter during the financial year 
2005-06 have been explained in Para 2. 19.  However, all the implementing 
agencies have been advised to monitor the progress of expenditure closely and 
regularly in future.  
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.22) 
 
2.3 The Committee has noted that the expenditu re on Holding of Lok Adalat is Rs. 0.32 
lakh, which comes to 16 percent of RE  upto February 2006. The Committee also 
note that out of 15000 industrial dispute ca ses, the Lok Adalats have been able to 
settle only 2000 cases so far out of whic h 124 cases were settled during the year 
2005-06. During the course of discussion , the committee were informed that 
expenditure on Lok A dalat has not been satisfactory because of disagreement 
between the employers and the workers. In the opinion of the committee the raison 
d’etre of setting up of Lok Ad alat is defeated if the cases regarding industrial 
disputes are not settled prompt ly which in turn increase the suffering of workers. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should make all 
out efforts to utilize the funds earmarked fo r setting up of Lok Adalat so that the 

number of pending cases are settled without further loss of time. Efforts should also 
be made to popularize this scheme by gen erating awareness among the litigating 
parties so that the increasing trend in pilin g up of cases is checked, which will in 
turn enable the workers to get justice in time. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 The advice of the committ ee has been noted. Infact, this Ministry has always been 
urging the Central Government Industria l Tribunal cum Labour Courts (CGITs) to 
make optimum use of the funds sanction ed under the Lok Adalat Scheme so that 
both awareness of the usefulness of Lok Adalats increases and a sizable number of 
disputes are settled through them. In spite of the best efforts of this Ministry, it is felt 
that it would take some more time time for Lok Adalat s to become popular. 
However, following the advice of the committe e, this Ministry would strive more 
vigorously to make the Lok adalats more popular in the CGITs. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, para no. 2.23) 
 
2.5 The Committee is constrained to not e that no comprehensive survey has been 
conducted by the Government to identify the beedi worker s in the country.  The 
Committee have been informed that Labour Department of the State Governments 
have been asked to launch a fresh survey in all the Stated to identify and issue 
identity cards to all beedi workers incl uding workers engaged by  contractors and 
“Ghar Khata”.  Responses only from Rajasthan, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh have been 
received so far.  The Committee are confi dent that the actual  strength of beedi 
workers is much more than the figures provided by the Government. The committee 
therefore, strongly reco mmends that the Ministry  should pursue the State 
Government to conduct a survey in all the States on at top priority but before March 
2007 so that the welfare measures for a ll beedi workers could be taken up in letter 
and spirit.  For this the matter should be taken up at the highest level. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.6 The Labour & Rehabilitation (D) Departmen t, Government of Kerala, has informed 
that since most of the beedi  workers are either working through contractor or are 
home workers, the authorized officers in the State Government do not issue Identity 
cards to these home workers as there is little evidence to prove that they are 
actually beedi workers.  Similarly contract  workers are also den ied Identity cards.  
They have accordingly suggested that the Id entity cards issued by the Kerala Beedi 
& Cigar Workers Welfare Fund Board may be treated as valid evidence that they 
are actual beedi workers.  The s uggestion is being examined. The Labour 
Department of Tripura has intimated that survey of beedi workers has already been 

taken up and is expected to be complete d within a month or so and thereafter 
Identity cards to all eligible beedi workers will be issued in cons ultation with Labour 
Welfare Organisation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Labour Departments of other State Govern ments have also been 
requested to launch fresh campaign in thei r States to identif y and issue identity 
cards to all eligible beedi workers.  The Welfare Commissioners working under the 
Labour Welfare Organisation ha ve been directed to assist the State Government 
authorities in the matter to the extent possible as per the resources available with 
them.  As desired by the Committee, the matter is being taken up at the highest 
level to ensure that all beedi worker s including “Ghar Khata” beedi workers are 
identified and issued Identity Cards.   
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, para no. 3.24) 
 
2.7 The Committee are constrained to note that safety, health and working conditions of 
workers employed in mines are the conc ern of the Central Government, i.e. 
Directorate General of Mines Safety who besides inspection of mines undertakes 
investigations into all fatal and non-fata l accidents in coal and non-coal mines yet 
the number of fatal and non-fatal accidents in these mines are increasing year after 
year. The Committee also note that during the last 20 ye ars the size of the mining 
industry has increased manifold whereas the staff strength of  DGMS remained 
static. The complete general inspection in  coal mines should be done at least once 
a year whereas it is done once in 2-3 year s in coal mines, even non-coal mines and 
many small mines remain uninspected fo r 3-5 years. The Committee are not happy 
that the Department has only 127 inspecting staff against the sanctioned strength of 
164. It is strange that the Government appears to be apatheti c to the inadequate 
inspecting staff which can have serious though avoidable,  repercussions on safety 
operations in the mines. T he Committee, therefor e, strongly feel that there should 
be no compromise insofar as the safety of mine workers in concerned and 
therefore, recommend that the general inspection of coalmines should be done 
annually. For this the mine safety machiner y should be augmented by filling up the 
posts of inspecting staff without further delay. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 

2.8 Selection process for f illing up the 9 posts of Deputy Director of Mines Safety 
(Mining) has been completed by  the UPSC and their joinin g is under process. The 
proposal for revival of other vacant posts is under examination as per the existing 
orders of the Ministry of Finance. With the increased strength of officers, the 
frequency of inspection of mines would further improve. 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, para no. 3.26) 
 
2.9 The Committee further note t hat the penalties prescribed fo r different categories of 
offences under the Mines Act are very meager which do not have any deterrent 
effect on potential offenders. The Committee,  therefore, desire that the Ministry 
should bring suitable amendm ents in the Mines Act to provide for stringent 
punishment against the offenders. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.10 The amendment of the Mines Act, 1952 is under process and penalties have been 
suitably amended in the proposal. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, para no. 3.85) 
 
2.11 The Committee is unhappy to note that the number of claim cases filed under the 
Minimum Wages Act in the Central sphe re since 2002 – 2003 are increasing. The 
condition in the State sphere is worse in respect of cases filed and settled. The 
Committee also note that the Ministry has fa iled to furnish the figures relating to the 
year 2005–2006. The Committee note that the Act is not being implemented in letter 
and spirit due to inadequate enforcement machinery and also due to the penalty 
imposed under Section 22 of the Act bei ng minimal. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the enforcement machinery s hould be strengthened both in the Central 
and State spheres besides ca rrying out suitable amendment in the Minimum Wages 
Act, 1948  for enhancement of punishment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

2.12 Action has to be initiated by the appr opriate Governments . State Governments 
have been already sent a copy of t he recommendations of the Parliamentary 
Sanding Committee in this regard. The recommendation for enhancing the 
punishment under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 will be taken into account while 
considering the amendment proposals. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, para no. 3.139) 
 
2.13 The Committee note with concern that out of 4.11 crore subscribers, only 29.73 
lakhs have been allotted National Social Security Number (NSSN) under the Re-
inventing EPF India Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, d esire that National Social 
Security Number should be allotted to every subscriber without further delay so that 
those are utilised by them for their early  settlement of Provident Fund claims and 
pension from any of the offices of Employees' Provident Fund throughout the 
country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.14 Initially the activity of allotment of Nation al Social Security Number was restricted to 
six pilot offices only viz. Kota, Mangalore, Hyderabad, Indore, Patna and Delhi.  
Later it was extended to the entire country. 
 
The activity was halted in between due to certain issues pending decision by the 
Government like nomenclature of Unique Identity Number and SSN card.  Now the 
activity for allotment of SSN has been resumed and instructions in this regard have 
already been issued to all the field office s.  The vendor has been finalized and 
instructions have been issued to the ven dor to deploy his resources and take 
necessary steps.  The allotment of SSN fo r the entire country s hall be completed at 
the earliest. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS REPLY 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, para no. 2.19) 
 
 
3.1 The Committee note that though the Mi nistry of Labour and Employment has 
improved their expenditure in Plan and No n-Plan allocations during the year 2005-
06, the percentage expenditure over Revise d Estimates on some of the Scheme up 
to February 2006 is not upto the mark under the Plan allocation such as Holding of 
Lok Adalats, DGMS, Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour – Grants-in-aid, Women Cell, 
Training, etc. The reasons put forth by t he Ministry for less expenditure on some of 
the Schemes, such as delay in finalization of DGS&D rate contract ,delay in book 
debit of account in respect of work done through CPWD, non receipt of materials 
purchased through DGS&D rate contract, non re ceipt of EFC approval in respect of 
plan scheme “MID”, non-finalization of so me construction work through CPWD, 
delay in approval of two Centrally Sponsored Schemes by Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA), non-receipt of Ut ilization certificates in respect of 
Rehabilitation of B onded Labour are not convincing. The Committee is of the firm 
view that the monitoring and coordination of the Ministry  with other implementing 
agencies are not at all effective. The Commi ttee, therefore, lay stress on improving 
planning and coordination between the Mini stry and the implementing agencies so 
that schemes specifically ai med at the welfare of labo ur become functional and the 
funds allocated are not left unspent. For this the Ministry may address itself with 
other construction agencies such as State Public Works Departments in order to get 
the construction work completed well withi n the time. The Committee further desire 
that in future the Ministry should not only ensure that the funds allocated for various 
schemes are utilized during the same financial year, but also devise effective steps 
to improve their monitoring over the respective schemes. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  
3.2 The reason for underutilization of the alloca ted fund is that for settling cases through 
Lok Adalats by the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cu m Labour Courts ( 
CGITs), mutual consent of the litigating pa rties is essential. The CGITs act as the 
facilitators only. The percentage expenditure over R.E, on the Scheme of  “Holding 
of Lok Adalats as an Alternative Griev ance Redressal Mechanism”, upto February, 
2005, was not upto the mark bec ause of the fact that Lok Adalats could not be held 
in large number by the C GIT-cum-Labour Courts. Settlement of disputes through 
Lok Adalats demands adequate awareness amon g the litigating parties of their 

efficacy and active cooperation and willingness on the part of the Managements and 
Workmen to get the disputes settled th rough this method. The Presiding Officer 
plays the role of a facilitator. However, t he concept of Lok Adalat is getting popular 
gradually and, it is hoped, t hat with the passage of time, awareness of its 
effectiveness will increase manifold and t he scope of optimum utilization of the 
funds allocated under this Scheme will go up considerably in the years to come. 
 
 
3.3 The plan scheme “Modernization of In formation Database relating to Mines 
Management (MID)” was merged with the other plan scheme “Modernization of 
Survey Capabilities (MSC)” of Directorate G eneral of Mines Safety (DGMS) as per 
the suggestion of Planning Commission.  The Expenditure Finance Committee 
approved the merged plan scheme “Moderniza tion of Information  Database (MID)” 
on 13.12.2005. Hence, there was less plan expenditure under th is plan scheme. 
The pace of plan expenditure is monitored periodically at various levels. 
 
 
3.4 The grants under the Centra lly Sponsored Plan Scheme for rehabilitation of Bonded 
Labour etc. are released to the States / Union Territories on receipt of complete 
proposals and clearance of utilization certificates for the grants released to the State 
concerned during the previous  years. Moreover, under t he direction of the Prime 
Minister’s Office, a Special Group had been constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Union Labour and Employment  Secretary has been moni toring the implementation 
of the Bonded Labour System  (Abolition) Act, 1976 and the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme for rehabilitation of bonded labour etc. by holding frequently region wise 
meetings. 
 
  
3.5 The Scheme relating to Grants-in-aid to  Research, Training & Academic Institutes, 
Voluntary Organisations & Non-Governmental Organisations for undertaking 
research in approved labour related matters ai ms at providing financial assistance in 
the form of Grants-in-aid to Resear ch & Academic Instit utions, Voluntary 
Organisations & Non-Governmental Organisations fo r undertaking research in 
approved labour related matters for securing policy inputs to enrich future labour 
policies. There is direct relationshi p between good study proposals received 
/approved and expenditure incurred.  Moreov er, the studies so conducted under the 
Scheme are need based and are recomm ended by concerned subject matter 
Divisions in the Ministry.  However, releases are made after due scrutiny of 
utilization certificates, approval  of the competent authority etc.  Hence, the Ministry 
was able to utilize an amount of Rs.9.39 lakh, i.e., 47% of Rs.20.00 lakh (RE) during 
the financial year 2005-06 for this Scheme.  The efforts would be made in future to 
utilize the entire amount earmarked for th e Scheme without compromising with the 
due diligence. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, para no. 3.57) 
 
 
3.6 The Committee note that although Directo rate General, Factory Advice Service & 
Labour Institutes (DGFASLI) is entrusted with an important task of improving safety, 
health and welfare of workers in factories and ports, there is an increase in reported 
accidents in some of the major ports.  Th e inspections of ships and oil tankers 
carried out by the organization during the y ear 2005 are also not satisfactory.  The 
Committee further note that a number of posts  are lying vacant in the organization.  
The Committee are not at all happy with the si tuation keeping in view the fact that 
number of fatal accidents in docks/ports ar e increasing.  The Co mmittee, therefore, 
desire that the organization should carry out more number of inspections in factories 
and docks to identify the causes leading to accidents and suggest the remedial 
measures to minimize the accidents.  Th e Committee, therefor e, desire that the 
Ministry should strengthen the organization  by providing sufficient manpower to 
enable it to intensify the activities on impr oving working conditions, health status of 
workers and other matters relating to industrial safety in the factories and ports. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.7 The Inspectorates under DGFASLI are ma king all possible efforts to carry out as 
many inspections as possible with a view  to identify the hazards, create and 
maintain safe working conditions and prev ent accidents as well. Considering the 
means of transportation as the major cause for about 40% of the total fatal 
accidents in the ports, DGFASLI had directed all the Port Trusts to undertake the 
following measures for controlling these accidents: 
 
¾ Constitution of sub-committee of the Safety Committees. 
¾ Imparting training on de fensive driving to the drivers of transport 
equipment. 
¾ Display of traffic signs and cautionary notices. 
¾ Maintenance of roads and approaches, etc. 
 
 To strengthen the organization, a propos al for filling up few posts by Direct 
Recruitment has been sent to the Screen ing Committee for review.  Further,17 
Group– A posts namely Deputy Director General, Director (Safety) and Assistant 
Director (Safety) have already been adverti sed by UPSC.  Other posts are at 
various stages of recruitment.  A proposal  for creation of 14 posts for Regional 
Labour Institute, Faridabad is under examination.   
 
 
 

(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, para no. 2.21) 
 
4.1 The Committee note with distress that a large part of funds allocated for the 
Scheme- Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour has lapsed as the State Governments did 
not come forward with their proposals for rehabilitation of bonded labour identified 
by them. The Committee also note that the Ministry has not been able to get 
utilization certificates from the States, viz. Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu which 
were allocated money under the Scheme in pr evious years. During the course of 
evidence on Demands-for-Grants, the Committ ee felt that because of the very title, 
viz. “Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour Scheme” due to which the State Governments 
are not coming forward with their proposals bec ause it is stigma on the society and 
no State Government wants to become a part to it. The Committee are deeply 
concerned to note that even after a period of above 60 years of Independence, the 
country is still following the footsteps of the British. The Committee, therefore desire 
that the Ministry should make vigorous efforts to eradicate this prevailing stigma on 
society and for that matter, it felt neces sary by changing the nomenclature of the 
Scheme so that bonded labour are rehabilitated effectively. The Committee also 
desire that the Ministry should strengthen its monitoring mechanism with the State 
Governments so that the utiliz ation certificates are receiv ed from them in time. In 
the opinion of the Committee failure to rehabilitate the bonded labour may lead to 
social, economic and politic al problems in the country. They, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should take steps for conducting survey with regard to 
identification of bonded labour by  a Central team in order to ascertain the actual 
number of bonded labour and th en come out with their rehabilitation package in a 
phased manner 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The Ministry of Labour and Employment has taken a pr oactive approach towards 
elimination of bonded labo ur system. Poverty, unemployment/under-employment 
and illiteracy are the most important factors that contribute to bonded labour. Given 

the complex socio-economic dimensions of  the problems, improv ement in the living 
and working conditions of the working people and their economic condition is crucial 
to the elimination of bonded labour. The support of various Ministries has been 
enlisted with a view to adopting a multi-di mensional strategy to ensure that the 
benefit of development programmes percolate s to this group. Bonded Labour is a 
dynamic problem which may occur/reoccur at any point of time as it is generally 
linked to socio-economic condition of t he working people. Engaging labour as 
‘bonded’ is an offence and punishable under the Act. Bonded Labour  is not a sector 
of employment continuing on regular basis. The Minist ry is providing grants to 
States/UTs. for conducting district wis e survey of bonded labour and awareness 
generation. In view of above, no purpose w ould be served by undertaking survey of 
bonded labour at the Central level. So far recommendation relating to monitoring 
the implementation of t he Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 and 
Centrally Sponsored Plan Scheme is concerned, reply of the Ministry has already 
been mentioned against Pare No. 2.19.  
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, para no. 2.24) 
 
4.3 The Committee regrets to note that so far only 4 hospitals and 206 dispensaries 
have been working for 44 lakh beedi workers in the country, which is obviously quite 
inadequate to provide proper Medicare for them.  The Committee also note that only 
OPD is functioning at Bihar Sharief hospital and the construction and electrical work 
is still in process in Saga r(Madhya Prades h) and Mukkadal (Tamil Nadu).  Further, 
these hospitals have not been provided with medical and para medical staff.  The 
Committee note with deep concern that t here has been an inor dinate delay in 
making these hospital functional.  The Co mmittee, therefore, desires that these 
hospitals should be made functional by  providing adequate medical and para 
medical staff and equipments wit hin a set time frame.  The Committee are also of 
the view that as an interim measure, the ministry may engage ESIC or some similar 
agency to administer these hospitals and Beedi Workers Welfare Cess fund may be 
utilized for the purpose.  The Committ ee also desire that a50 bedded hospital 
should be set up at Orissa, particularly in Sambalpur region which is highly 
concentrated zone of beedi workers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 The Civil construction work at Sagar has  already been completed, while both civil 
and electrical work at Mukkudal is over.  Necessary orders for creation of posts of 
Doctors and paramedical staff for all the three hospitals have been issued.  For 
appointment of Medical Officers, the Health  and Family Welfar e Department has 
already been requested.  After the Ministry of Health fills up the posts of doctors, 
other paramedical staff may be posted and the Hospitals will be made fully 
functional.    

 
 With regard to setting up of a new Hospit al for beedi workers, it is reiterated 
that no new project for setting up of Hospitals /Dispensaries can be considered, in 
the light of the recommend ation of the Committee on Non Plan Expenditure.  
Further, the fund position under the Beedi Workers Welfare Fund and also the 
difficulties faced in getting doctors in our  existing Hospitals/Dispensaries, restrain 
us to move towards setting up of more Hosp itals/Dispensaries. It is also reiterated 
that a new pilot scheme has already been launched to provide one time grant of 
Rs.2.00 crore to State Governm ents/Employees State Insurance 
Corporation/Reputed NGOs/Beedi Wo rkers Group Housing Cooperative 
Society/Central or State Government r ecognized Private Hospitals/Dispensaries 
intending to construct new Hospitals/Dispensaries or to expand the existing 
Hospitals/Dispensaries so as to provide medical facilities to beedi workers and their 
dependents. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, para no. 3.83) 
 
4.5 The Committee note with concern that there is a widespread disparity in the 
minimum wages across the country, i.e.  Rs. 55.00 – 57.00 in Arunachal Pradesh 
and Rs. 54.00 – 150.00 in Tamil Nadu. In so me of the States, the minimum wages 
are even below the National Floor Level W ages fixed by the Central Government. 
The Committee note that 26 State Governm ents/Union Territory Administrations 
have been able to link mini mum wages with variable dearness allowance (VDA). 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should take up the issue with the 
State Governments/Union Territory Admini strations and ensure that the minimum 
wages for any scheduled employment fixed by them is kept at least at the National 
Floor Level Minimum Wages, which is Rs. 66.00 per day. The Committee also 
desire that the minimum wages should be revised where these have not been 
revised so far. Also vigorous effo rts should be made to  pursue the State 
Governments/UTs to link the minimum wages to the Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
and revise the variable dearness allowanc e after every six months or when CPI 
increases by 50 points, which ever is ear lier. Further, the Committee note that with 
the passage of time, new employments such as security workers, safai karamcharis 
and other similar employments have come up. They, therefore, desire that the 
parent Act should be suitably amended to cover these new employments both in the 
Central and State sphere at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.6 The States / Union Territories are request ed from time to time to fix minimum wages 
in the scheduled employment not less than the National Floor Level Minimum Wage 
of Rs.66/- per day, which is  a non statuary measure. Revision of wages is a 
continuous process; the Appropriate Governm ents revise it as per the provisions of 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948. Further State Governments have been forwarded the 

recommendations of the Par liamentary Committee for necessary action in their 
respective jurisdiction.  
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, para no. 3.84) 
 
4.7 The Committee are surprised to note that though the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
was enacted for statutorily fixing the mi nimum remuneration payable to workers 
employed in industries where the payment was substantia lly lower than in similar 
industries, but has failed to  define the term “minimum wages” or to lay down any 
norms/criteria for fixation of minimum wages in the Act. The Committee also note 
that there are several concepts in vogue. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should bring out an amendment in the Minimum Wages Act to define the 
term “minimum Wages” or criteria/norms for fixing the minimum wages so that the 
employers are legally bound to pay the prescribed wages. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8 Well-defined norms as decided by 15 th Session of Indian L abour Conference and 
the guidelines issued by Supreme Court in  the Reptakos Brett and Company Vs its 
workers are in existence, which are being  taken into account by the appropriate 
Governments while fixing/revising mini mum wages. The system is working 
reasonably well.  
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, para no. 3.138) 
 
4.9 The Committee regret to note that th e outstanding Providen t Fund arrears as on 
31.03.2005 are to the tune of  Rs. 2,144.82 crore while a large number of cases are 
pending under Sections 7A and 14B of the EPF & MP Act, 1952 and also under 
section 406/409 of the IPC for quite a l ong time.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should stre ngthen and gear up its machinery to 
recover the outstanding dues  by taking appropriate legal action against the 
defaulting establishments besides taking urgent steps for early disposal of pending 
cases under the EPF & MP Act, 1952. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.10 It is submitted that out of Rs. 2144.82 crore an amount of  Rs.1586.66 crore 
(73.97%) is not-immediately realizable on account of the following reasons: 
¾ Stays granted by courts/Tribunal. 
¾ Establishments having gone into liquidation/closure/lock-outs. 

¾ Sanction of Installments by courts/higher authorities. 
¾ Establishment in respect of which Rehabilitation Scheme had been 
sanctioned by the BIFR. 
 
Nonetheless, for recovery of outstanding dues, necessary actions as provided in the 
Act are taken and a substantia l amount of old arrears is recovered.  However, the 
amount of arrears keeps on increasing on account of fresh default.  Hence, 
recovery of arrears is a continuous proc ess.  As the proc edure prescribed for 
recovery calls for a series steps to be taken for recovery of dues, it has some 
impact on timelines.   
 
With a view to liquidate the arrears and to gear up the recovery machinery targets 
for recovery are set each year.   
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24, para no. 3.140) 
 
4.11 The Committee note that under the Em ployees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952, the rate of interest is determined by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Central Board of Tr ustees, Employees’ Provident Fund, which 
is a tripartite body consisting of the re presentatives of the employers, employees 
and Central/State Governments.  The Committ ee has been apprised that the Central 
Government shall satisfy itself that there is no overdrawal on the Interest Suspense 
Account as a result of debit thereto, of th e interest credited to the accounts of the 
Members.  The Committee express their d eep concern on lowering the rate of 
interest which is affecting nearly 4 cr ore subscribers.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, while taking any decision on im portant issues concerning workers, the 
Government should always evolve a consensus.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Government that while taking a decision in deciding the rate of interest, the trade 
unions representing employees’ side must in variably be consulted.  The Committee 
also desires that the rate of interest fr om 2005-2006 onwards should be at a realistic 
level, which may be at least @9.5% so that  the interest of subscribers could be 
safeguarded. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.12 In accordance with the provisions cont ained in Para 60(1) of the Employees’ 
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Ac t, 1952, the rate of interest to be 
credited to the account of members is declared by the Government in consultation 
with the Central Board, which is a trip artite body consisting of representatives of 
employees, employers as well as the Government.  It is therefore submitted that any 
decision including the rate of interest, taken  by the Board is invariably arrived at, 
only after taking into due consideration, views of members of the Board, including 
Trade Union representatives.   
 
 
The Central Board of Trustees, Employees’ Provident Fund recommends the 
rate of interest as per provisions cont ained in Para 60(4) of the Employees' 
Provident Fund Scheme, 1952 which reads as “in determining the rate of interest, 
the Central Government shall satisfy itself that there is no overdrawal on the Interest 
Suspense Account as a result of debit th ereto of the interest credited to the 
accounts of members”.  Thus, the rate of in terest, which is recommended by CBT is 
purely based on the estimates of the inco mes likely to be earned during the next 
year and the corresponding liability during th is period in paying the interest to 
members.  In view of this, the question of providing unrealistic rate of interest does 
not arise.  The interest rate is always linked to the income of the Fund.   
 
 
 
 

(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RE SPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, para no. 2.23) 
 
5.1 The Committee is constrained to not e that no comprehensive survey has been 
conducted by the Government to identify the beedi workers in the country.  The Committee 
have been informed that Labour Department of the State Governments have been asked 
to launch a fresh survey in all the Stated to identify and issue identity cards to all beedi 
workers including workers engaged by contractors and “Ghar Khata”.  Responses only 
from Rajasthan, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh have been received so far.   The Committee are 
confident that the actual str ength of beedi workers is much mo re than the figures provided 
by the Government. The committee therefor e, strongly recommends that the Ministry 
should pursue the State Government to conduct a survey in all the States on at top priority 
but before March 2007 so that t he welfare measures for all beedi workers could be taken 
up in letter and spirit.  For this the matter should be taken up at the highest level. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 The Labour & Rehabilitation (D) Departmen t, Government of Kerala, has informed 
that since most of the beedi workers are either working th rough contractor or are home 
workers, the authorized officers in the Stat e Government do not issue Identity cards to 
these home workers as there is  little evidence to prove that  they are actually beedi 
workers.  Similarly contract workers are also denied Identity cards.  They have accordingly 
suggested that the Identity cards issued by the Kerala Beedi & Cigar Workers Welfare 
Fund Board may be treated as va lid evidence that they are actual beedi workers.  The 
suggestion is being examined.  The Labour Department of Tr ipura has intimated that 
survey of beedi workers has already been taken up and is expected to be completed within 
a month or so and thereafter Identity cards to all eligible beedi work ers will be issued in 
consultation with Labour Welfare Organisation. 
5.3 The Labour Departments of other State Governments have also been requested to 
launch fresh campaign in their States to ident ify and issue identity cards to all eligible 
beedi workers.  The Welfare Commissioners working under the Labour Welfare 
Organisation have been directed to assist the State Government authorities in the matter 
to the extent possible as per the resource s available with them.  As desired by the 
Committee, the matter is being taken up at the highest level to ensure that all beedi 
workers including “Ghar Khata” beedi workers are identified and issued Identity Cards.   

 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, para no. 3.24) 
 
5.4 The Committee are constrained to note that safety, health and working conditions of 
workers employed in mines are the conc ern of the Central Government, i.e. 
Directorate General of Mines Safety who besides inspection of mines undertakes 
investigations into all fatal and non-fata l accidents in coal and non-coal mines yet 
the number of fatal and non-fatal accidents in these mines are increasing year after 
year. The Committee also note that during the last 20 ye ars the size of the mining 
industry has increased manifold whereas the staff strength of  DGMS remained 
static. The complete general inspection in coal mines should be done at least once 
a year whereas it is done once in 2-3 year s in coal mines, even non-coal mines and 
many small mines remain uninspected fo r 3-5 years. The Committee are not happy 
that the Department has only 127 inspecting staff against the sanctioned strength of 
164. It is strange that the Government appears to be apatheti c to the inadequate 
inspecting staff, which can have serious though avoidable, repercussions on safety 
operations in the mines. The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that there should 
be no compromise insofar as the safety of mine workers in concerned and 
therefore, recommend that the general inspection of c oal mines should be done 
annually. For this the mine safety machiner y should be augmented by filling up the 
posts of inspecting staff without further delay. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.5 Selection process for f illing up the 9 posts of Deputy Director of Mines Safety 
(Mining) has been completed by  the UPSC and their joinin g is under process. The 
proposal for revival of other vacant posts is under examination as per the existing 
orders of the Ministry of Finance. With the increased strength of officers, the 
frequency of inspection of mines would further improve. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, para no. 3.25) 
 
5.6 The Committee regret to note that the number of prosecution launched against the 
erring managements are piling up year after y ear as the disposal rate is very 
meager in a year. The commi ttee also note that the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment in consultation with the Mini stry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs 
has requested the Registrar-General of various High Courts to designate one 
Judicial Magistrate/Metropolitan Magistrate in the District exclusively to deal with the 
cases under the Mines Act, 1952. Although, the High Courts of Allahabad, Patna, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh have agreed to the proposal but most 

of the States where pendency of cases is la rge in number are yet to follow suit. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly desire that the remaining Hig h Courts should be 
persuaded to designate the Judicial Magistrate to liquidate the pending cases. 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.7 The matter is being taken up with the Registrar Generals of  the remaining High 
Courts, who have not yet designated the Judicial Magistrate / Metropolitan 
Magistrate to liquidate the pending cases. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, para no. 3.26) 
 
5.8 The Committee further note t hat the penalties prescribed fo r different categories of 
offences under the Mines Act are very meager which do not have any deterrent 
effect on potential offenders. The Committee,  therefore, desire that the Ministry 
should bring suitable amendm ents in the Mines Act to provide for stringent 
punishment against the offenders. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.9 The amendment of the Mines Act, 1952 is under process and penalties have been suitably 
amended in the proposal. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, para no. 3.27) 
 
5.10 The Committee noticed during their recent visit to ONGC (Mumbai High) that there 
were 52 fatal accidents due to Helicopter cr ash and BHN fire incident. The Ministry 
has informed that there is no Central law on safety, heal th and welfare of workers 
applicable beyond the limit of territorial wate rs. In the year 1997, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment proposed to extend through a suitable amendment in the 
existing Oil Mines Regulati ons, 1984 applicable up to te rritorial water to cover 
offshore operations beyond territorial wa ters. The Rajya Sabha Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation cons idered the matter in 1997 but the same was not 
approved. The Committee are of the view that there should be timely intervention in 
cases of unsafe conditions, which result in occurrence of accidents. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that t he Oil Mines Regulations, 1984 should be suitably amended 
on a top priority to provide safety and occupational health to  off-shore workers 
beyond the limits of territorial waters. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

5.11 The matter is under consideration. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, para no. 3.58) 
 
5.12 The Committee note with distress that E nnore Port, which has become a major port 
in the country and handling a large number of containers and bulk cargo, does not 
have any Inspectorate of Dock Safety as per the scale laid down in the Schedule 
appended to the Regulations. The Committee have been informed that the proposal 
for creation of necessary posts and setting up of Inspectorate at Ennore is still 
under consideration of the Ministry.  The Committee fail to understand as to why the 
Inspectorate of Dock Safety at Ennore Port has not so far been set up as this Port 
started functioning as a Major Port sinc e March, 1999 and therefore, desire that 
there should not be any furt her delay in setting up the o ffice of Inspectorate at 
Ennore Port with full infrastructure.   
 
Reply of the Government 
  
5.13 The Inspectorate of Dock Safety, Chennai, is  presently looking after the activities at 
the Ennore Port. The setting up of the Inspec torate of Dock Safety at Ennore Port 
will be done after creating the necessary po sts. This matter is under examination in 
consultation with the DGFASLI and the Ministry of Finance. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, para no. 3.59) 
 
5.14 The Committee regret to note t hat the Regional Labour Institute (RLI) at Faridabad 
is still in the formative stage even after taking possession of l and from the Haryana 
Government in March, 2000 for construction of its own building.  The Ministry has 
now informed that the matter is being pur sued with the concerned agencies, such 
as CPWD, HUDA, etc. by an officer of DGFASLI, stationed at Faridabad for its early 
completion.  The Committee are least satisfied with the reply as more than six years 
have elapsed and the Ministry has not been abl e to achieve its objective to cater to 
the needs of the northern area in relation to safety and health.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should make all effo rts to complete its building by 
the end of June, 2006 so as to make the Institute fully functional. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.15 The construction of RLI - Faridabad buildi ngs (Office block, Auditorium, Hostel, 
Utilities, etc.) is nearing completion and CPWD has promised to hand over the 

building to DGFASLI by the end of June, 2006. The matter is being pursued with the 
officials of CPWD for timely completion of the project. 
 
           Though RLI – Faridabad building is not yet comp leted, the officer stationed 
at Faridabad is carrying out some of the te chnical activities relating to occupational 
safety and health in the nort hern region in association with the officials of RLI, 
Kanpur & Central Labour Institute, Mumbai.  
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, para no. 3.60) 
 
5.16 The Committee note that there are numerous le gislations, e.g. Dock Workers 
(Safety, Health and Welfare) Act, 1986; Factories Act, 1948, Mi nes Act, 1952, etc. 
dealing with Occupational Safety and He alth (OSH) in a fragmented manner 
resulting in duplication in some areas.  The Committee have been informed that the 
draft Bill on the Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2002 was prepared and 
circulated amongst the State Go vernments / Union Territories for their comments.  
26 State Governments / Union Territories  have so far furnished their comments, 
which are under examination of DGFASLI.  The Committee fail to understand as to 
why the Government has not been able to  bring an umbrella legislation on 
occupational safety and health even after a lapse of 4 years.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that an umbrella legislation on safe ty and health of workers should 
be enacted without further delay to secure th e safety and health of workers against 
the risk. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.17 The comments received from 26 States / Union Territories on the proposal duly 
compiled along with the comment s of DGFASLI are under t he active consideration 
of Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, para no. 3.99) 
 
5.18 The Committee note with concer n the present level of utilization of seats located for 
trade apprentices in establis hments both in the Central and State Sectors, the 
percentage of which is 89% and  69% respectively. The situation is dismal in this 
regard particularly in Faridaba d (69%), under Central Sect or and less than 50% in 
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Go a, Manipur, Rajasthan and Uttaranchal 
in State Sector. The position in respect of seats located and seats utilized in 
Graduate, Technician and Technician (Vocat ional) apprentices is even worse, i.e. 
only 46%. The Committee is distressed to not e that the percentage of seats located 
and seats utilized in respect of persons with disabilities in Central and State Sectors 

is less than 3. The Committee is not happy with the situation an d therefore, urges 
the ministry to take up the matter with both the Central and St ate establishments 
urgently so that the gap bet ween the seats located and ut ilized is bridged in all the 
trades. Also 3% seats reserved for persons with disabilities should be fully utilized in 
all the trades. For this the matter may be taken up with the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development and the State Gove rnments on priority. Steps taken and 
progress achieved in this regard should  be communicated to the Committee at 
regular intervals.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
5.19 The Regional Directorate of Appr enticeship Training, Faridabad, State 
Apprenticeship Advisers of Arunachal Prades h, Bihar, Chhattisgar h, Goa, Manipur, 
Rajasthan and Uttaranchal State and Addl. A pprenticeship Adviser, Department of 
Secondary & Higher Education,  Ministry  of Human Resources Development have 
been requested to make concerted efforts to achieve 100% utilization of seats in all 
the trades and full utilization of 3 % seat  reserved for persons with disabilities. 
Further they have been reque sted that the steps tak en by them and progress 
achieved on above matter may be communica ted to the Directorate General of 
Employment, urgently. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, para no. 3.114) 
 
5.20 The Committee is surprised to note that  though the DGE&T pr ovides training 
facilities to women in the country to  increase employability among women of 
different age groups from various socio-economic strata through NVTI/RVTIs, the 
percentage of expendit ure in RVTI Kolkata and RVTI Vadodara is in the range of 
64-72 up to February 2006.  The Committee al so note that 68 vacancies of Training 
Officers (TOs) and Vocational Instructors (VIs ) are lying vacant since August 1996, 
thus affecting the normal functioning of these institutes.  The Committee take a 
serious note of this sorry state of affairs and call upon the Ministry to fill these 
vacant posts within a year positively.  The Committee may also be apprised of the 
concrete progress in this regard every quarter till needful is done.  The Committee 
further desire that the Gove rnment should take immedi ate steps to replace the 
obsolete and unserviceabl e equipments in order to incr ease the proficiency of the 

trainees in the specialized fields in all t he institutes.  The Committee also desires 
that the funds allocated for the purpose should be fully utilized so that the objectives 
of the vocational training programmes are achieved to the maximum extent. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.21 (i) It is submitted that percentage ex penditure for RVTI Kolkata and Vadodara 
was less due to the following reasons: - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a) For RVTI Kolkata the expenditure on el ectricity during 2004-05 was very high, 
though the State Electricity Board was r equested to reduce the tariff but did not 
reduce it.  To meet high expenses, Budget provisions was kept during 2005-06, 
however, later on the State Electricity Boar d agreed for reduction in overall bill by 
curtailing the connected electrical load for the Institute.  Since the electricity bill was 
reduced during 2005-06, the expenditure incu rred was less otherwise there was no 
major saving.  The savings of this instit ute were diverted and utilized for other 
institutes. 
     
b) For RVTI Vadodara it was pl anned to start a new training course during 2005-06 but 
the EFC approval could be obtained in Marc h 2006, therefore, ne w training course 
could not be started and ther e were savings during 2005-06.  The new course is 
being started in 2006-07 w.e.f. August 2006. 
 
(ii) As regards filling up of vac ant posts, due to various economy instructions difficulties 
were being faced in getting the posts revived.   Now the issue has been taken up by 
Secretary (Labour & Employment) with t he Secretary (Expenditure) for his 
interventions to get the posts revived.  
 
(iii) To replace the obsolete and unserviceabl e equipments all the NVTI/RVTIs have 
been instructed to take necessary action. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, para no. 3.137) 
 
 
5.22 The  Committee are constrained to note that out of the 39.7 crore strong workforce 
in the country, only 4.11 crore workers have so far been covered under the 

Employees' Provident Fund Scheme.  The  committee also note that during the 
Special Drive launched from January to Ma rch 2005 a total of 19,854 establishments 
were covered and 6,02,669 workers we re made members of the Fund.  The 
Committee are not satisfied wi th this state of affairs.   In the opinion of the 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should intensify its 
efforts vigorously for providing social secu rity cover to every single eligible person 
both in the organised and uno rganised sectors.  The Committee desire that special 
drives may be launched at regular inter vals in order to cover more number of 
establishments.  The Committee also recommend that the Enforcement Officers of 
the organisation should henceforth be  earmarked areas and the concerned 
Assistant Commissioner be made personally accountable for any lapse or laxity in 
this regard.  Further, the Central Offi ce of EPFO should strengthen its monitoring 
mechanism over the Regional Offices and progr ess achieved in regard to coverage 
of establishments should be communicated to the Committee at regular quarterly 
intervals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.23 The Government is exploring every possi ble step to cover the maximum number of 
workers both in organized and unorganized sectors. Recently, “Railways: (excluding 
India Railways) has been included in the classes of establishments for coverage 
under the Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and 
more recently the workers in “Informa tion Technology” sector have also been 
included in the classes of establishment.  
 
5.24  The Employees’ Provident Fund Or ganization had launched the ‘Compliance 2001’ 
programme keeping in view the changed ec onomic policy of liberalization and 
globalisation.  Under this  programme, routine inspec tions by the enforcement 
officers were dispensed with and emphas is was given to promote voluntary 
compliance.  By the revised procedure, insp ections were to be conducted only after 
appropriate input and aut horization.  Though the programme has been effective in 
certain areas e.g. gathering of inputs/information for co verage of establishments, 
detection of default through the Computerised Compli ance Tracking System 
(CCTS), etc., tendency of evasion / under-r eporting has also been noticed.  This 
could be due to lack of periodical ins pection.  The Standing Committee time and 
again for reviewing this policy has made Recommendations/Observations.  
Accordingly, it has been decided  to ev aluate the performance of the Compliance 
2001 programme and place a suitable proposal for the consideration of the Central 
Board of Trustees, Employees’ Provident Fund . The dec ision of the Board on the 
matter will be intimated to the Standing Committee in due course.   
 

 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, para no. 3.139) 
 
5.25 The Committee note with concern that out of 4.11 crore subscribers, only 29.73 lakh 
have been allotted National Social Security Number (NSSN) under the Re-inventing 
EPF India Scheme.  The Commi ttee, therefore, desire that  National Social Security 
Number should be allotted to every subscrib er without further delay so that those 
are utilised by them for their early settl ement of Provident Fund claims and pension 
from any of the offices of Employees' Provident Fund throughout the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
5.26 Initially the activity of allotment of Nation al Social Security Number was restricted to 
six pilot offices only viz. Kota, Mangalore, Hyderabad, Indore, Patna and Delhi.  
Later it was extended to the entire country. 
 
 The activity was halted in between due  to certain issues pending decision by 
the Government like nomenclature of Uniq ue Identity Number and SSN card.  Now 
the activity for allotment of SSN has been resumed and instructi ons in this regard 
have already been issued to all the field o ffices.  The vendor has been finalised and 
instructions have been issued to the ven dor to deploy his resources and take 
necessary steps.  The allotment of SSN fo r the entire country s hall be completed at 
the earliest. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/7/2006-Coord dated 7 August 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     SURAVARAM SUDHAK AR REDDY       
                                       Chairman 
6 December 2006          Standing Committee on Labour 
15 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

APPENDIX I 
 
EXTRACTS OF MINUTES OF THE FIFTH   SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 6 DECEMBER,   2006 
 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1700 hours in Committee Room `E’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Subrata Bose 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
4.         Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
5.       Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan 
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7.         Smt. C.S. Sujatha   
            
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
9. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
10. Shri Rahul Bajaj 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
 2.     Shri R.S. Misra  - Director 
           
           
     
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them about two 
draft reports on the action taken replies received from the Ministry of Labour and Employment and 
the Ministry of Textiles on the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Reports on the Demands for Grants for 
the year 2006-2007. 
   
3. The Committee first took up th e draft Eighteenth Report  on the Action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour on   De mands for Grants for the year  2006-2007 of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment for consideration and a doption.  The Committee adopted the report with 
the following modifications: 
 

Page No.5 Para No.1.9 Line No.8 To delete the words, “ due to certain 
problems’ after the words, “fully 
functional.” 
 
14 Insert the words, ‘two months’ instead of  
three months and add “positively” after 
‘report’.  
 
 Page No.7 Para No.1.13 Line No.7 Add i.e‘Rs.66/- for unskilled labourers’ after  
the words “Minimum wages.” 
   
Page No.8 Para No.1.17 Line No.7 Insert i.e ‘Rs.66/- at present’ after the  
Words, “National Floor Level.” 
 
 
4. XX    XX    XX 
 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports by 
incorporating the above amendments and present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
6. XX    XX    XX 
 
 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
      A P P E N D I X - I I  
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
THIRTEENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
         Total Percentage  
 
I. Total number of Recommendations   24  
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have   29.2%  
been accepted by Government 
(Sl. Nos. 2,4,5,7,9,17&23) (Total-7)  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the      8.3%  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s  replies 
(Sl. Nos. 1 and 11) (Total-2)  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of   25%  
which  Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration 
(Sl. Nos. 3,6, 15,16,22 and 24)(Total-6)  
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
final replies of Government are of interim 
 in  nature 
(Sl. Nos. 8,10,12,13,14,18,19,20 and 21)(Total -9)   37.5%  
                   -----------  
           100%  
                              -----------  
  
 
 
 