  
24  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2007-08) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Twenty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Textiles for the year 2007-2008] 
 
 
 
 
  TWENTY FOURTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                         NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 

 2
 
 
 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2007-08) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Twenty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Textiles for the year 2007-2008] 
 
 
 
         Presented to Lok Sabha on  5.9.2007 
                                      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 5.9.2007 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August,  2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 

 3
 
CONTENTS 
 
       
     PAGE(S) 
       
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N         ( i v )  
        
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………    
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Obse rvations which have been   
accepted by the Government………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Obse rvations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s reply…………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observ ations in respect of which   
replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration…………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
which  replies of the Government  are interim  
in nature    …………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on   
   30 August 2007  
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First 
report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 

 4

 5
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 .  S h r i  F u r k a n  A n s a r i         
3. Shri Subrata Bose    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot    
6. Shri Munawar Hasan   
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta   
8. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar     
10. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
11. Shri Basangouda R. Patil   
12. Shri Devidas Pingle  
13. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar 
14. Shri Mohan Rawale  
15. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat   
    16. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat   
17. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
18. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
*19. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam 
  23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
25.       Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
26.       Shri Gandhi Azad 
27.       Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
28.       Shri Dilip Ray 
29.       Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant  
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
          1.    Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri N.K. Sapra   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
5.    Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Under Secretary 
    6.    Shri Suresh Kumar  - Senior Executive Assistant 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*  Changed the nomination from Committee on Railways to Committee on Labour w.e.f. 
21 August 2007. 

 6
  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been authorised  
by the Committee to submit the Twenty-fourth  Report on their behalf, present this  
Twenty Fourth Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) on  Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Textiles for the year 2007-2008. 
 
2. The Twenty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid in  Rajya 
Sabha on  26 April 2007.  The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 26 July 2007.  The 
report was considered and adopted by th e Standing Committee on Labour at their 
sitting held on 30 August 2007. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by  Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty First  Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For the facility of reference and conven ience recommendations/observations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                   SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,     
30 August, 2007                                                             CHAIRMAN,  
8 Bhadrapada  1929 (Saka)                                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.  
    

 7
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report on Demands for Grants 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) for the year 2007-2008. 
 
1.2 The Twenty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 26.4.2007.  It contained 16 recommend ations.  Replies of Government in 
respect of all the recommendations have been received and are categorised as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 7.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply --Paragraph Sl. Nos.  5, 8, 9, 14, 
15 and 16. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration--Paragraph Sl. Nos.  6, 12 and 13. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 10 and 11.  
 
  
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect of recommendations 
contained in Chapter I and final action ta ken notes in respect of recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V for which only in terim replies have been given by the 
Government may be furnished to them at th e earliest and in any case not later than 3 
months of the presentation of the Report.   
 
1.4      The Committee will now deal with the action taken replies of the Government   
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 

 8
 
 
   
A. TEXTILE WORKERS’ REHABILITATION FUND SCHEME (TWRFS) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6  Para - 3.25) 
 
1.5 The Committee had noted that one of the el igibility criteria to avail of the benefit 
under the scheme is that the workers should have been drawing wage equivalent to 
Rs.2,500 per month or less from the mills, wh ich had closed between 6 June 1985 and 1 
April 1993 and Rs.3,500 on 1 April 1993 or thereafter.  The Committee felt that the 
ceiling on the wages of Rs.2,500 between 6 June 1985 and 1 April 1993 and Rs.3,500  
thereafter and the cut off dates for closure of  mills to avail of the benefits under the 
Scheme are unrealistic and are definitely anti-worker.   The Committee further observed 
that this Scheme is restricted only to private mills and is not applicable to mills of Public 
and Cooperative Sector.   The Committee, th erefore, called upon the Government to 
take all necessary steps including amendments, if necessary, in the relevant provisions 
of Acts, Rules and Statutes to make it more  flexible and also to include the mills of 
Public and Cooperative Sectors closed  between 6 June 1985 and 1 April 1993 and 
thereafter so as to protect the interests of  workers of the closed mills to the maximum 
possible extent.   
 
 1.6 In their action taken reply furnished to  the Committee, the Ministry has stated as 
follows: 
“TWRFS aims at providing relief to th e workers of closed textiles mills for a 
transitional period so that they are ab le to get alternative employment.  The 
funding of the scheme is through budgetary  support and no cess of any kind has 
been imposed on the Indian textiles industry.  Also no State Government shares 
the financial burden of the Union Govern ment on the disbursal of TWRFS relief 
despite the fact that workers’ welfare is the equal responsibility of the State 
Government.  The Committee may thus appreciate that within a fixed budgetary 
provision involving public money, only the most needy target group can be 
provided relief.  Therefore, the wage ceilings of Rs. 2,500/- between 6th June 1985 
and 1
st April 1993 and Rs. 3,500/- thereafter are fully justified.  In so far as the 
Committee’s recommendation to include mills  of Public and Cooperative Sector is 
concerned, mills in these sectors have separate social security provisions, which 
private sector mills do not have”.  
 
 
 
 
 

 9
 
 
 
 
 
  
1.7 The Committee are not happy with the reply furnished by the Government, 
since the Ministry has not moved an inch from their stand with respect to removal of 
ceiling on the wages under Textile Workers’  Rehabilitation Fund Scheme (TWRFS). 
The Committee  reiterate that the existing ceil ing on wages is not at all logical and is 
not in favour of workers, keeping in view the continuous rise in prices of all the 
basic essentials required for survival in the current scenario.  They are of firm 
opinion that the welfare of workers cannot be compromised merely due to the reason 
that the State Governments are not shar ing the financial burden and the Union 
Government has limited budgetary provisions for this Scheme.  As it is a Central 
Scheme, hence contribution of State Governments is not mandatory.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendatio n and desire that relaxation should be 
made in the present Act to remove the ceiling on wages in the larger interest of 
workers.  The Committee further desire that those workers of public and cooperative 
sector Textile Mills who are  not covered under social security provisions available to 
workers of these mills, should also be covered under TWRFS.  The steps taken and 
the progress achieved should be intimated to the Committee within a period of three 
months. 
 

 10
 
B.  WEAVERS WELFARE SCHEMES 
 
 (i) HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME (HIS) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12  Para - 3.58) 
 
1.8 The Committee had noted that the ‘Health Insurance Scheme’ for Handloom 
weavers  was launched on 3 November  2005. ICICI Lombard General Insurance 
Company has been chosen to implement the sch eme. The objective of the scheme is to 
financially enable the weavers to have access to the best medical facilities at an annual 
premium of Rs.1,000/- per weaver. The annual coverage per family is Rs. 15,000 under 
the scheme. The cap of Rs. 15,000 per family  under Health Insurance Scheme is, 
however, too meagre. The Committee felt the weavers suffer from occupational health 
hazards in addition to normal diseases.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that 
in view of the rising cost of consultation, tests, medicines, etc. the ceiling under the 
Scheme should be raised to at least Rs .1,50,000 per annum per family.  Moreover, the 
areas of critical care like cancer, bye-pass su rgery, brain surgery, etc. should also be 
brought within the ambit of the Scheme.  The ceiling of proposed Rs.1,50,000 per annum 
should not,  however, apply in such cases.  
 
1.9 In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated as follows: 
 
“The  matter regarding inclusion of critical illness cover under the Health 
Insurance Scheme was considered by the Go vernment of India.  The Ministry of 
Finance informed that the Life Insurance Corporation ( LIC)  will  be coming up 
with critical illness cover under a new product at a much lesser cost.  It has 
therefore been decided to get details of th e product, which is yet to be launched 
by the  LIC”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 11
1.10 While noting the reply of the Government, the Committee observe that the 
LIC is coming up with a new Scheme to provide critical illness cover to handloom 
weavers.  However, no time frame has been  indicated for the launch of the Scheme.  
The Ministry, at present, is providing general health cover to Handloom weavers 
under the “Health Insurance Scheme’ wh ich is being implemented by ICICI 
Lombard General Insurance Company.  The Committee feel that it is not at all logical 
to run two different Schemes simultaneousl y to provide health insurance to an 
individual as this will create confusion and discomfort to the weavers due to lower 
literacy ratio and lack of awareness besides increasing the procedural formalities.  
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the G overnment that instead of launching a 
new scheme to cover critical illness, the features of the new scheme should be 
suitably included in the existing scheme, viz., the Health Insurance Scheme (HIS) 
only.  The Committee are also unhappy to no te that the Ministry has conveniently 
avoided the question of raising the cap of Rs. 15,000/- per family under Health 
Insurance Scheme.  The Committee, ther efore, strongly reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the amount to cover general medical facilities should be raised 
to atleast Rs. 1,50,000/- without any further delay.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the concrete action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 12
 
(ii) MAHATMA GANDHI BUNKAR BIMA YOJANA (MGBBY) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13  Para - 3.59) 
 
 
1.11 The Committee noted that at present a ll  the weavers, whether male or female, 
between the age group of 18 and 58 years are eligible to be covered under the Mahatma 
Gandhi Bunkar Bima Scheme.  The Committ ee, however found that at present only 
1,96,337 weavers have been covered under the Scheme which is quite inadequate. The 
Committee in their earlier Report (9
th Report, 14 th Lok Sabha) had recommended that 
the eligibility criteria regarding the uppe r limit in coverage under Mahatma Gandhi 
Bunkar Bima Yojana should be raised from  58 to 70 years.  In this regard, the 
Committee were informed during evidence that the matter regarding extension of age 
limit under the Scheme was taken up with the Ministry of Fina nce and LIC.  They 
opined that in case the age is extended to 70 years, the premium will substantially go up 
as the mortality rate after the age of 60 goes up steeply.  Since the rate of premium is 
uniform in respect of age at entry, persons in younger ages will have to cross subsidize 
the premium for higher ages to a great exte nt.  The Committee, totally disagreed with 
this contention and felt that the Ministry ha s demonstrated utter lack of empathy in the 
instant  matter and has dealt with it in a routine manner.  The Committee found that as 
per the existing scheme, the annual prem ium is Rs.330/- of which Government of 
India’s share is Rs.150/-, weaver’s share is Rs.80/- and LIC’s share is Rs.100/- per 
annum.  During 2005-2006, Rs.315 lakh were released towards Central Government 
share of premium to LIC against 1,96,337 weavers covered under the Scheme.  Thus, the 
overall collection of LIC on account of Go vernment’s share and weavers contribution 
towards premium payments amounts to more than Rs.472 lakh excluding the share of 
LIC during 2005-2006.  The total disbursement by LIC under the settlement of claims 
has been Rs.414.30 lakh upto January  2007.  Thus, the Scheme prima facie appeared to 
be in favour of LIC.  The Committee were of the opinion that th e Government should 
have shown more concern for their socio-ec onomic obligations towards weavers rather 
than watching the interest of insurance companies.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterated their earlier recommendation for extension of age limit from 58 to 70 for 
coverage under the Scheme.  The Committee also  desired to be apprised of the steps 
taken in this regard at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 13
 
1.12 In response to the above recommendation , the Ministry of Textiles in its action 
taken reply has furnished as under:- 
 
“The matter regarding extension of ag e limit to 70 years under the Mahatma 
Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana was taken up with the Ministry of Finance and the 
LIC.  The LIC has informed that consid ering the impurity in age, the premium 
for persons between 60 and 70 years of age works out to Rs.1,650/-, out of which 
Rs.100/- will be borne from Social Securi ty Fund and the rema ining will have to 
be borne/shared by the members and/or Ministry. ” 
 
Since the premium of Rs.1,650/- is very high, the Ministry of Finance have 
been requested to reduce the premium”.  
 
 
1.13 The Committee fail to understand that de spite their repeated recommendations 
made regarding increase in upper age limit from 58 to 70 years for handloom weavers 
under MGBBY, the matter is still at the proposal stage and it has now been referred to the 
Ministry of Finance.  It seems that the Government is not pursuing the matter at the 
desired pace and interest.  The Committee feel th at it only amounts to lack of will and the 
desired empathy on the part of the Ministry so  far as the proposal of welfare schemes for 
the people is concerned.  The Committee now ex pect this matter to be taken up on a top 
priority and a decision taken in the matter.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made within one month of presentation of this report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 14
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1  Para - 3.11) 
 
2.1 The Committee observe that the a nnualized plan outlay for the 10th Plan has been 
Rs.4,852.50 crore whereas the utilization of plan  outlay was Rs.4,452.60 crore   (upto 31 
March 2007), thus leaving an unspent amount  of Rs.428.54 crore.  Approximately, more 
than one hundred crore of rupees remained unspent at the end of each year of the 10 th 
Five Year Plan.  The Committee note that on e of the major reasons for unspent balance 
has been the introduction of new schemes an d  m o d i f i c a t i o n s  o f  e x i s t i n g  o n e .   A s  a  
result, the Ministry of Textiles could not forecast the exact amount of plan expenditure.  
The Committee further note that there has been withdrawal, modifications and merger 
of schemes with other schemes almo st in all sectors of Textiles viz. handlooms, 
sericulture and handicrafts.  The Committee ha ve been informed during the course of 
evidence that in order to give a focussed th rust to the handloom sector, twelve existing 
schemes will be grouped into five schemes.  Si milarly, in handicrafts sector, the existing 
eleven schemes will be merged into seven with an emphasis on cluster development 
and welfare of artisans in the Eleventh Pl an.  The Committee are of the view that the 
modifications in existing schemes/introduction of new schemes which may be half-
baked as well, would only hamper the pa ce of expenditure because it involves 
completion of fresh procedural formalities, the process undergoes a test of acceptance 
by the beneficiaries through implementing  agencies and the assimilation of new 
schemes takes time.  The Comm ittee are skeptical that if this trend continues, the 
ambitious target set by the working group of  Textiles and Jute Industries (2007-12) that 
the Textile Industry is expected to reach the market size of US$ 115 billion by 2012 will 
remain a distant dream.  The Committee in th eir earlier reports have been impressing 
that developmental and welfare schemes of the Textile sector should be selected 
carefully after a thorough study keeping in view the past experiences, ground realities 
and the future need.  Instead of loading the sector with a plethora of half-baked 
schemes, a few effective and well planned sch emes should be devised to assist the 
Textile Industry to achieve the desired grow th of the sector and make it globally 
competitive.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
hope and trust that the Ministry will be mo re careful in formulation and selection of 
schemes.  The Committee also de sire the Ministry to adopt an innovative approach to 
improve utilization of the plan fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 15
Reply of Government 
 
2.2  The suggestion of the Hon’ble Commi ttee has been noted for compliance. 
Concerted efforts are being made to fully  utilize the plan fund through regular 
m o n i t o r i n g  o f  t h e  p e r f o r m a n c e .    S u c h  appraisal is necessary for identification of 
constraints, if any, and also timely introduction of corrective measures in 
implementation. Keeping this in view, the fo llowing steps have been taken/ proposed 
to be taken for full utilisation of the plan  outlays and for improvement of the schemes 
being implemented for the textiles sector: 
 
• 
• 
The Ministry of Textiles had already sponsored the evaluation of the 
major plan schemes. A Committee was constituted to scrutinize the evaluation 
reports of the schemes.  The Committee wa s mandated to ensure that the schemes 
were scrutinized before approving their continuation in the 11 th Plan.  
Continuation of schemes from the 10 th Plan to the 11 th Plan is to be supported by 
in-depth and independent evaluation reports. 
The schemes of the handloom and handicrafts sector have been 
appropriately modified by adding new components, dropping some components 
and at the same time enlarging the scope of some of the components.     In order to 
make the implementation more effect ive, guidelines are being revised & 
monitoring system is being further strengthened and broad based. 
• A review of the progress of physical and financial targets in respect of the 
schemes is held at the meetings of the Senior Officers (SOM) of the Ministry 
chaired by the Secretary (Textiles). Thes e are organised on a weekly basis. These 
meetings are in addition to various fora  at which the review of the Plan schemes is 
undertaken. For example, periodical revi ew reports are furnished to the Planning 
Commission. State Governments, and implem enting agencies are also called for 
discussions from time to time.  
• A Project Management Consultant (PMC) has been engaged for the 
implementation of the Scheme for Inte grated Textiles Parks (SITP). The PMC 
submits a monthly progress report to the Ministry of Textiles. Moreover, a High 
Level Committee under the Chairmanship of Minister of Textiles has been 
constituted to monitor and review the impl ementation of the scheme periodically.  
Project Approval Committee chaired by Secr etary (Textiles) regularly reviews the 
progress of project sanctioned under the scheme. 
• In the Office of the Textiles Commission er, Mumbai, a computerized monitoring 
mechanism with online connectivity with  the nodal banks is being set up to 
maintain information in respect of all be neficiaries.  This will help in efficient 
monitoring of disbursement of loans by banks as well as subsidy by Government 
to individual units.  
• Efforts are being made to create awareness about the schemes and related 
requirements through workshops (local and regional), marketing events, training, 
etc. Interaction through reviews and meet ings with State Governments has been 
increased.  

 16
• A major thrust is being made to promote cluster development leading to 
empowerment of artisans,  capacity building of artisans, Self Help Groups (SHGs), 
entrepreneurs and NGOs, etc.  This w ill facilitate Human Resource Development 
at all levels. 
• State level Screening Committees have been constituted to screen proposals, and  
local and State level Monitoring Committees provide  guidance for better 
implementation. 
• Steps have been initiated to involve St ate and National Level NGOs as Mother 
NGO, with a view to build the capacity of local NGOs and improve the delivery 
mechanism, leading to better implementation of scheme/achieving the objectives. 
• Initiatives have been undert aken in the form of the introduction of an Artisans 
Credit Card, the Credit Guarantee Scheme in J&K, etc., to provide financial linkage 
to the artisans/Self Help Groups of artis ans through formal financial institutions 
to meet their working capital requirements. 
• Periodic monitoring is undertaken to ensure utilisation of the Plan outlay. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated 26.7.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2  Para - 3.12) 
 
2.3 In respect of non-plan expenditure of th e Ministry, the position is also not very 
promising.  The Committee find that there is a huge variation in Budget Estimates and 
the actual expenditure during each year of the 10
th Plan except for the year 2005-2006 
when the actual expenditure was higher.  As against ov erall Budget Estimate of 
Rs.5,274.90 crore, only Rs.4,231.08 crore were actually spent during the entire 10 th Plan 
period.  The reasons for huge variation in  BE and actuals during the year 2006-07 have 
been stated as non-payment towards voluntary retirement scheme of NJMC, non-start 
of scheme regarding grant of special rebate  @ 10% on sale of accumulated handloom 
stock and imposition of 5% cut of non-plan scheme by the Ministry of Finance, etc.  The 
Committee are not convinced of the reasons adduced for non-utilization of funds and 
f e e l  t h a t  i t  i s  m o r e  d u e  t o  p o o r  p l a n n i n g and short-sightedness on the part of the 
Government.  The Committee, therefore, de sire the Ministry to adopt a scientific 
approach of forecasting the Budget Estimate s for non-plan expenditure so as to avoid 
surrender of huge unutilized amounts and co nsequential locking of precious financial 
resources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 17
Reply of Government 
 
 
2.4 Non-plan budget proposals are prep ared after a detailed review with the 
concerned Divisions. Thereafter, Non-Plan budget estimates are discussed in detail with 
the officials of the Ministry of Finance. Th e expenditure is also monitored regularly in 
the Senior Officers Meeting. In view of th e detailed scrutiny of budget proposals, 
budget estimates for the year 2007-08 were reduced to Rs.893.68 crore from Rs.1698.71 
crore in the year 2006-07.                                                                                                                                        
 
2.5 From the year 2007-08, Monthly Expend iture Plan (MEP) has been made 
applicable in the Ministry. According to th e MEP, expenditure for the last quarter is 
restricted to 33 % of the budget provision and expenditure can not exceed  15% in the 
month of March. Savings, if any, incurre d under Quarterly Expenditure Allocation 
(QEA)  would not be available for automatic  carry forward to the next quarter. 
Approval of Ministry of Finance is necessary for revalidation of such savings through 
modifications in the MEP and the QEA. 
 
2.6 This Management System will improve th e utilization  situation in the year 2007-
08 and prevent the surrender of funds. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated    26.7.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3  Para - 3.13) 
 
2.7 The Committee find that the Ministry faces difficulties in implementation of 
various schemes due to inability of the Stat e Governments to make adequate budgetary 
provision to meet the requisite State share as  stipulated under guidelines of respective 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS).  To over come this shortcoming, the Ministry has 
converted all handloom related Centrally Sponsored Schemes into Central Schemes 
(CS).  Similarly, to enable them to achieve the target fixed under various schemes, 
Catalytic Development Programme (CDP) has also been converted into Central 
Schemes for its better implementation. Th e Committee note that Handloom is the 
second largest sector in terms of employment , next only to agriculture. Taking into 
account the vastness and importance of the sector, the Committee feel that involvement 
of the State Governments, which have sufficient manpower and are better equipped 
with the monitoring machinery, is essentia l for successful implementation of various 
welfare schemes. The Committee therefore, recommend that the existing system of CSS 
in the handloom sector may continue for one year more in order that the Ministry gets 
fully acquainted with the new system. 
 
 

 18
Reply of Government 
 
 
2.8 The suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for compliance.  
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated   26.7.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4  Para - 3.14) 
 
2.9 The Committee are aware of the directive of the Government to earmark 10% of 
the entire allocation to the State Governments of North Eastern region of the country for 
their development.  The Ministry had made a lump sum provision of Rs.134.95 crore at 
BE level for the year 2006-07 for textiles and te xtile- based schemes of the North Eastern 
region.  However, the Committee are at a loss to understand the reasons for irrational 
share/outlay under various schemes of North Eastern region.  For instance, out of the 
total outlay of Rs.185.00 crore and Rs.110.00 crore in respect of handlooms and 
sericulture sectors, the  share  of North Eastern region was Rs.35 crore and Rs.40 crore 
respectively whereas for segments such as TUFS and SITP out of the total outlay of 
Rs.550.00 crore and Rs.209.00 crore, the share was Rs.15.00 crore and Rs.20.00 crore, 
respectively.  The amount spent on these se ctors  during the year was, however, nil.  
The shortfall is reportedly due to lack of ba sic facilities relating to development of large 
industry. The reason cited by the Ministry in this regard is not acceptable to the 
Committee.  The Committee feel that there is  need for some correction and adjustment 
in allocation of outlay to various schemes of North Eastern region particularly in the 
Sericulture sector where out of total plan allocation of Rs. 110 crore, Rs.40 crore i.e. 
about 37% has been reserved for the Nort h- East during 2007-2008.  Besides, the 
Committee also desire that the Government  should take steps to strengthen the 
monitoring/evaluation of different schemes so  that the allocation in respect of the 
North-Eastern States is better utilized.  
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.10 The suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for compliance.   
 
2.11 It is again submitted that strict prop ortional allocation to the North Eastern 
Region (NER) is neither feasible nor practical,  as some schemes are more relevant in the 
NER, due to the peculiar industrial and geographical circumstances prevailing in NER 
States. 
 
 
 
 
 

 19
 
2.12 The North Eastern Industrial and Technical Consultancy Organisation 
(NEITCO), Guwahati is conducting an evalua tion study of textiles related schemes in 
the North Eastern Region to assess their effe ctiveness for future planning.  Based on the 
recommendations of this evaluation study, appropriate steps will be taken during the 
implementation.  Adequate care will also be taken to ensure that the flow of funds to 
the States falling under NER is fully utilized. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated   26.7.2007) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7  Para - 3.36) 
 
2.13 The Committee observe that the Govern ment had launched the Apparel Parks 
for Export Schemes (APES) and Textile Cen tre Infrastructure Development Scheme 
(TCIDS) in 2002 with a view to create export zone of excellence of Apparel 
manufacturing and to modernize/fill in the ga ps in the existing infrastructure at the 
major textile centres.  An amount of Rs.131.55 crore were spent on these Schemes.  After 
three years of implementation, in the year 2005, both these Scheme s were merged with 
a new Scheme namely, SITP as these Schemes did not make much headway.    The new 
Scheme SITP, as envisaged, has the invo lvement of Government of India, State 
Governments, State Industrial Developmen t Corporations, Industry Associations, 
Group of Entrepreneurs, etc. for its funding  and functioning.  In addition, the Project 
Management Consultant has also been assigned  an important role for identification of 
potential location, facilitating formation of SPV, project Report formation and assisting 
SPV in attaining financial closure, preparation of tender documents and execution of 
projects under the Scheme.     Besides,  SPVs have been given operational autonomy.  
Considering the involvement of multiple agencies and complex nature of the SITP 
Scheme, the Committee calls upon the Govern ment to frame suitable guidelines to 
ensure that the execution of the Scheme is transparent, role assigned to each of the 
individual/agency is well defined, funding of the Scheme by private 
entrepreneurs/association of Industry is regulated in proper proportion and all 
functionaries involved are accountable tow ards the success of the Scheme.  Besides, 
there should also be an effective monito ring mechanism to oversee the progress of 
these Parks with a view to ensure that they  are being developed within the stipulated 
time frame and are in a position to achieve the set target. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.14 Guidelines for SITP have been issued by the Government in 2005, which lay 
down role and responsibility of the project specific Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV), the 
Project Management Consultant (PMC) and the Government.   
            
 
 

 20
 
 
2.15 Government of India support is releas ed in a phased manner after ensuring 
appropriate matching contribution by the member entrepreneurs.   
 
2.16 The PMC is helping the SPVs for the speed y implementation of the Projects in a 
professional manner from the formulation of the project report to the execution of the 
project.  
 
2.17   A Project Approval Committee regularly reviews the progress of the projects. 
Moreover, to monitor the projects efficientl y, representatives of the Government of 
India and PMC have been nominated on the Board of Directors of the SPV.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated    26.7.2007) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 21
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDTIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5  Para - 3.24) 
 
3.1 The Committee are deeply distressed to note that a large number of mills are 
being  closed every year and lakhs of workers are being rendered without any job or 
assistance.  As many as 3,22,855 workers of 462 mills have so far been displaced in the 
country.   But,  as per the norms decide d by the Government, only 99,780 workers of 47 
mills have been found eligible to get benefit under Textile Workers’ Rehabilitation Fund 
Scheme (TWRFS).  Moreover, out of the eligible workers, only 82,262 workers have been 
disbursed the assistance thus leaving 17,518 workers without any benefit despite being 
eligible under the Scheme. The Committee feel  that the benefits under the TWRFS have 
not only been delayed but denied to the elig ible workers due to statutory requirements 
of permission under section 25(O) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, appointment of 
official liquidator under Companies Act, 1956 and scrutiny of applications by the State 
Governments.  The Committee, theref ore, strongly recommend that the 
compensation/relief due to a huge number of 17,518 eligible workers of the closed mills 
be disbursed to them without any delay in a time-bound manner.  The Ministry is 
advised to expedite the matter in consulta tion with the State Governments.  The 
progress in this regard may be reported to the Committee within three months of 
submission of this report.  The Commi ttee also reiterate that the role and 
responsibilities of the office of Textile Commissioner may be suitably redefined 
vis-à-vis 
this scheme so as to cut short the delays in  process.  While doing so, the provision be 
made of holding the concerned officer a ccountable in the office of the Textile 
Commissioner, in case of undue delay. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 
3.2 It is brought to the kind notice of  the Committee that as on 11.06.2007, 51 mills 
have been covered under the Textiles Worker s’ Rehabilitation Fund Scheme (TWRFS).  
These Mills have a strength of 1,02,244 work ers and out of these 82,297 have been paid 
relief to the extent of Rs. 195.06 crores.  From the remaining 19,947 workers who have to 
be paid relief , about 15,000 workers have been found to be ineligible under the Scheme 
by the concerned State Governments thus le aving only about 5000 workers to be paid 
relief.  These pertain to 2 mills namely M/s Mahendra Textile Mills, Kalol (Gujarat) and 
M/s Nandi Hasbi Mills, Nargund, Karnataka which were identified under TWRFS 
recently. As on 11.06.07, 2779 applications amou nting to Rs. 8 crores are under scrutiny 
in the offices of the Regional Textiles Commissioners / State Governments.  The 

 22
Government of India has released Rs. 2.5 crores during 2007-08, which has been 
allocated to various Regional Offices by op ening Letters of Credit in their favour. 
Government would like to apprise the Committee that disbursement is expeditious 
once applications are received from the competent authority (State Governments).  It 
may also be mentioned that the Office of the Textiles Commissioner is always in contact 
with the State Governments for speedy scrutin y of applications of workers.  The O/o 
TXC also helps the workers in opening bank accounts. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated    26.7.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8  Para - 3.37) 
 
 
3.3 The Committee further observe that due to involvement of various Government 
agencies like Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance, etc. and also for completing 
various procedural formalities, a lot of time is  taken in the clearance of the project.  The 
Committee, therefore recommend that there should be close liaison and coordination 
among various Government agencies for expeditious clearance of the projects so as to 
avoid time and cost overruns.  The Committ ee further recommend that the procedural 
formalities required for clearance of such projects should also be simplified. 
  
Reply of Government 
 
  3.4 Involvement of the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance is initially 
limited to the allocation of funds and approv al of the scheme. Approval of individual 
project is considered by a Project Approval Committee (PAC) which include 
representatives of Planning Commission and Mi nistry of Finance. Approval of projects 
during the 10
th Five Year Plan was done expeditiously, and 30 projects were sanctioned 
as per target. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated   26.7.2007) 

 23
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9  Para - 3.38) 
 
3.5 The Committee also note that there is a great demand of Textile Parks from all 
over the country.  As many as 30 Parks have already been sanctioned covering the 
States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Karnataka, 
Punjab and West Bengal.    However, more and more demands for setting up Parks 
from the entrepreneurs are pouring in.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should make a realistic assessment as to the number of Parks to be opened 
keeping in view the demands from entrepre neurs in the overall perspective.  The 
establishment of these Textiles Parks should be  decided in such a manner that as far as 
possible a balance is maintained among various regions/States of the country so that 
the benefits accruing with the setting up of Textile Parks are equally divided 
throughout the nation.  Simultaneously, it sh ould also be kept in view that the areas 
with high density of weavers and other ha ndloom workers are given priority while 
taking a decision regarding establishment of such Parks in a State/UT.  This will go a 
long way in the development of Textile sector and generation of employment 
opportunities. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 
3.6 The scheme has received overwhelming response from entrepreneurs.  Only 
those projects, which are considered to be vi able are approved by the Project Approval 
Committee (PAC).  
 
3.7 In the 1 st phase, proposals from traditional textiles producing areas were 
received. Entrepreneurs are the main promoter s of these Textiles Parks.  Entrepreneurs 
of States/UTs, from where no proposal was approved during the 10 th Plan, will be 
sensitized to develop Textiles Parks as soon as a decision is taken to sanction more 
projects during the 11th Plan.. 
 
3.8 During the 10 th Plan one Handlooms Park was approved. Efforts will  be made to 
set up more such parks during the 11th Plan. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated   26.7.2007) 
 

 24
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14  Para - 3.60) 
 
3.9 The Committee are disheartened to note the position of settlement of claims 
under the schemes.  811 cases of natural death and 11  cases of the accidental death have 
been settled as on January 2007 while some cases yet remain to be settled.  This reflects 
the lackadaisical attitude of the Government agencies in setting the due claims of the 
poor and needy families of the weavers.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Government should take  immediate steps to settle all the pending 
cases of claims under the scheme and devise  a proper mechanism to make the process 
of claim settlement quick and hassle free in future. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 
3.10 As regards the settlement of claims un der Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana 
is concerned, the LIC has informed that 1345 natural death claims and 14 accidental 
death claims (totalling 1359 claims) have been received by the LIC and all the 1359 
claims amounting to Rs.6.84 Crores have b een settled by the LIC up-to March 2007.  
Thus it may be stated that the claims have been settled by the LIC promptly. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated  26.7.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15  Para - 3.71) 
 
3.11 The Committee note that the Technology Mission on Cotton was launched by the 
Government of India on 21 February 2000 with the aim of addressing issues relating to 
the increase in productivity,  improvement of quality and reduction in the cost of 
production and thus providing the much n eeded competitive adva ntage to the textile 
industry along with ensuring attractive re turns to the farmers. The Mission comprises 
four Mini Missions, which are being implemented jointly by the Ministries of 
Agriculture and Textiles. Research and Deve lopment on cotton and dissemination of 
technology to farmers are bein g undertaken by the Minist ry of Agriculture through 
Mini Missions I and II respectively. The obje ctives of Mini Missions III and IV are to 
improve marketing infrastructure and moderni zation of ginning and pressing factories, 
respectively. The Committee prima facie feel satisfied with the performance of  Mini 
Missions III and IV. They, however, note with  distress that no evaluation study with 
regard to the performance of  Mini Mission I and II seems to have been done, although 
they are meant for research and development of cotton sector and dissemination of 
technology to farmers. These activities are of vital importance and have direct bearing 
on the functioning of Mini Missions III and IV. Lack of information regarding 
performance of  Mini Missions I and II may have a bearing on the functioning  of Mini 
Mission III and IV.   Hence, in the opinion of the Committee, the integrated functioning 

 25
of all the four Missions is the need of the hour. The disparate functioning of the 
Technology Mission on Cotton, despite the existence  of co-ordination mechanism may 
not yield the desired results as integrated and unified approach of all these Missions 
may do.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that an appropriate 
mechanism be devised to make sure that all the Mini Missions meant for the 
development of cotton sector are brought under a single and unified command for their 
better, integrated, result oriented and cohesive performance. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 
3.12 There is an Empowered Committee un der the Chairmanship of the Cabinet 
Secretary to oversee the implementation of the Technology Mission on Cotton (TMC).  
Issues pertaining to Mini Missions I and II of the Ministry of Agriculture and Mini 
Missions III and IV of the Ministry of Textiles are taken up in the Empowered 
Committee.  There is no problem of coordina tion between the Ministries of Agriculture 
and Textiles in the implementation of the TMC project.  There does not appear to be any 
need for such a mechanism to be devised at this stage. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated  26.7.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16  Para - 3.72) 
 
3.13 The Committee observe that the allocation  of funds for Mini Missions III and IV 
for the years 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07  were Rs.40 crore, Rs.70 crore  and   Rs.50.50  
crore, respectively whereas the expenditure du ring the aforesaid period has been to the 
tune of Rs.30.33 crore in 2004-05, Rs.26.33 cror e in the year 2005-06 and Rs.25 crore in 
the year 2006-07. Thus,  the expenditure during  the last three years has been far less 
than stipulated. However, the performance of these two Missions has been stated to be 
satisfactory as the targets were over achieved. The Committee are surprised to note that 
the targets were achieved with under utilizat ion of funds.  The Committee, therefore, 
feel that there should be correlation between the budgetary allocations and physical 
targets and desire that the Ministry should take corrective action in this regard and 
ensure that B.E is projected on a realistic basis.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 26
Reply of Government 
 
 
3.14 The original target for the X Plan unde r Mini Missions III and IV of the TMC was 
the development of 60 Market Yards, an d the Modernization of 350 Ginning and 
Pressing factories. The Government of In dia share was fixed at Rs. 152.60 crores. The 
year-wise targeted expenditure, and the allo cation of funds (Budget Estimates and the 
actual expenditure) is given below: - 
                                                                         
                                                                                             (Rupees in crores) 
Year Targeted 
Expenditur
e  
Funds 
allocated 
Funds 
utilized 
2004-05 38.40 40.00 30.33 
2005-06 38.40 70.00 26.33 
2006-07 38.40 50.50 25.00 
 
3.15 The variation between the budget estima tes and the expenditure incurred in the 
past years was due to the fact that the esti mates were based on the assumption that the 
Market Yards and the G & P factories approv ed under the project would be completed 
within a period of 1 year.  To implement the TMC approved projects, both APMCs and 
G & P factories have to face various proble ms such as financial limitations, weather 
conditions, non-availability of machinery et c., Hence the development of Market Yards 
actually takes two to three years once the approval is accorded. 
 
3.16 The utilisation of funds during 2004-05 and 2005-06 was slow because projects 
approved earlier i.e., during 2002-03 and 2003-04 were at the completion stage.  New 
and additional targets were fixed duri ng June 2005 and approvals were accorded 
thereafter.  As such the projects under  the Mini Missions were at different stages of 
progress after June 2005.  The Government of India released funds to those projects only 
which had achieved their target whereas for the remaining projects, funds will be 
released as and when completion is achieved. 
 
3.17 It was proposed to extend Mini Missions I II and IV to complete   targets.  This 
extension will be for  another two years i.e ., up to 31.03.09 and has been agreed to  by 
the Empowered Committee on TMC under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary. 
 
 
 

 27
 
3.18 A sum of Rs. 220 crores was   released to the CCI for the implementation of the 
TMC (MM III and MM IV) up to 2006-07.  The same has since been utilized.  Additional 
funds would be required for the completion of  the targets during the XI Five-Year Plan.  
A sum of Rs. 241.35 crores has been allotted up to 31.3.09 in the XI Five Year Plan.   Rs. 
50.00 crores have been provided  in the current financial year 2007-08. 
 
  
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated  26.7.2007) 
 

 28
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6  Para - 3.25) 
 
4.1 The Committee further note that one of the eligibility criteria to avail of the 
benefit under the scheme is that the wo rkers should have been drawing wage 
equivalent to Rs.2,500 per month or less from  the mills, which ha d closed between 6 
June 1985 and 1 April 1993 and Rs.3,500 on 1 Ap ril 1993 or thereafter.  The Committee 
feel that the ceiling on the wages of  Rs.2,500 between 6 June 1985 and 1 April 1993 and 
Rs.3,500  thereafter and the cut off dates for closure of mills to av ail of the benefits 
under the Scheme are unrealistic and are definitely anti-worker.   The Committee 
further observe that this Scheme is restricted  only to private mills and is not applicable 
to mills of Public and Cooperative Sector.   The Committee, therefore, call upon the 
Government to take all necessary steps in cluding amendments, if necessary, in the 
relevant provisions of Acts, Rules and Statut es to make it more flexible and also to 
include the mills of Public and Cooperative Sectors closed between 6 June 1985 and 1 
April 1993 and thereafter so as to protect the interests of workers of the closed mills to 
the maximum possible extent.   
 
Reply of Government 
 
4.2 TWRFS aims at providing relief to the workers of closed textiles mills for a 
transitional period so that th ey are able to get alternativ e employment.  The funding of 
the scheme is through budgetary support and no cess of any kind has been imposed on 
the Indian textiles industry.  Also no Stat e Government shares the financial burden of 
the Union Government on the di sbursal of TWRFS relief despite the fact that workers’ 
welfare is the equal responsibility of the State Government.  The Committee may thus 
appreciate that within a fixed budgetary pr ovision involving public money, only the 
most needy target group can be provided relief.  Therefore, the wage ceilings of Rs. 
2,500/- between 6th June 1985 and 1
st April 1993 and Rs. 3,500/- thereafter are fully 
justified.  In so far as the Committee’s recommendation to include mills of Public and 
Cooperative Sector is concerned, mills in these sectors have separate social security 
provisions, which private sector mills do not have.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated    26.7.2007) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I of the  Report) 

 29
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12  Para - 3.58) 
 
4.3 The Committee note that the ‘Health In surance Scheme’ for Handloom weavers  
was launched on 3 November 2005. ICICI Lombard General Insurance Company has 
been chosen to implement the scheme. The objective of the scheme is to financially 
enable the weavers to have access to the best  medical facilities at an annual premium of 
Rs.1,000/- per weaver. The annual coverage pe r family is Rs. 15,000 under the scheme. 
The cap of Rs. 15,000 per family under Health Insurance Scheme is, however, too 
meagre. The Committee feel the weavers suff er from occupational health hazards in 
addition to normal diseases.  The Committee,  therefore, recommend that in view of the 
rising cost of consultation, tests, medicines,  etc. the ceiling under the Scheme should be 
raised to at least Rs.1,50,000 per annum per family .  Moreover, the areas of critical care 
like cancer, bye-pass surgery, brain surgery, etc. should also be brought within the 
ambit of the Scheme.  The ceiling of pr oposed Rs.1,50,000 per annum should not,  
however, apply in such cases.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
 
4.4 The  matter regarding inclusion of critical illness cover under the Health 
Insurance Scheme was considered by the Government of India.  The Ministry of Finance 
informed that the Life Insurance Corporation ( LIC)  will  be coming up with critical 
illness cover under a new product at a much lesser cost.  It has therefore been decided 
to get details of the product, which is yet to be launched by the  LIC. 
  
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated  26.7.2007) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13  Para - 3.59) 
 
4.5 The Committee note that at present all  the weavers, whether male or female, 
between the age group of 18 and 58 years are eligible to be covered under the Mahatma 
Gandhi Bunkar Bima Scheme.  The Committee,  however find that at present only 
1,96,337 weavers have been covered under the Scheme which is quite inadequate. The 
Committee in their earlier Report (9
th Report, 14 th Lok Sabha) had recommended that 
the eligibility criteria regarding the uppe r limit in coverage under Mahatma Gandhi 
Bunkar Bima Yojana should be raised from  58 to 70 years.  In this regard, the 
Committee were informed during evidence that the matter regarding extension of age 
limit under the Scheme was taken up with the Ministry of Fina nce and LIC.  They 

 30
opined that in case the age is extended to 70 years, the premium will substantially go up 
as the mortality rate after the age of 60 goes up steeply.  Since the rate of premium is 
uniform in respect of age at entry, persons in younger ages will have to cross subsidize 
the premium for higher ages to a great extent.  The Committee, totally disagree with 
this contention and feel that the Ministry has demonstrated utter lack of empathy in the 
instant   matter and has dealt with it in a routine manner.  The Committee find that as 
per the existing scheme, the annual prem ium is Rs.300/- of which Government of 
India’s share is Rs.150/-, weaver’s share is Rs.80/- and LIC’s share is Rs.100/- per 
annum.  During 2005-2006, Rs.315 lakh were released towards Central Government 
share of premium to LIC against 1,96,337 weavers covered under the Scheme.  Thus, the 
overall collection of LIC on account of Go vernment’s share and weavers contribution 
towards premium payments amounts to more than Rs.472 lakh excluding the share of 
LIC during 2005-2006.  The total disbursement by LIC under the settlement of claims 
has been Rs.414.30 lakh upto January 2007.  Thus, the Scheme 
prima facie appears to be 
in favour of LIC.  The Committee are of th e opinion that the Government should have 
shown more concern for their socio-economic  obligations towards weavers rather than 
watching the interest of insurance companies.   The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation for extension of age limit from 58 to 70 for coverage under the 
Scheme.  The Committee also desire to be appr ised of the steps taken in this regard at 
the earliest. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
4.6 The matter regarding extension of age limit to 70 years under the Mahatma 
Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana was taken up with the Ministry of Finance and the LIC.  
The LIC has informed that considering the impurity in age, the premium for persons 
between 60 and 70 years of age works out to Rs.1,650/-, out of which Rs.100/- will be 
borne from Social Security Fund and the remaining will have to be borne/shared by the 
members and/or Ministry.   
 
4.7 Since the premium of Rs.1,650/- is very hi gh, the Ministry of Finance have been 
requested to reduce the premium.  
 
4.8 As regards the settlement of claims under the Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima 
Yojana, it is stated that 1359 claims ( 1345 cases of natural death and 14 cases of 
accidental death) amounting to Rs.6.84 Crore have been settled up to March 2007. 
Besides this, Scholarships for 29127 cases amounting to Rs.1.99 Crore has been 
disbursed by the LIC up-to March 2007. The total amount disbursed by LIC towards 
settlement of claims and scholarship was     Rs.8.83 Crore. During the year 2005-06 and 
2006-07, a sum of Rs.6.15 Crore was released to  LIC towards Central Government Share 
of Premium. The premium amount towards Central Government share and the weavers 
share works out to Rs.9.43 Crore.  Agai nst Rs.9.43 Crore, Rs.8.83 Crore has been 
disbursed by the LIC towards settlement of claims and scholarship which works out to 
93.63%.   

 31
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated 26.7.2007) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

 32
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10  Para - 3.46) 
 
5.1 The Committee note that the Technolo gy Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS), the 
flagship scheme of the Ministry of Textiles, was launched with the objective of making 
funds available  to the domestic textile industry to upgrade the technology of existing 
units and also to set up new units with th e state of the art technology to enhance 
competitiveness in the domestic and internatio nal markets. To achieve the objective, an 
outlay  of Rs. 911 crore has been earmarked  in the year 2007-08 as against Rs. 550 crore 
in the year 2006-07. Reasons advanced for the substantial step-up in TUFS is to make 
Indian textile industry globally competitive an d to equip it to face fierce competition as 
a result of phasing out of agreement on Te xtiles and Clothing (ATC).  The scheme is 
implemented on reimbursement basis, 
i.e.  funds are released  after the expenditure is 
incurred. The scheme has been extended be yond 31 March 2007 reportedly because it 
has been found to be working satisfactor ily towards its goal. The Committee further 
find that the quarterly payments of subsidy due in September 2006 and December 2006 
have not yet been released in quite a fe w cases for want of funds. The Committee, 
therefore, feel that Rs.911 crore allotte d under the scheme may turn out to be 
inadequate. In order to make the scheme highly effective and successful, the Committee 
observe that a result – orient ed scheme should not prove a laggard merely due to non- 
availability of sufficient funds. They, theref ore, strongly recommend that the Ministry 
may urge upon the Planning Commission to allocate the additional amount of Rs. 500 
crore, or even more, if needed.  
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 
5.2 Ministry of Textiles has estimated that the net requirement of funds under the 
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme ( TUFS) would be approximately Rs. 2,600 
crores.  This has already been communicated vide EFC Note to the Ministry of Finance 
and the Planning Commission.  No commitment in this regard has been received from 
them so far. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated    26.7.2007) 
 
 
 
 

 33
 
 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11  Para - 3.49) 
 
5.3 The Committee note that the handloom sector is providing livelihood to a large 
number of weavers in the country.  As  per the joint census of handlooms and 
powerlooms done in 1995-96, about 65.51 lakhs persons are engaged in weaving and 
associated activities in handloom sector.  Most of the weavers are scattered in rural 
areas and remote parts of the country.  It is  more than a decade since last census was 
conducted by the Government to assess the number of weavers in the country.   The 
Committee are of the opinion that in the absence of latest and updated figures, 
hypothetical data is relied on, which adversely affects policies and programmes 
designed to strengthen the sector. Th e Committee, therefore, calls upon the 
Government to take immediate and urgent  steps to conduct a fresh census of handloom 
weavers and allied workers engaged therein as of now so that realistic allocation for this 
sector could be made. The Committee also desire  to be apprised of the efforts initiated 
in the matter within three months of presentation of this report. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 
5.4 The recommendation has been noted for compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(5)/2007-Parl. dated    26.7.2007) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                      SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,      
                                                        Chairman, 
30 August  2007                 Standing Committee on Labour. 
8 Bhadrapada,  1929 (Saka) 

 34
  APPENDIX-I  
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON THURSDAY, 30 AUGUST  2007 
 
The Committee met from 1000 hours to 1055 hours in Committee Room 
“C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
5. Shri Virendra Kumar 
6. Shri Mohan Rawale 
7. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
8. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
9. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
10. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam  
11. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
12. Shri Gandhi Azad 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.  Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
3. Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
4. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 35
  
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting 
particularly a new Member, Shri Ramdas At hawale who has been nominated by the 
Hon’ble Speaker w.ef. 21.8.2007 to the Committee for the term 2007-08.  He then 
apprised the Members about the two draft reports on the action taken replies received 
from the Ministry of Labour and Employme nt and the Ministry of Textiles on the 
Twentieth and Twenty-First Reports on the Demands for Grants for the year 2007-2008 
respectively. 
   
3 .   X X      X X     X X  
  
4. The Committee then took up the draft T wenty-Fourth  Report on   the Action 
taken by the Government on the Recommen dations/Observations contained in the 
Twenty-First Report of the Standing Committ ee on Labour on Demands for Grants for 
the year 2007-2008 of the Ministry of Textile s for consideration an d adoption.  After 
some discussion, the Committee adopted the report with the following modification. 
 
Page no. 3, Para no. 1.7, Line no.13-after workers  insert “ The Committee further 
desire that those workers of public and cooperative sector Textile Mills who are  
not covered under social security provisions available to workers of these mills, 
should also be covered under TWRFS”. 
 
5. The Committee then authorised the Chai rman to finalise the above Reports and 
present the same to the Parliament on their behalf. 
 
  
  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
  
  
 
 

 36
 
      APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKE N BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIRST REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
        Total  Percentage  
 
I. Total number of Recommendations      16  
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have          
been accepted by Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4 and 7)          5  31.25%  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s  replies 
(Sl. Nos. 5,8,9,14,15 and 16)             6   37.50%  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which  Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration 
(Sl. Nos. 6, 12 and 13)              3  18.75%  
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which     
final replies of Government are of interim in  nature 
(Sl. Nos. 10 and 11)             2    12.50% 
                  ----------  
           100%  
                              ------------  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 37
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 