 
38 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-2009) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
 
 THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008 
 
 
  
 THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
      
        
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2009/Pausa,  1930 (Saka) 

 2
       THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-09) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
 
  
 THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008 
 
 
 
 
                  Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 22.1.2009 
            
 Presented to  Lok Sabha on  13.2.2009     
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   13.2.2009      
 
   
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
  
 
January, 2009/Pausa,  1930 (Saka) 

 3
CONTENTS 
PAGE                 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                 (iii) 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N          ( v )    
                          
          
R E P O R T          1 - 2 2    
        
   
   
                     ANNEXURES 
        
 (I)         The Plantations  Labour  (Amendment) Bill, 2008   23-37 
 
(II)         Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Labour 38-40  
  held on 17th December, 2008   
                                                         
 (III)         Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Labour  41-42 
  held on 16th January, 2009   
                                                         
 
  
  
 

 4
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-2009) 
 
               Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy-CHAIRMAN 
 
                              MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
2. Shri Furkan Ansari  
3. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale  
4. Shri Subrata Bose  
5. Shri Santasri Chatterjee  
6. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
*7. Shri Munawar Hasan  
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta  
9. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan  
10. Shri Virendra Kumar  
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi  
12. Shri Basangouda R. Patil  
13. Shri Devidas Pingle  
14. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar  
15. Shri Mohan Rawale  
16. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat  
17. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat  
18. Smt. C. S. Sujatha  
19. Shri Paras Nath Yadav  
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant  
 RAJYA SABHA  
**22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam  
23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany  
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari  
25. Shri K. Chandran Pillai  
***26. Shri Gandhi Azad  
 27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
 28. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta  
 29. Vacant  
30. Vacant  
31. Vacant  
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*  Expired on 10.12.2008. 
**   Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya     
 Sabha w.e.f. 29.11.2008. 
*** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya  
 Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008.

 5
                                                  
 
                                                  SECRETARIAT 
 
 
  1.    Shri Brahm Dutt   -  Joint Secretary 
            2.    Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director 
3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary 
  

 6
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this 
Thirty-Eighth Report on `The Plantations Labour (Amendment) Bill, 2008’.   
 
2. `The Plantation Labour (Amendment) Bill, 2008’   was introduced in the 
Rajya Sabha on 21 st October, 2008  and was referred to the Standing 
Committee on Labour by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E (b) 
of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for 
examination and report within three months from the date of publication of the 
reference of the Bill in the Bulletin Part- II of Lok Sabha dated 31 st October, 
2008.    
 
3. The Bill seeks to provide a safety net to plantation workers dealing with 
agro-chemicals particularly, insecticides, pesticides and herbicides besides 
enabling the Central Government to prohibit, restrict or regulate the 
employment of women and adolescents for handling hazardous chemicals in 
plantations.  
 
4. The Committee sought written information regarding the origin of this 
Bill from the nodal Ministry, i.e., the Ministry of Labour and Employment.    
The Committee also sought written clarifications on the proposed amendments 
in the Act. 
 
5. The Committee also invited views/comments of Central Trade Unions on 
the proposed amendments.  The Committee further undertook on-the-spot 
study visits to Bangalore and Kochi from 29 th November, 2008 to 2 nd 
December, 2008 to have first hand information about the problems of the 
plantation workers and to know their views on the proposed amendments in 
the Act. 
 
6. The Committee took oral evidence of th e representatives of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment on 17th December, 2008 in connection with the examination of 
the Bill.   
 
7. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on the Bill at 
their sitting held on  16
th January, 2009.  
   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,       
                                                                          Chairman, 
 16th January, 2009       Standing Committee on Labour  
 26 Pausa, 1930  (Saka) 

 7
REPORT 
 
 
THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008 
 
 
Background  
 
 
 
 The Plantations Labour Act, 1951 provides for the welfare of labour and 
regulates the conditions of work in plantations. It also regulates conditions of 
employment including working hours and provides for mechanism for safety, 
health and welfare of plantation labour.  The Act was reviewed in September, 
1984, in a conference of Labour Secretaries of States having plantation 
industry, and the need to amend the Act was noted.  It was strongly articulated 
that additional safeguard for workers is necessary in view of increasing use of 
hazardous chemicals in the plantation industry as well as poor implementation 
of welfare provisions of the Act.  Some State Governments also sent proposals 
to amend the Act and the Rules framed there under. 
 
 
2. Implementation of welfare provisions of the Act, relating to medical 
facilities, protective clothing etc. were also deliberated by the Industrial 
Committee on Plantations at its meeting held in March, 1985.  The Committee 
felt that the plantation industry was not fully extending the mandated rights 
and safeguards to the workers.  The Committee observed that the Act should 
be amended to ensure that the provision of such welfare facilities as well as 
adequate safeguards against toxic chemicals (i.e. insecticides, fungicides and 
herbicides etc.) that were being increasingly used in plantations are extended 
to plantation workers.  Accordingly, a sub-committee was constituted on 06 
August, 1985 to consider the required amendments to the Act and the model 
rules framed thereunder including rules framed by the State Governments 
relating to safety, health and welfare of plantation workers.  The report of this 
sub-committee was considered and approved with certain modifications by the 
Industrial Committee on Plantations, in August 1986. 
 
3. The Cabinet approved the proposal of Ministry of Labour to amend the 
Act.  This amendment proposal relied heavily on the recommendations of 
August 1986 of the Industrial Committee on Plantations.  The Plantations 
Labour (Amendment) Bill, 1988 was introduced in Lok Sabha) on 16 December, 
1988 during 8th Lok Sabha.  The Bill, however,  lapsed due to dissolution of the 
Lok Sabha. 
 
 
 
 
 

 8
 
 
 
4. In the meanwhile, certain aspects relating to handling of hazardous 
chemicals by workers in plantation came up for a fresh scrutiny and it was felt 
that an enabling provision may be made by the State Governments to prohibit 
or regulate reemployment of women and adolescents for using or handling any 
hazardous chemicals in plantation.  Therefore, the Bill was got deleted from the 
list of Business of the Lok Sabha) on 26th July, 1989 during 9th Lok Sabha with 
a view to examining these suggestions further. 
 
5. Subsequently in January, 1991, the Cabinet desired that the proposal to 
amend the Act may be re-examined to ensure adequacy of the restrictions 
required in respect of employment of women and children in view of use of 
hazardous chemicals in the plantation industry.  As per the directions of the 
Cabinet, a revised Note for the Cabinet after consulting Ministries concerned 
was submitted in December, 1991. 
 
6 After obtaining the approval of the Cabinet, the Plantations Labour 
(Amendment) Bill, 1992 was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 7 May,1992  The 
Bill was passed by Rajya Sabha on 30 July, 1992 and was laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 4 August,1992. 
 
7. In the meantime, Government received a number of representations from 
various organizations expressing apprehensions about some of the 
amendments proposed in the Bill, particularly, regarding the viability and 
necessity to establish within two and three years ‘Garden’ and “Group 
Hospitals” by the plantation management, irrespective of the scale of plantation 
size and strength of employment.  It was felt that the amendment would lead to 
avoidable duplication of infrastructure leading to waste of resources.  It was, 
accordingly decided, with the approval of the then Labour Minister, to 
reconstitute the Tripartite Industrial Committee on Plantations.  The Industrial 
Committee on Plantations was reconstituted and a meeting of the Committee 
was held on 27 April, 1994.  It was deci ded in the meeting that in view of 
increasing commitment of resources on transport and road infrastructure the 
isolation of plantation has been significantly mitigated and thus to that extent 
the need to insist on Group hospitals and garden hospitals irrespective of scale 
of plantation, may not be necessary.  In a related development, with the 
dissolution of the 10
th Lok Sabha, the Bill lapsed on 10 May, 1996. 
 
8. A new Tripartite Committee on Plantations Industry was constituted in 
2002.  This Tripartite Committee, in its deliberations of April 4, 2002, decided 
to constitute an Inter-Ministerial Committee with representatives from 
Ministries of Commerce, Finance, Labour and State Governments.  The 
Committee recommended that if the right legislative and policy
 environment is 
made available, then, the plantation sector has a lot of promise to grow.  The 
Committee was of the view that in the event of the State providing the welfare 
amenities to plantation states, as are ordinarily available to citizens of the 

 9
country, the relevant provisions in the Act may be reviewed.  This exercise was 
taken up in consultation with all the Plantation States and Central Ministries 
concerned.  The amendment proposals thus formulated were placed before the 
Industrial Tripartite Committee on Plantation Industry in a meeting held on 26 
August, 2005 and Consultative Committee attached to the  Ministry of Labour 
& Employment meeting held on 3 May, 2007 and the amended proposals 
approved have been taken up now.
 
 
9. The current Bill was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 21 October, 2008. 
The proposed amendments in brief are as follows:- 
 
(i) To amend the definition of ‘employer’ so as to fix the responsibility on 
the Managing Directors, Partners, Lessee or the Officers of the 
Government entrusted with the management of the plantation. 
 
(ii) To amend the definition of ‘family’ to remove the distinction between 
the family of a male and female worker. 
 
(iii) To amend the definition of ‘workers’ enhancing wage ceiling from Rs. 
750/- to Rs. 10,000/- per month.  The proposal is also to amplify the 
definition of ‘workers’ to include contract worker(s) in plantations 
employed for more than 60 days in a year. 
 
(iv) To amend Section 10(2) to enjoin upon the State Government to 
provide medical facilities and recover the costs from the defaulting 
employer.  Presently this duty is entrusted to the Chief Inspector. 
 
(v) To amend the provisions of Section 19 to delete the word “Child” in 
view of addition of Section 24 to Plantations Labour Act, 1951 
prohibiting child labour in plantations.  Consequently also, 
amendments to sections 25,26 and 27 have to be made in order to 
delete the work “Child” from these sections. 
 
(vi) To add Section 24 by deleting section 24(b) of the Child Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 in order to prohibit child 
labour in plantations. 
 
(vii) Insertion of Section 32-C after section 32-B in order to prescribe the 
manner in which compensation in case of accident shall be registered 
by the employer with the Commissioner in terms of Workmen’s 
Compensation Act, 1923. 
 
(viii) In Sections 33, 34, 35, 36 and 37, it is proposed to enhance the 
quantum in penal provisions. 
 
(ix) The Section 39 of the Principal Act relating to cognizance of the 
offences shall be substituted and a new section 39-A giving protection 
to persons acting in good faith etc. shall be added. 

 10
 
(x) To delete Section 43(3) relating to approval of Central Government to 
rules framed by State Governments and to insert a new provision to 
the effect that the rules made by the State Government shall be laid 
before Legislative Assembly concerned. 
 
(xi) A new chapter IV-A is being added to provide for safety and absence of 
risk to the health of workers in plantations.  
 
10. When asked about the Plantations which come within the purview of the 
Plantations Labour Act, 1951 the Ministry informed that  any land used for 
growing tea, coffee, rubber, cardamom, cinchona etc. and measuring five 
hectares or more or employing 15 or more persons is covered under the Act. 
    
11. When asked about the details of plantations which do not come 
within the ambit of the Act along with the reasons for their exemption, the 
Ministry replied in a post evidence written note as under: 
 
“The Plantations with less than five hectares and employing less than 
fifteen workers do not fall under the ambit of the Plantations Labour Act.  
In other words, small growers who mostly manage their holdings with 
own family labour do not come under the purview of the Act.  The 
Plantations include tea, coffee, rubber, cinchona or cardamom and no 
other  Plantations.  However, as per Section 4 (b) of the Plantations 
Labour Act, after approval of the Central Government, the State 
Government may direct by notification in the official Gazette to any land 
used for intended to use for growing any other plant which measures 5 
hectare or more and in which 15 or more persons are employed.” 
 
12. The Committee pointed out that the primary objective of the amendment 
in the Act is to provide a safety net to plantation workers dealing with agro 
chemicals particularly insecticides, pesticides and herbicides. Asked about the 
details with regard to extent of hazards these chemicals have on the health of 
workers, the Ministry of Labour and Employment stated in a note as under: 
 
“Many mechanical and chemical hazards exist in the plantations where a 
large number of unskilled and semi-skilled workers are employed.  Due 
to the negligent use of fertilizers, pest and weed controlling chemicals 
and  bad work practices in some plantations and there are possibilities of 
serious health hazards. Many different varieties of pesticides, weedecides 
and fertilizers are used in the plantations and these pesticides are not 
transported and stored in a safe manner. In the mixing of concentrate, 
safety precautions are often neglected by the workers.  Measuring 
utensils and personal protective equipment are improperly used or are 
not used at all, thereby causing serious exposure hazards. The enhanced 
use of these chemicals affects the health of the workers working in the 
plantation industry exposing them to the risk of various ailments relating 

 11
to skin irritation, dermatitis, asthma, bronchitis etc.  Some chemicals 
also affect the nervous system, the nose, the ear of the workers.” 
 
13.    It is proposed in the Bill to prohibit/restrict or regulate the employment of 
women and adolescents for handling hazardous chemicals in plantations 
besides banning the employment of children below 14 years. When asked to 
state the mechanism in place through which these objectives will be achieved, 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment replied as under: 
 
“To achieve the objective as proposed in the Bill in regard to prohibit, 
restrict or regulate the employment of women and adolescent for 
handling hazardous chemicals would be achieved by way making of 
rules in this regard by the State Government as proposed in sub-
section 2 of section 18A of new chapter IV A”. 
 
14.  There is a ‘Industrial Committee on Plantations’ with the mandate to 
discuss the problems of Plantation Industry and to find solutions which also 
implied the welfare of plantation workers. It was last constituted on 18 August, 
1998 and reconstituted on 22 July, 2002. The Committee is chaired by Union 
Labour Minister and is constituted as under:  
 
 (i) Workers Representatives  = 10 seats 
 (ii) Employers Representatives  = 10 seats. 
 
        (iv) State Governments   = 7 seats 
(iii) Central Government   = 4 seats 
    
15.  The above Committee in their meeting held in March, 1985, noted that 
plantation industry was not extending the mandated rights and safeguards to 
workers relating to medical facilities.  When asked to furnish details as to how 
the Government propose to ensure these rights to plantation workers now, the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment submitted as under: 
 
“Section 10(1) of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 provides medical 
facilities for workers and their families as may be prescribed by the State 
Government.  In case employer failed to provide such medical facilities, it 
was experienced that the efforts of the Chief Inspector as provided under 
section 10(2) in providing the facilities and recovering the cost thereof 
have not been effective largely for reasons of lack of executive authority 
and insufficiency of funds required for the purpose.  Therefore, to achieve 
the objective of providing the medical facilities as provided under section 
10(1), the proposed amendment stipulated that this responsibility will be 
directly with the State Government to achieve the objective.  The State 
Government will ensure the medical facilities  once  the  request  is made  
by  the Chief  Inspector”. 
 
 
 

 12
 
 
16. ` Labour’ being in the concurrent list in the Seventh schedule to the 
Constitution, involvement of State Governments is there in implementation of 
the Plantations Labour Act, 1951. When inquired whether the suggestions of 
all the State Governments have been obtained in this regard, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment replied as under: 
 
“All the plantations States Governments have been participating in the 
meetings/consultations regarding proposed amendments to the 
Plantations Labour Act, 1951.  A meeting of Tripartite Industrial 
Committee on Plantation Industry was held on 26.8.2005 where besides 
the representatives of the Central Trade Unions, representatives of the 
State Governments where the plantations are located, were also present.  
The proposed amendments were taken up in consultation with all the 
State Governments concerned.  Views of the State Governments 
concerned were also invited on the draft Note for the Cabinet”. 
 
17.  The Committee noticed that various organizations expressed their 
apprehension regarding viability and necessity to establish Garden and Group 
hospitals by the plantation management irrespective of the scale of plantation, 
size and strength of employment.  Later the need for group and garden 
hospitals was not felt necessary. When asked the medical network available to 
plantations labour in the absence of Garden and Group hospitals, the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment explained as under: 
 
“As per the information received from the Ministry of Commerce & 
industry, D/o Commerce, Spices, Coffee and Rubber, which are mainly 
having small holdings there is no need to establish garden and group 
hospitals by the plantation managements as their catering their needs 
from the nearest available hospitals by claiming reimbursement of 
medical expenses.  However, in respect of Tea plantations, there is a 
concept of having Group Hospitals for the groups having tea area above 
1000 hectares, for Garden Hospitals the area is from 400 hectares to 
1000 hectares and tea garden having tea areas above 10 to 12 hectares 
the concept of establishing dispensaries is there.  There are 59 Group 
Hospitals, 152 Garden Hospitals and 1450 dispensaries that are reported 
to have been established in Tea gardens.  There is a shortage of 125 
dispensaries”. 
 
18. Regarding the alternative arrangements in place for the plantation labour 
to avail of the medical facilities, the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
submitted that the proposed amendment makes the State Government 
responsible for supplementing medical care facilities, where they are 
inadequate. 
 
 
 

 13
 
 
 
19. The Committee pointed out that there are more than 90 per cent of the 
Plantations in rubber and coffee segments that fall in the category of small or 
very small plantations and most of the workers working there are self-employed 
workers. Enquired about the manner in which the benefits of the Act will flow 
to these workers, the Ministry replied in a post evidence written reply as under: 
 
“Most of the workers of these plantations acquired their own housing 
under various schemes of the Government and live in their regular 
habitation. Social infrastructure like educational institutions and 
Hospitals under the control/support of respective State Governments 
and Panchayats which are already functioning in the vicinity of the coffee 
estates meet the usual needs of health care and education in the same 
manner the needs of the rest of the population in those villages are met. 
There is separate dispensation available to those of the workers who 
work on the coffee farms of such small holdings for a few days in a year.  
Their working on such farms is incidental.  Their livelihood is not 
primarily dependent on the work in such small holdings”. 
 
20. In Section 10 of the Act, the medical facilities are proposed to be 
extended to plantation workers through the hospitals of the State Governments 
on the recommendation of Chief Inspector.  The cost of such expenditure will 
be realized from the planters. When asked whether the procedure is not 
cumbersome for ensuring medical treatment, the Ministry in post evidence 
written reply, submitted as under:  
 
“The proposed amendment differs from the existing provisions to the 
extent that the responsibility of providing medical facilities has been 
entrusted to the State Governments in place of the Chief Inspector, as 
the Chief Inspectors have not been effective in having the medical 
facilities provided directly from the employer.  This issue was also 
discussed in detail during the course of the meeting. 
 
 Further, the proposed  amendment is only in sub-section (2) of 
Section 10 of the Principal Act for the Chief Inspector, the word State 
Government upon a request by the Chief Inspector shall be substituted 
as has been proposed and other provisions of sub-section(1) and (3) of 
Section 10 are not proposed to be changed and as per the existing 
provision of sub-section (3), the cost of such expenditure will be realized 
from the planters as such the procedure is not being made more 
cumbersome.” 
 
 
 
 
 

 14
 
 
21. When asked whether the facilities/medical infrastructure available in the 
hospitals of the State Governments are sufficient to treat the hazardous 
ailments contracted during the work in plantations, the Ministry replied as 
under: 
 
“As per the provisions of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951, the 
responsibility of the employer is to provide for immediate medical aid to 
the plantation workers in case of common ailments and making available 
medical facilities/hospitalization in case of serious ailments. The details 
of facilities medical infrastructure available in the hospital of the State 
Governments is not available with the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment” 
 
22. When asked about the reasons for not extending the ESI coverage to 
Plantations workers in a phased manner, particularly when the ESIC propose 
to extend coverage to unorganized workers also under Rashtriya Swasthya 
Bima Yojana, the Special Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment 
replied during the course of evidence as under: 
 
“Essentially if you were to see how the ESI Act is structured, coverage is 
not uniform throughout.  It has to go through a series of establishments 
and areas progressively.  Unless the ESI coverage improves and we are 
able to have a better response especially in the isolated and remote areas 
as to how best we can do it, it cannot be said.  There, the State 
Government will have to take stronger response in the matter.” 
 
23. Elaborating this further, in a post evidence written note, the Ministry 
replied as under: 
 
“Under Section 1(4) of the ESI Act, 1948, the provisions of the Act apply 
in the first instance to all factories other than “seasonal factories”.  
Seasonal factories have been defined in Section 2(19-A) of the Act and 
include Plantations.  Plantations are, therefore, not covered under the 
ESI Act, 1948.  However, under Section 1(5) of the Act, the appropriate 
governments are empowered to extend the provisions of the Act to any 
other establishments or class of establishments-industrial, commercial, 
agricultural or otherwise.  The question of extending the provisions to 
plantations was considered by the Corporation in the past and the views 
of the State Governments of Assam.  Karnataka, Kerala, Tamilnadu and 
West Bengal where the plantations are mainly located were called for.  
The State Governments of Assam, Kerala, and Tamilnadu were however 
not in favour of extending the scheme to plantations mainly on the 
ground that medical care if already provided to the workers by the 
employer as per the provisions of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 

 15
without any contribution from the workers.  There was no positive 
response from the other State Governments. 
 
With regard to the proposal for medical care to the workers covered 
under the ‘Rashtriya Swasthaya Bima Yojana’ from under-utilized ESI 
Hospitals on payment of user charges, the requisite amendment in the 
ESI Act is still under consideration in the Parliament and till the 
amendment are brought into force, the ESIC cannot participate in the 
tender process for providing medical care to RSBY beneficiaries.  After 
the Act is amended the Central Government can, however, frame 
schemes for extending medical care to other beneficiaries including 
plantation workers from under utilized ESI Hospitals on payment of user 
charges” 
 
24. When enquired of the main plantation locations wherein the group and 
garden hospitals  have been functioning, the Ministry informed that as far as 
tea is concerned the major tea growing States are Assam, West Bengal, Kerala 
and Tamilnadu.  Invariably all the Tea gardens located in these States have 
garden hospitals and bigger corporate groups have well equipped group 
hospitals with specialist doctors.   
 
25. When asked about the details of the evaluation of the functioning of  
group and garden hospitals  working in the Plantations, the Ministry informed 
as under:  
  
“The PLA is the central Act and it is being implemented by the concerned 
State Governments.  For this purpose the State Governments have 
framed rules and established office of Plantation Inspectorate for carrying 
out periodical inspections to ensure implementation of various provisions 
of the PLA.  As per the rules framed by the State Governments, the 
garden and group hospitals are required to furnish returns at periodic 
intervals and these hospitals are also being checked by the Medical 
Inspectors appointed by the State Governments”. 
 
26. Regarding the assessment of the Ministry in regard to working of these 
hospitals, the following has been submitted: 
  
“The working of the hospitals in well managed tea gardens has been 
satisfactory.  However, there is a shortfall in meeting the PLA 
requirements in the financially weaker units”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 16
 
27. The definition of ‘family’ is proposed to be widened under the Act to 
include dependant parents and widow sister of female workers also. When 
asked whether it will be plausible and feasible to sustain them particularly 
when the cost involved on the facilities to be extended to them may be beyond 
financial reach of the planters, the Ministry in a post evidence note submitted 
as under:    
 
“The intention behind the proposed amendment is to remove the gender 
bias.  However, once the economic health of the plantations improves, 
this enhanced financial burden may not be of a very great magnitude”. 
 
28. When enquired as to why can’t there be a system wherein resources may 
be pooled in on an agreed proportion from planters, State Government and 
Union Government for providing facilities to plantation workers and their 
families, the Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment replied during the 
course of evidence as under: 
 
“Sir, We have the experience of ESI and EPF that when we have this 
contribution coming from the employees and the employers.  Also in the 
case of Employees Pension Scheme, from the Government there is 
default.  If there is default, then we are running after them.  Now we have 
an amnesty scheme in ESI till the end of this month.  So, I do not find 
that when we agree on a fund that fund has to be maintained.  
Somebody has to manage that pool of resources.  Then we create more 
bureaucracy.  We did not really think of that .  We do not think that is 
such an easy move.  We start collecting contribution and then we have to 
chase   those who do not make contribution.” 
 
29. In their post-evidence reply on the same point, the Ministry stated as 
under:- 
  
“The working conditions in the plantation areas are protected primarily 
by the provisions of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951.  Towards social 
security various statutory and non-statutory benefits are provided to the 
Plantation Labour.  The statutory benefits provided are health, 
education, housing drinking water, sanitation and conservancy.  Child 
care and crèches etc.  Non-statutory benefits include fuel roads, and 
concessional ration.  The plantations industry is required to meet 
substantial expenditure on these statutory and non-statutory social 
commitments which it is increasingly finding it difficult to fund from its 
own resources. Due to existence of the Plantations Labour Act, the State 
Governments tend to ignore the welfare of plantation workers.  However, 
the administrative  Ministry i.e. Ministry of Commerce & Industry and 
Ministry of Labour and Employment support the proposal for a central 
scheme for providing social welfare facilities to the plantation workers 
and their families, if a suitable mechanism or scheme can be worked 
out.” 

 17
 
 
 
30. The proposed Bill inter-alia provides  that any worker or any office bearer 
of trade union of which such worker is a member can lodge a complaint 
directly in the court of metropolitan magistrate or judicial magistrate the 
cognizance of which shall be taken by the court.  The Committee pointed out 
that through this provision, the role of labour functionaries in between could 
be minimized and asked to comment on the issue that the direct access to 
court without any administrative mechanism in between could give undue 
advantage and an extra platform to worker wherein a few unscrupulous 
workers could take advantage of the situation much to the detriment of the 
planters.  The Ministry replied in a post evidence note as under: 
 
“The rationale behind such an amendment is that `Chief Inspector’ of the 
Plantation State rarely gives the sanction to file the complaint and that too by 
an Inspector alone.  By this proposed amendment even  an aggrieved worker or 
a trade union member can file a complaint.” 
 
 

 18
 
 
31. The Committee note that the primary objective of the amendment 
in the Plantations Labour (Amendment) Act, 1951 is to provide a safety 
net to plantation workers who handle the agro-chemicals particularly 
insecticides, pesticides and herbicides.  For the purpose, a new Chapter–
IV A has been proposed to be incorporated in the Act to provide safety 
and to minimize the risk to the health of plantation workers.  Special care 
has also been proposed to be taken in case of women and adolescents 
employed in plantations.  The Committee find that the Government  
initially brought a similar Bill as far back as in 1984 and on two more 
occasions subsequently.  The Committee take a serious note of the fact 
that poor plantation workers have been deprived of some very basic 
amenities for over two decades from the time when some welfare 
measures were thought for them.  The Committee welcome this step, 
though belatedly, taken for the welfare of plantation workers, but are 
skeptical about making these provisions a reality for the workers at large 
in the absence of a well defined and empowered monitoring mechanism 
with the State Governments who are directly responsible for 
implementing the Act.  Moreover, the applicability of the Act has been 
restricted and only those plantations with five hectares or more of land 
area and employing 15 or more workers will be within the ambit of the 
Act.  Small and marginal growers constitute a major segment of the 
plantation industry except tea growers.  In what manner their interest 

 19
will be taken care of has been left unattended by the Government.  After 
all, the workers working in small holdings are equally and similarly 
exposed to the identical risks as are the workers working in bigger 
plantations.  Simply the provisions in the Act [Section 4 (b)] stipulating 
that any State Government, after approval of the Union Government can 
notify the extension and application of the Act to any land used or 
intended to be used will do no good to the workers of small land holdings 
as it lacks an element of certainty and has been left at the discretion of 
the respective State Governments. The Committee consider the interests 
of the workers as of paramount one, whether working individually or 
collectively.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
Government should adequately provide the safety net to the workers 
irrespective of the numbers who are engaged in plantations and are 
exposed to the hazards of pesticides, insecticides, agro-chemicals, etc.   

 20
 
32. The Plantations Labour Act, 1951 regulates the conditions of 
employment, working hours and provides for mechanism for safety, 
health and welfare of plantation workers.  However, the Act is 
implemented by the respective State Governments.  Plantation Inspector 
or the Chief Plantation Inspector has been entrusted with the 
responsibilities to ensure the implementation of various provisions 
relating to welfare of workers under the Act.  However, the infrastructure 
of social security network is not only deficient but also differs from State 
to State. Although it has been proposed to provide safety net against 
possible health hazards due to risks associated with the growing use of 
agro chemicals, but no concrete mechanism has been put in place except 
innocuous suggestions regarding storage, utilization and handling of such 
substances.  The manner in which it will be enforced has not been spelt 
out.  The issue, which is so vital to the interest of the workers, should 
have been appropriately dealt with, definite conditions laid down like  
defining the role of the inspectors, level of the permissible toxicity, the 
manner of handling of these toxic substances by workers, duration of such 
handling during a day, age and experience of such workers, mandatory 
health check-up at periodic intervals of the workers handling these 
substances and necessary safeguards.  It would have been appropriate had 
some expert in handling of these substances be associated with the 
inspector so as to deal with the issues more systematically and 
scientifically.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that instead of 

 21
vague provisions leaving much to the discretion of the inspectors, it will 
be in the interest of the workers if the entire gamut of activities relating 
to handling of toxic substances by workers are taken into account 
systematically and stipulations made accordingly to ensure the safety of 
the workers so that the discretion of the inspectors is minimized and the 
workers get the intended benefits as is spirited in the amendment of the 
Act.   

 22
 
 
 
33. The Committee note that medical facilities are proposed to be 
extended to plantation workers through the hospitals of the State 
Governments on the recommendation of Chief Inspector. The cost of such 
expenditure is proposed to be realised from the planters.  The only 
noticeable difference is the inclusion of State Government hospitals.  The 
role of Chief Inspectors has remained unchanged.  The reason given for 
this step is that the Chief Inspectors have not been effective in having 
the medical facilities provided directly by the employer.  The hospitals of 
the State Governments are not functioning under the Chief Inspectors.  In 
what manner and to what extent the Chief Inspector will succeed in 
ensuring medical facilities to workers is anybody’s guess, particularly 
when these hospitals  are located in towns or moffusils. The employers 
will still bear the cost of such treatment.  Hence, the primary 
responsibility to provide medical aid to plantation workers is that of the 
employer.  Prima facie it appears to be a workable arrangement, but 
impliedly it has excluded the non Governmental hospitals from the list 
from where treatment could have been provided. The condition of the 
State run hospitals leaves much to be desired and hence confining 
treatment of plantation workers in these hospitals only may  not be 
appropriate.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Government should explore the possibilities where workers can directly 

 23
go to designated or empanelled hospitals including some reputed private 
hospitals without any involvement of Chief Inspector.  The Planter can 
make the reimbursement to the hospital directly, whether private or 
Government of the expenditure incurred over the treatment of the 
workers subject to a ceiling which may be prescribed in this regard.     
 
 
 

 24
 
34. The Committee note that the Government is unaware about the 
evaluation of the functioning of the Garden/Group hospitals for providing 
medical services to plantation workers.  Although, the Act is implemented 
by the State Governments, nonetheless, it is a Central Act and the Central 
Government is directly as well as vicariously responsible to ensure that 
the benefits enshrined under the Act actually do reach the targeted 
beneficiaries.  The Committee have been apprised that, as per the rules 
framed by the State Governments, Garden/Group hospitals are required to 
furnish returns at periodic intervals and these hospitals are also being 
checked by the Medical Inspectors appointed by the State Governments.  
The Committee recommend that the Central Government must find ways 
and means to cross-check the claims of State Governments in regard to 
medical services provided to plantation workers.  

 25
 
35. The Committee have been informed that in view of the increasing 
commitment of resources on transport and road infrastructure, the 
isolation of plantation has been significantly mitigated and thus to that 
extent the need to insist on Group/Garden hospitals, irrespective of 
scales of plantation may not be necessary.   This is an unfriendly attitude 
towards a worker as the absence of these hospitals will force a worker to 
travel somewhat longer distance to go to hospitals thereby not only 
forsaking his work but also incurring expenditure on items other than 
medical treatment.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the concept of Garden/Group hospitals be appropriately strengthened and 
medically upgraded within the specified norms.  In cases where the norms 
do not permit the establishment of such hospitals despite the large 
concentration of plantation workers (though in small holdings) the 
concept of dispensaries/hospitals in cooperatives be explored and all 
efforts should be made to provide medical treatment to workers near their 
workplace.  

 26
 
36. The Committee note that the Government proposes to widen the 
definition of `family’ in the Act with a view to including widow sister and 
dependent parents of the female plantation worker.   This is a welcome 
move.    The current  social security network is very feeble and inclusion 
of more members without correspondingly strengthening the medical and 
social security network may only worsen the situation.  This appears 
imminent in view of the fact that the cost involved on the facilities to be 
extended to these entrants will be met by the planters.  The Government 
itself has admitted that the Plantation Industry is required to meet 
substantial expenditure on statutory and non statutory social 
commitments which it is increasingly finding difficult to fund from its 
own resources and Government supports the proposal for a Central 
Scheme for providing social welfare facilities to plantation workers and 
their families if a suitable mechanism or scheme can be worked out.  The 
intention behind the proposed amendment has been stated to remove the 
gender bias regarding financial burden on planters.  It has also been 
stated that once the economic health of the plantation improves this 
enhanced financial burden may not be of  great magnitude.  This is a very 
casual and perfunctory approach towards a problem which merits serious 
consideration and apt response taking into account the enormity of the 
issue.   Making of provisions without concrete and practical mechanism 
to enforce it in letter and spirit is hollow and unimaginative exercise.    
The Committee, therefore, recommend that efforts should be made to 

 27
generate resources on an agreed basis to be shared by the Union 
Government, State Government, Planters and Plantation workers so that 
specific fund may be created under the Act to meet the social security 
obligations for all the eligible workers and their dependents.   
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;             SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,       
                                                 Chairman, 
16th January,  2009                        Standing Committee on Labour  
26 Pausa, 1930  (Saka) 

 28
 ANNEXURE-I 
 
 
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
 
Bill No.  XLIV of  2008 
 
 
THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
 
further to amend the Plantations Labour Act, 1951. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:. 
 
1.   (1)  This Act may be called the Plantations Labour (Amendment) Act,  
2008. 
 
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different 
dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and for 
different States and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall, in relation to any State, be 
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision 
in that State. 
 
2.  In section 2 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to 
as the principal Act),. 
 
(a) in clause (e), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:. 
 
Amendment of section 2. 
 
.Explanation.. For the purposes of this clause, .the person who has the 
ultimate control over the affairs of the plantation. means in the case of a 
plantation owned or controlled by. 
 
(i)  a company, firm or other association of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not, every director, partner or individual; 
 
Short title and commencement. 
  

 29
(ii)  the Central Government or State Government or any local 
authority, the person or persons appointed to manage the 
affairs of the plantation; and 
 
(iii)  a lessee, the lessee;.; 
 
(b) in clause (ee), for the words .and includes, where the worker is a 
male, his parents dependent upon him., the words .and includes parents and 
widow sister, dependent upon him or her. shall be substituted; 
 
(c) in clause (k),. 
 
(i)  in the opening portion, after the words .manual or clerical., the 
words .and includes a person employed on contract for more than 
sixty days in a year. shall be inserted; 
 
(ii)  in sub-clause ( ii), for the words .rupees seven hundred and fifty., 
the words .rupees ten thousand. shall be substituted; 
 
(iii)  in sub-clause ( iii), for the words .managerial capacity, 
notwithstanding that his monthly wages do not exceed rupees 
seven hundred and fifty., the words .managerial or administrative 
capacity, notwithstanding that his monthly wages do not exceed 
rupees ten thousand. shall be substituted. 
 
3.  In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), in clause ( b), for the 
words .and children are, or are to be., the word .are. shall be substituted. 
 
Amendment of section 7. 
 
4.  In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words .chief 
inspector., the words .State Government upon a request by the chief inspector. 
shall be substituted. 
 
Amendment of section 10. 
 
5. After Chapter IV, the following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:. 
 
Insertion of new Chapter IVA. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 30
 
 
CHAPTER IV A 
 
PROVISIONS AS TO SAFETY 
 
18A.  (1)  In every plantation, effective arrangements shall be made by the 
employer to provide for the safety of workers in connection with the 
use, handling, storage and transport of insecticides, chemicals and 
toxic substances. 
 
(2) The State Government may make rules for prohibiting or, 
restricting employment of women or adolescents in using or 
handling hazardous chemicals. 
 
(3)  The employer shall appoint persons possessing the prescribed 
qualifications to supervise the use, handling, storage and 
transportation of insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances in 
his plantation. 
 
(4)  Every employer shall ensure that every worker in plantation 
employed for handling, mixing, blending and applying insecticides, 
chemicals and toxic substances, is trained about the hazards 
involved in different operations in which he is engaged, 
the various safety measures and safe work practices to be adopted 
in emergencies arising from spillage of such insecticides chemicals 
and toxic substances and such other matters as may be prescribed 
by the State Government. 
 
(5)  Every worker who is exposed to insecticides, chemicals and toxic 
substances shall be medically examined periodically, in such 
manner as may be prescribed, by the State Government. 
 
(6)  Every employer shall maintain health record of every worker who 
is exposed to insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances which 
are used, handled, stored or transported in a plantation, and every 
such worker shall have access to such record. 
 
Safety. 
  
 
(7)  Every employer shall provide. 
 
(a) washing, bathing and clock room facilities; and 
 
(b) protective clothing and equipment, to every worker engaged in 
handling insecticides, chemicals or toxic substances in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government. 

 31
 
(8)  Every employer shall display in the plantation a list of permissible 
concentrations of insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances in 
the breathing zone of the workers engaged in the handling and 
application of such insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances. 
 
(9)  Every employer shall exhibit such precautionary notices as may be 
prescribed by the State Government indicating the hazards of 
insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances. 
 
18B.  (1)  The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. 
 
(2)  In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:. 
 
(a)  the restriction on employment of women and adolescents for 
handling hazardous chemicals under sub-section (2) of 
section 18A; 
 
(b)  the qualifications of superviser appointed under sub-section 
(3) of section 18A; 
 
(c)  the matters for training of workers under sub-section ( 4) of 
section 18A; 
 
(d)  the medical examination of workers under sub-section ( 5) of 
section 18A; 
 
(e)  the facilities and equipment to be provided to the workers 
engaged in handling insecticides, chemicals and toxic 
substances under sub-section (7) of section 18A; 
 
(f)  the precautionary notices to be exhibited under sub-section 
(9) of section 18A... 
 
Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
6.  In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words .or child. 
shall be omitted. 
Amendment 
of section 19. 
 
 
 
 
 

 32
 
7.   After section 23 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:. 
 
.24. No child shall be employed to work in any plantation... 
 
Insertion of new section 24. 
    Prohibition of employment of children 
 
8.  In section 25 of the principal Act,. 
 
(a)  the words .or child. shall be omitted; 
 
(b)  in the marginal heading, the words .and children. shall be 
omitted. 
 
Amendment of section 25 
 
9.  In section 26 of the principal Act,. 
 
(a)  in the opening portion, the words .child and no. shall be omitted; 
 
(b)  in clause ( b), the words .child or. shall be omitted. 
 
 
 
10.  In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words .either as 
a child or. shall be omitted. 
  
 
Amendment in section 27 
 
11.  After section 32B, the following section shall be inserted, namely:. 
 
.32C. The employer shall give compensation to a worker in plantation in 
case of accident and the memorandum relating to such compensation 
shall be got registered by the employer with the Commissioner in 
accordance with the provisions of the Workmen’.s Compensation Act, 
1923... 
 
Insertion of new section 32 C Compensation 
 
12.  In sections 33, 35 and 36 of the principal Act, for the words .three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both., 
wherever they occur, the words .six months, or with fine which may extend to 
ten thousand rupees, or with both shall be substituted. 
 
Amendment of sections 33, 35 and 36 

 33
 
13.  In section 34 of the principal Act, for the words .one month, or with fine 
which may extend to fifty rupees, or with both,. the words .two months, or with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. shall be  
substituted. 
 
Amendment of section 34 
 
14.  In section 37 of the principal Act, for the words .six months, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both., the words .one year, 
or with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may 
extend to one lakh rupees, or with both. shall be substituted. 
 
Amendment of section 37 
 
15.  For section 39, the following sections shall be substituted, namely:. 
 
.39. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except 
on a complaint made by any worker or an office bearer of a trade union 
of which such worker is a member or an inspector and no court inferior 
to that of a metropolitan magistrate or a judicial magistrate of the first 
class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. 
 
39A. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act... 
 
Substitution of new sections for section 39 
 
Cognizance of offences 
 
16.  In section 43 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:. 
 
.(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall, as 
soon as may be after it is made, be laid before the State Legislature”... 
  
   
Protection of action taken in good faith 
 
Amendment of section 43

 34
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
 
The Plantations Labour Act, 1951, provides for the welfare of labour and 
regulates the conditions of work in plantations. One of the major problems of 
safety and health in plantations arises out of the risks associated with the 
growing use of agro-chemicals, especially insecticides, pesticides and 
herbicides. At present, the Act has no provisions for safety measures and 
precautions to be taken for the storage, utilisation and handling of such 
agrochemicals. It is, therefore, considered necessary to amend the Act to 
provide for safeguards to be adopted in the use and handling of such 
substances. It is also necessary to amend the Act to enable the Central 
Government to prohibit, restrict or regulate the employment of women and 
adolescents for handling hazardous chemicals in plantations. It is, therefore, 
considered necessary to amend the Act to prohibit employment of children 
below 14 years in plantations. 
 
2.  It has been felt that in order to ensure better implementation of welfare 
provisions under the Act, specific targets may be fixed for provisions of certain 
facilities and that penalties for non-compliance of such provisions should be 
made more stringent. It has also been considered necessary that the Act 
should be amended to make provisions relating to the liability of an employer 
in regared to the workmen employed by a contractor engaged for the execution 
of work by such employer. This Act also needs to be suitably amended to 
modify the definition of "family", "employer" and .worker" to make such 
definitions broad based and gender sensitive and also to make implementation 
of the Act more effective. 
 
 
3.      The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       OSCAR FERNANDES. 
 
The 31st October, 2008. 
  

 35
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter IV A containing 
provisions dealing with safety of workers. This clause seeks to insert a new 
section 18A which empowers the Central Government to specify the manner in 
which, and the conditions and limitations subject to which women or 
adolescents may be employed for using or handling any hazardous chemical in 
a plantation. This clause also seeks to insert a new section 18B which 
empowers the State Governments to make rules for carrying out the purposes 
of the said Chapter. 
 
 
2.  Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 32C to provide for the 
employer to give compensation to a worker in a plantation in case of accident 
and the Memorandum relating to such compensation shall be registered by the 
employer with the Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of the 
Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923. Clause 16 seeks to amend section 43 
relating to power to make rules to provide for laying of the rules framed by the 
State Government, before the State Legislature. 
 
3.  The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative details. The delegation of the legislative power is 
therefore, of a normal character. 

 36
ANNEXURE 
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951 
 
( 69 OF 1951) 
 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
 
Definitions 
 
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,. 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
 
(e)  “.employer.”, when used in relation to a plantation, means the person 
who has  the ultimate control over the affairs of the plantation, and where the 
affairs of any plantation are entrusted to any other person (whether called a 
managing agent, manager, superintendent or by any other name) such other 
person shall be deemed to be the employer in relation to that plantation; 
 
3[(ee) .family., when used in relation to a worker, means. 
 
(i) his or her spouse, and 
 
(ii) the legitimate and adopted children of the worker dependent 
upon him or her, who have not completed their eighteenth year, 
and includes, where the worker is a male, his parents dependent 
upon him; 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
(k)  "worker" means a person employed in a plantation for hire or 
reward, whether directly or through any agency, to do any work, 
skilled, unskilled, manual or clerical, but does not include. 
 
(i)  a medical officer employed in the plantation; 
 
(ii)  any person employed in the plantation (including any 
member of the medical staff) whose monthly wages exceed 
rupees seven hundred and fifty; 
 
(iii)  any person employed in the plantation primarily in a 
managerial capacity, notwithstanding that his monthly 
wages do not exceed rupees seven hundred and fifty; or 
 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
 

 37
7. (1)   *   *   *   *   * 
 
Certifying surgeons 
 
      (2) The certifying surgeon shall carry out such duties as may be prescribed 
in 
connection with. 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
 
(b)  the exercise of such medical supervision as may be prescribed 
where adolescents and children are, or are to be, employed in any work 
in any plantation which is likely to cause injury to their health. 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
 
10.  (1)  *   *   *   *   * 
 
Medical facilities 
 
(2)  If in any plantation medical facilities are not provided and 
maintained as required by sub-section (1) the chief inspector may cause 
to be provided and maintained therein such medical facilities, and 
recover the cost thereof from the defaulting employer. 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
  

 38
CHAPTER V 
 
HOURS AND LIMITATION OF EMPLOYMENT 
 
19.  (1)  Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no adult worker 
shall be required or allowed to work on any plantation in excess of forty-
eight hours a week and no adolescent or child for more than twenty-
seven hours a week. 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
    Weekly hours 
 
25.  Except with the permission of the State Government, no women or child 
worker shall be employed in any plantation otherwise than between the hours 
of 6 A.M. and 7 P.M.: 
 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to 
midwives and nurses employed as such in any plantation. 
 
    Night work for women and children 
 
26.  No child and no adolescent shall be required or allowed to work in any 
plantation unless. 
 
(a) a certificate of fitness granted with reference to him under section 27 
is in the custody of the employer; and 
 
(b) such child or adolescent carries with him while he is at work a token 
giving a reference to such certificate. 
 
Non-adult workers to carry tokens 
 
27.  (1)  A certifying surgeon shall, on the application of any young person 
or his parent or guardian accompanied by a document signed by the employer 
or any other person on his behalf that such person will be employed in the 
plantation if certified to be fit for work, or on the application of the employer or 
any other person on his behalf with reference to any young person intending to 
work, examine such person and ascertain his fitness for work either as a child 
or as an adolescent. 
 
Certificate of fitness 
 
*   *   *   *    * 
 
 
 

 39
 
 
CHAPTER VII 
 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
 
33.  (1)  Whoever obstructs an inspector in the discharge of his duties 
under this Act or refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the inspector any 
reasonable facility for making any inspection, examination or inquiry 
authorised by or under this Act in relation to any plantation, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with 
both. 
 
(2)  Whoever wilfully refuses to produce on the demand of an inspector 
any register or other document kept in pursuance of this Act, or prevents 
or attempts to prevent or does anything which he has reason to believe is 
likely to prevent any person from appearing before or being examined by 
an inspector acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with 
both. 
 
Obstruction 
 
34.  Whoever knowingly uses or attempts to use as a certificate of fitness 
granted to himself under section 27 a certificate granted to another person 
under that section, or having been granted a certificate of fitness to himself, 
knowingly allows it to be used, or allows an attempt to use it to be made by 
another person, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 
one month, or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees,or with both. 
 
Use of false certificate of fitness 
 
 
35.  Whoever, except as otherwise permitted by or under this Act, 
contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, 
prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment of persons in a plantation, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
  
Contravention of provisions regarding employment of labour 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 40
 
 
36.  Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of any rules 
made thereunder for which no other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under 
this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with 
both. 
 
Other offences 
 
37.  If any person who has been convicted of any offence punishable under 
this Act is again guilty of an offence involving a contravention of the same 
provision, he shall be punishable on a subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both: 
 
Provided that for the purposes of this section no cognizance shall be 
taken of any conviction made more than two years before the commission 
of the offence which is being punished. 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
 
39.  No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on 
complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of, the chief 
inspector and no Court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a 
magistrate of the second class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. 
 
*   *  *   *   * 
 
Cognizance of offences 
 
 
43. (1) *   *   *   *   * 
 
(3)  All rules made under this Act shall, if made by any Government, 
other than the Central Government, be subject to the previous approval 
of the Central Government. 
  
General power to make rules 
 
 
GMGIPMRND.3310LS(S5).14.10.2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 41
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
  
A 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further to amend the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 
.... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Oscar Fernandes, Minister of Labour and Employment) 

 42
 ANNEXURE-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR  HELD ON  WEDNESDAY, THE 17TH DECEMBER,  2008  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1700 hours in Committee Room 
No.139, Parliament House Annexe, New  Delhi to have briefing by the 
representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment on  `The Plantations 
Labour (Amendment) Bill, 2008’   and to consider and adopt draft Thirty-Sixth 
and Thirty-Seventh reports on `The Employees’ State Insurance (Amendment) 
Bill, 2008’ and `The Workmen’s Compensation (Amendment) Bill, 2008’. 
 
 
PRESENT  
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee  
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
8. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
9. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
               
  RAJYA SABHA  
  
10. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
  
SECRETARIAT 
         
   
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2.      Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
 3.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 43
 
 
 
 
    XX    XX    XX 
 
 
2.  Thereafter, witnesses were called in.  The Chairman welcomed   the 
representatives of the Ministries of Labour  and Employment and Commerce to 
the sitting  and requested them to brief the Committee on  various provisions of 
`The Plantations Labour (Amendment) Bill, 2008’.  
         
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment  briefed the 
Committee about  various provisions of the Bill.  The Special Secretary made a 
detailed power point presentation on the existing provisions vis-à-vis the 
proposed amendment in the Plantations Labour Act, 1951.  The Chairman and 
other Members of the Committee sought clarifications on several points 
pertaining to the Bill which inter-alia included:  
 
(i) Procedure for extending benefits of the Act to the self-
employed workers of various Plantations. 
(ii) Feasibility of providing medical treatment to the Plantation 
workers under ESI Scheme. 
(iii) Viability of existing Group and Garden hospitals in the 
present scenario. 
(iv) Follow-up of the recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial 
Committee regarding health and social security network to 
the Plantation Workers. 
(v) Implications of extending facilities to the workers as per the 
widened definition of `Family’ keeping in view the financial 
reach of the planters. 
(vi) Provision of direct access to the courts by the workers bye 
passing the registered trade unions without any 
administrative mechanism in between. 
(vii) Deliberations with stakeholders/trade unions on the various 
provisions of the proposed Bill.  
(viii) Rationality of proposed penalties  in the Bill. 
(ix) Definition of `Employer’ as proposed in the Bill. 
 
The representatives of the Ministry then responded to the aforesaid 
queries.  The Chairman requested the Secretary, Ministry of Labour and 
Employment  to send written replies of those questions whose replies were not 
readily available within one week to the Committee.    
 
     (The witnesses then withdrew).  
 
 
 

 44
 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
 
 
 
5.  XX    XX    XX 
 
6.  XX    XX    XX 
 
7.  XX    XX    XX 
  
8. XX    XX    XX  
 
9.  XX    XX    XX 
 
 
     The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

 45
ANNEXURE-III 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR  HELD ON FRIDAY, 16TH JANUARY,  2009  
 
The Committee met from 1200 hours to 1300 hours in Committee Room 
`E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt draft Thirty-
Eighth  Report on `The Plantations Labour (Amendment) Bill, 2008’. 
 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
6. Shri Furkan Ansari  
7. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
8. Shri  Virendra Kumar 
9. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
10. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
11. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar 
12. Shri Mohan Rawale 
13. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
14. Shri Paras Nath Yadav 
               
 RAJYA SABHA  
  
  
 11. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
12.     Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
13. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
   
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
 2.  Shri  R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
         3. Shri A.S. Sajwan  - Deputy Secretary-II  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 46
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about the draft Thirty-Eighth Report on  `The Plantations Labour 
(Amendment) Bill, 2008’. 
  
3.  The Committee took up the draft   Report for consideration and adopted 
the same with some amendments/modifications.   
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report and 
present the same to the Hon’ble Speaker under Direction 71 A of the Directions 
by the Speaker, keeping in view the time limit of three months which is 
expiring on 30
th January, 2009. 
 
 5.  XX     XX    XX 
  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 