 1
9 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
                            (2005-06) 
 
 
        FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
                      MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
          DEVELOPMENT SCHEMES FOR HANDLOOM SECTOR       
 
 
              NINTH REPORT 
 
 
            
  
 
 
          LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
    NEW DELHI 
 
December  2005/ Agrahayana 1927 (Saka) 
 

 2
  
9 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
                            (2005-06) 
 
 
        FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                    MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
 
          DEVELOPMENT SCHEMES FOR HANDLOOM SECTOR       
 
 
               NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   20.12.2005 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.12.2005 
 
 
   
  
 
          LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
    NEW DELHI 
  
  December 2005/ Agrahayana 1927 (Saka) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 3
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
   
Composition of the Committee      (iii) 
 
Introduction         ( i v )  
 
        CHAPTER I  I n t r o d u c t o r y       1  
          
      CHAPTER-II 
 
   Organisation of Handloom Workers    4 
 
 CHAPTER-III 
 
 Deen Dayal Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana……..  9 
 
 Mill Gate Price Scheme………………………………….. 13  
 
 Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme……………………… 17  
 
 Weavers Welfare Scheme……………………………….  21 
 
 Research and Training Programmes…………………..  27 
 
 Promotion of Sale of  Handloom Products……………  32 
 
 Protection of Handloom Weavers……………………..  40  
 
         APPENDIX-I Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 
   22.12.2004, 15.6.2005 and 15.12.2005 

 4
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2005-06) 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy -CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Munawwar Hassan Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa   
7. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot   
8. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar    
10. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi   
12. Shri Ananta Nayak   
13. Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal)  
14. Shri Lal Mani Prasad   
15. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
16. Shri Mohan Rawale  
17. Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat   
18. Shri Chandra Pratap Singh   
19. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
20. Shri Parasnath Yadav   
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  21. Shri Gandhi Azad 
  22. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
  23. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
  24. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
  25. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
  26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  27. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
28. Shri Dilip Ray 
 
          SECRETARIAT 
         
  1. Shri John Joseph    -  Secretary 
2.     Shri N.K. Sapra   - Joint Secretary 
3.     Shri R.S. Misra    - Deputy Secretary  
4.  Shri N.K. Pandey   - Under Secretary  
5.     Shri C.Kalyanasundaram  - Committee Officer 
 

 5
  
 INTRODUCTION 
                               
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour 2005-06 having been authorised 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Ninth Report on 
“Development Schemes for  Handloom Sector”. 
 
2. The Committee had selected  “Development Schemes for 
Handloom Sector” as one of the subjects for detailed examination for the year 
2004-05.  The subject has again been selected for the 2005-06. The Committee 
took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Textiles on 22 December, 
2004 and 15 June 2005.   The Committee co nsidered and adopted the Report at 
their sitting held on 15 December 2005. 
 
3. The Committee also heard the views of handloom weavers on the 
subject during their Study Visit to Kanchipuram (Tamil Nadu) on 2 November, 
2004, Bangalore on 8 November, 2004 and Pochampally (Andhra Pradesh) on 12 
November, 2005. 
 
4. The Committee wish to e xpress their thanks to the officers of the Ministry 
of Textiles for placing before them the detailed written notes on the subject and 
furnishing the information as desired by the Committee in connection with the 
examination of the subject  and tendering evidence before the Committee. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience,  the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.                   
                               
                
 
  
 
New Delhi;                   SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY   
16 December 2005                  CHAIRMAN  
25 Agrahayana 1927 (Saka)  STANDING COMMITTEE ON   
LABOUR    
 

 6
 
REPORT 
 
 CHAPTER-I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 
1.1 Handloom textiles are an age-old trad ition in India.  Weaving was known to 
people from the ancient times and India enjoyed a strong tr ade in textile goods over the 
years.   The Handloom Sector reflects a wide  variety of traditions and techniques from 
the simple cotton dhotis to the rich silk saris of Banaras and Kancheevaram. Handloom 
weaving is part of the socio-cultural life style of the weaving community.  With the 
advent of mechanized textile production, the contribution of handlooms to cloth 
production has been declining but even t oday handlooms contribute over 5,000 million 
square metres of cloth produc tion in the country.  However,  the Sector is  beset with 
manifold problems such as obsolete technologies, unorganized production system, low 
productivity, inadequate work ing capital, conventional pr oduct range, weak marketing 
link, overall stagnation of production and sales and above all, competition from 
powerloom and mill sector. 
 
1.2 In a written note submitted to the Committ ee, the Ministry of Textiles had stated 
that the Handloom Sector is one of the largest employers in the country, estimated to be 
the second only to agriculture in the rural economy. About 65 lakh people are directly or 
indirectly employed in the Handloom Sector as weavers and allied workers. Based on the 
joint handloom and powerloom census conducted in 1995-96, the break up of handloom 
weavers and workers is as follows: - 
 
Full time weavers                 16,48,816 
Part time weavers                 18,21,690 
Full time workers engaged in preparatory work     5,37,130 
Part time workers engaged in preparatory work 11,89,846  
Workers engaged in other activities   13,52,644 
       ------------- 
Total:       65,50,126 
        ------------- 
1.3 In this regard, the S ecretary (Textiles) informed the Committee during the 
evidence as follows:- 
 
“One more thing is that about these 65 lakh weavers: this survey was done in 
1995-96.  Most of the time what is happening is that-because of the market forces 
there has been some change over.  Th erefore, the handlooms and the powerlooms 
are there in many places or for other avocations.  We will soon conduct another 
survey and get the data about the number of handloom weavers as they are now”. 
   
 
 
 
 

 7
 
1.4 The Census also showed that a large population of weaver household belongs to 
disadvantaged strata of society, with 10.76% of weavers belonging to  Scheduled Castes 
and 25.50% belonging to Scheduled Tribes and 42.65% belonging to  other backward 
classes.  As per the Working Group of Te xtile Industry for Xth Plan, about 120 lakh 
persons are engaged in the handloom weaving and allied activities in the country.  
 
Policy of the Government of India  
 
1.5 The Ministry of Textiles in a written note informed the Committee that in view of 
the high employment in the Sector and the cost disadvantage  faced by handlooms 
compared to mill sector due to the manual na ture of production, the Government of India 
had been following a policy of protection of  the Handloom Sector since long. This policy 
consisted of subsidy for production and yarn supply, marketing rebate as well as 
exemption from excise on the hank yarn, whic h is the main raw material of the cotton 
handloom sector. The Handloom  (Reservation of Articles for Production) Act, 1985 also 
extends statutory protection to  the Sector, by reserving 11 items of textile products for 
production only on handlooms.   
 
1.6 It has further been informed that the Government of India has been implementing 
a number of development and welfare schemes for the benefit of the handloom sector. 
The Schemes being implemented by Government of India are:  
 
1. Deen Dayal Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana 
2. Handloom Export Scheme 
3. Design Development and Training Programme  
4. Integrated Handloom Training Project Package Scheme 
5. Mill Gate Price Scheme 
6. Weaver Welfare Scheme 
7. Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme 
8. Bunkar Bima Yojana 
9. Implementation of Handloom Reservation Act 
10. Special rebate on sale of Handloom Products 
11. Scheme for Reimbursement of CENVAT on Hank Yarn 
 

 8
 
1.7 The Committee find that the data on number of weavers and allied workers 
engaged in Handloom Sector cannot be taken as authentic as it is based on a Survey 
conducted almost a decade ago.  The Working  Group of Textile Industry for Xth  
Plan has shown the data as about 120 lakh weavers and allied workers.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that a ne w Survey should be conducted to find 
out the number of handloom weavers and allied workers as they are now. 
 
1.8 The Committee have noted that as ma ny as 11 Development and Welfare 
Schemes for the Handloom Sector are being implemented by the Ministry of 
Textiles. But, there is no perceptible im provement in the Ha ndloom Sector as a 
whole or in the conditions of workers en gaged in it.  Handloom Sector is in no 
position to compete with the powerloom despite the protection given to handloom by 
reserving 11 articles to be produced only in  this Sector. This necessitates the total 
recast and a new fillip to revive it and make it viable, competitive and self-sufficient.  
Instead of loading it with the multiplici ty of Schemes and programmes and looking 
for ad-hoc solutions to problems plaguing the Handloom Sector, the Committee 
recommend that solutions should be found with regard to the streamlining of the 
production in Handloom Sector with high  productivity and latest technologies, 
ensuring availability of sufficient workin g capital, widening of the product range 
and strengthening of market links.

 9
 
CHAPTER-II 
Organisation of Handloom Workers 
 
2.1 Handloom Sector is a highly decentra lized and dispersed sector. Handloom 
weavers can be found in most parts of the country and large concentrations are found in 
over 200 clusters in the country. A major ity of the handloom weavers operate as 
household units.  Only 1,98,590 had been identified as commercial units as against a total 
of 34,87,146 units in the Sector as per the Census conducted in 1995-96.  This 
emphasizes that handloom weaving is practis ed more as a vocation than as a purely 
commercial activity. In fact, there is a consid erable lack of entrepreneurship and profit 
motive in the Sector.  
 
2.2 The Ministry of Textiles informed the Committee that efforts were made in the 
fifties to organize handloom weavers into co operatives.  However, in spite of these 
efforts and a mushrooming growth in th e Handloom Cooperative Sector over the 
seventies and eighties, current  estimates show that only 17% of the handloom weavers 
are within the cooperative fold.  It must be mentioned that th is is also an over estimation 
since many of the cooperatives are defunct e ither due to financial mis-management or 
due to accumulation of stock and are therefor e unable to provide yarn to the handloom 
weavers for cloth products. Most of the hand loom rich States also have their State 
Handloom Development and State Apex Coop eratives. However, these organizations 
have also been facing difficulties due to over staffing, poor marketing activities and over 
dependence on Government purchases and rebates.   
 
2.3 Regarding implementation of Central Sche mes to weavers, the Committee were 
informed that prior to introduction of Deen Dayal Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana 
(DDPHY) most of the Schemes were aimed at  benefitting the weavers under cooperative 
fold only.  Even under DDPHY, the Central Gove rnment releases assistance to agencies 
recommended by the State Directors of Handlooms .  In general, the State Directors have 
been recommending projects in respect of cooperative agencies. In this regard, the 
Secretary, Textiles, confessed before the Comm ittee that the Government of India for the 
last 30 years has taken the cooperative approach to handloom sector.  All the schemes are 
operated basically through the cooperative sect or.  In certain parts of the country the 
cooperative sector is very strong, in other it is not so strong and in still others it is weak.   
 
2.4 As regards the functioning of Co-operati ves, the Secretary of Textiles further 
stated before the Committee as follows:- 
 
“Now, as regards handlooms, the main prob lem is the cooperative sector.  This is 
a State subject. Originally only the cooperative sector coul d help the weavers 
particularly the handloom weavers, because they are quite weak.  If they organize 
as cooperatives, they would get higher wa ges.  Therefore, cooperatives were set 
up long time back, which were functioning.  What Development Commissioner 
(Handlooms) has mentioned is that due to various problems, the cooperative 
sector is not performing well in most of the States.  In fact, most of the apex 

 10
cooperatives are sick.  They do not have m oney; scandals are there.  There is no 
proper management also.  As a result, Development Commissioner (Handlooms) 
is finding it difficult to support weavers”.  
 
2.5 On the Scheme to revitalize the apex coope rative societies, a representative of the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as below:- 
 
“ We have also a Scheme with us just now to strengthen these Apex 
Cooperative Societies.  In Uttar Pr adesh and Andhra Pradesh, we have 
even funded apex cooperative societies to the tune of Rs.10 crore and 
Rs.20 crore.  It is an ongoing proj ect, for restructuring the Apex 
Cooperative Societies where they have gi ven VRS to all the surplus staff.  
In some cases, it is as many as to 1500 persons.  They had to close down 
all the unviable showroom s so that they can become a lean commercial 
body, which can compete in the open market.  There are quite a few other 
State Governments, which have approached us.  We have told them first to 
get a proper study done and give VRS to those who are not doing anything 
but drawing the salaries.  We have told them to close down the 
showrooms, which are not productive.  Two States have done it. Even, we 
have funded them also. Some others are in the pipeline”.  
 
2.6 When asked whether any alternatives or  some other way out of cooperative 
failure, the Secretary, Textiles, stated during the evidence as under: 
 
“Now, the Ministry of Cooperation is looking into this situation.  They are 
looking into the measures as how th ey can revitalize these cooperative 
societies.  We have also one scheme  for the revival of these cooperative 
societies.  If the Committee feels that we should address the Secretaries of 
the State Governments, we will certainly do that.  For this, we have to 
adopt the cluster approach.  The State Governments have no objection 
towards this approach.  They also know that cooperative societies are 
passing through the phase of bad conditions.  They also want to help the 
weavers.  This cluster approach is the direct and needful assistance to 
weavers.  The State Governments have no objection to this approach.  We 
are taking the State Governments on board  for these efforts.  The revival 
of the cooperative sector takes a much longer time.  The cooperative 
sector has to face various other problems to stand on its legs”. 
 
2.7 With regard to the proposal to adopt cluster approach to organize handloom 
weavers, the Ministry of Textiles in a written reply submitted to the Committee had 
stated that the Government of India proposes  to take up a new scheme titled ‘Integrated 
Handloom Cluster Scheme’ from th e current financial year, i.e. 2005-2006.  The Scheme 
inter-alia envisages to provide a ssistance in a comprehensiv e and coordinated manner 
towards setting up of infrastructure, upgradation of technology, desi gn inputs, marketing 
support, etc.  The Departmental Expenditure Finance Committ ee, in its meeting held on 
1.6.2005, had approved development of 20 handloom clusters throughout the country 
under the Integrated Handloom Cluster Deve lopment Scheme with a ceiling of Rs.3.00 
crore per cluster.  After the scheme is approved by the competent authorities, the Ministry 
of Finance would be moved by the Ministry of Textiles, to make adequate budget 

 11
provision for the Scheme in Supplementar y Demand for Grants.  This was further 
informed by the Secretary during evidence that the scheme will be 100 per cent funded 
by the Central Government and is  being tried out in 20 clusters  in the country on a pilot 
basis.  If it succeeds, the Ministry will take it up in 100 more clusters.  
 
2.8 The Secretary also stated, “With regard to  what is to be done in each cluster, we 
propose to have a diagnostic study by an inde pendent agency, an expert body.  That body 
will study these clusters and tell us what is th e intervention required in each cluster. We 
have already done a diagnostic study for five clusters. The scheme is already through.  
The funds for the scheme will be of the order of Rs. 30 crore totally.  In the current year 
we want a provision of about Rs.5 crore.  The Finance Ministry  has said that it would be 
given as additionally”. 

 12
 
2.9 The Committee have noted that the Handloom Sector is a highly 
decentralized and dispersed sector.  Effort s have been made to organize handloom 
weavers into Cooperatives during the last 50 years. However, these efforts proved 
dismal failures as only 17 per cent of the handloom weavers could be brought under 
the Cooperative fold so far.  Moreover,   many of the Cooperatives are defunct due 
to inaction on the part of the Union Government to take timely action in 
coordination with State Governments to fi nd out the root cause of their failure and 
to take timely and suitable corrective step s for their success.  Since assistance under 
many of the Central Schemes is channelis ed through Cooperatives, the Committee 
are but skeptical about the percolation of intended benefits of Central Schemes to 
weavers when the Cooperatives are becoming increasingly defunct, more so when 
only 17 per cent of the weavers are c overed under cooperative fold.   The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Mi nistry should have a reappraisal of 
the role of Cooperatives in the Handloom Se ctor as to how Cooperatives can revive 
this Sector particularly in the light of th e fact that only 17 per cent of the weavers 
have been brought under its fold despite such Herculean efforts.  Alternative 
strategies may be chalked out for revival  of the Sector.  In this regard, the 
Committee further recommend that the Minist ry should apprise the Department of 
Cooperation about the problems being fa ced by Cooperative Handloom Societies 
and take necessary corrective steps  urge ntly in coordination with the State 
Governments and the Department of Cooperation to revitalize and restructure the 
cooperative societies on priority basis. 
 
 

 13
 
2.10  The Committee note that the Scheme to revitalize apex cooperative 
organizations under Deen Dayal Hathgarha Protsahan Yojana has so far covered 
only two States.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
also assist the other States in revitalizing their apex cooperative societies in a time- 
bound manner if the desired results have been achieved under the Scheme in the 
two States.  The Committee further recomme nd that this Scheme should cover 
primary cooperative societies in addition to apex cooperative organizations. 
 
2.11  The Committee also note that the Government have come up with a new 
Scheme, namely “Integrated Handloom Clus ter Development Scheme”.  As per this 
Scheme, weavers who are organized as cl usters, would get the assistance directly 
from the Union Government. Although this Scheme is proposed to be implemented 
in 20 clusters, a diagnostic study has so fa r been conducted only in 5 clusters.  The 
Committee urge the Ministry to take expedi tious steps to implement this Scheme in 
all the 20 clusters during 2005-2006 as pla nned and inform the Committee of the 
progress made in this regard.  The Committee also recommend that all the 
handloom clusters in the country should be covered by the Scheme within a definite 
period of time. 
 
 
 
  
 

 14
CHAPTER-III 
DEVELOPMENT SCHEMES FOR HANDLOOM SECTOR 
A. DEEN DAYAL HATHKARGHA PROTSAHAN YOJANA (DDHPY) 
3.1 Deen Dayal Hathkargha Protsahan Yoja na was launched by the Ministry of 
Textiles to provide assist ance to the handloom weaver s in an integrated and 
comprehensive manner.  The Scheme has been in operation w.e.f. 1 April 2000 and will 
continue to be in operation till 31 March 2007.  The Scheme aims at taking care of a wide 
gamut of activities such as basic inputs, like looms and accessories, working capital 
loans, product development, infrastructure support, institutional support, training to 
weavers, supply of equipments and marketing support both at micro and macro levels to 
the handloom organizations.  The handloom or ganizations can also get assistance under 
other components of the DDHPY like design inputs, publicity, marketing incentive and 
transport subsidy for North Eastern Region and J&K.  The Ministry of Textiles informed 
the Committee that it has been noticed that a number of organizations at State level need 
to be strengthened and therefore, a com ponent has been provided under the scheme for 
restructuring such organizations for better marketing efforts through bankable projects.  
The DDHPY envisages covering weavers bot h under cooperative and non-cooperative 
fold.  The national and state level organizatio ns, primary societies, self-help groups etc. 
shall be eligible to get benefit of the scheme.   
 
3.2 Under this Centrally-Sponsored Scheme , the sharing between Central and State 
Government is in the ratio of 50:50.  In the case of North Eastern States, Sikkim, J&K, 
Uttaranchal and Himachal Pradesh the fundi ng pattern is in the ratio of 90:10. For 
agencies where 100 per cent members are from SC/ST/Minorities/Women, the funding 
pattern is in the ratio of 75:25.  However, the assistance for mark eting incentives under 
the Scheme is 50:50 between Central and State Governments in respect of all the States. 
 
Performance of the Scheme 
 
3.3 This Centrally-sponsored Plan Scheme entails nearly Rs.25 7.00 crore of Central 
assistance for the Tenth Plan period.  Sin ce inception of the Scheme in the year 2000-
2001, assistance of Rs.12,101.46 lakh has been rel eased in respect of 3,034 fresh projects 
and 1006 projects relating to 2 nd instalment to as many as  19 States to cover 1,82,362 
beneficiaries.   
 
3.4 When asked about the reasons for such a poor performance of the Scheme in a 
span of 5 years, the Ministry of Textiles in a written reply had stat ed that the number of 
beneficiaries shown to have been covered under the DDHPY in the earlier reply relates to 
those covered under the Basic Input component  of the Scheme only and do not include 
beneficiaries covered under th e Marketing Incentive (MI) Com ponent of the Scheme.  It 
is difficult to quantify the exact number of  beneficiaries covered under MI component 
because funds are released to Apex Le vel organizations and Primary Weavers 
Cooperative Societies.  However, as per th e information received from eight major 
Handloom States, viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Kerala, Karnataka, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, 
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, the number of beneficiaries cove red during the last 3 
years under the MI component is approximately 13.63 lakh. 

 15
 
3.5 Under the Basic Input Component of th e Scheme, assistance is provided to 
weavers to procure basic inputs like looms and accessories.  The following figures show 
the huge difference between the number of projects received and the number of projects 
sanctioned under basic input component of the Scheme: 
         
        ( R s .  i n  L a k h s )  
  
Years No. of 
projects 
received 
No. of 
projects 
sanctioned 
Amount 
sanctioned  
Amount 
Released  
2003-04 2,592 1,004 3,210.01 2,824.92 
2004-05 
(Upto 
31.12.04) 
2,572    418 2,310.47 1,407.59 
 
3.6 When asked about the reasons for huge di fference between the number of projects 
received and sanctioned, the Ministry of Textile s, in a written reply, has clarified that the 
difference between the number of projects received and sanctioned is mainly due to non-
submission of requisite documents like Utiliz ation Certificate for the past releases, 
recommendation of the State Le vel Project Committee,  Certif icate from the bank about 
loan tie up for the components for which cred it is required, provi sion of matching State 
Shares etc. 
 
3.7 In regard to the Performan ce of the Scheme, the Ministry of Textiles admitted that 
the Scheme has not been fully operational for want of adequate s upport from the banks 
for the components under the scheme towards loan.  Besi des, because of stringent 
conditions and the requirement of the support from the State Governments for bearing 50 
per cent of the cost, this Scheme has not b een very successful.  There has also been 
considerable pressure from the State Gove rnments for recasting the Scheme.  The 
Scheme, therefore, needs to be compre hensively reviewed and revised.   
 
3.8 When the Committee observed that the Sc heme is not being implemented because 
the Central Government’s condition that matching grant should come from the State, the 
Secretary, Textiles, stated as follows: 
  
“Sir,  I share your concern.  But the point is like this.  The sharing pattern is like 
this.  The DDHPY scheme is 50:50 for norma l States and for the North-East it is 
90:10 and the share is 75:25 when all th e member-beneficiaries are women.  
These are the patterns of the scheme.  As  you rightly pointed out, some States are 
very proactive.  For example, the southe rn States are very proactive and as a 
result, we have been able to persuade them.  Actually what we do is we make 
efforts, we speak to the Chief Secretary, write letters to them, we speak to the 
Finance Secretaries of the State Govern ments and see that the money is fast 
released.  Many meetings are held.  As a re sult of these, last year we have been 
able to spend Rs.84 crore under this Scheme”. 
 
 

 16
 
 
 
3.9 On being asked as to whether it is pr oposed to revamp the Scheme with suitable 
changes in subsidy ceiling, pattern of spending, sharing ratio of the Scheme, etc. the 
Ministry stated that it is pr oposed to modify the Scheme an d this proposal has been kept 
in abeyance till the Integr ated Handloom Cluster Develo pment Scheme is finalized 
particularly to avoid duplica tion of components for which assistance is to be imparted. 
 

 17
 
 
3.10 The Committee have noted that Deen Dayal Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana 
was launched by the Ministry of Textiles to provide comprehensive assistance in an 
integrated  manner during the Tenth Plan period.  However, the performance of the 
Scheme has not so far been encouraging as only 1,004 projects were sanctioned out 
of 2,592 projects received during 2003-2004 a nd only 418 projects were sanctioned 
during 2004-05 upto 31 December 2004 out of  2,572 projects received under the 
Basic Input Component.  The reasons put forth by the Ministry are non-provision of 
matching State share, non-submission of utilization certificate for the past releases 
of funds, non-issue of certif icate by banks about loan tie-up, etc.  The Committee 
find that the condition of providing matchi ng share by the concerned State is not 
uniformly met by the States.  Some States are proactive in this regard while others 
are not.  As such, the Scheme has not b een fully operational.  The Committee take a 
serious view of this and recommend that imme diate steps should be taken to review 
the Scheme comprehensively and revise it  particularly with regard to the aspect of 
matching share and also in the light of the fact that a fully Centrally-Sponsored 
scheme, namely Integrated Handloom Cl uster Development  Scheme has been 
introduced though in a limited way on the pilot basis.  The Scheme should be 100 
per cent Centrally funded so as to make it fully operational in all States.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that this  comprehensive Scheme should not be 
confined to Tenth Plan period only particularly when the vast majority of the 
weavers have not yet been benefited from the Scheme.  They, therefore, recommend 
that this Scheme should be extended beyond Tenth Plan period. 

 18
B. Mill Gate Price Scheme 
3.11 The Mill Gate Price Scheme (MGPS) was introduced by the Ministry of Textiles 
in the year 1992-93.  The Main ob jective of the Scheme is to ensure regular supply of 
yarn to the handloom sector at reasonable pric e so that handloom weaving in the country 
does not suffer from shortage of  its basic raw material, i.e. yarn.  Another objective is to 
help employment generation in the economy.  Under the Scheme, yarn(s) of required type 
is to be supplied to the eligible handloom weavers at prices at which the yarn(s) is 
available at the mill gate(s).  The agencies which are eligible to avail the benefits of 
MGPS include all handloom organizations at  national/state/regional levels, primary 
weavers’co-operative, handloom development centers, producers/exporters of handloom 
products registered with the Handloom Exports Promotion Council (HEPC), members of 
approved handloom associations,  NGOs fulf illing Carpart norms etc.  The National 
Handloom Development Corporation (NHDC) is the only agency in charge of 
implementing this Scheme.  The monitoring of the Scheme, however, is being done by 
the office of Development Commissioner for Handlooms in the Ministry of Textiles, 
Government of India. 
  
3.12 As per the provisions of the MG PS, the weavers organizations, e.g. apex societies, 
primary co-operatives, etc. place their order for yarn with the NHDC, who in turn tie up 
with the mills for supply of the required qua ntity.  As per the provision of the MGPS, 
expenditure incurred for transportation of yarn from mill to the godown of the user 
agencies is being reimbursed by NHDC subject to certain limits.  For weavers located at 
remote and hilly areas yarns are also supplied through yarn depots and mobile vans.  The 
additional expenditure incurred for this is reimbursed by the NHDC.  Finally, the 
expenditure incurred by the NHDC for running the Scheme is reimbursed by the 
Government of India. 
  
3.13 The Weavers from almost all the States ar e availing of the benefits of the Scheme.  
However, there is a large concentration of beneficiaries in a few States, namely Tamil 
Nadu, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh a nd West Bengal.  In contrast, in States 
like Gujarat and Punjab the impact of the Scheme has been limited so far.  The States 
from the North-Eastern Region have  also failed to reap the full benefits; in spite of this 
fact the Scheme provides special preference for such regions. 
 
Performance of the Scheme 
 
3.14 The Ministry of Textiles engaged the National Productivity Council to carry out 
an evaluation study to assess the imp act of the Scheme and to suggest 
modifications for better implementation of the Scheme.  The following are the 
major recommendations of the study conducted by Nati onal Productivity 
Council:- 
 
(i) Given only 15 per cent of the ha ndlooms are covered by MGPS, the 
coverage of the Scheme needs to be increased.  This can  be done by (i) 
extending the scope of the Scheme to  the weavers outside co-operative 
fold (ii) making re-imbursement rates more attractive and (iii) giving wide 
publicity about the benefits of the Scheme. 

 19
(ii) Weavers’ cooperatives availing ya rn supply through MGPS should be 
eligible for transport subsidy at the standard rates based on the distance 
covered.  The rates prepared by NHDC should be approved by Office of 
DC(Handlooms) before making such rates effective. 
 
(iii) The rates at which NHDC would get subsidy from the Government of 
India should, however, be based on the value of yarn supplied under the 
Scheme.  The NHDC can selectively sa nction credit to big co-operatives 
and apex societies, based on credit worthiness of such organizations. 
 
(iv) Besides co-operatives the individual weavers working in co-operative fold 
be made eligible to buy yarn, even of  small quantities, from these depots.  
The weavers can buy their balance requirements for yarn by showing co-
operative membership/identity cards.  For individual weav ers the facility 
of buying yarn through cash payment (i nstead of cheque/demand draft) 
should be available. 
 
(v) The Scheme does not allow operation of both yarn depots and mobile vans 
by the same weaver agency.  It is to be mentioned that yarn depots and 
mobile vans are not substitutes-rather they are supplementary.  Given the 
poor coverage of the Scheme, more particularly in remote areas such as 
the North-Eastern region, the option of operating mobile vans should be 
available for all eligible weavers’ organizations.  
 
3.15 When asked about the reasons for poor coverage of the Scheme, the Ministry of 
Textiles in a written reply stated as follows:- 
 
“The position of supplies under scheme is regularly being reviewed by the 
NHDC, the only implementing agency of the MGPS and also by Office of the DC 
(Handlooms).  Since the yearn supply unde r the scheme can only be undertaken 
through the handloom agencies recomme nded by the State Ha ndloom Directors 
and generally they make their recommendation in favour of handloom weaver 
cooperatives, the coverage has been limited.  However, the State Governments 
have constantly been asked to evolve a mechanism to identify handloom agencies 
who can supply yarn to the w eavers outside the cooperative  fold.  In this regard, 
the Ministry of Textiles has stated that only one response from the State 
Government of Uttar Pradesh has been  received till now.  With the active 
attention of the States the coverage of the scheme can be increased”. 
 
 
3.16 The Ministry of Textiles has also informed that the following steps have been 
initiated to increase the coverage of the Scheme:- 
 
(i) Brochures in different languages i. e. Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Bengali, 
Malayalam in addition to Hindi a nd English were got printed and 
circulated in the weaver clusters. 
 
(ii) Release of Press advertisement in th e weaver cluster ar eas in selective 
basis including advertisement through HEPC in-house magazine.  

 20
 
(iii) Allowing flexible payment system by the agencies instead of making in 
advance. 
 
(iv) NHDC has allowed full reimbursement of freight (from 5 to 7 per cent) for 
supplies in North-East Area, although as per Scheme, weaver agencies are 
entitled only up to 3 per cent. 
 
(v) NHDC is persuading Stat e Directors for identifying more primary level 
weaver cooperatives as well as othe r to obtain yarn under the scheme as 
well as to run depots”. 
 
 
 
 

 21
3.17 The Committee have noted that the Mill Gate Price Scheme was introduced 
in 1992-93 to ensure regular supply of yarn to weavers at prices at which yarn is 
available at Mill Gate.  However, the Sche me has not achieved the desired results 
even after a decade of its implementation as it has co vered only 15 per cent of the 
handlooms in the country so far.  The rea son given by the Ministry for the poor 
coverage of the Scheme is supply of yarn to weavers mainly through cooperatives.  
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and are of the 
opinion that the steps taken by the Minist ry were not adequate enough to increase 
the coverage of the Scheme.  The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that immediate 
steps should be taken by the Ministry to extend the scope of the Scheme to the 
weavers outside the Cooperative fold besides encouraging  individual weavers or a 
group of individual weavers to avail of the yarn supply through Mill Gate Price 
Scheme.  More yarn depots should be open ed near Handloom Weaving Clusters as 
far as possible or at places from where weavers could easily avail of the supply of 
yarn.   Availability of a sufficient number of mobile vans may be ensured to cater to 
the yarn needs of the weavers.  As the Coop erative concept has failed to deliver the 
desired results, other alternatives shou ld be tried to make the Scheme more 
effective.  Cooperatives are engaged in the Scheme on the recommendations of State 
Handloom Directors.  Hence, steps should be  taken to ensure that each of the State 
Handloom Directors is held responsible to own the responsibilities for the failure of 
Co-operatives recommended by them.   Th e Committee also find that the publicity 
being given to the Scheme is not enough  and recommend that the benefits of the 
Scheme should be widely publicized and steps taken for the speedy implementation 
of the recommendations of National Productivity Council. 

 22
 
C. Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme 
 
3.18 The Ministry of Textiles introduced a Centrally Sponsored Scheme called 
“Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme” for handloom weavers from the beginning of 7th Plan, 
i.e. 1985-86.  The Scheme is being implemente d primarily for providing suitable work 
place and dwelling units for providing better wo rking environment to the weavers.  The 
implementing agencies for the Scheme are the respective State Handloom Development 
Corporations, primary Societies or any othe r Specialized agency set up by the concerned 
State Government for execution of projects under the Scheme. 
 
Performance of the Scheme 
 
3.19 During the 9 th Plan, Rs.6,286.54 lakh were releas ed for construction of 63,853 
units of Rural/Urban Worksheds/Worksh ed-cum-Houses under the Scheme.  The 
following Table shows the Budget provision fo r the Scheme and the proposals received 
and sanctioned since 2003-2004:- 
 
Budget Provision 
 (Rs. in crore) 
Years 
North-
Eastern 
States 
 
Rest of 
India 
 
No. of 
viable 
proposals 
received  
No. of proposals 
sanctioned 
2003-2004 7 10 12 11 
2004-2005 7 10 12   9 
2005-2006 7  5   
 
3.20 The above figures show that only Rs.5 crore has been allocated to rest of India for 
the year 2005-2006.  When asked the reasons for very less allocation for rest of India and 
as to whether the amount will be sufficient to meet the requireme nts of all the major 
States, the Ministry of Text iles in a written reply stat ed that the funds under the 
Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme are released on the basis of viable proposals submitted 
by the State Governments.  In case additional funds are required to consider the proposals 
received under the Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme, higher allocation will be sought at  
the Revised Estimate stage.  It was further cl arified by the Ministry that enhancement of 
central assistance under the scheme would serve the purpose only if the State 
Governments submit viable proposals.  Moreov er, only 24 viable proposals have been 
received during the last two years.   
 
 
 

 23
 
 
3.21 On being asked the reasons for very poor response from the States, the Ministry 
replied that the State Governments submit the proposals which are not complete or not as 
per the guidelines of the Scheme.  Only those proposals, which are submitted in 
conformity with the guidelines of the Sche me are considered for sanction.  The State 
Governments have already been requested by the Ministry to submit viable proposals as  
per the guidelines of this Scheme.  Besides th is during the meetings held with the State 
Secretaries/Directors’ in-charge of Handlooms they are also requested to submit complete 
proposals under the Scheme.  
 
Scale of Central Assistance 
 
3.22 The information regarding present fundi ng pattern of the Central assistance and 
the weavers’ contribution as also the loan tie up arrangements is given below:- 
 
  
Name of the 
Component 
Unit Cost 
in Rs. 
Maximum 
Subsidy 
Loan from 
HUDCO/FIs
Weavers 
Contribution 
Rural Workshed 9,000 7,000 - 2,000 
 
Urban Workshed 14,000 10,000 - 4,000 
 
Rural Workshed-
cum-Houses 
35,000 18,000 14,000 3,000 
Urban Workshed-
cum-Houses 
45,000 20,000 20,000 5,000 
  
3.23 The above figures show that the maximum subsidy  being given for various 
components of the Scheme is very less.  When asked as to whether there is any proposal 
to enhance the scale of assistance under the Scheme, the Ministry in a written reply had 
stated that the matter of enhancing central assistance under the Workshed-cum-Housing 
Scheme is under consideration. 

 24
 
3.24 The Committee note with concern th e implementation of Workshed-cum-
Housing Scheme at a tardy pace by the Mini stry which aims at providing suitable 
work place and dwelling units for creating better working environment to the 
handloom weavers.  Only 24 viable project proposals have been received during the 
last two years, out of which 20 project proposals have been sanctioned.  The reasons 
advanced by the Ministry that the State Governments submit the proposals which 
are not complete or not as per guidelines  of the Scheme are not acceptable to the 
Committee.  The Committee are of the view th at the Ministry is not serious enough 
to implement the Scheme and as a result the budgetary allocation has been reduced 
from Rs.17 crore for 2004-2005 to Rs.12 crore for 2005-2006.  While allocation for 
the North-Eastern States has been kept at Rs.7 crore for the la st three years, the 
allocation for rest of India has been reduced to a mere Rs.5 crore for 2005-2006 
which would be hardly sufficient to meet the requirements of the majority of the 
States.  The Committee take a serious view of the pace of implementation of this 
Scheme and recommend that immediate steps should be taken by the Ministry to 
properly educate the State machinery ab out the features of the Scheme. The 
guidelines of the Scheme ar e also required to be reviewe d on a priority basis and 
amendments carried out to facilitate the States to adhere to them.  The Committee 
also consider it improper to release funds only on the basis of viable proposals 
submitted by the States.  They recommend th at a State-wise assessment of need of 
funds should be carried out for effective implementation of the Scheme and funds 
should be allocated as per the need of each State. 

 25
3.25 The Committee also feel that a co mprehensive review of the unit cost 
calculation of Rural/Urban Work-sheds and Rural/Urban Workshed-cum-Houses 
should be carried out and the scale of central assistance per unit should be enhanced 
accordingly.  

 26
 
D. Weavers Welfare Schemes 
(i) Group Insurance Schemes 
 
3.26 This Scheme was introduced in the y ear 1992-93 in order to meet the socio-
economic obligations of the weaver towards his family and to provide security against the 
uncertainty of his working capacity in old age.   Under the Scheme, a weaver is provided 
an insurance cover of Rs.10,000/- for an annua l premium of Rs.120/-.  The premium is 
shared equally among the beneficiary; State Government and the Central Government.  
Since Bunker Bima Yojana has been introduced in place of Group Insurance Scheme, no 
further funds were released under the scheme thereafter. 
 
  (ii) Bunkar Bima Yojana 
3.27 In pursuance of the announcement made  by the then Prime Minister in his 
Independence Day Address to the Nation on August 15, 2002, the Ministry of Textiles 
has introduced a Special Contributory Insu rance Scheme called “Bunkar Bima Yojana” 
during December, 2003.  This Insurance Sche me is a combination of Janshree Bima 
Yojana and add-on  Group Insurance.  This  Scheme was implemented in collaboration 
with the Life Insurance Corporation of India.   
 
3.28 Under the Bunkar Bima Yojana, the annua l premium is shared between the LIC, 
the Government of India and the weaver.  There is no State Government share involved 
in the Scheme.  The details of premium are as under:- 
 
3.29 The Bunkar Bima Yojana was introdu ced with the objective of providing 
enhanced Insurance cover to the handloom weavers in the ca se of natural death.  This 
scheme was introduced in place of the earlier Group Insurance Scheme under which the 
sum assured was only Rs.10,000/- in the case of natural death.  The sum assured under 
the Janshree Bima Yojana is Rs.20,000/- in the case of natural death and Rs. 30,000/- for 
natural as well as accident al death.  Thus, the sum assured under the Bunkar Bima 
Yojana is Rs.50,000/- in the case of natu ral death and Rs.80,000/- in the case of 
accidental death.  On being asked as to whether policy holders of erstwhile Group 
Insurance Scheme are covered under Bunkar Bima Yojana, the Ministry in a written reply 
stated that all the weaver s who are policy holders of the erstwhile Group Insurance 
Scheme are required to switch over to Bunkar Bima Yojana. 
 
3.30 In the Budget, 2005-2006, it was announced th at the coverage of Life Insurance 
Scheme for weavers would be enlarged from 2 lakh weavers to 20 lakh weavers.  When 
asked as to what steps are being taken to achieve this target, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as under: 
 

 27
“Since inception of  the Scheme, 235134 w eavers were covered till March, 2005.  
For the year 2005-2006, it is expected to  cover 10 lakh weav ers and another 10 
lakh weavers in 2006-2007.  Wide publicity to the Scheme will be given by the 
Government of India and Life Insuran ce Corporation to cover the weavers under 
the Scheme”.  
 
3.31 When it was pointed out that there are 65 lakh weavers in the country and the 
target is only 20 lakh weavers, the Secretar y, Textiles stated during the evidence, “We 
went to the Finance Ministry a nd said – let us at least cove r 20 lakh weavers, that is one 
third of the total number of weavers as a social safety net.  They have agreed.  The idea is 
 to cover one-third”. 
  
(iii) Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana 
 
3.32 A new insurance scheme called Maha tma Gandhi Bunkar Yojana was launched 
on September 19, 2005.  The objective of the Sc heme is to provide enhanced insurance 
coverage to the handloom weavers in case of  natural as well as a ccidental death.  The 
Scheme is applicable to all weavers residing in both rura l and urban areas throughout the 
country.  The Scheme is implemented through the Life Insurance Corporation of Indian 
through State Directions in charge of handlooms. 
 
BENEFITS 
 
(A) In the event of death of the Member, Sum Assured of Rs.50,000 will become 
payable, to the nominee. 
 
(B) In the event of death by accident or Partial/Total Permanent Disability due to 
accident, the following benefit shall be payable: 
 
(i) On death due to accident Rs.80,000/- 
(ii) Permanent total disability due to 
accident 
Rs.50,000/- 
(iii) Loss of 2 eyes or 2 limbs OR one 
eye and one limb in an accident 
Rs.50,000/- 
(iv) Loss of one eye or one limb in an 
accident 
Rs.25,000/- 
 
PREMIUM 
 
Government of India contribution Rs.150/- per annum 
Weavers’ contribution Rs.80/- per annum 
LIC’s contribution Rs.100/- per annum 
Total Rs.330/- 
 
 

 28
3.33 The eligibility criteri a for availing assistance under the Mahatma Gandhi 
Bunkar Bima Yojana is as under:- 
 
(a) The weaver should be earning at least 50% of his income from handloom 
weaving. 
(b) All weavers whether male or female, between the age group of 18 and 59 
years are eligible to be covered under the Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima 
Yojana. 
(c) Weavers being regular members of a Co-operative Society will be eligible 
to benefit from the scheme. 
(d) Weavers affiliated to State Handloom Development Corporations will also 
be eligible. 
(e) Weavers belonging to the Primary Weavers’ Co-operative Society/Apex 
Society/Handloom Development Corporations having at least 25 members 
are eligible to be covered under this insurance scheme. 
 
 
3.34 The Weavers of Pochampally pleaded before the Committee that upper age limit 
of 58 years should be raised to 70 years for eligible to be covered under MGBBY.  In this 
regard, the Ministry of Textiles, in its co mments provided to the Committee, has stated 
that the matter relating to increase the age limit to 70 years under MGBBY has been 
taken up with the Life Insurance Corporation of India. 
 
3.35 The Ministry of Textiles informed the Committee that with the introduction of 
Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Yojana (MGBBY), the earlier Bunkar Bima Yojana stands 
discontinued and no proposals for further renewal under that scheme will be considered. 
 
(iv)  Health Package Scheme for Handloom Weavers 
 
3.36 The Ministry of Textiles introduced the Health Package Scheme in March, 1993.  
Under the scheme, the weavers are provided fi nancial assistance for the treatment of 
diseases like asthma, tuberculosis and inflam mation of respiratory system, cost of testing 
of eyes and provision spectacle s, supply of drinking water, maternity benefits to women 
weavers, payment of additional compensation for permanent measures of family planning 
and infrastructure for the primary health care.   
  
3.37 During the 9 th Plan, Rs.1,464,09 lakh was released by the Ministry of Textiles 
under the Scheme for covering 2,53,835 w eavers.  During 2003-2004, Rs.221.25 lakh 
was released under this Scheme to various  State Government covering 26,814 weavers.  
During 2004-2005 an amount of Rs.369.26 lakh has been released (upto 31.01.2005) to 
the various State Governments for coverage of 72,198 weavers.

 29
 
3.38 In the Budget, 2005-2006, it was announced  that the coverage  of the Health 
Insurance Package would be increased to 2 lakh weavers at a recurring cost of Rs.30 
crore per year.  To a query as to what step s are being taken to achieve this target, the 
Ministry of Textiles in a written reply stated as follows:- 
  
“It is proposed to introdu ce a Health Insurance Scheme  for handloom weavers in 
pursuance of the budget announcement 2005 -2006 made by the Hon’ble Finance 
Minister.  Under this Scheme, 3.00 lakh w eavers proposed to be covered each in 
the year 2006-2007.  The H ealth Insurance Scheme for handloom weavers has 
been approved by the Departmental Expenditure Finance Committee.  The final 
approval for the scheme is being sought from the Competent Authority”.  
 
3.39 In this regard, the Secretary (Textile s) further informed the Committee during 
evidence as under:- 
 
“Another important Scheme, as part of th e social security safety net for the 
handloom weavers, is to give them a hea lth cover.  Earlier, we had a scheme 
under which we used to give Rs.1,500 for every weaver and the weaver would be 
given some drugs and also spectacles.  It is a full grant from the budget of the 
Government of India.  But the funds available were limited and the coverage was, 
therefore, limited.  The coverage was only for about 20,000 weavers.  We felt it is 
inadequate.  We asked for a dditional funds for covering at least 2 lakh weavers.  
Instead of giving it as a gr ant, we went through the in surance route.  I am happy 
to inform the hon’ble Members of the Committee and the Chairman that we have 
been able to tie up with an insurance company under which a very good package 
will now be available for the weavers.  The total cover would be Rs.15,000 for a 
weaver family.  In addition to weavers, the family of the weavers will also be 
covered.  Pre existing illness will be c overed and OPD treatment will also be 
covered under this Scheme.  So Rs.15,000 will be the value of the health 
insurance the weavers will now get for which the Insurance premium from the 
Government side would be about Rs.1000 plus the taxes involved.  We want some 
participation from weavers so that they take interest in the sc heme and, therefore, 
we have prescribed about Rs.200/- coming from the weavers.  Due to the lower 
cost of this package we w ill now be able to cover 3.2 lakh weavers this year.  
Instead of the present coverage of about  20,000 weavers, we will be able to cover 
3.2 lakh weavers now.  The funds required would be again Rs.30 crore.  The 
Finance Minister has agreed to provide the funds for this.  This would be in 
addition to the funds which are already provided in the Budget”.    

 30
 
3.40 The Committee have noted that Bunkar Bima Yojana was launched in 2003 
to provide enhanced Life Insurance cov erage of Rs.50,000/- in the case of natural 
death and Rs.80,000/- in the case of accidental death.  A target has been set to cover 
one-third of all the handloom workers under the Scheme by 2007. The Committee 
recommend that an action plan should be  chalked out and concrete and vigorous 
steps should be taken to cover one-third of handloom weavers under the Scheme by 
2007 and to cover all the weavers before the end of next  Five Year Plan.  
 
3.41 The Committee are concerned to note  that Insurance Schemes are often 
either withdrawn or merged with new Sc hemes which leads to confusion in the 
minds of handloom weavers.  For instance, Bunkar Bima Yojana was introduced in 
place of Group Insurance Scheme and th e Committee were informed that policy 
holders of erstwhile Group Insurance Scheme are required to switch over to Bunkar 
Bima Yojana.  Recently, a new Scheme named Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima 
Yojana (MGBBY) has been launched and this would replace the Bunkar Bima 
Yojana. The Committee are of the view th at such mergers should be preceded by 
proper information to policy holders regar ding merger. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that all the policy holders of Group Insurance Scheme and Bunkar 
Bima Yojana should automatically be covered under the Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar 
Bima Yojana (MGBBY).  Necessary instructions should be given to the Insurance 
Company in this regard.  The Committ ee also recommend that the eligibility 
criteria in regard to the upper age limit  for coverage under MGBBY should be 
raised from 58 to 70 years as desired by the weavers. 

 31
 
3.42 The Committee have also noted that only 26,814 weavers and 72,198 weavers 
were covered under Health Package Scheme during 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 
respectively.  A target for covering 3.2 lakh weavers each in the year 2005-2006 and 
2006-2007 has been set under a new Health Insurance Scheme which is likely to be 
launched soon.  The Committee expect that concrete steps would be taken to fulfill 
the targets during 2005-2006 and 2006-2007 as envisaged under the new Scheme.  
The Committee should be informed of the progress made in this regard at quarterly 
intervals. The Committee further recommend th at suitable steps should be taken to 
cover all the beneficiaries of the exis ting Health Package Scheme under the 
proposed Health Insurance Scheme in a time-bound manner. 

 32
 
E. Research and Training Programmes 
 
(i) Research & Development 
 
3.43 Research & Development is an essential ingredient for any industry to keep pace 
with the fast changing devel opment on account of the increasing global interest in Indian 
Handlooms. Hence, undertaking Research & Development in the handloom sector is very 
essential in order to have regular system of feed back on economic, social, aesthetic, 
technical and promotional aspects of handloom  sector with the he lp of expertise of 
reputed research institutes and other professional/voluntary organizations, Non-
Governmental organizations registered under any of the statutory Acts, Universities, 
IIHTs/WSCs having basic infrastructural facili ties to effectively implement the scheme 
through studies, need based survey, research and development etc.  
 
3.44 The following table shows the amounts rele ased for Research & Development of 
Handloom Sector: -  
     (Rs. in lakh) 
 
Years Amount Released  
2003-04 40.06 
2004-05 35.00 
2005-06 40.00 
  
3.45 When asked as to whether the above f und releases are suffi cient to meet the 
Research and Development needs of handloom sector, the Ministry in a written reply 
stated that the releases for R&D projects are made only if the Ministry considers them as 
viable projects and that the amounts gr anted for the R&D in Handloom Sector are 
sufficient as the funds released under R& D depend upon the viable proposals received 
from the organisations and approval of projects by the technical Committee.  
 
3.46 To a query, whether the Government propose to take itself the task of R&D 
projects in handloom sector, the Ministry re plied that if it is found that the private 
organisations are not coming upto expectations, IITs would be considered for undertaking 
and R&D Projects, especially for suggest ing measures for cost reduction in the 
production of handlooms.  In this regard, Se cretary (textiles) assured that Committee 
during evidence as follows:- 
 
“As regards Research and Development, I certainly agree with the hon. Member. 
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi is  the only institutio n, which is having 
textile technology as a course.  We are already in touch with them.   The Professor 
of IIT is in the Committee of DC (Handlooms). We will allocate more funds for 
Research and Development. We will ask them to examine as to how cost of 
production could be reduced.” 
 

 33
  
(ii) Integrated Handloom  Training Programmes 
 
3.47 Integrated Handloom Training Progr amme (IHTP) was introduced in 2003 for 
skill up-gradation of one lakh weavers/work ers and artisans working in the Handloom 
Sector.  This project envisa ges the imparting of compre hensive training to handloom 
weavers/workers and artisans in technical, managerial and marketing skills to enable 
them to produce and market high value and di versified quality produc ts in keeping with 
current trends in domestic and internati onal market, and providi ng the workers with 
equipment.  
 
3.48 Out of the target of one lakh weavers,  the target of coverage of handloom 
weavers/workers is 90,000 by office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms 
and remaining 10,000 artisans by Office of the Development Commissioner for 
Handicrafts. 
 
Performance of the scheme 
 
3.49 The scheme was introduced in December, 2003 Rs.295.75 lakh was sanctioned 
for conducting 200 programmes, covering 4000 weavers at the fag end of the year 2003-
04. These programmes were actually implemen ted during 2004-05. Similarly a target to 
cover 20,000 weavers was fixed for 2004-05 and the same was revised as 15,000 weavers 
after taking into account the issues relating to implementation in the field level.  But 
sanctions for training of 16,540 trainees were issued. As of now, only 6520 weavers have 
been trained and the training of 2540 weavers ar e in progress. It is also proposed to take 
up training of at least 20,000 weavers in each of 2005-06 and 2006-07.  
 
3.50 When asked the reasons for repeated  non-achievement of targets under the 
scheme, the Ministry of Textiles in a written reply stated as follows: - 
 
“the scheme was introduced in December , 2003 and since it was a  new scheme, 
therefore, it took time to understand the scheme by the States/Weavers Service 
Centres (WSCs), to constitute State Leve l Training Committee (SLTC), invite the 
proposals through release of advertisement, scrutiny of the proposals received, 
convening the meeting of SLTC, release of funds and other ground preparations 
for conduct of the sanctioned training pr ogrammes. On the whole, IHTP scheme 
could not be implemented during the firs t year of the Xth Plan. However, the 
efforts are being made to achieve the targets as much as possible during the Xth 
Plan. The remaining targets, if any will be carried forward to the next Five Year 
Plan.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 34
 
3.51 In this regard a representative of the Ministry of Textiles stated as follows during 
the evidence: - 
 
“Previously weavers were not coming for tr aining because they could not attend 
to their work for it and they were give n low stipend too. But now we are giving 
rupees hundred for a day to them.  For dye course too rupe es hundred is being 
given for a day. This course is of 15 days. By making this change we have seen 
that previously weavers were not coming for training but now they are coming in 
large numbers.”   
  

 35
3.52 The Committee have noted that Research and Development in the handloom 
sector is essential to enable them compete wi th other sectors.   However, it is noted 
that fund allocation for Rese arch and Development is hardly sufficient to meet the 
needs of Research and Development effort s in the Handloom Sector especially for 
suggesting measures for cost reduction in  the production of handlooms, exclusive 
design development and development of superior handlooms.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry sh ould take more proactive steps for 
accelerating Research and Development efforts in Handloom Sector including 
enhancement of fund allocation and engagement  of reputed institutions like Indian 
Institutes of Technology to find out w ays and means for the development of 
Handloom Sector. More IITs and other Techni cal Institutions of repute should be 
requested to introduce the Textiles Technology as one of the courses keeping in view 
the ground situation of Textiles Industry particularly Handlooms.  
 
3.53 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the Ministry has 
repeatedly failed to achieve the targets fixe d for a particular year under Integrated 
Handloom Training Programmes and that it could complete the programme targets 
in the subsequent years only.  As a result, the remaining targets are carried forward 
to the next Five Year Plan.  The reasons put forth by the Ministry are : time taken 
to understand the Scheme by th e States, invitation of pr oposals and their scrutiny, 
release of funds and other ground preparat ions.  On the whole, the Scheme could 
not be implemented in the first year of the Tenth Plan.  The Committee are of the 
view that before launching a Scheme all the ground preparations, including 

 36
properly  educating  implementing agencie s/States should be done and recommend 
that the Ministry should take concrete steps to achieve the target of imparting 
training to 1 lakh weavers within the Tenth Plan period.  The Committee also 
recommend that work loss of weavers should  be continuously compensated by an 
appropriate amount of stipend during th e training period. The stipend amount 
should also be reviewed periodically and enhanced, so as to attract more weavers for 
training.    

 37
 
F. Promotion of sale of Handloom Products 
 
 
(i) Marketing Promotion Programme 
 
3.54 Marketing Promotion Programme (MPP) is an integrated scheme including 
components for Publicity and Awareness, setting up of Marketing Complexes and  
organization of Exhibition and Fairs through vari ous agencies  to promote the marketing  
of handloom in the country and to improve levels of awareness among handloom weavers 
and the general public in the interest of overall development of the handloom sector.  
 
3.55 One of the main components of this scheme is organizing of National Handloom 
Expos (NHE), Special Expos and District Le vel Events (DLE) Financial assistance is 
provided to eligible agenci es for organizing NHEs, Special Expos and DLEs. The 
objective of these events, as stated by the Ministry of Textiles, is to provide an 
opportunity to handloom weavers to market their products in various parts of the country. 
These events also enable consumers to ac cess handloom production from various sources 
at one place. 
 
3.56 The following table shows the target fi xed approved and the actual achievement 
of these events since 2002-03: -  
 
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 SL. Name of the Event 
Tar Apprd Ach Tar Apprd Ach Tar Apprd Ach Tar 
1. National/Special 
Handloom Expos 
 
10 21 19 16 30 27 30 42 37 50 
2. District Level 
Events 
 
150 153 130* 150 167 158 150 170 145** 300 
3. Craft Mela & 
Master creation 
Programme 
06 06 06 06 06 06 07 07 07 06 
 
* The District Level Events could not be organized by the Implementing 
agencies. 
 
** On the basis of report received till date from the State Government.  
 
3.57 During evidence, the Committee observed that this vast country itself a big 
market and there is a big scope for handloom products. In reply, the secretary (textiles) 
stated as follows: - 
 
“We have a scheme for supporting marketing within the country and 
actually a number of exhibitions are held by the DC, Handlooms at 
various levels. We have enough budget.   We have in fact doubled the 
target in terms of numbers, which gives an opportunity for weavers to 
exhibit their products a nd people buy it.  In real ity, there is a lot of 

 38
demand for handloom products in the va rious commercial centres.  So, for 
marketing we are really giving assistan ce and there is no limit.  If more is 
required, certainly we will give more assistance for all these exhibitions. 
The numbers are available. I can give  you the number of exhibitions that 
were being supported”.   
 
3.58 The Secretary further stated during the course of evidence as below:- 
 
“In addition, we are thinking of Hand loom Mark like the ‘Wool Mark’. It 
is an independent body which certifies knitwear that if there is Wool Mark 
that means, there is quality. Peopl e are selling powerloom products as 
handloom in some private places. We want to introduce Handloom Mark 
in the current year so  that people who buy, know that is a genuine 
handloom product.  All these efforts, we feel, will help in increasing the 
domestic market. In addition, the de sign input, which we are giving now, 
will be market oriented. Designer wi ll come in and produce a good design 
that they should be able to market. So, there are the efforts which we are 
making.”  
 
3.59 During the Committee’s recent Study Vis it to Pochampally in Andhra Pradesh, 
weavers of the Pochampally Handloom W eaver’s Cooperative Society Limited, had 
submitted a Memorandum to the Committee in which they had requested that mobile 
marketing facilities should be provided to the Primary Handloom Weaver’s Cooperative 
Societies.  In this regard, the Ministry of Textiles had stated in a wr itten reply that as of 
now, there is no provision under the Marketing Promotion Programme to provide mobile 
marketing facilities.  But  Primary Weavers Cooperatives are encouraged to participate 
in the National/Special Handloom Expos to market their products.  Moreover, District 
Level Events are organized especially for th e Primary Weavers Cooperative Societies to 
market their products.  This year, in order to give more thrust, the number of events have 
been doubled making it to 300. 
 
(ii) Export of Handlooms 
 
3.60 On account of having the advantage of flexibility of production in small batches, 
uniqueness, constant scope for innovation, eco friendliness, adaptab ility and above all, 
the element of rich artistry, handloom sect or has the potential to contribute towards 
export earnings in a big way.  The Governme nt has identified e xport of handloom 
products as a “Thrust Area” for the overall  development of the sector. The committee 
were further informed that the Government is exploring the possibility making optimal 
use of the resources to enhance production capabilities of exportable handloom products.   
 
3.61 To give impetus to the export of handloom fabrics, made ups and other handloom 
items, a scheme for Development of Exporta ble Products and thei r Marketing (DEPM), 
was introduced by the Ministry of Textiles in 1996-1997 (October 1996), and it operated 
till 31.3.2002.  During the 10
th Five Year the Scheme is continuing as “Handloom Export 
Scheme”, and it covers development of exportable products, publicity of the products and 
the international marketing thereof.  The financial assistance under the Scheme is 

 39
extended to the eligib le National State Level Handloom Corporations, Apex Cooperative 
Societies and Primary Handloom  Weavers Cooperative Soci eties.  Private Handloom 
Exporters are also assisted  under the scheme only thr ough Handloom Export Promotion 
Council (HEPC). 
 
3.62 The Year-wise Export of Cotton Ha ndloom Fabrics and Mad-ups during 2000-
2001 to 2002-2003 is as follows:- 
 
Year Fabric 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Made-ups 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Total 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Total 
(US Dollar)  
 
2000-
2001 
489.63 1637.82 2127.45 466 
2001-
2002 
496.47 1568.47 2064.94 433 
2002-
2003 
842.94 1790.33 2633.27 544 
 
3.63 The above figures show that the export of cotton handloom fabrics and made-ups 
has increased to Rs.2633 crore during 2002-2 003.  When asked as to whether the 
Ministry are optimistic to continue thei r performance during post MFA period, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as follows:- 
 
“Yes; the Ministry is optimistic to continue this performance during the post MFA 
period.  However, in the absence of se gregated ITC (HS) code for handloom 
products in the revised ITC (HS) code with effect from 01.04.2003, the Council is 
not in a position to monitor the trends from April 2003 onw ards.  In order to have 
separate ITC (HS) code for the handloom products, efforts have been made in 
consultation with the Handloom export Pr omotion Council, the exporters etc. and 
a list of handloom approval,  Personal m eetings of the Office of DC (Handlooms) 
and Executive Director, Handloom Export Promotion Council with the concerned 
officers of DOR have been place and th e requisite notification from DOR is 
awaited”. 
 
3.64 In a post evidence reply, the Ministry informed the Committee that the following 
steps are contemplated to boost export of handlooms and to withstand the disadvantages 
in post MFA period. 
 
• A special Brand Equity Fund would be  sought from the Ministry for the 
handloom sector to conceptualize a nd to the promote Indian Handwoven 
Brand as generic and specific brands  like natural dyed, organic textiles, 
etc.  This will make the consumers well aware of the USP and richness of 
Indian handwoven products and protect their interest in sourcing genuine 
handloom products. 
 

 40
• A trade mark for handlooms is being developed on lines similar to 
“woolmark”, which will enable handloom products to develop a niche 
market with a distinct identity. 
• More number of exclusive handwoven shows would be conducted in the 
leading international consumer centers supported with retail shows and roa 
shows to create awareness and public ity on the Indian handloom products 
among consumer/buyers. 
 
• In the International market USP of the handloom should be projected as 
unique, exclusive, custom designed, niche product.  The high-end 
segments of developed countries conti nue to be potential market for the 
growth of handloom exports. 
 
• Efforts are being made to focus on the unexplored countries.  However, 
due to lack of information and uncer tainty in the new areas, the response 
from the exporters are lukewarm.  Th erefore, the Council would request 
the Government to provide grant to th e Council’s participation in fairs for 
exploring the market.  At present grant for the Counc il’s participation 
without exporters are not provided with financial support.  Since Financial 
support for such participation will help the Council to collect and 
disseminate the useful informatio n on the new market in order to 
encourage and build up the confidence among the exporters for their 
participation in the International events. 
 
• There will be a special thrust on th e development and promotion of new 
and potential product ranges such as garments, lifestyle products, 
accessories, made-ups, gifts, nature fibre, natural dyed products, organic 
textiles, etc. 
 
• Tariff exemption will be sought for handloom products through WTO 
negotiation by treating handloom as heritage product and also on the 
ground that its sustenance and growth will mitigate unemployment and 
reduce poverty. 
 
3.65 The Ministry further informed th e Committee that the Handloom Export 
Promotion Council is also preparing a pr oposal for Market Study under the market 
Access Initiative Scheme of the Department of Commerce for export enhancement in 
USA market. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 41
 
The Continent-wise export of co tton handlooms during 2000-2001 to 2002-
2003 is as under:- 
 
Continent 2000-2001 2001-2002 2002-2003 
Asia 369.46 340.51 443.79 
Africa 128.12 160.87 164.41 
Europe 831.77 802.27 989.05 
America 684.28 660.84 926.03 
LAC  47.16   41.32   36.39 
Oceanic  66.66   59.12   73.59 
Total          2127.45           2064.94           2633.27 
 
3.66 The above figures show that exports of  handlooms to Latin American Countries 
(LAC), Asia and Africa is very less when compared to other continen ts.  On being asked 
as to what efforts are being made to boost e xport to the countries in  these continents, the 
Ministry of Textiles in a  written reply stated that in order to boost  export of handlooms 
to Latin American countries, Asia and Africa, the Council had organized the participation 
of its member exporters in the following events during 2004-2005: 
 
1. Council had participated in International Apparel, Textile, Footwear 
and Machinery Trade Exhibition held  in Cape Town, South Africa 
during 2nd and 4 th November 2004 under Focus Africa programme.  5 
member exporters had participat ed through the Council and spot 
orders worth of Rs.39 lakhs had been generated apart from concrete 
enquires worth to the tune of Rs.72.50 lakh. 
 
2. Council had also organized a Buyer-Sel ler Meet at Santiago, Chile in 
coordination with Santiago Chamber of Commerce and Embassy of 
India, Santiago, Chile.  10 member exporters had participated through 
the Council and the event witnes sed a huge turnout and all the 
participants were very much satisfi ed over their participation in the 
BSM.  Considering the grand success witnessed during the last year, 
this year also Council is planning to organize a similar BSM at 
Santiago, Chile during November 2005 with 20 member exporters 
under Focus LAC programme. 
 
3. The Council had participated in Hong Kong Housewear Fair held 
during 21 st to 24 th April 2005 under Focus ASEAN + 2 programme.  
The stalls of Council’s member exporters attracted more than 475 
trade visitors and generated enquires worth over Rs.278.5 lakh and 
spot orders were booked for Rs.163.5 lakh.  Considering the success 
achieved during this fair, the Council is  planning to participate in this 
Fair regularly. 
 
 

 42
 
3.67 In this regard, Secretar y (Textiles) had stated during evidence as follows:- 
 
“The other thing is that the Handl oom Export Promotion Council (HEPC) 
is sponsored for exports of handlooms.   They participate in a number of 
fairs.  If you take the world over, 50 per cent of trade is only in two areas – 
America and Europe.  The areas, which were mentioned, do not have 
much scope and the exporter s will not be willing to go and do that.  But, 
we assist them in 7 or 8 fairs in a year.  Recently, a delegation went to 
South Africa and Chile too. We will  also explore Australia and other 
countries too. We leave it to the expor ters.  They know the market; they 
know the demands.  So, we allow them to go wherever they want.  That 
scheme is already there”.     
 

 43
3.68 The Committee note that marketing events such as National/Special 
Handloom Expos and District Level events provide great opportunity to handloom 
weavers to market their products in various parts of the country and that 83 
National/Special Handloom Expos were organized during the period from 2002-
2005 as against a target of only 56 Expos.  This shows the overwhelming response of 
the weavers to such marketing events.  Howe ver, there are fluctuations in achieving 
the targets of District Level Events.  Th e Committee are of the view that District 
Level Events (DLEs) would be easily accessi ble both to the weavers and consumers.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that reasons for which DLEs could not be 
organised by implementing agencies should  be found out and corrective steps taken 
to achieve targets in regard to DLEs.  The Committee also recommend that fund 
allocation for such marketing events should be enhanced and the number of 
National/Special Handloom Expos and District Level Events should be increased as 
per the need of a particular area.  The Committee further recommend that the 
feasibility of providing mobile market ing facilities to the Primary Handloom 
Weavers’ Cooperative Societies be explored which would be very useful for them for 
marketing their products.   
3.69 The Committee have also noted that there is a proposal to develop a Trade 
Mark namely “Handloom Mark” for handlooms on the lines of Woolmark.  Such a 
trade mark would definitely enable handl oom products to develop a niche market 
with a distinct identity both in domestic and international markets.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that expeditious step s should be taken by the Ministry to 
develop this trademark for handloom products.  

 44
 
3.70 The Committee note that export of handloom products has shown an 
increasing trend over the years.  However,  this increase is lo psided.  While the 
export to the continents of Europe and America is on very high side, the export to 
the countries in the continents of Asia, Africa, Latin America and Oceania is not 
appreciable.  The Committe e, therefore, recommend that export promotion 
measures should be augmented in su ch untapped markets which would boost 
handloom exports to those markets.  In this regard, the Committee further 
recommend that apart from participation in  potential fairs, Buyer-Seller-meets 
should be regularly arranged with the he lp of Indian Missions abroad to tap the 
potential markets for handlooms.  The Commi ttee also expect that the Government 
would help exporters of handlooms through bilateral trade talks with the countries 
concerned. 
 
3.71 The Committee further note that certai n export promotion measures have 
been contemplated to boost export of handlooms and to withstand the disadvantages 
of post Multi-Fibre arrangement period.  The Committee expect that sincere efforts 
would be made to implement measures su ch as projection of the  handloom as 
unique, custom designed and niche pr oduct besides conducting exclusive 
handwoven shows in leading internationa l consumer centres and seeking tariff 
exemption for handloom products through WTO to boost handloom exports, etc.  
The progress made in this regard should be intimated to the Committee. 

 45
 
G. Protection of Handloom Weavers 
 
(i) Handloom (Reservation of Arti cles of Production) Act, 1985 
 
3.72 The Government of India in its Textile Policy of 1985 promulgated the Handloom 
(Reservation of Articles of  Production) Act, 1985 dated 29 March 1985 to protect the 
interests of the handloom weavers in the country from the encroachment of the 
powerloom and mill sector on their livelihood.  Under th e Act, protection to the 
handloom sector was extended by way of reserv ing certain textile ar ticles, which were 
traditionally being produced on handlooms for lower and middle class.  At present 11 
textile articles or cl ass of articles for exclusive pr oduction on handloom, which were 
notified, vide SO No.557 (E) date d 26 July 1996 and this order is till in operation.  The 
following textiles articles are required for handloom sector: 
 
1. Saree 
2. Dhoti 
3. Tower, Gamcha and Angawastaram 
4. Lungi 
5. Khes, Bedsheet, Bedcovere, Counterpane, Furnishing (including tapestry, 
upholstery) 
6. Jamakkalam Durry or Durret 
7. Dress Material 
8. Barrack Blankets, Kambal or Kamblies 
9. Shawl, Loi, Muffler, Pankhi etc. 
10. Woollen Tweed 
11. Chaddar, Mekhala/Phanek 
 
3.73 The Handlooms (Reservation of Ar ticles for Production) Act, 1985 is 
implemented through the Central and Stat e Government Enforcement machineries 
notified under Section 5 of this Act.  To supplement the efforts of the State Governments 
in establishing the State Enforcement machin ery, funds are released under the Scheme 
entitled “implementation of Handlooms (Res ervation of Articles for Production) Act, 
1985” is in operation.   
 
3.74 During the Tenth Five Yearn Plan period, the outlay is Rs.6 crore.  During the 
year 2003-2004 a sum of Rs.120.00 lakh (Plan) had been released to various State 
Governments and the outlay for 2004-2005 was Rs.120 lakh. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 46
 
3.75 The Ministry of Textiles in a written not e informed the Committee that at present 
there is no proposal to add any it em in the list of Reservation Order.  When asked as to 
whether any demands have been received from handloom weavers for increasing number 
of reserved textile articles for handloom sector, the Ministry of Textiles stated that so far 
no demand has been received from the handloom weavers for increasing number of 
reserved articles for handloom sector.  In re gard to the criteria to add more items in the 
list of Reservation Order, the Ministry provided the following excerpts of the Act:- 
 
“4 (1): The Central Government shall, wi th a view to determining the nature of 
any article or class of arti cles that may be reserved for exclusive production by 
handlooms constitute of Advisory Committ ee consisting of such persons as have 
in the  opinion of that Government, the necessary expertise to give advice on the 
matter”. 
 
3.76 The Ministry further informed the Committee that an Advisory Committee has 
been constituted under Secti on 4 (1) of The Handlooms (Reservation of Articles for 
Production) Act, 1985.  The Advisory Committee looks into the demands and submits its 
recommendations to the Government fo r consideration.  At present no such 
representations have been received from the industry. 
 
(ii) Scheme for reimbursement of onetime Rebate @ 10% given  by the 
Handloom Agencies on sale of Handloom cloth from 2002-2003 to 2004-
2005. 
 
3.77 The then Prime Minister had made an announcement on 15.8.2002 that the 
Ministry of Textiles would earmark a sum of Rs.100 crore for a one-time special rebate 
on handloom fabrics to kick-start this em ployment-intensive industry and revive its 
production cycle. 
  
3.78 The Scheme envisages reimbursement of  10 per cent rebate to National/State 
Level Handloom Corporations/Apex Societie s on sale of accumulated handloom cloth 
from 15.8.2002 to 31.1.2004.  Thereafter, from 1.2.2004 to 31.3.2005 the assistance to 
these agencies, including the Primary Ha ndloom Weavers Cooperative Societies is 
available on sale of all handloom clot h during the calendar of festivals and 
National/Special Handloom Expos/District Le vel Events approved by the Development 
Commissioner for Handlooms.  In addition, the State Governments/Union Territories 
have the option to extend the benefit of the Scheme for a period of 7 days for any 
important festival/occasions other than the festivals mentioned in the calendar of festivals 
approved by the Office of Development Commissioner for Handlooms. 
 
3.79 During 2003-2004, Rs.20 crore was released by the Ministry of Textiles to 
various State Governments and in 2004-2005 (till 11.2.2005), Rs.820.39 lakh has been 
released.   
 
 

 47
 
 
 
3.80 When asked whether this Scheme is  proposed to be extended beyond 2005, the 
Ministry in a written reply informed the Committ ee that at this stage, there is no proposal 
to extend the Scheme beyond, 2005.  When it was observed that this Sp ecial rebate is a 
relief for weavers and expressed hope that it would be continued, the Secretary (Textiles) 
stated during the evidence as follows:- 
 
“To be very frank, we expect the State Gove rnments to write to us so that we can 
move the Government of India.  We are not  the Government of India.  So far, no 
one has written to me or Development Commissioner (Handl ooms).  No State 
Government has written to us.  If the Committee recommends, we have  
something to go by because we have to know  the conditions.  Earlier, the Scheme 
was announced because there was a large accumulation.  A lot of things came in 
the newspaper.  The Prime Minister intervened and sanctioned this Scheme.   Tthe 
Scheme was for a specific period and the money was also specified.  If the State 
Governments Like Kerala, Tamil Nadu, UP, Andhra Pradesh or any State, write a 
letter, then we can move saying that so much is the accumulated goods, etc.  As of 
now, there is no such request .  The Committee can take a view on it.  Then, we 
will certainly consider. ………..The Government will be very sympathetic.  There 
will be no difficulty.  But, we will have to go to the Ministry of Finance and ask 
them to provide funds for this scheme.  We are hopeful of succeeding because of 
the kind of support that we are having from the Committee”.  
 
3.81 During Committee’s visit to Pochampally, the Weavers of the Pochampally 
Handloom Weaver’s Cooperative Society Lim ited demanded that 20 per cent rebate for 
the Societies participati ng in National Handloom Expos  & Special Handloom Expos 
should be provided in order to attract more cu stomers.  The Ministry of Textiles in its 
comments on the above demand of the weavers, has stated that the continuation of the 
Scheme is under consideration of the Government. 
 
 
(iii) Rate of interest for weavers 
 
3.82 At present, handloom weavers are given credit at the rate of 12 per cent. During 
evidence, when  it was asked whether any steps are being taken  in this regard, a 
representative of the Ministry of Textiles stated as follows:- 
 
“The rate of interest for weavers is the same as that of industries as of now.  
We have requested the Ministry of Finan ce that the rate of interest should be 
same as that of agriculture.  It should be the minimum at least.  Agriculture 
also has large employment and this sect or also gives a large employment.  
Therefore, we have written  to the Ministry of Finance.  It is under active 
consideration.  It should be 9 per cent”.  
 

 48
iv) Waiver of interest on cash credit 
 
3.83 During the Committee’s visit to Pocham pally, weavers of Pochampally Handloom 
Weaver’s Cooperative Society Limited had re quested for Waiver of interest on cash 
audit.  This was taken up with the Ministry of Textiles by the Committee.  In its reply, the 
Ministry of Textiles had stated that at present, there is no scheme to waive the 
outstanding interests on the loans availed of by the Handloom Units.  However, under the 
proposed Handloom Policy, there is a proposal to examine the possibility of waiving the 
interest on the loans availed by the Handloom Units, having poor financial health.  
  

 49
3.84 The Committee have noted that at p resent 11 textile articles have been 
reserved for exclusive production by handloom weavers to protect them from the 
encroachment of the Powerloom and Mill Sectors under the Handloom (Reservation 
of Articles of Production) Act, 1985.  This reservation was done in 1985 and after 
that no review of the same has been done so far.   An Advisory Committee has been 
constituted under Section 4(1) of the Act to look into th e various aspects including 
the demands for addition of more articles under reserved category of articles and to 
submit its recommendations to the Govern ment for its consideration. However, no 
such demands have been received from the industry.  The Committee are of the 
view that this Advisory Committee can suo-moto determine the nature of any article 
or class of articles that may be reserved for exclusive production by handlooms as 
per the provisions of the Act.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the textile 
articles reserved for Handlooom Sector sh ould be comprehensively reviewed and 
necessary steps taken to reserve more textile articles for Handloom Ssector so as to 
protect it from powerloom and mill sectors.   
 
3.85 The Committee have noted that a Sche me for reimbursement of one-time 
rebate of 10 per cent was given to handloom weavers on sale of handloom cloth from 
2002-2003 to 2004-2005 so as to kick-start th is employment-intensive industry and 
revive its production cycle.  The Committee are of the view that this one-time special 
rebate helped the handloom weavers to co mpete with the organized sector and 
recommend that the feasibility of extending this reimbursement of rebate should be 
examined and necessary relief should be provided to handloom weavers to protect 
them from powerloom and mill sectors. 

 50
 
3.86 The Committee are concerned to fi nd that handloom weavers are given 
credit at the rate of 12 per cent which is same  as that given to industries.  They just 
could not understand the logic of equating industries with poor handloom weavers.  
The Committee consider the high rate of inte rest as one of the reasons for failure of 
cooperative societies in handloom sector.  Moreover, handloom sector is the second 
largest employment provider, next only to  agriculture, comprising several lakh 
handloom weavers.  The Committee, therefo re, recommend that expeditious steps 
should be taken to lower the interest on the credit given to Handloom Weavers. 
 
3.87 The Committee have learnt that there is a proposal to examine the possibility 
of waiving the interest on  the loans availed of by the Handloom units which are 
having poor financial health.  The Commi ttee expect that the proposal would be 
examined expeditiously and interest on handloom units with poor financial health is 
considered for waiver. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY  
           CHAIRMAN, 
16 December, 2005                             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
25 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)                                     

 51
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON LABOUR HELD ON 22nd DECEMBER 2004. 
 
 
The Committee met from 15.00 hrs. to 16.15 hrs. in Committee Room `B’ 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  Shri P.K. Vasudevan Nair - Chairman  
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
3. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
4. Shri Virendra Kumar 
5. Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal) 
6. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
7. Shri Mohan Rawale 
8. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
9. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
10. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
11. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri J.P. Sharma -  Director 
2. Shri S.K. Saxena - Assistant Director 
   
 
 
 
 

 52
 
 
LIST OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES  
 
Sl.
No 
Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri R. Poornalingam Secretary 
2. Shri B.K. Sinha  Development Commissioner 
(Handlooms) 
3. Shri B.P. Singh Addl. Development Commissioner 
(Handlooms) 
4. Shri S.K. Samal Addl. Development Commissioner 
(Handlooms) 
5. Shri Inder Dhamija Addl. Development Commissioner 
(Handlooms) 
6. Shri V.K. Goyal MD, National Handloom Development 
Corporation 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them that as per the decision of the Committee in its sitting held on 23.11.2004, 
a press communiqué, inviting co mments/suggestions from Trade Unions, subscribers, 
Employees’ groups, Employers’ groups and other interested groups on Employees 
Provident Fund Organisation and Employees’ State Insurance Corporation was published 
through DAVP in different newspapers and publicity was also given in the news of 
Doordarshan.  The Chairman also informed the members that letters were also issued to 
42 Central Trade Union Organisations, Em ployers’ Groups and Employees’ Groups 
inviting their suggestions and that the Mi nistry of Labour and Employment had been 
requested to obtain comments from the State Governments on the above subjects.   
3. Thereafter, the Committee took the oral evidence of the repr esentatives of the 
Ministry of Textiles on “Development Sche mes for Handloom Sector”. At the outset, 
Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Shri R. Poornali ngam, Secretary and other officials of the 
Ministry of Textiles and requested them to brief the Committee on the subject.  

 53
4. After the briefing, the Secret ary and other officials of th e Ministry replied to the 
queries raised by the Members.  The Chairma n, thanked the Secretary and other officials 
for giving their valuable time to the Committee and directed the Secretary to send written 
replies to the queries raised by the Memb ers on which information was not readily 
available with them during the evidence and also asked them to send written replies to the 
List of Points furnished by the Secretariat.   
5. A copy of the verbatim record of the evidence has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 

 54
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTI NG OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON LABOUR HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 15 JUNE  2005. 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hours to 1300 hours in Committee Room 
`B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
   Shri P.K. Vasudevan Nair - Chairman 
  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
4. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa   
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot   
6. Shri Virendra Kumar    
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta   
7. Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal)   
8. Shri Lal Mani Prasad   
9. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
10. Shri Mohan Rawale  
11. Shri Chandra Pratap Singh   
12. Smt. C.S. Sujatha  
13. Shri Parasnath Yadav   
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  14. Shri Gandhi Azad 
  15. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
16. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
17. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.    Shri P.D.T. Achary  -  Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
 
 

 55
 
                             REPRESENTATIVES OF  MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
Sl.No Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri R. Poornalingam Secretary (Textiles) 
2. Shri B.K. Sinha Development Commissioner  
(Handlooms) 
3. Shri S.K. Samal Addl. Development Commissioner 
(Handlooms) 
4. Shri V.K. Goel  Managing Director, National 
Handloom Development Corporation 
Ltd., Lucknow 
5. Shri S.K. Sharma Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Manoj Jain  Deputy Development Commissioner 
(Handlooms)  
7. Shri R.C. Saini Deputy Secretary  
8. Shri T.P.A. Narayanan Assistant Director (Handlooms) 
 
  
2.      At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of 
the Ministry of Textiles and asked them to brief the Members about the Development 
Schemes for Handloom Sector.  
 
3. The Committee then took up evidence of th e representatives of the Ministry of 
Textiles on the subject.  
 
4.  The Secretary and other officials of the Ministry replied to the queries raised by 
the Members.  The Chairman directed the Secr etary to send written replies to the queries 
of the Members on which information was not  readily available with them during the 
evidence.  
 
5. The Chairman thanked the Secretary a nd other officials for giving valuable 
information to the Committee on the subject. 
 
6. The Committee decided to hold their ne xt sitting on 29 June 2005 to hear the 
views of the representatives of Trade Uni ons on ESI Scheme if their willingness to 
appear before the Committee are received on time. 
 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
The Committee then adjourned.   
 

 56
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 15 DECEMBER 2005. 
 
 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to  1600hrs. in Committee Room `D’ 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Joachim Baxla        
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
5. Shri Virendra Kumar 
6. Shri Lal Mani Prasad    
7. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
8. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
             
RAJYA SABHA  
 
9. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
10. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
  1.    Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
  3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena              -  Assistant Director 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 57
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them 
about the two Draft Reports on “Development Schemes for Handloom Sector” and “The 
Labour Laws (Exemption from Furnishing Returns and Maintaining Registers by Certain 
Establishments) Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2005.”  
 
 3.  The Committee first took up the draft Ninth Report on “Development Schemes 
for Handloom Sector” and adopted the same with the following modifications:  
 
(i) Page 7, Para No.2.9, line 16   delete the words “if necessary”; 
 
(ii) Page 31, Para No.3.53, line 6 delete the words “if necessary”;  
 
(iii) Page 45, Para No.3.86, line 8 delete the words “on par with 
agricultural sector”;  
 
4.   XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports and present the 
same to Parliament on their behalf. 
  
6.   XX   XX   XX   XX  
  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 