 
 
1
 
8 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2005-06) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
 
 
Action tak en by the  Government on the R ecommendations/Observations 
contained in the S ixth Report of the Stan ding Committee on Lab our on 
Demands for Grants-2005-2006 of the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
 
 
 
 EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
            
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December 2005/ Agrahayana  1927 (Saka)

 
 
2
 
 
8 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2005-06) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
 
 
 
(Action ta ken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Six th Report of the Standing Committee 
on Labour on Demands for Grants-2005-2006 of the Ministry of 
Textiles) 
 
 
 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on  14 December  2005 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14 December  2005 
 
 
 
            
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December 2005/ Agrahayana  1927 (Saka)

 
 
3
 
 
 
  
 
  
CONTENTS 
 
      
     P A G E  
      
     
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     4  
 
INTRODUCTION        5  
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………  6 
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been  16 
accepted by the Government………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the   20 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s reply…………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  24 
replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration…………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   29 
which  replies of the Government  are interim  
in nature    …………. 
 
APPENDIX-I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on  31 
 5 December 2005 
 
APPENDIX-II Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the      33 
Recommendations contained in the Second report (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
4
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2005-06) 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy -CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Munawwar Hassan Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa   
7. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot   
8. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar    
10. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi   
12. Shri Ananta Nayak   
13. Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal)  
14. Shri Lal Mani Prasad   
15. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
16. Shri Mohan Rawale  
17. Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat   
18. Shri Chandra Pratap Singh   
19. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
20. Shri Parasnath Yadav   
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  21. Shri Gandhi Azad 
  22. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
  23. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
  24. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
  25. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
  26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  27. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
28. Shri Dilip Ray 
 
          SECRETARIAT 
         
  1. Shri John Joseph    -  Secretary 
2.     Shri N.K. Sapra   - Joint Secretary 
3.     Shri R.S. Misra    - Deputy Secretary  
4.  Shri N.K. Pandey   - Under Secretary  
5.     Shri C. Kalyanasundaram  - Committee Officer 
  
        
 
 
 

 
 
5
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been authorised  
by the Committee to submit the Report on th eir behalf, present this Eighth  Report on 
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants-2005-2006 relating to Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also  laid in  Rajya Sabha on 
24 April  2005.  The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies indicating action taken on 
the recommendations contained in that Report on 25.7.2005. This report was considered 
and adopted by the Standing Committee on Labour at their sitting held on 5 December 
2005. 
 
3. The Report has been divided into the following chapters:- 
 
I. Report. 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
Government. 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply. 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration. 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
5. For the facility of reference, recommendations/observations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                   SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY  
12 December 2005                 CHAIRMAN  
21 Agrahayana 1927 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR    
 
       
 
 
 
 

 
 
6
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
         
 
1.1 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Sixt h Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of 
Textiles.  
 
1.2 The Sixth Report was presen ted to Lok Sabha and was al so laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 25 April 2005.  It contained 13 recommendati ons.  Replies of Government in respect 
of all the recommendations have been examined and are categorised as under: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos.  1, 2 and 12. 
 
(Total 3 - Chapter II) 
          
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire  to  pursue  in 
view of the  replies  of  the Government: 
 
Paragraph  Sl.  Nos.  3, 4, 10 and 13 
 
(Total 4 - Chapter  III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos. 5, 6, 8 and 9 
 
(Total 4 - Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which replies are of interim in 
nature: 
  
Paragraph Sl. Nos.  7 and 11 
  
(Total 2- Chapter V)  

 
 
7
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect of the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and final action ta ken notes in respect of recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V for which only in terim replies have been given by the 
Government may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later than three 
months of the presentation of this Report. The Committee will now deal with those action 
taken replies of the Government which need reiteration of comments on merits  
 
A. Textile Processing Sector  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5 Para 2.29) 
 
1.14 The Committee had noted that 83% of the Textile Processing Units are in Hand 
Processing Sector and were concerned to  note that the producti on process is most 
unscientific and unsystematic in these units. The personnel working in such units do not 
have any scientific knowledge of dyes, chemicals, machines and processes. The 
Committee also noted that the advanced t echnology of independent processing units 
mainly cater to the higher segment of th e market. Even though the high tech textile 
processing machines are necessary for the de velopment of the industry, the Committee 
were of the view that measur es being taken by the Ministry such as 10% capital subsidy 
scheme, etc. may not meet th e needs of the Hand Processing Sector as they would still 
not be in a position to acquire hi-tech proc essing machines. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that a suitable training sc heme should be launched for imparting 
comprehensive training in the fields of scientific knowledge of dyes, chemicals, machines 
and processes to the personnel of hand processing units. 
 
 
1.5 The Ministry of Textiles in its action taken note furnished to the Committee had 
stated as follows: 
 
“In this regard it may be mentioned that though the scientific  knowledge of dyes, 
chemicals, is very important for them, it is also to be kept in mind that the hand 
processing sector is extremely disperse d and decentralised which makes it very 
difficult to impart such knowledge to this s ector. There is also lack of initiative 
and desire on the part of the hand proce ssors to keep themselves updated in the 
field of dyes, chemicals, machines, processes, etc. which also makes it very 
difficult for the Government to arrange for their proper training. Government 
already has a wide network of Weaver Service Centres (24), Powerloom Service 
Centres (44), Textile Research Associat ions (8) and many similar centres through 
which such knowledge may be acquired by the hand processors”. 

 
 
8
 
1.6 As the hand processing sector, which comprises 83% of the processing units, 
lacks input of high technology beside s its production pattern being mostly 
unscientific and unsystematic, the Co mmittee had recommended that a suitable 
training scheme should be launched for imparting comprehensive training in the 
fields of scientific knowledge of dyes, chemicals, machines and processes.  The 
Government in this regard has replied that it  is very difficult for it to arrange for 
their proper training as the hand processing  sector is extremely dispersed and  the 
processors lack initiative and desire to keep themselves  updated in the field  of dyes, 
chemicals, machines and processes. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply 
of the Government and are of the view th at a training scheme for hand processing 
sector can also be implemented particularly when such training is being provided to 
decentralized and dispersed handloom and powerloom weavers and handicraft 
artisans. The Committee are also not conv inced that the hand processors lack 
initiative and desire to undergo such training. On the contrary, the Committee feel 
that it is the Government that lacks initiative in motivating the hand processors. The 
Committee being fully confident that such a training would boost the performance 
of hand processors, they reiterate th eir earlier recommendation and urge the 
Ministry to take steps in this regard at the earliest.  The Committee further 
recommend that the feasibility of providi ng incentives to hand processors be 
examined so that they are motivated to undergo such training. 

 
 
9
 
B. National Textile Corporation Ltd. (NTC) 
 
Recommendation ( Sl.  No 6 Para.2.37) 
 
1.7 The Committee were dismayed to note that the net worth of 8 of the 9 subsidiaries 
of NTC had completely eroded necessitating reference to BIFR in 1994 but a 
rehabilitation scheme for NTC was impl emented only after a lapse of 8 years, i.e. in 
2002.   As per the rehabilitation scheme, out of  119 mills, 66 mills were to be closed and 
the remaining 53 viable mills were to be re vived.  Even in 2005, the Ministry are in a 
dilemma whether to run or close the viable 53 mills and in the process NTC has 
accumulated a staggering loss of Rs.9,829 cror es.  The Committee are disheartened to 
note that the very goal of incorporation of NTC in 1968  to manage the affairs of sick 
textile undertakings in the pr ivate sector has been defeated due to Government’s 
inefficiency to run and modernise these units.  The Committee recommended that 
vigorous efforts should be made by the Ministry for revival of all the 53 viable mills 
without further loss of time.    
  
1.8 The Ministry of Textiles in its actio n taken reply had stated as follows:- 
 
“The 119 mills of NTC were taken over by the Government as potentially sick 
companies under the various Nationalisation Acts.  The mills suffered from huge 
surplus workforce, obsolete machinery and lack of working cap ital, necessitating  
their reference to BIFR in 1994.  The Gove rnment initially prepared various Turn 
Around Strategies for revival of the Co rporation through infusion of funds. The 
Cabinet in its meeting held on 4 Sept ember 2000 decided to adopt a unit by unit 
assessment to determine whether a mill should be revived or closed.  Accordingly, 
a Techno Economic Viability Study was conducted by Textile Research 
Associations to determine th e viability or otherwise of  all the NTC mills.  The 
study recommended that out of a tota l of 119 mills, 66 mills, which were 
chronically sick, may be closed and the remaining 53 mills, projected as viable 
should be revived.  Based on this study report, rehabilitation schemes for the 8 
subsidiary corporations of NTC were prepared by IDBI a nd IFCI. The BIFR 
approved these rehabilitation schemes in the year 2002. The modernization 
process of 53 viable mills could not, however, take off due to slow progress in the 
sale of surplus assets of the closed mills.  A further analysis of the performance of 
the 53 mills proposed for revival indicated that even with an increased capacity 
utilization, none of these mills were ge nerating operational profits and continued 
to depend on Government support for wages.  It was indicated that further 
investment to the tune of Rs.1,465 crore w ould be required for modernization and 
provision of working capital for these mills .  Since the sale process has been held 
up for more than  two years in various pa rts of the country due to non-receipt of 
required permission from the State Govern ments like Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat, the modernization process has been delayed. Out of 
the 119 mills, two mills, including one out of the 66 unviable mills and one out of 
the 53 viable mills, located at Pondiche rry, have been handed over to the State 
Govt. of Pondicherry, 
w.e.f. 1st April 2005. However, with the success achieved 
in the sale of surplus land of NTC in Mumbai, NTC has resources to modernize 
22 mills.  The Government directed in th e meeting of Group of Ministers held on 
12.05.2005 that these mills should be mode rnized immediately and accordingly 
the process for procuring machinery has started. For moderanisation of other 

 
 
10
 
mills, NTC does not have resources presently.  Since depending on sale of 
proceeds for attempting further modernisation is likely to delay the modernization 
process, Government decided to explore al ternatives like inviting private partners 
who could invest in modernization of these mills.  NTC would, therefore, be 
inviting expression of interest from re puted textiles industries who could 
participate in the process of modernizati on of these mills under joint ventures.  If 
this attempt succeeds, other mills could also be modernized quickly”. 
 

 
 
11
 
 
1.9 During the examination of  Demands for Grants (2005 -2006), the Committee noted 
that a Rehabilitation Scheme of National Textile Corporation was approved by BIFR in the 
year 2002.  The Scheme envisaged closing down of 66 unviable mills and modernisation of 
53 viable mills.  While out of 66 unviable mill s, 65 mills have already been closed and one 
mill transferred to the State Government,  th e modernisation process of 53 viable mills has 
not taken off even after three years. Hence, the Committee had recommended that vigorous 
efforts should be made by the Ministry for rev ival of all the 53 viable mills without further 
loss of time. The reason for delay in modernis ation process has been reported as the slow 
progress in the sale of surplus assets of the closed mills which is linked to the 
modernization of viable mills. According to the Ministry, a little headway has recently been 
made in modernisation of 22 mills by starting  the process of procur ing machinery through 
sale of surplus land of NTC in Mumbai. However, NTC does not have resources to 
modernise the rest of the Mills.  Since dependance on sale of assets would delay the 
modernisation process, the Ministry has also d ecided to explore private participation.  The 
Committee are sceptical of the success of privat e participation since NTC itself was created 
on the graveyard of the private sector.  More over, the Ministry has not divulged on the 
proposed modalities of the joint ventures  with the private sector. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation  and urge the Ministry to make vigorous 
efforts in chalking  out a time-bound action pl an for the modernisation of all the 53 viable 
mills of NTC without the support of Private Sector.  

 
 
12
 
C. Closure of Jute Mills 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8 Para.2.46) 
 
1.10 The Committee were constrained to note th at out of 78 jute mills, 37 are sick mills 
and have been referred to BIFR.  The Co mmittee were also unable to understand the 
rationale behind the non-eligibility of viable sick jute mills to avail of the Technology 
Upgradation Fund Scheme and were of the view that the Scheme should be extended to 
them as the sickness of jute mills mainly arises from obsolete technology. Considering 
the potential of jute products both in the domestic and international markets, the 
Committee strongly recomm ended that feasibility of providi ng assistance to viable sick 
jute mills under TUFS should be examined and appropriate steps in this regard should be 
taken immediately. 
  
  
 1.11 In its action taken notes, the Ministry of  Textiles had, inter-alia , stated that the  
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) provides reimbursement of interest to the 
extent of 5% to the entrepreneurs.   TUFS is  an umbrella scheme of the Textile Ministry, 
covering both the organized and unorganized sect ors. It is not confined only to the Jute 
Sector, but extends to the en tire Textile Industry.  For av ailing the benefits under this 
scheme, the entrepreneur or company concerned is to submit a viable project report to the 
Nodal Financial Institution i.e. IFCI (Industria l Finance Corporation of India). To prove 
the bankability of the project, the company/ entrepreneur need to provide sufficient 
information regarding the quant um of owned funds, surety, and many other formalities. 
The financial institutions still perceive the jute industry as a sunset industry despite the 
tremendous progress made by the industry in ac hieving ever increasing levels of product 
diversification and exploring new markets for traditional items. All this has hampered the 
progress of TUFS in the jute sector.  
 
1.12 However, recognising the peculiar nature of  the jute industry, Ministry of Textiles 
has introduced an alternative Scheme of Cap ital Subsidy for Modernisation of the Jute 
Industry. This scheme is called the JMDC In centive Scheme for Modernisation of the 
Jute Industry. Hence, the Ministry of Textile s has contended that the slow progress of 
TUFS in Jute sector does not stand on the way of modernisation of the jute industry. It is 
up to the jute entrepreneurs or the comp any concerned to choose between the two 
Schemes: TUFS or the JMDC Incentive Scheme for Modernisation of the Jute Industry. 
The latter Scheme, which was launched on 8 Ju ly 2002 has been successful in attracting 
the 77 entrepreneurs with an investment of Rs.83.61 crore within a short span of three 
years. 

 
 
13
 
 
1.13 The Committee, having been concerned over the non-eligibility of viable sick jute 
mills to avail of the Technology Upgradatio n Fund Scheme (TUFS), had made a specific 
recommendation to examine the feasibility of provi ding assistance to viable sick jute mills 
under TUFS.  They, however, regret to note that  no action has been taken by the Ministry 
in this regard. Instead it has been stated in its reply that the financial institutions still 
perceive the jute industry as a sunset industry despite the tremendous progress made by 
this industry. The Commi ttee regret that the Ministry ha s apparently taken no steps to 
apprise the financial institutions of true pi cture of the strides being made by the jute 
industry. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the 
Ministry to examine the feasibility of providing  assistance to viable sick jute mills under 
TUFS.  

 
 
14
 
Closure of Jute Mills 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9 Para.2.47) 
 
1.14 The Committee had noted that the Ministry proposes to revive only 2 of the 6 sick 
mills of NJMC which is a Public Sector U ndertaking and all the employees of the NJMC 
including that of the head office would be  offered VRS. The Committee were, however, 
sceptical of revival of the sick  units in the absence of the employees of the organization. 
They, therefore, recommended that efforts shou ld be made by the Ministry to revive all 
the six mills of NJMC within a definite tim e frame with the help of existing employees 
who know the strengths as well as the wea knesses of the organization. The Committee 
further urged the Ministry that necessary steps should be taken to enable the revived units 
function without the handicap s such as obsolete plant and machinery, uneconomic 
product-mix, lack of working capital, etc. 
 
1.15 The Ministry of Textiles in its acti on taken reply had stated that the Union 
Cabinet vide its decision on 24/3/05 has directed the Ministry of Textiles to refer the 
revival of the two units to th e newly constituted Board of R econstruction of the PSE. It 
has further approved to offer VRS to the empl oyees of these units as well as the other 4 
units and to provide budgetary support for clearing the outstanding dues of this 
Corporation.  Options like running the two m ills by the Corporation itself or in lease 
agreement with private entrepreneurs will be considered and recommended by BRPSE. 
 

 
 
15
 
 
1.16 In view of the Ministry’s proposal to  revive only 2 of the 6 sick mills of 
NJMC, the Committee had made a specific r ecommendation that efforts should be 
made by the Government to revive all the six mills of NJMC within a definite time 
frame with the help of existing employe es who know the strengths as well as 
weaknesses of the organisation.  However, th e Ministry in its reply has stated that 
the Union Cabinet had directed it to refer th e revival of the two units to the newly 
constituted Board of Reconstruction of P ublic Sector Enterprises and to offer VRS 
to the employees of all the six units.  The Committee regret to note that the Ministry 
has not addressed to the crux of the recomm endation of the Committee in the right 
spirit. The Committee are distressed to note that the reply given is totally silent on 
the efforts made by the Ministry to reviv e all the six units with the help of the 
existing employees.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and expect all the six units of NJMC to be revived expeditiously 
with the help of the existing employees.  

 
 
16
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
General Performance 
 
Recommendations ( Sl. No. 1 Para  2.8 ) 
 
2.1 The Committee feel deeply concerned to note that Plan allocations made for 
implementation of various Schemes remain underutilized year after year.  During 2002-
2003 the unspent plan allocation was Rs. 102.55 crore, during 2003-2004 it was Rs. 
121.34 crore and Rs. 148.13 crore during 2004-2005.  Hardly two years are now left for 
the completion of 10
th Five Year Plan and at such a tardy pace of Plan spending, the 
Committee are apprehensive as to how the Mini stry would be able to achieve the target 
fixed for various flagship Schemes.  The major reasons put forth by the Ministry for 
under-utilisation of funds are poor fund utilisati on till third year of the Plan due to 
procedural formalities involved in the clearan ce of Schemes, implementing agencies are 
locally based with inadequate capacity and no exposure and non-release of State’s 
matching share. The Committee feel that such  serious flaws in the implementation of 
development/welfare schemes would impede the development of the entire textile sector.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that funds allocated for the Schemes in a financial 
year should be fully utilized within th e year in a phased manner by hastening the 
completion of procedural formalities.  For this, the steps in regard to procedural 
formalities should be taken well in advance so that these are completed within six months 
time.  Moreover, the identification of proper implementing agencies is as important as the 
launching of the Scheme itself and the Comm ittee expect that enough attention should be 
given in this regard including involvement of  District/State level agencies which would 
coordinate the activities of the implementi ng agencies and provide them guidance for 
effective implementation of the Scheme on a continuous basis.  The Committee also find 
that the Ministry face difficulties in implem entation of Schemes due to non release of 
matching share of the States.  They, therefore, recommend that the matter should be taken 
up with the State Governments at  the highest level so that th e States come out with their 
matching share for smooth running of the Schemes.  Also the issue should be 
appropriately addressed during the meetings of State Ministers.  The Committee further 
recommend that wide publicity of various welfare and developmental schemes should 
invariably be made in various media so th at the information about these reaches the 
targeted groups well in time.   The step s taken and progress achie ved in this regard 
should be communicated to the Committee. 
 

 
 
17
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 For the implementation of the recommendations many steps have already been 
taken which include: 
 
(i) the amount of expenditure to be ma de in every quarter has already been 
fixed. The pace of expenditure is also  being monitored periodically to 
ensure that funds sanctio ned for 2005-06 are fully ut ilized & targets fixed 
under various flagship schemes are achieved in time.   
 
(ii) creation of awareness about th e scheme/ programme through workshops 
(local and regional), marketing events ,  frequent interactions through 
reviews and meetings with State Governments;  
 
(iii) constitution of State-level Screen ing Committees to screen the proposals 
and setting up of Local and State Level Monitoring Committee (SLMC) to 
provide guidance for better implementation; 
 
(iv) taking up the issue of non-release of  state share of funding with Chief  
Secretaries/Secretaries of State Govern ments to ensure timely release of 
the State’ share; and   
 
(v) formation of Planning Advisory and Monitoring Groups and Procurement 
Committee for completion of procedural formalities at field level, etc. 
 
2.3 During 2004-05, against the RE alloca tion of Rs.750 crore, the total fund 
utilisation was Rs.729.87 crore i.e. 97.32%. During 2005-06 till 24 th June, 2005 (latest 
available) against the BE  allocation of Rs 1,150 crore Rs 336.37 crore i.e. 29.24% of 
total outlay has been utilized.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.  No. 2 (5)/ 2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2 Para No. 2.9) 
 
 2.4 The Committee are also not happy with th e trend of Non-Plan Expenditure of the 
Ministry. The Committee find that the Actual N on-Plan Expenditure is either more than 
the Budgetary allocation or less than it. The main reas on for lesser level of Actual 
Expenditure during 2004-2005 has been stated  as introduction of the ceiling of 33% 
expenditure during the final quarter of a year . This clearly shows the non-uniform spread 
of expenditure and the last-hour rush of expenditure resorted  to by the Ministry so far. 
The Committee urge the Ministry to make proper and exact forecast of Budget estimates 
for Non-Plan expenditure so as to avoid surr ender of huge unutilized amounts which also 
leads to unnecessary locking of precious financial resources. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
18
 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
  
2.5 The observation contained in the sixt h report of the Standing Committee on 
Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) – on Demand for Grants 2005-2006 of the Ministry of 
Textiles has been noted for strict compliance. 
 
2.6 Further the Non-Plan Budget of the Minist ry has been split into quarterly targets 
which is reviewed by the Secretary (Textiles) regularly. The pace of expenditure will be 
further reviewed by the Ministry of Finan ce at the time of finalisation of Revised 
Estimates 2005-2006.The above exercise will avoid surrender of huge  unutilised amount 
in future. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2 (5)/ 2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 
 
 
Indian Jute Industries Research Association (IJIRA),Kolkata 
 
 
Recommendation ( Sl. No. 12 Para.2.60) 
 
 
2.7 The Committee are dismayed to note th at the Ministry ha s no control over the 
Research Associations which are mainly f unded by the Government. The Government is 
neither participating in the management of these Research Associations nor it has any 
regular interaction with them. The Committee take a serious view of this communication 
gap between the Government and the Research Associations funded by it as this may lead 
to misuse of funds by Research Associations and the very goal of funding may be 
defeated. Further, the reply of the Ministry in regard to alleged mismanagement in IJIRA 
is not at all satisfying to the Committee, who feel this is poor monitoring over the issue. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the alleged irregularities committed 
by the officials of IJIRA should be thoroughly i nvestigated and the repo rt in this regard 
furnished to the Committee within 3 months. Also, there should be a suitable mechanism 
to watch the activities of the Research Associ ations to ensure proper utilisation of funds 
for research purposes.    
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.8 It is a fact that IJIRA is  mainly funded by Ministry of Textiles, Government of 
India  but  it is not correct to say that the Government has no control over the IJIRA .  In 
fact the total number of me mbers of IJIRA’s Council of Management is 24 and out of 
these, 12 are Government nominees and other 12 are representatives of the jute industry.  
There is a strict financial control over releas es made to the IJIRA.  Before a financial 
release, it is ensured that the utilization ce rtificates for previous releases are obtained 
from IJIRA. Moreover, 90% of the funds give n to IJIRA are utilized under the  salary 
component, and only 10% funds are deployed fo r other activities.  In addition, there are 
various audits such as C&AG, Statutory and Internal audits wh ich are conducted every 
year with respect to accounts of  IJIRA.  Therefore, the possibility of any misuse of funds 

 
 
19
 
by IJIRA becomes bleak . No misuse of funds by IJIRA has been reported so far, and 
each year the audit of IJIRA is ensured. Irre gularities, if any, committed by officials of 
IJIRA would be thoroughly investigated. Alre ady Jute Commissioner and Joint Secretary 
(Jute) Ministry of Textiles have tried to redress the grievances of the staff, and a series of 
meetings have been held. Most of thes e cases, involving employees’ grievances, are 
pending before different Courts. However, the advice of the Standing Committee to 
watch the activities of IJIRA and to ensure  proper utilization of funds for research 
purposes has been taken note of.  Now, such matters will be monitored more closely and 
on priority basis.  
 
 (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(5)/2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 
 

 
 
20
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3, Para 2.19) 
 
3.1 The Committee have noted that beneficiary units under TUFS have achieved an 
annual turnover of 33%, operating profit of 15% unit value realization for domestic sales.    
The Committee are of the view  that this flagship scheme  of the Ministry should be 
extended beyond the year 2007 so as to achieve the desired results.  However, the 
Committee are constrained to note that more than 200 amendments have been carried out 
in the Scheme, since it was launched in 1997, as the need based modifications of the 
Scheme.  The Committee are of the view that proper awareness programmes should 
coincide with such a large number of amendments to clear the doubts of the entrepreneurs 
and to evoke enthusiastic response from th em.  The Committee have also noted with 
constraint that only 10.5% of the Small Scal e Industries Sector has availed TUFS.  The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should find out the reasons for poor response of 
the SSI Sector and take suitable steps to make the Scheme attractive to them. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
3.2 The recommendation of the Committee is for awareness programmes for 
entrepreneurs and to take suitable steps to make the scheme attractive for the SSI sector. 
 
3.3 As regards awareness programmes for entr epreneurs, it may be mentioned that the 
amendment carried out in the TUFS are duly placed on the web-site of the Ministry of 
Textiles as well as the Textile Commissioner. These web-sites are widely accessed by the 
textile sector of the country spread far a nd wide. Prominent advertisements in national 
dailies and Textiles journals / magazines ar e also published to create awareness specially 
about the changes in the scheme. 
 
3.4 In addition to this, Government sends ci rculars to prominent textile associations. 
It also organizes awareness campaigns, inter active sessions, workshops, etc. through its 
regional offices for the entrepreneurs in the various textile clusters. As many as 364 such 
programmes have been organized during 2004-05. During the current year also these are 
being organized on regular basis to spread awareness among the various beneficiaries 
associated with textile. 
 
3.5 The poor response of the SSI se ctor is mainly attributed to their not being able to 
access TUFS loans due to absence of books of accounts. In the decentralised powerloom 
sector, a large number of powerloom units work on job basis. They neither have need nor 
capacity to maintain books of accounts. Th ey are consequently unable to meet the 
requirement of bankers for loans, who are in any case wary of advancing credit to 
decentralised units. The poor performance of SSI units in the textile sector is not different 
from the poor performance of SSI units in other non textile sectors. Government has 
constantly endeavoured to fashion its policie s to make them as industry friendly as 
possible. 

 
 
21
 
                                                            
 
   
3.6 A few important measures taken by the Gove rnment to improve the health of the  
SSI Textile Sector  are as under:- 
 
¾ For the decentralized powerloom sector , Government has enhanced w.e.f. 
13.01.05, the capital ceiling for machinery from Rs. 60.00 lakh to Rs.100.00 
lakh under 20% capital subsidy scheme-TUFS. 
 
¾ For small-scale textile and jute industri al units, Government has enhanced the 
rate of Credit Linked Capital Subsi dy (CLCS) from 12% to 15% w.e.f. 
13.01.05. 
 
¾ In order to facilitate modernisation of the Powerloom Sector, Schemes such as 
High-tech Weaving Parks, Modernisation and Strengthening of Powerloom 
Service Centres, Group Workshed have been introduced. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2 (5)/ 2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4 Para 2.20) 
 
3.7 The Committee are of the view that indigenous engineerin g industry should be 
encouraged to have a strong shuttleless weaving machine manufacturing base in India so 
as to cater to the needs of the entrepreneurs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
suggestions of the Working Group of Textile  Machinery Industry should be examined 
and expeditious steps taken for the growth of  the indigenous engineering industry for the 
manufacture of textile machines. The feasib ility of extending TUFS for manufacture of 
weaving machines should also be examined and necessary steps taken in that regard. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
3.8 The Textile Machinery Industry is under the purview of Mi nistry of Heavy 
Industry. Therefore, suggestions of the Wo rking Group of Textile Machinery Industry 
have to be implemented by that Ministry. As regards feasibility  of extending TUFS for 
manufacture of weaving machines, it may be mentioned that this doesn’t come under the 
scope of the TUFS which aims at textile sect or and not at textile machinery sector. After 
all, TUFS is going to create demand for vari ous textile machiner y, including weaving 
machines. Naturally, the beneficiary of TUFS is also the indigenous  Textile Machinery 
Industry. Inclusion of this industry under the fold of TUFS will amount to double subsidy 
to Textile Machinery Industry for which Government sees no justification. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2 (5)/ 2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
22
 
 
National Centre for Jute Diversification (NCJD) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10 Para.2.54) 
 
3.9 The Committee have noted that the presen t level of jute dive rsification in the 
country is 8%. The Committee have been informed that 25% of jute diversification would 
boost employment in the jute sector and th e farmers would get better price for their 
produce. The Committee, therefore urge the Mini stry to chalk out time. For this, the Jute 
Packaging Material (Compulsory use in Packing Commodities) Act, 1987 should be 
followed in letter and spirit to attract more investment in the jute sector and to provide the 
necessary protection to the jute industry bound programmes to achieve the goal of 25% 
jute diversification and above. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
3.10 In order to achieve the desired level of  jute diversification NCJD proposes to 
continue with the on-going schemes with more vigour and thrust. Efforts will be made to 
make jute diversified products acceptable globally with widened entrepreneurial base, 
particularly in rural areas, with the involvement of NGOs and oriented towards changing 
market and costumer needs, globally. In order to maintain systematic and sustained 
efforts for creating awareness among consum ers, exposure of products to new markets 
and tapping potential demand both within th e country and abroad, NCJD proposes to 
showcase the products of its beneficiaries, es pecially of NGOs and small entrepreneurs, 
to the world to cater to the latent demand in distant areas. In order to provide the desired 
marketing thrust  to create consumer awareness and products awareness for old products 
in new markets and new products in old mark ets and, in order to penetrate the overseas 
market, the following activities will be carried  out with renewed vi gor – National-level 
fairs, State-level fairs, International fairs in  India, International fairs abroad,   Buyers-
sellers meets, Village fairs, Consumer  Awareness Campaigns, Product Promotion 
Campaigns, etc. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(5)/2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 
 

 
 
23
 
Central Cottage Industries Corporation of India Ltd. , New Delhi 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13 Para 2.65) 
 
3.11 The Committee have noted that the objectiv es of CCIC is to be a dealer, exporter, 
manufacturer and an agent of quality Indian  handicraft and handlooms.  CCIC procures 
handicraft items from the craftsmen/suppliers.  The Committee are of the view that direct 
procurement of the handicraft items from craftsmen/ State awardees would eliminate 
middlemen and pave way for the survival of particular handicr aft by benefiting the 
craftsmen directly.  Moreover, the suppliers operate mainly on profit basis.  Hence, the 
Committee recommend that immediate steps s hould be taken to give preference to 
artisans, craftsmen, weavers including Nationa l and State awardees over the suppliers/ 
traders of handicrafts which will enable the Indian tradition and culture to survive. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.12 At present CCIC has 5,919 craftsmen/ weaver s/ artisans/ suppliers in its panel. Of 
these, 104 suppliers are National/ State Awardees.  Category wise break up of purchases 
made by CCIC, New Delhi during 2004-2005 is as under: 
 
Sl.  Category Purchases (% age) 
A Craftsmen/ Weavers 79.65 
B Co-operatives Societies 4.28 
C Manufacturers 6.80 
D Dealers/ Traders 9.27 
     T o t a l  1 0 0 . 0 0  
 
3.13 In pursuance of objectives of CCIC, it con tinuously strives to enlist new artisans/ 
craftsmen producing high quality handicrafts and handlooms, and teams of its officials 
travel to various craft clusters, and organi se exhibitions throughout the country for this 
purpose. 
 
3.14 In order to introduce and enroll more artisans, CCIC has initiated the following 
steps for giving preference to artisans, craf tsmen, and weavers, including National and 
State Awardees, vis-à-vis suppliers/ traders of handicrafts and handlooms: 
 
(i) A nationwide advertisement was released on 13 th May/14 th May, 2005 inviting 
craftsmen/ artisans of handicrafts and weaver s of handlooms to enroll with CCIC.  While 
selecting artisans/ weavers, preference will be given to National/ State awardees and 
women artisans, prohibiting dealers/middlemen/ traders; 
 
(ii) A copy of the advertisement has been sent to the Marketing & Service Centres 
and Weavers Service Centres of the Office of Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) 
and Office of Development Commissioner (Handlooms), respectively. 
 
(iii) With a view to encourage National/ State awardees to empanel with CCIC, letters 
are also being written to them inviting to supply their crafts/ products to CCIC. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(5)/2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 

 24
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Textile Processing Sector  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5 Para 2.29) 
 
4.1 The Committee have noted that 83% of the Textile Processing Units are in Hand 
Processing Sector and are concerned to note that the production process is most  
unscientific and unsystematic in these units. The personnel working in such units do not 
have any scientific knowledge of dyes, chemicals, m achines and  process es. The 
Committee also note that the advanced t echnology of independent processing units 
mainly cater to the higher segm ent of th e m arket. Even though the high tech textile 
processing machines are necessary for the de velopment of the industry, the Comm ittee 
are of the view that m easures being taken by the Ministry such as 10% capital subsidy 
Scheme, etc. m ay not meet the needs of the Hand Processing Sector as they would still 
not be in a position  to acquir e hi-tech proc essing machines. The Comm ittee, therefore, 
recommend that a suitable training sche me should be launched for im parting 
comprehensive training in the fields of scientific knowledge of dyes, chemicals, machines 
and processes to the personnel of hand processing units. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
  
4.2 The Commi ttee have recommended that a suitable training scheme should be 
launched for im parting com prehensive training in the fields of sc ientific knowledge of 
dyes, chem icals, m achines and processes to the personnel of hand processing units. In 
this regard it m ay mentioned that though the scientific knowledge of dyes, chem icals, is 
very important for them, it is also to be ke pt in m ind that the hand processing sector is 
extremely dispers ed an d decentralised which m akes it very difficult to im part such 
knowledge to this sector. There is also lack of initiative and desire on the part of the hand 
processors to keep them selves updated in the field of dyes chem icals, m achines and 
processes etc, which  also m akes it very diffi cult for the Governm ent to arrange for their 
proper training. Government already has a wide network of Weaver Service Centres (24)  
Powerloom Service Cen tres (44), T extile Research Associ ations (8 ) an d m any similar 
centres through which such knowledge may be acquired by the hand processors. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2 (5)/ 2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 
 
 
                                                              
  

 25
National Textile Corporation Ltd. (NTC) 
 
Recommendation ( Sl.  No 6 Para.2.37) 
 
4.3 The Committee are dismayed to note that the net worth of 8 of the 9 subsidiaries 
of NTC had com pletely eroded necessitating reference to BIFR in 1994 but a  
rehabilitation schem e for NTC was im plemented only after a laps e of 8 years, i.e. in 
2002.   As per the rehab ilitation scheme, out of 119 mills, 66 mills were to be closed and 
the rem aining 53 viable m ills were to be revived.  Even in 2005, the Ministry is  in a 
dilemma whether  to  r un or close  the  viab le 53 m ills a nd in the  p rocess NTC has 
accumulated a staggering loss of Rs.9,829 crore.    The Comm ittee have noted with g rave 
concern that there is a fresh m ove in the Ministry to close down about 20 viable m ills by 
offering VRS to workers.  The Comm ittee are disheartened to note th at the very goal of 
incorporation of NTC in 1968 to m anage the a ffairs of sick textile undertakings in the 
private sector has been defeated due to Gove rnment’s inefficiency to run and m odernise 
these units..  Further, th e Committee do not approve at all the policy of  the Government 
regarding offering VRS to the workers.  They, therefore, recommend that vigorous efforts 
should be made by the Ministry for revival of all the 53 v iable mills without further loss 
of time.  The steps taken and progress achieved in this regard should be communicated to 
the Committee within six months. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
4.4 The 119 m ills of NTC were taken over by the Governm ent as potentially sick 
companies under the various Nationalisation Acts.  The m ills suffered from huge surplus 
workforce, obsolete m achinery and lack of working capital, necessitating their ref erence 
to BIFR in 1994.  The Governm ent initially prepared various Turn Around Strategies for 
revival of the Corporation though infusion of  funds.   A revised Turn Around Strategy 
prepared by the Ministry of Textiles in 1999 based on unit-wise viab ility of NTC m ills 
suggested for an investm ent of Rs.2,684.66 crore to turn around the National Textile  
Corporation.  The then Group of M inisters considered the plan and did not agree to the  
same, as funds of such magnitude could not be found within the budgetary resources.   
 
4.5 The Cabinet in its m eeting held on  4 Septem ber 2000 accordingly decided to 
adopt a unit by unit assessm ent to determine whether a m ill should be revived or closed.  
Accordingly, a Techno Econom ic Viability  Study was conducted by Textile Research 
Associations to dete rmine the viability o r otherwise of  all the NTC m ills.  The s tudy 
recommended that out of a total of 119 m ills, 66 mills, which were chronically s ick, may 
be closed and the rem aining 53 m ills, projected as viable should be revived.  Based on 
this study report, rehabilitation schem es for th e 8 subsidiary corpor ations of NTC were 
prepared by IDBI and IFCI. The BIF R approved these rehabilitation schemes in the y ear 
2002. 
  

 26
4.6 The modernization process of 53 viable m ills could not, ho wever, take off due to 
slow progress in the s ale of surplus assets of  the closed m ills.  A f urther analysis of the 
performance of the 53 m ills proposed for reviv al indicated that even with an in creased 
capacity utilization, none of these mills were generating operational profits and continued  
to depend on Governm ent support for wages.  It  was indicated that further investm ent to 
the tune of Rs.1,465 crore would be required for modernization and provision of working 
capital for these mills.  Since th e sale process has been held up for more than  two y ears 
in various parts of the country due to non-recei pt of required perm ission from the State 
Governments like Maharashtra, UP, MP and Gujarat, the modernization process has been 
delayed.  
 
4.7 Out of the 119 mills, two mills, including one out of the 66 unviable mills and one 
out of the 53 viable m ills, located at Pondicherry, have been handed over to the S tate 
Govt. of Pondicherry w.e.f. 1 April 2005.  
 
4.8 However, with th e su ccess achieved in  the sale of surplus land o f NTC in 
Mumbai, NTC has resources to modernize 22 mills.  Government directed in the meeting 
of Group of Ministers  held on 1 2.05.2005 that  these m ills should be m odernized 
immediately and accordingly the process for procuring machinery has started.  
 
4.9 For moderanisation of other mills, NTC does not have resources presen tly.  Since 
depending on sale of proceeds for attem pting further modernisation is likely to delay the 
modernization process, Governm ent decided to  explore alternatives  like inviting p rivate 
partners who could inv est in m odernization of  these m ills.  NTC would, ther efore, be 
inviting expression of interest  from reputed textil es industries who c ould participate in 
the process of modernization of these mills under joint ventures.  If this attempt succeeds, 
other mills could also be modernized quickly. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(5)/2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 
 
Closure of Jute Mills 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8 Para.2.46) 
 
4.10 The Committee are constrained to note that out of 78 jute m ills, 37 are s ick mills 
and have been referred to BIFR. The Comm ittee urge th e Min istry to tak e up the  
development scheme for the jute sector at the right earnest particularly to ensure that the 
existing jute m ills become functional and profit making. The Committee are also u nable 
to understand the ration ale behind the non-elig ibility of viable sick ju te mills to avail of 
the Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme and are of the view that the Scheme should be 
extended to  them as the sickness o f jute m ills mainly arises from  obsolete techno logy. 
Considering the potential of jute products bot h in the domestic and international markets, 
the Committee strongly recommend that feasibility of providing assistance to viable sick 
jute mills under TUFS should be examined and appropriate steps in this regard should be 
taken immediately. 
 
  

 27
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
  
 4.11 The Technology Upgradation Fund Sche me (TUFS) provides reim bursement of 
interest to the exten t of 5% to  the entrepreneurs.   TUFS is an um brella scheme of the  
Textile Ministry, covering both the organized and unorganized sectors. It is not confined 
only to the Jute Sector, but extends to the entire Textile Industry.  For availing the 
benefits under this schem e, the entrepreneur or company concerned is to subm it a viable 
project report to the Nodal Financial Institution, i.e. IFCI (Industrial Finance Corporation 
of India). To prove the bankability of the project, the Company/entrepreneur need to 
provide sufficient inform ation regarding th e quantum of owned funds, surety, and m any 
other f ormalities. Th e f inancial institutions s till perceive the jute industry as a sun set 
industry despite the trem endous progress ma de by the industry in achieving ever 
increasing levels of product diversification and exploring new m arkets for traditional 
items. All this has hampered the progress of TUFS in the jute sector.  
 
4.12 However, recognising the peculiar nature of the jute industry, Ministry of Textiles 
has introduced an alternative Schem e of Cap ital Subsidy for Modernisation of the Jute 
Industry. This schem e is called the JMDC In centive Schem e for Modernisation of the  
Jute Industry. Hence, slow progress of TUFS in  Jute sector does not stand on the way of 
modernisation of the j ute industry. It is up to the jute entrepreneurs or the company 
concerned to choose between the two Sche mes: TUFS or the JMDC Incentive Schem e 
for Modernisation of the Jute Industry. The latter Schem e, which was launched on 8th 
July 2002 has been successful in attracting the 77 entreprene urs with an investm ent of 
Rs.83.61 crore within a short span of three years. 
 
4.13 The basic objective of the aforesaid JMDC Incentive Schem e for Modernisation 
of the Jute Industry is to speed up modernization and upgra dation of technology in jute  
mills. The schem e is operated by Jute Manuf actures Development Council, Kolkata.  All 
jute m ills who pay statutory cess o n m anufacture of jute goods and subm it to JMDC 
returns on payment of cess are eligible to receive subsidy under the scheme provided that 
the modernization and upgradation is carried out subsequent to  the date of notification of 
the schem e.  All eligible ju te m ills under the schem e are entitled to get subsidy for 
procurement of  the elig ible ite ms of  machinery/equipment/ancillary item s for 
modernization and up gradation on m aking an applica tion to JM DC in a form at 
prescribed for the purpose. The subsidy is res tricted to 15 % of the cos t of  
machinery/equipment procured by th e jute mills.  With effect from 19.09.2003, new jute  
mills established in new locations pertaining to jute growing areas having inadequate jute 
processing facilities have been made eligible to get subsidy @20% after paym ent of cess 
for at least 3 m onths. The el igible machinery may be purchased from  approved vendors 
from out of the loan of any financial in stitution/bank/leasing com pany or from  t he 
available resources of th e jute m ill. The Sc heme has been extended for a period  beyond 
July 2005 for three years or until the launch of Jute Technology Mission ( JTM).   
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(5)/2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 
  

 28
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9 Para.2.47) 
 
4.14 The Committee have also noted that the Ministry proposes to revive only 2 of the 
6 sick mills of NJMC which is a Pu blic Sector Undertaking and all th e employees of the 
NJMC inclu ding that of the head o ffice would be offered VRS. The Comm ittee are, 
however, skeptical of revival of  th e sick un its in the ab sence of the employees of the 
organization. They, therefore, recom mend that efforts should be m ade by the Ministry to 
revive all th e six mills of NJMC within  a d efinite time frame with the  help of  existing 
employees who know t he strengths as well as the weaknesses of the organization. The 
Committee further urge the Ministry that nece ssary steps should be taken to enable the 
revived units function without  the handicaps such as obs olete plant and m achinery, 
uneconomic products-mix, lack of working capital, etc. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
4.15 The Union Cabinet vide its decision on 24/3/05 has directed the Ministry of 
Textiles to  ref er the  reviva l of  the two units to th e n ewly cons tituted Board  of 
Reconstruction of the PSE. It has further ap proved to offer VRS to the em ployees of 
these units as well as the other 4 units and to provide   budgetary    support for    clearing 
the outstand ing dues of  this  corpo ration.  Options lik e ru nning the two m ills b y the 
Corporation itself or in lease agreement with private entrepreneurs will be considered and 
recommended by BRPSE. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(5)/2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 
  

 29
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7 Para.2.38) 
  
5.1 The Committee further note with concern th at the process of sale of lands of the  
closed mills in Mumbai, Ahmedabad and other cities continued to be delayed due to lack 
of constant and persuasive efforts by the Mini stry and as a result the m odernization of 
viable mills has been put on hold as the pro cess is linked with the realization of funds  
through sale of these lan ds.  The Committee, th erefore, urge the Min istry to tak e urgent 
steps to tak e up th e iss ue at the highest level with the State Governm ents concerned 
particularly with the  Governm ent of  Maha rashtra and G ujarat.  Th e Comm ittee also 
recommend that a special cell com prising senior officers of the Ministry should be set up 
to pursue th e issue cons tantly with the Stat e Governments and to seek expeditious legal 
relief so as to realize th e sale of lands of closed m ills.  The Comm ittee should als o be 
periodically apprised of the progress made in this regard.   
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 There has been a prolonged delay in th e process of sale of high value surplus 
lands of NTC m ills in Mum bai due to denial  of permission by the Sta te Government of  
Maharashtra.  The Governm ent of Mahara shtra had am ended the Developm ent Control 
Regulation,  1958 of Mumbai on 20 March 2001, which prescribed revised norms for sale 
of surplus land of textile m ills undergoing rehabilitation as a part of schem e approved by 
BIFR.  Governm ent of India subm itted an Inte grated Plan f or its lands in Mum bai on 3 
May 2003.  The Municipal Comm issioner, BMC appointed a Sub Committee to consider 
the plan, which after prolonged inspections and deliberations decided to ask NTC to 
surrender additional lands of BMC.  Since the recommendations of the Sub-Comm ittees 
were aga inst th e in terest of  NTC, Minis try of Textiles held disc ussions at the highest 
level to break the deadlock.  After prolonge d negotiations, Governm ent of Maharashtra 
has given p ermission for sale of  surplus land of  5 m ills in the State.  E ven as NTC was 
proceeding with th e sale process of  these 5 lan ds, an environm ental action g roup, viz. 
BEAG of Mumbai had filed a Writ Petition in the High Court of Bombay against the sale 
of mills’ lands. The Hig h Court had  granted an inte rim stay on the sa le, in April 20 05. 
This order was contested by NTC in the Supreme Court, whereupon the Hon’ble Court in 
a hearing held on 11.05.2005 vacated the stay orders and permitted NTC to go ahead with 
the sale of the land. Consequently, NTC has since sold 3 out of the 5 lands, fetching Rs. 
1,158 crore. The tenders for sale of 2 more pieces of land will be opened on 21.07.2005. 
 
5.3 In Ahmedabad, Govt. of Gujarat perm itted sale of the NTC lands on surrender of 
20% of the land for public use.  The Notification in this regard is under issue. 
   
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(5)/2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 
 
  

 30
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11 Para.2.55) 
 
5.4 The Committee are constraine d to note that the response of the entrepreneurs to 
the Jute Entrepreneurs Assistance Scheme, which is implemented by the National Centre 
for Jute Diversification, is not encouraging. Further, no review of the perfor mance of the 
scheme has been conducted since its  launch in the year 2002. The Comm ittee, therefore, 
recommend that more awareness programmes including technical demonstrations should 
be carried out by the NCJD to e voke desi red response from  the entrepreneurs. The  
Committee are also of the opinion that there sh ould be an in-built m echanism within the 
Ministry for proper m onitoring and review of the scheme at regular interval. Steps taken 
and progress achieved in this regard shoul d be comm unicated to the Comm ittee within 
three months. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 5.5 NCJD proposes to carry out m ore awareness programm es during the com ing 
years alongwith m ore technica l demonstrations in order to boost the response to the 
scheme. A proposal for enhancing the rate of subsidy under this schem e is under 
consideration of the Governm ent. A study on th e effectiveness of the NCJD sche mes is 
being conducted by the National Productivity Council (NPC).  
 
  
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(5)/2005-Parl. dated 25.7.2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY  
           CHAIRMAN, 
December, 2005                                         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)                                     
  

 31
         APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE O N 
LABOUR HELD ON 5 DECEMBER 2005. 
 
 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room `C’ 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot   – Acting Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
4. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
5. Shri Virendra Kumar 
6. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
7. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
8. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
             
RAJYA SABHA  
 
9. Shri Gandhi Azad 
10. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
11. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
  1.    Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
  3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena              -  Assistant Director 
        
  

 32
  
  
2. In the absence of the Ch airman, the Members of the Co mmittee chose Shr i Thawa r 
Chand Gehlot, MP to preside over the sitting unde r Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
 
3. At the outset, the Hon’ble Acting C hairman welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about the two Draft Reports on action ta ken replies received fr om the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment and the Ministry of Textiles on the Demands for Grants for the 
year 2005-2006.  
 
4. XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
5. The Comm ittee then co nsidered the dr aft Eighth Report on action taken by the 
Government on the recomm endations/observations containe d in the S ixth Report on 
Demands for Grants-2005-2006 pert aining to Ministry of Tex tiles and adopted the same  
with the following modifications: 
 
(i) Page 8, Para N o.1.6, line 20 after th e w ord “earlies t” add “The 
Committee further recommend that  the feasib ility of provid ing 
incentives to hand processors  for undergoing training should be 
examined and steps should be taken accordingly”; 
 
(ii) Page 11, Para No. 1.9, line 19 for the words “The Commi ttee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recomm endation and urge the Ministry to chalk out 
and im plement a tim e-bound plan for the m odernization of all the 53 
viable m ills of  NTC” substitute “The Committee, therefo re, reiterate 
their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to make vigorous 
efforts and chalk out  a time bound action plan for the moderniz ation 
of all the 53 viable mills of NTC without the support of Private Sector.   
 
6. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports and present the 
same to Parliament on their behalf. 
  
7.  XX   XX   XX   XX  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
 
33
 
      A P P E N D I X - I I 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE SIXTH  
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FOURTEENTH  
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations   13 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have  23.07%  
been accepted by Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1,2 and 12)  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    30.77% 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s  replies 
(Sl. Nos. 3,4,10 and 13) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  30.77% 
which  Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration 
(Sl. Nos. 5,6,8 and 9)  
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  15.39% 
 which final replies of Government are of interim 
 in  nature 
(Sl. Nos. 7 and 11)      ----------- 
          100% 
          ----------- 
  
 
 