  31
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR
(2008-09)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Twenty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants of
the Ministry of Textiles for the year 2008-2009]
   THIRTY- FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
                                         NEW DELHI
September, 2008/Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR
(2008-09)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Twenty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants of
the Ministry of Textiles for the year 2008-2009]
               Presented to Lok Sabha on    21.10.2008
                                      Laid in Rajya Sabha on      21.10.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
September,  2008/Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CONTENTS
PAGE(S)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii)
INTRODUCTION        ( i v )
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………   1-24
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government………………………   25-41
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s reply……………………………..        42
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration…………   43-47
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which  final replies of the Government  are still
awaited    …………                                                                48-51
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
            18.9.2008
                                                                                                  52-53
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth
report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)                                      54
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR
(2008-2009)
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy-CHAIRMAN
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale
4. Shri Subrata Bose
5. Shri Santasri Chatterjee
6. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot
7. Shri Munawar Hasan
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta
9. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan
10. Shri Virendra Kumar
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi
12. Shri Basangouda R. Patil
13. Shri Devidas Pingle
14. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar
15. Shri Mohan Rawale
16. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat
17. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat
18. Smt. C. S. Sujatha
19. Shri Paras Nath Yadav
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
 RAJYA SABHA
22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam
23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari
25. Shri K. Chandran Pillai
26. Shri Gandhi Azad
 27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan
 28. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta
 29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
              SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Secretary
2. Shri Braham Dutt   -  Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Bajaj    - Director
4. Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Suresh Kumar  - Senior Executive Assistant
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been authorised
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-First Report
on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Textiles for the year 2008-2009.
2. The Twenty-Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya
Sabha on  22 nd April 2008.  The Ministry of Textiles furnished their action taken replies
on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report on 18 July 2008.  The
report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Labour at their
sitting held on 18.9.2008.
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.
New Delhi; SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,
September, 2008 CHAIRMAN,
Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER-I
REPORT
          This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Ninth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Labour
(2007-08) on Demands for Grants (2008-09) relating to the Ministry of
Textiles, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 22nd April, 2008.
2.     The Ministry of Textiles were requested to furnish action taken
replies to the recommendations contained in the Twenty Ninth Report
within three months from the presentation of the Report i.e. by 22 nd July,
2008.  The action taken replies of the Government in respect of all the 14
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 18 July, 2008.
These have been categorized as follows:-
(i)    Recommendations/observations  that  have  been accepted by
       the Government:-
        Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,7,8,9,11 and 13
(ii)     Recommendations/observation  which the  Committee do not
        desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:-
          Sl. No. Nil
(iii)    Recommendations/observation  in  respect  of  which reply of
         the Government has not been accepted by the Committee:-
          Sl. Nos. 5,6 and 14
(iv)   Recommendations/observations   in   respect  of  which   final
        replies of the Government are still awaited:-
           Sl. Nos. 10 and 12
3.   The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the
recommendations for which only interim replies have been furnished
by the Government should be furnished expeditiously.
 4.     The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations which need reiteration or
merit comments in the succeeding paragraphs.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

A.                                  NON PLAN EXPENDITURE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
 5.     The Committee had observed that the position regarding non
expenditure was far from satisfactory. The Committee found that in the first y
of the XI plan period there was a huge variation in Budget Estimates, Revised
Estimates and Actual Expenditure. The BE of Rs.983.68 crore was reduced to
Rs.813.68 crore at RE stage. An amount of Rs.633.66 crore was actually spent
during the first Annua l Plan. The reasons for variation in BE and actual
spending during the year 2007- 08 had been stated that CCI could not purchase
cotton at MSP level during the cotton season of the year 2006- 07 due to higher
prices of cotton. This resulted in lesser expenditure during the year 2007- 08. The
Committee were not convinced with the reasons adduced for non- utilization of
funds and felt that it was more due to poor planning and short- sightedness on
the part of the Government. The Committee, therefore, desired the M inistry to
adopt a  scientific approach of forecasting the Budget Estimates for non
expenditure so as to avoid surrender of huge unutilized amounts and
consequential locking of precious financial resources.
 6.     In their reply, the Ministry has stated that the non-plan budget was
reduced to Rs. 813.68 crore at RE stage. The reduction was on account of
lesser requirement of funds for  MSP-Cotton Operation. MSP operations
are to provide security financial cover to cotton growers.
During the year 2007-08, the market ruling prices remained higher than
benchmarked MSP benefiting farmers and only 2.22 lakh bales were
required to be procured under MSP by Cotton Corporation of India.
Hence, the full budgetary allocation was not required.
The Ministry had a system to watch the progress of expenditure on a
weekly basis. The non-plan budget proposals are discussed first with the
respective heads of the divisions and, thereafter, it is discussed with the
officers of the Ministry of Finance (Budget).
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

7.     The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the
Government that the under utilization of non plan funds is mainly due
to lesser requirement of funds for MSP operations by Cotton
Corporation of India.  The Committee regret to note that the Ministry
could not estimate the actual requirement of funds even at R.E. stage
more so when it had a system to watch the progress of expenditure on a
weekly basis and non plan budget proposals are thoroughly discussed
first with respective heads of divisions and then with the Ministry of
Finance.  The Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry of Textiles to
be more careful at planning stage to have realistic budgetary allocations
and strengthen its monitoring and reviewing system relating to
utilization of non-plan funds by PSUs/Corporations under its
administrative control.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

B.                                        TEXTILE EXPORTS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
 8.     The Committee had observed that the share of textile imports by USA
from India was 5.4 per cent, 5.6 percent and 5.5 per cent respectively
during 2005, 2006 and 2007. The share of China in USA’s textile import
was 24.2 per cent, 27.4 per cent and 31.4 per cent respectively during the
corresponding period (2005, 2006 and 2007). The growth rate of US textile
imports from India also declined from 25.92 per cent in 2005 to a mere
1.39 per cent in 2007. The exports and their growth rate is also declining
with Europe as a whole. The Committee were of the opinion that the
appreciation of rupee may be one of the contributory factors hitting textile
exports, yet it cannot be attributed to be the sole reason for such a poor
performance in textile exports during the last three years as rupee has
appreciated vis-à-vis dollar only recently.  The other factors responsible
were stated to be outdated equipments and processes leading to low
productivity, weak infrastructural support like power, transport, berthing
etc. Apart from these, high transaction costs, high power tariff, shortage
of skilled manpower are other factors stated to be responsible for slow
growth of export of textile. In Committee’s view a long term and
permanent solution will have to be explored to the problems of weak
infrastructural support, high transaction cost, power tariff, shortage of
skilled manpower etc., if growth of textile export is to be accelerated. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that necessary remedial
measures including strong infrastructural base, availability of
uninterrupted power supply at competitive rates, skilled manpower, tax
and duty concessions, liberal bank loans to textile exporters, etc. be taken
without any delay so that textile industry can improve its global market
share and stand up to the increasing global competitiveness.
 9.     In their reply, the Ministry has stated that the Government is
providing support modernization through financing technological
upgradation and to help build global brands for Indian textiles.  The
Government is implementing various schemes, like the Technology
Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) and the Scheme for Integrated Textile
Parks (SITP), to enhance the potential of India’s textiles industry by
equipping it with state of the art technology and world class
infrastructure.  In addition, the Government is providing financial
support under the Market Development Assistance (MDA) and the
Market Access Initiative (MAI) Schemes to the textiles sector, through
various Textiles Export Promotion Councils, to enable the industry to
enhance its share in the global market for textiles.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Various steps have been taken by the Government for the growth of
textiles industry, which are as under: -
(i) 100% Foreign Direct Investment is allowed in the textiles sector under
the automatic route.
(ii) The Government has de-reserved readymade garments, hosiery and
knitwear from the Small Scale Industry (SSI) sector.
(iii) The Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) has been made
operational from 1-4-1999 to facilitate the modernisation and upgradation
of the sector.    TUFS has been extended beyond 31.3.2007 and has been
modified in consultation with the industry and approval of the
Competent Authority w.e.f. 1 st November 2007.  The Scheme is now in
operation.  For the speedy modernisation of the textiles processing sector,
Government has introduced, w.e.f 20.4.2005, a credit linked capital
subsidy scheme @10% under TUFS, in addition to the existing 5% interest
reimbursement.
(iv) A new “Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks” has been formulated by
merging this “Scheme for Apparel Parks for Exports” and the “Textiles
Centre Infrastructure Development Scheme”, in order to expand the
production base of the textiles and garment sector.
(v) The fiscal duty structure has been generally rationalised to achieve
growth and maximum value addition within the country. Except for
mandatory excise duty on man-made filament yarns and man-made
staple fibres, the whole value addition chain has been given the option of
excise exemption.
(vi) The import of specified textiles and garment machinery has been
allowed at a concessional rate of customs duty to encourage investment
and to make our textiles product competitive in the global market. The
cost of machinery has also been reduced through fiscal policy measures.
(vii) The Duty-free import of 21 items of trimmings and embellishment
items is allowed to garment exporters. This can be upto 3% of their actual
export performance during the previous year.
(viii) In 2004-05 Budget, the entire textile sector, except for man-made
fibre and filament yarn was provided optional exemption from excise
duty.  In 2005-06 Budget, Central Value-added Tax (CENVAT) on
Polyester Filament  Yarn has been reduced from 24% to 16%.  These
modifications in fiscal levies aim at attracting more investments for
modernization of textile sector.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(ix) To facilitate import of state of the art machinery to make our products
internationally competitive in post quota regime, in 2005-06 Budget, the
customs duty on textile machinery has been brought down to 10% except
23 machinery appearing in List 49 which attracts Basic Customs Duty
(BCD) of 15%.  The concessional duty continues to be at 5% on most of the
machinery items.
(x) Government has launched the Debt Restructuring Scheme w.e.f. Sept.,
2003 with the principal objective to permit banks to lend to the textile
sector at 8-9% rate of interest.
(xi) In addition, the Government has introduced, since July’07, several
relief measures for Textiles exporters.  The measures are as under:
• Duty Entitlement Pass Book (DEPB) rates have been enhanced by
3% for 9 sectors including textiles (also handlooms), Readymade
Garments (RMGs) and handicrafts.  For other items, DEPB rates
have  been enhanced by 2%.
• Export Credit Guarantee Corporation  (ECGC) premium  has been
reduced by 10%.
• An amount of Rs.600 crore was released for clearing arrears of
Central Sales Taxes (CST) reimbursement and terminal excise duty.
• Duty drawback rates have been enhanced by 10-40% of the existing
rates.
• Subvention on credit rate has been allowed upto 4% including
interest subsidy of 2%.
• Refund of service tax paid by exporters has been permitted on
services linked to export of goods, viz.,  port services for exports,
transport of goods by road from container depot to port of export,
general insurance services for insurance of goods for export,
technical testing and analysis, agency services,  inspection and
certification services, storage & warehousing services, and clearing
activity services.
• Customs duty on intermediates for Polyester staple fibre and
polyester filament yarn has been  reduced from 7.5% to 5%.
• Customs duty on paraxylene, a raw material for the intermediate
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

PTA has been  reduced from 2% to 0%.
• Customs duty has been reduced on other man-made filament yarn
& staple fibres of acrylic & viscose from 10% to 5%.
• Customs duty has been  reduced on spun yarn of man-made staple
fibres & filament yarn (other than nylon) from 10% to 5%.
• Customs duty has been  reduced on polyester chips from 7.5% to
5%.
Apparel Training Design Centres (ATDCs) have been set up throughout
the country to cope up the requirement of skilled / semi-skilled
manpower for the textile industry.  39 ATDCs are running in 14 States at
present.  33314 persons have been trained in these centres till December
2007.  70 locations have also been identified to open new ATDCs in the
first phase of the 11 th Five Year Plan.  These centres are likely to be
operationalised in the academic session of 2008.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

10.     The Committee are satisfied  to note that necessary remedial steps
have been taken by the Government for the growth of textile industry
particularly to support the exports of textiles such as like exemption
from excise duty, concessional rate of customs duty to encourage
investment, launching of Debt Restructuring Scheme w.e.f. 2003,
enhancement of Duty Entitlement Pass Book rates and Duty drawback
rates etc.  The Committee while appreciating  the launching of its
flagship schemes i.e. TUFS and SITP to enhance the potential of Indian
textiles industry, feel that concrete specific steps are required to be
taken for their fully  success so that these schemes become a reality and
meet the aspiration of textiles sector.  The Committee trust  and hope
that these steps will enable the Ministry to achieve the desired targets.
The Committee would await result of such steps.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

C. SCHEME FOR INTEGRATED TEXTILE PARKS (SITP)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
 11.    The Committee had observed that the Government launched the
Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks (SITP) in August 2005, by merging
the two existing Schemes viz. Scheme of Apparel Park for Export and the
Textile Centres Infrastructure Development Scheme. The Scheme, a public
private partnership, is being implemented through Special Purpose
Vehicles (SPVs). The industry associations/group of entrepreneurs are the
main promoters of SITP. The primary objective of SITP is to facilitate
world class infrastructure for setting up textile units. The Government of
India provides assistance @ 40 per cent of the project cost subject to ceiling
of Rs.40 crore. So far only 30 Textile Parks have been sanctioned (during
the Tenth Plan) and out of 50 Textile Parks which were initially
considered for development during the Eleventh Plan period only 10
Parks have been taken up in the first instance. Sanction of additional
projects have been subjected to completion of critical analysis and
evaluation of four projects approved in the year 2005-2006. Although, it is
a flagship scheme of the Ministry, the pace of progress in the
development of these parks is far from satisfactory. Only one park is fully
functional out of 12 projects sanctioned under erstwhile APES, while
work in only three projects have been completed out of 18 sanctioned
under TCIDS. This itself speaks about the poor functioning of the scheme.
No doubt, the entire process of developing a Textile park involves
enormous efforts at least till it is sanctioned, yet these formalities and
timely development of these parks cannot be protracted on any ground
whatsoever more so, when enterprising entrepreneurs and other
industrial associations form Special Purpose Vehicle (Promoters of Textile
Park) and the assistance of the Government of India is to the tune of 40
per cent of the project cost. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommended that a time bound action plan be drawn up for ensuring
that the sanctioned Textile Parks become fully operational as any delay in
this regard may not only involve the cost overrun but also run the risk of
meeting the same fate which its earlier components, viz. i.e. APES and
TCIDS met, besides disenchanting the focused and result oriented
entrepreneurs.
 12.    In their reply, the Ministry has stated that, under the Scheme for
Integrated Textiles Parks (SITP), the development of infrastructure is the
responsibility of the group of entrepreneurs, who will be putting up their
units in the park and will be the actual users of the facilities thus created.
Apart from contributing a minimum 60% of the cost of common
infrastructure / facilities, these entrepreneurs also make investment for
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

their individual units. This group of entrepreneurs, thus, has a
commitment not only for proper and timely development of necessary
infrastructure with appropriate technology, but also for running it
properly and effectively in future.
In SITP projects, the entrepreneurs come together and decide their
proposed activities upfront. The groups of entrepreneurs take
considerable time before making such huge investments. Procurement of
land by the SPV and transferring this in its name, conversion of  land use,
and  obtaining statutory clearances take considerable time. But, once these
are finalized, the project moves at a faster pace.
Government of India support is released in a phased manner after
ensuring appropriate matching contributions by the member
entrepreneurs.
The Project Management Consultant (PMC) is helping the SPVs for the
speedy implementation of the projects in a professional manner right
from formulation of project report to the execution of the project.
Representatives of the Government of India and PMC have been
nominated on the Board of Directors of the project SPVs to oversee the
execution of projects.
Implementations of the projects are being regularly monitored to ensure
timely completion.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

13.    The Committee find the reply of the Government evasive and
entirely unsatisfactory.  The Committee note with dismay that the
scheme was launched in August 2005 and so far, not a single park has
been made fully functional out of the 30 sanctioned under SITP during
Xth Plan.  The Committee are further constrained to note that the
Government has not laid down any time limit for ensuring
operationalisation of the sanctioned Textile parks despite involving
public money to the tune of 40 percent of the project cost in the form of
financial assistance and regularly monitoring the implementation of the
projects to ensure timely completion through the Project Management
Consultant (PMC) and Board of Directors.  The Committee feel that
there is need for more active role by the Government and therefore,
strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the
Government should draw a time limit for the group of
entrepreneurs/SPVs for making the sanctioned parks fully operational
without any further delay.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

D. SCHEME FOR INTEGRATED TEXTILE PARKS (SITP)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
 14.    The Committee had observed that SITP (a flagship scheme of
Government of India) aims to develop world class infrastructure for
setting up textile units. Entrepreneurs and Industrial Associations have
been identified as the main promoter of the Textile Parks but the Scheme
looses sight of the fact that besides entrepreneurs and industry it is the
worker, weaver, crafts persons who form backbone of the entire chain in
the textile sector. The Committee were distressed to note that the
Government were disinclined to provide any kind of infrastructural
facilities to the groups of artisans, weavers, textile workers, etc. either in
the individual capacity or to their representative bodies, Cooperatives,
Associations, etc. to enable them to carry out their profession. The
response of the Government that interested artisans, weavers may join
hands and form a special purpose vehicle to develop a textile park as per
their business plan, was not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommended that infrastructural facilities under SITP
should also be made available to the Cooperatives and other
representative bodies of the artisans, weavers, textile workers, etc.
providing them with an opportunity to contribute their mite in their own
way in the development of textile sector. The Committee also
recommended that the interest of entire chain of workforce associated
with the textile parks should be taken care of as far as their wages, social
security coverage and exact money value of their products were
concerned.
15.    In their reply, the Ministry has stated that the scheme for Integrated
Textiles Park (SITP) does not exclude Cooperatives and other representative
bodies of the artisans, weavers, t extile workers, etc. to develop infrastructure
facilities. In fact, Metro Hi Tech Co- operative Textile Park, Pride India
Cooperative Textile Park and Shri Dhairyashil Mane Textile Park Cooperative
Society in Maharashtra are some of the projects  being developed by Cooperative
Societies. Further, an exclusive Handloom Park, namely Pochampally Handloom
Park in Andhra Pradesh is also being developed by Handloom Weavers.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

16.    The Committee are informed that some of the SITP projects are
being d eveloped by Cooperative societies and Handloom weavers.
However, no details have been given as to  whether these bodies have
been given any relaxation in the prescribed guidelines of the scheme
and whether any extra financial assistance is being rendered to them.
The Committee are of the opinion that the textile
workers/weavers/artisans are the backbone of the entire textile sector
and their direct involvement in the textile parks is extremely essential
for the balanced growth of the sector.  Therefore, the Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation and impress upon the
Government to encourage such bodies by providing necessary credits at
lower rates, incentives and requisite space to them keeping in view
their financial constraints.  The Committee would like to be apprised
about such details at the earliest.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

E. TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION FUND SCHEME (TUFS)
                                 Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
 The Committee had observed that TUFS is a flagship scheme of the
Government. The implementation of the scheme has been envisaged
through the length and breadth of the country. Although the scheme has
picked up in the rest of the country, it is virtually a non-starter in the
North-Eastern States of the country. Since the year 2005-06 not even a
single paisa has been spent under the scheme in North-Eastern States of
the country. This is a lopsided implementation of the scheme and failure
of the planning of the Government. The Government has done nothing so
far to make the scheme popular in that region of the country. Now the
Government proposes to initiate the process of awareness programme for
the proper exposure of the scheme there. The Committee welcomed this
belated step. The Committee recommended that every step should be
taken to popularize the scheme in that region so that not only the
compulsory allocation of 10 per cent of the scheme but the previous
unspent amount are also spent there for the successful operation of the
scheme.
18.    In their reply, the Ministry has stated that the scheme is entirely demand
driven.  The design of the scheme is non-discriminatory and all- inclusive.  There
is no cap on projects under the scheme.  The major reason behind non- utilisation
of TUFS funds in North- Eastern region is that it is not a textile region.  There is
neither easy availability of raw materials nor markets exist  for  sale of
production.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

19.    The Committee are not satisfied with the response of the
Government as the TUFS has been a complete non starter in the North
Eastern region and no funds have been spent under it since the year
2005-06.  Considering the distinct identity of clothing pattern in North
Eastern States and the need to explore scope for production of
Handicraft/Handloom items as per the raw material available in that
region, the Committee, once again, strongly recommend that the
Government should play pro active role in the implementation  of
TUFS in that part  of the country by launching region specific
awareness programmes, ensuring easy availability of raw material and
creating market place for sale of finished products in the region.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

F. HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME FOR HANDLOOM WEAVERS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
20.    The Committee had noted that ‘Health Insurance Scheme’ for handloom
weavers was launched in the year 2005 with the  ICICI Lombard General
Insurance Company Limited as the implementing agency of the scheme. 23.17
lakh weavers have been covered till date under the Insurance Scheme. As
regards  pending cases for settlement under the scheme, it had been stated that
12,572 cases involving Rs.3.38 crore are still to be settled. The present Health
Insurance Scheme does not pr ovide coverage for critical illness of the weavers.
On being enquired on this aspect, it had been stated that the proposal for
covering critical illness was placed before the EFC on 5 July 2007 while
considering the Handloom Weavers Comprehensive Welfare S cheme. It was
suggested that this could be covered under a new scheme to be launched by LIC
and negotiations are going on with LIC as to the rate of premium payable by the
Ministry. For the purpose of covering general ailments and critical illness the
engagement of two separate insurance companies defies all logic. It will be more
appropriate if only one insurance company, preferably LIC, is entrusted with the
responsibility of covering both kind of ailments i.e. General Ailment and Critical
Illness. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommended that the appropriate steps be
taken in this regard. The Committee further recommended that immediate steps
be taken to settle all the pending cases of claims under the scheme and devise a
proper mechanism to make the process of claim settlement quick and hassle free
in future.
 21.    In their reply, the Ministry has stated that the critical illness cover
was proposed to be included under Health Insurance Scheme under the
new Handloom Weavers Comprehensive Welfare Scheme (HWCWS) of
11th Plan, as there was a demand to provide extra benefits to cover seven
critical illnesses.  The limit of such illness was proposed as Rs.30,000/- i.e.
double the limit of Rs.15,000/- per family.
This proposal was discussed in the EFC meeting held on 5.7.2007.  During
the discussions, Ministry of Finance (Financial Services) felt that a
provision for critical illness need not be kept as part of the Health
Insurance Scheme as LIC will be offering a similar product at a much
cheaper cost within next month.  Therefore, coverage of critical illnesses
under the Health Insurance Scheme was not accepted by the EFC and it
was decided that this could be covered under the new scheme to be
launched by the Life Insurance Corporation.  In  line  w ith  this  decision,
the  issue  of critical illness cover was taken up with the LIC.  Initially, LIC
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

proposed that the premium for critical illness will be fully paid by the
Ministry @ Rs.4/-per thousand for a maximum cover of Rs.30,000/-.  The
LIC was requested to consider lowering the premium.  However, LIC
vide their letter-dated 5.3.2008 proposed an even higher rate of Rs.8/-to
Rs.10/-per thousand for a maximum cover of Rs.30,000/-.  Therefore, LIC
was again requested to reconsider their earlier quote of Rs.4/-per
thousand or lesser to enable consideration of their proposal.
Now the LIC has given a final quote of Rs.4/-per thousand for a
maximum cover of Rs.30,000/-provided the premium charged for critical
illness cover will be fully paid by the Ministry with the caveat that in case
of claim over premium, the loss will be made good by the Ministry.  The
proposal is under examination.
As regards the pending claims under Health Insurance Scheme, it is
stated that as per the report furnished by the ICICI Lombard, there were
12572 claims pending amounting to Rs.3.38 crore up-to February 2008.  As
per the report up to March 2008, there are only 6866 claims pending
amounting to   Rs. 2.63 crore.  From this it may be seen that the pending
claims are being settled.  However, the ICICI Lombard has been advised
to settle the remaining claims also.  The Government of India is reviewing
the implementation of the scheme regularly at the Central level as well as
at the State level.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

22.    The Committee regret at the slow progress on this score and  desire
that the Ministry should make sincere and all-out efforts towards the
finalisation of the scheme of LIC under examination, by coordinating
with the Ministry of Finance and LIC expeditiously.  They would like
to be apprised of the time schedule by which the Ministry expects to
start the proposed scheme.  The Committee find that the reply of the
Government is also silent on the Committee’s recommendations
regarding devising a proper mechanism to make the process of claim
settlement quick and hasslefree. The Committee expect that the
settlement of pending claim cases would be expedited and a definite
time period fixed in this regard.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

G. MAHATMA GANDHI BUNKAR BIMA YOJNA (MGBBY)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12)
 23.    The Committee were distressed to note that despite repeatedly
stressing the need to raise the upper age limit from 58 to 70 for coverage
under MGBBY, the Government was not taking up the issue with the
seriousness it deserves. It was simply quoting the replies of LIC which are
evasive in nature to shirk its responsibility. The Government had stated
that the matter was taken up with the Ministry of Finance and LIC. The
LIC informed that for raising the age limit the premium would be
Rs.1,650/- per weaver. Since the premium was very high, the Ministry of
Finance and the LIC were again and again requested to reduce the
premium. It had also been stated that at present the annual premium for
the weaves in the age group of 18 to 59 years is Rs.330/- per weaver per
annum. The premium proposed by the LIC for the age group between 60-
70 years is Rs.1,500/- per annum. The Committee were not convinced by
the logic of Insurance Company and the Ministry of Finance as it is prima-
facie untenable. Going by this yardstick there was no justification for
keeping a uniform premium for beneficiaries of all ages i.e. 18 to 58 years
as mortality rate  in   the lower  age     group        of      the beneficiaries is
far less than in the higher age group. Hence, the rate of premium should
be structured accordingly in the light of the perceived mortality rate for
different age groups of beneficiaries. Therefore, high rate of premium for
beneficiaries of 59 to 70 years does not hold any ground. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommended that the issue of increasing the age of
weavers from 58 to 70 years for the purpose of coverage under insurance
be immediately decided without any further delay. Being a public sector
company, LIC should not shirk its social responsibility towards the
handloom workers who are from the poor section of the society.
However, the Government may, if necessary, create a fund to indemnify
LIC in case the claim outgo of LIC in this segment (i.e between 59 to 70
years) is more than the premium collected by the company.
24.    In their reply, the Ministry has stated that The matter regarding raising the
upper age limit under the Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana was taken up
with the LIC.  The premium proposed by the LIC for the age group between 60
and 70 years was Rs.1500/-  per annum.  Since this premium was very high, the
LIC was requested to lower the premium.  Now the LIC has given two options
for lowering the premium as under:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

A premium of Rs.1,000/- per person will be charged for the persons aged
above 59 years with the caveat that in case of claim over premium, the
loss will be made good by the Ministry.  Alternatively, a premium of
Rs.450/- be paid for all the persons being covered under MGBBY (age
group 18 to 69).  The matter is under examination.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

25.    The Committee are happy to note that there has been some
progress with regard to raising the upper age limit from 58 to 70 years
for providing insurance coverage to weavers under MGBBY.  The
Committee desire that expeditious steps should be taken by the
Government by taking up the matter with LIC to reach at a conclusion
within a definite time frame.  The Committee also desire to be apprised
of the outcome at the earliest.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

H. FASHION HUBS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)
 26.    The Committee had taken note of the fact that Government propose
to set up `Fashion Hubs’ with a view to strengthen the entire textile value
chain and to provide an interface between the stakeholders by creating a
permanent market place for the Indian Fashion Industry. It would also
serve as a single stop fashion business point, show casing Indian fashion
trends, craftsmanship and design legacy of India. It would also involve
strengthening of the entire supply chain which would include
establishing, backward linkages with suppliers. However, it appeared
that the entire plan is still in conceptual stage as the Ministry itself was
not aware of the availability and the cost of the land. The size of land and
cost would determine the facilities to be created and also the
methodology of the operation of the entire project. The concept of creation
of `Fashion Hub’ is laudable as it will help in the generation of
employment opportunities in addition to displaying the skills and talents
of Indian crafts persons and providing them an opportunity to create a
niche for themselves in the global arena.  The Committee, therefore, urged
upon the Government to take all necessary steps for establishing the
`Fashion Hub’ at the earliest. If feasible, land for fashion hub may either
be acquired through outright purchase by the Government or a private
agency or may be taken on lease from private parties or such land owners
may be associated as partners with specific percentage of their
shareholding in the project. Search of land cannot be prolonged
indefinitely lingering on the project for want of land from Government
agencies.
27.    In their reply, the Ministry has stated that the Government proposes to set
up ‘Fashion Hubs’ with a view to strengthen the entire textiles value chain and
to provide an interface between the stakeholders by creating a perman
market place for the Indian Fashion Industry.  It would also serve as a single
stop fashion business point, showcasing Indian fashion trends, craftsmanship
and design legacy of India.  It would also involve strengthening of the entire
supply chain whic h would include establishing, backward linkages with
suppliers.  However, the entire plan is still in conceptual stage as the Ministry is
not aware of the availability and the cost of land.  The size of land and the cost
would determine the facilities to b e created and also the methodology of the
operation of the entire project.  The concept of creation of ‘Fashion Hub’ is
laudable as it will help in generation of employment opportunities in addition to
displaying  the skills and talents of Indian crafts pe rsons and providing them as
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

opportunity   to   create   a    niche   for themselves in the global arena.  Search of
land has prolonged indefinitely on the project for want of land from
Government agencies.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

28.    The Committee regret to note that although about half of the
financial year has gone by but the Government has still not been able
to identify the land for setting up of a ‘Fashion Hub’ in Delhi.  The
Committee are of the opinion that the concept of creation of ‘Fashion
Hub’ is laudable as it will help in the generation of employment
opportunities besides displaying the skills and talents of Indian
craftspersons, and therefore, this project should not be prolonged
indefinitely on account of  search for land.  The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the Ministry
should make all out efforts to finalise the land for these projects in
Delhi as well as in the other parts of the country, at the earliest. For
Delhi, the Government can explore possibilities of getting land
anywhere in NCR keeping in view its availability   as compared to the
main city area.  For rest of the country, the States with comparatively
larger production of textile items, can be identified and made partners.
Thus, the involvement of the interest of the States would definitely
expedite the land acquisition process all over the country.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
 The scrutiny of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Textiles reveals
that the total outlay of Rs. 2,500 crore for the year 2008-09 shows an
increase of 177 crore rupees over the allocation of Rs. 2,323 crore for the
year 2007-08. However, the total expenditure during the year has been
Rs.2,228 crore (provisional) leaving an unspent amount of Rs. 95 crore.
The reasons for under utilization of the allocation have been stated to be
that during the first year of the new Five Year Plan, the utilisation of
planned fund is generally low as many schemes were required to be
firmed up. All the major schemes  in  the  VSE  sector  were    also re-
structured and hence required fresh approval from the competent
authority. Launching of new schemes take a reasonable time, users takes
substantial time to understand the benefits of the programmes,
acceptance of the programmes by the targeted beneficiaries also requires
time. It has also been stated that the Ministry is making concerted efforts
to improve the plan expenditure so as to utilize maximum budget
allocation. The Committee observe that the overall expenditure is
satisfactory yet there has been withdrawal, modification and merger of
schemes with other schemes in handlooms and handicrafts sectors now
forming part of VSE sector. The Committee feel that the modification in
the existing schemes hampers the pace of expenditure as it involves
completion of fresh procedural formalities. The Committee also stressed
earlier that developmental and welfare schemes of the textile sector
should be selected carefully after thorough study involving past
experiences, ground realities and future needs. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that developmental schemes of the textile sector
should be drawn up keeping all the factors in view. This will help not
only the proper and adequate utilization of funds but will also be
successful in achieving the targets set out under the schemes and
benefiting the targeted group.
Reply of the Government
 The suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for compliance.
The Ministry has subsequently revised the actual plan expenditure figure
for the year 2007-08 to Rs.2210.69 crore.  As per the revised figures, the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

total savings for the year 2007-08 is Rs.112.31 crore out of which Rs.93.45
crore  had been surrendered to the Ministry of Finance before March 31,
2008 and the balance amount had lapsed.  Out of the total surrender of
Rs.93.45 crore, Rs.78.21 crore was in respect of the  funds earmarked for
the North East Regions – Technology  Upgradation Funds Scheme (TUFS)
– Rs.34.00 crore, Scheme for Integrated Textiles Park (SITP) – Rs.25.00
crore,  Technology Mission on Cotton (TMC) – Rs.10.00 crore and
Handicrafts – Rs.9.21 crore.  There was no demand from the North East
for assistance under TUFS and SITP.  As there was no cotton cultivation in
the North East, no funds could be spent in the North East under
Technology Mission on Cotton.
As there is no scope for incurring any expenditure under TUFS and TMC
in the North East, the Ministry has requested the Planning Commission
and the DoNER to exempt these schemes from the 10% mandatory
earmarking for the North East so that the entire allocation for these
schemes could be spent in areas other than the North East where there is
un-met demand for assistance.    Concerted efforts are being made to fully
utilize the plan fund through close and regular monitoring of the
performance.  Such monitoring  is necessary for identification of
constraints, if any, and also timely introduction of corrective measures in
implementation. Keeping this in view, the following steps have been
taken/ proposed to be taken for further improving utilisation of the plan
outlays and for improvement of the schemes, directed towards benefiting
the targeted group:
• The Ministry of Textiles had already sponsored the evaluation of
the major plan schemes. Continuation of schemes from the 10 th
Plan to the 11 th Plan had been  supported by in-depth and
independent evaluation reports.
• The schemes of the handlooms and handicrafts sectors have been
appropriately modified by adding new components, dropping
some components and at the same time enlarging the scope of
some of the existing components. Modifications/restructuring of
the schemes or their components, wherever required, were carried
out after assessing its need through evaluation studies, and
keeping in mind the need for the overall development of the sector
. However, while reducing the number of schemes, efforts have
been made to retain all the essential and basic requirements of
weavers and artisans.  In order to make the implementation more
effective and to improve plan expenditure, guidelines are being
revised & monitoring systems are being further strengthened and
broad based.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

• Review of the progress of physical and financial targets in respect
of the schemes is being held at the meetings of the Senior Officers’
(SOM’s) of the Ministry chaired by the Secretary (Textiles). These
are organised on a weekly basis. These meetings are in addition to
various fora at which the review of the Plan schemes is
undertaken. For example, periodical review reports are furnished
to the Planning Commission. Further, Planning Commission takes
the Performance Review Meeting on half-yearly and yearly basis of
the various schemes being implemented by the Ministry of
Textiles. In such meetings, representatives from State Governments
and implementing agencies are also called for discussions.
• Eight Project Management Consultants (PMCs) have been engaged
for the implementation of the Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks
(SITP) across the country including NER. The PMC submits
progress reports to the Ministry of Textiles. On the basis of the
progress report submitted by the PMCs, the Project Approval
Committee(PAC), chaired by  Secretary (Textiles), regularly
reviews implementation, and milestones are  set for each project
sanctioned under the scheme
• The Ministry of Textiles has made some modifications to increase
the Central assistance for NER under SITP so that the
entrepreneurs of the NER may be interested to establish Textile
Parks in their region. During the Eleventh Plan period, for the two
projects in NER, the contribution of Government of India has been
enhanced to 90 per cent of the project cost subject to a ceiling of
Rs.40.00 crore.
• An online project proposal monitoring system has been introduced for the
Handicrafts schemes and TUFS.  Time schedules for processing/ disposal
at each stage have also been prescribed.  This web- based system has been
made accessible to public as well, in order to enable them see the stages of
processing of their proposal.  In case of TUFS, the nodal banks will be
requested to strengthen their TUFS cells. This will help i n efficient
monitoring of disbursement of loans by banks as well as subsidy by
Government to individual units.
• Developmental schemes of the ministry are designed and
implemented on the basis of the past experience, recommendations
of evaluation reports a nd suggestions of Planning Commission.
The major thrust of these schemes is to address the needs of
weavers and artisans leading to their empowerment, capacity
building of artisans, Self Help Groups (SHGs) and entrepreneurs,
etc. and to promote investment and technology up-gradation in the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

textile sector.  The various schemes are designed in such a way as
to achieve these objectives.
• Efforts are being made to create awareness about the schemes and
related requirements through workshops (local and regional),
marketing events, training, national & special Expos, district level
events, craft mela, international fairs etc. These activities are
directed towards proper and adequate utilization of funds so as the
maximum benefit of the welfare and developmental scheme reach
the targeted groups. Further, the recommendations of the
Committee regarding achieving the targets fixed and maintaining
proper pace of expenditure have been taken note of for compliance.
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
 The Committee note that the percentage of expenditure in each of the four
quarters of the year 2007-08 is extremely skewed. Financial rules of the
Government clearly stipulate the spreading of expenditure evenly over
the four quarters and bars the undue utilization of funds in the last
quarter of the year. However, on close scrutiny of the progressive
quarterly figures, the Committee find that the actual quarterly
expenditure under various Plan schemes have been 0.28% in the first
quarter, 34.74% in the second quarter, 66.81% in the third quarter and
only 82.02% (upto 17 March 2008) in fourth quarter. The reasons for
uneven expenditure in every quarter are stated to be non-receipt of bills
during the first quarter, delay in approval of schemes, restrictions on
advance payment etc. The Committee are not at all inclined to accept the
explanation given by the Ministry in this regard. The Committee in their
earlier reports also stressed the need to spread the expenditure evenly
during each quarter of the year, but it seems that recommendations of the
Committee have not been taken seriously. The Committee are of the
opinion that uneven distribution of funds directly affects the functioning
of developmental and welfare schemes and consequently the growth of
the sector is hampered. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all the
foreseeable hurdles in the even spending of allocations during each of the
four quarters of a year should be taken into account alongwith the
preventive measures before announcing any scheme for implementation.
The monitoring system of the Ministry also needs to be toned up to
ensure that expenditure on a scheme is incurred as planned during every
quarter of the year
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Reply of the Government
The suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for compliance.
As of now, all the major schemes of the Ministry have already been
approved by the  Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)/ Cabinet
Committee on Economic Aff airs (CCEA).  The budget allocated has been
distributed in all the schemes. There will not be any delay in
implementing the schemes right from the beginning of the financial year.
Further, all out  efforts are being made for evenly spending of funds
during each quarter of the  current financial year (2008-09).  As against the
BE of Rs. 2500 crore, plan expenditure during the first quarter of the
current financial year, i.e April-June(up to 9.6.2008) is  Rs.941.03 crore
showing 37.64  percent utilisation.  Following steps are being taken to
ensure evenly spending of funds and to achieve set plan expenditure
during each of four quarters of the current financial year:
• Concerted efforts have been made to ensure effective
implementation of all the development schemes in letter and spirit
and to ensure that the plan expenditure  fixed for each quarter of
the financial year 2008-09 is achieved. Along with the progress of
physical and financial targets in respect of the schemes, the
expenditure is regularly monitored in the weekly Senior Officers’
Meeting (SOM’s) chaired by Secretary (Textiles)  & in-house review
meetings for the various schemes.
• Efforts are also being made for timely submission of project
proposals of schemes wherever it is required so as to ensure  timely
and even spending of funds.
• The monitoring of the implementation of the projects sanctioned under
different schemes is being regularly conducted.  The field officers are
being instructed to increase the pace of inspections for effective
implementation of the schemes and based on their report, the grants are
released or curtailed.
• While all possible efforts are being taken to streamline the phasing
expenditure quarterly, there may be possibility of some slight
deviations under some schemes, like TUFS, SITP etc., as these are
demand driven.
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
 The Committee observe that the position regarding non-plan expenditure
is also far from satisfactory. The Committee find that in the first year of
the XI plan period there is a huge variation in Budget Estimates, Revised
Estimates and Actual Expenditure. The BE of Rs.983.68  crore was
reduced to Rs.813.68 crore at RE stage. An amount of Rs.633.66 crore was
actually spent during the first Annual Plan. The reasons for variation in
BE and actual spending during the year 2007-08 has been stated that CCI
could not purchase cotton at MSP level during the cotton season of the
year 2006-07 due to higher prices of cotton. This resulted in lesser
expenditure during the year 2007-08. The Committee are not convinced
with the reasons adduced for non-utilization of funds and feel that it is
more due to poor planning and short-sightedness on the part of the
Government. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to adopt a
scientific approach of forecasting the Budget Estimates for non-plan
expenditure so as to avoid surrender of huge unutilized amounts and
consequential locking of precious financial resources.
Reply of the Government
 The non-plan budget was reduced to Rs. 813.68 crore  at RE stage. The
reduction was on account of lesser requirement of funds for MSP-Cotton
Operation. MSP operations are to provide security financial cover to
cotton growers.
During the year 2007- 08, the market ruling prices remained higher than
benchmarked MSP benefiting farmers and only 2.22 lakh bales were required to
be procured under MSP by Cotton Corporation of India. Hence, the full
budgetary allocation was not required.
The Ministry had a system to watch the progress of expenditure on a
weekly basis. The non-plan budget proposals are discussed first with the
respective heads of the divisions and, thereafter, it is discussed with the
officers of the Ministry of Finance (Budget).
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
 The Committee observe that the share of textile imports by USA from
India was 5.4 per cent, 5.6 percent and 5.5 per cent respectively during
2005, 2006 and 2007. The share of China in USA’s textile import was 24.2
per cent, 27.4 per cent and 31.4 per cent respectively during the
corresponding period (2005, 2006 and 2007). The growth rate of US textile
imports from India also declined from  25.92 per cent in 2005 to a mere
1.39 per cent in 2007. The exports and their growth rate is also declining
with Europe as a whole. The Committee are of the opinion that the
appreciation of rupee may be one of the contributory factors hitting textile
exports, yet it cannot be attributed to be the sole reason for such a poor
performance in textile exports during the last three years as rupee has
appreciated vis-à-vis dollar only recently.
The other factors responsible have been stated to be outdated equipments
and processes leading to low productivity, weak infrastructural support
like power, transport, berthing etc. Apart from these, high transaction
costs, high power tariff, shortage of skilled manpower are other factors
stated to be responsible for slow growth of export of textile. The
Committee are of the opinion that a long term and permanent solution
will have to be explored to the problems of weak infrastructural support,
high transaction cost, power tariff, shortage of skilled manpower etc., if
growth of textile export is desired to be accelerated. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that necessary remedial measures
including strong infrastructural base, availability of uninterrupted power
supply at competitive rates, skilled manpower, tax and duty concessions,
liberal bank loans to textile exporters, etc. be taken without any delay so
that textile industry can improve its global market share and stand up to
the increasing global competitiveness.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Reply of the Government
The Government is providing support modernization through financing
technological upgradation and to help build global brands for Indian
textiles.  The Government is implementing various schemes, like the
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) and the Scheme for
Integrated Textile Parks (SITP), to enhance the potential of  India’s textiles
industry by equipping it with state of the art technology and world class
infrastructure.  In addition, the Government is providing financial
support under the Market Development Assistance (MDA) and the
Market Access Initiative (MAI) Schemes to the textiles sector, through
various Textiles Export Promotion Councils, to enable the industry to
enhance its share in the global market for textiles.
Various steps have been taken by the Government for the growth of
textiles industry, which are as under: -
(i) 100% Foreign Direct Investment is allowed in the textiles sector under
the automatic route.
(ii) The Government has de-reserved readymade garments, hosiery and
knitwear from the Small Scale Industry (SSI) sector.
(iii) The Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) has been made
operational from 1-4-1999 to facilitate the modernisation and upgradation
of the sector.    TUFS has been extended beyond 31.3.2007 and has been
modified in consultation with the industry and approval of the
Competent Authority w.e.f. 1 st November 2007.  The Scheme is now in
operation.  For the speedy modernisation of the textiles processing sector,
Government has introduced, w.e.f 20.4.2005, a credit linked capital
subsidy scheme @10% under TUFS, in addition to the existing 5% interest
reimbursement.
(iv) A new “Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks” has been formulated by
merging this “Scheme for Apparel Parks for Exports” and the “Textiles
Centre Infrastructure Development Scheme”, in order to expand the
production base of the textiles and garment sector.
(v) The fiscal duty structure has been generally rationalised to achieve
growth and maximum value addition within the country. Except for
mandatory excise duty on man-made filament yarns and man-made
staple fibres, the whole value addition chain has been given the option of
excise exemption.
(vi) The import of specified textiles and garment machinery has been
allowed at a concessional rate of customs duty to encourage investment
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and to make our textiles product competitive in the global market. The
cost of machinery has also been reduced through fiscal policy measures.
(vii) The Duty-free import of 21 items of trimmings and embellishment
items is allowed to garment exporters. This can be upto 3% of their actual
export performance during the previous year.
(viii) In 2004-05 Budget, the entire textile sector, except for man-made
fibre and filament yarn was provided optional exemption from excise
duty.  In 2005-06 Budget, Central Value-added Tax (CENVAT) on
Polyester Filament  Yarn has been reduced from 24% to 16%.  These
modifications in fiscal levies aim at attracting more investments for
modernization of textile sector.
(ix) To facilitate import of state of the art machinery to make our products
internationally competitive in post quota regime, in 2005-06 Budget, the
customs duty on textile machinery has been brought down to 10% except
23 machinery appearing in List 49 which attracts Basic Customs Duty
(BCD) of 15%.  The concessional duty continues to be at 5% on most of the
machinery items.
(x) Government has launched the Debt Restructuring Scheme w.e.f. Sept.,
2003 with the principal objective to permit banks to lend to the textile
sector at 8-9% rate of interest.
(xi) In addition, the Government has introduced, since July’07, several
relief measures for Textiles exporters.  The measures are as under:
• Duty Entitlement Pass Book (DEPB) rates have been enhanced by
3% for 9 sectors including textiles (also handlooms), Readymade
Garments (RMGs) and handicrafts.  For other items, DEPB rates
have  been enhanced by 2%.
• Export Credit Guarantee Corporation  (ECGC) premium  has been
reduced by 10%.
• An amount of Rs.600 crore was released for clearing arrears of
Central Sales Taxes (CST) reimbursement and terminal excise duty.
• Duty drawback rates have been enhanced by 10-40% of the existing
rates.
• Subvention on credit rate has been allowed upto 4% including
interest subsidy of 2%.
• Refund of service tax paid by exporters has been permitted on
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

services linked to export of goods, viz.,  port services for exports,
transport of goods by road from container depot to port of export,
general insurance services for insurance of goods for export,
technical testing and analysis, agency services,  inspection and
certification services, storage & warehousing services, and clearing
activity services.
• Customs duty on intermediates for Polyester staple fibre and
polyester filament yarn has been  reduced from 7.5% to 5%.
• Customs duty on paraxylene, a raw material for the intermediate PTA has
been  reduced from 2% to 0%.
• Customs duty has been reduced on other man-made filament yarn
& staple fibres of acrylic & viscose from 10% to 5%.
• Customs duty has been  reduced on spun yarn of man-made staple
fibres & filament yarn (other than nylon) from 10% to 5%.
• Customs duty has been  reduced on polyester chips from 7.5% to
5%.
Apparel Training Design Centres (ATDCs) have been set up throughout
the country to cope up the requirement of skilled / semi-skilled
manpower for the textile industry.  39 ATDCs are running in 14 States at
present.  33314 persons have been trained in these centres till December
2007.  70 locations have also been identified to open new ATDCs in the
first phase of the 11 th Five Year Plan.  These centres are likely to be
operationalised in the academic session of 2008.
Details of the courses offered by ATDC are given below:-
S. No. Name of Course Eligibility Duration
of the
Course1. Diploma in Apparel
Manufacturing Technology
12th Std 1 Year
2. Diploma in Knit Garment
Manufacturing Technology
12th Std 1 Year
3. Diploma in Fashion Sampling
/ Co-ordination
12th Std 1 Year
4. Diploma in Textile Design 12 th Std 1 Year
5. Production Supervision &
Quality Control Course
12th Std 6 Months
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5. Production Supervision &
Quality Control Course
12th Std 6 Months
6. Textile Appreciation Course 12 th Std 6 Months
7. Pattern/Cutting Master
Course
10th Std. 6 Months
8. Machine Mechanic Course 10 th Std. 4 Months
9. Garment Construction Course 10 th Std.  4
Months
10. Sewing Machine Operator
Course
8th Std.  3
Months
11. Measurement & Quality
Control Course
10th Std. 3 Months
12. Apparel Merchandising Graduation
/ Diploma
in AMT
3 Months
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
 The Committee observe that Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme was
launched to make funds available to the domestic textile industry to
upgrade the technology of existing units and to set up new units with the
state-of-the-art technology to enhance competitiveness in the domestic
and the global market. Initially, the scheme was scheduled to be phased
out on 31 March 2007. However, due to the demand and satisfactory
working of the scheme it has been extended beyond 31 March 2007. There
is an Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee (IMSC) to monitor and review
the functioning of TUFS. Meetings of the IMSC are held every quarter to
assess the functioning of TUFS. However, the meeting of IMSC was last
held in the month of July 2006 and reasons for not convening the meeting
thereafter has been stated that, at the fag end of the operation of scheme
there was no need to carry out any other modification in the parameters
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

of the scheme hence no meeting was held. It has also been stated that
constitution of both the, Working Group constituted by the Planning
Commission on Textile and Jute Industry and the IMSC are similar. Since
the Working Group had gone into details of the impact of operation of
scheme and recommended the thrust areas for the future growth of the
sector, the revised parameters were accordingly drafted in line with its
recommendations. To avoid the duplicity of the work, the meeting of
IMSC was not called. The logic put forth by the Government is far from
convincing as there was a gap of more than eight months for the closure
of the scheme since the last meeting of the IMSC. Moreover, it was also
decided much before that the scheme will continue to be in operation
even after March 2007. Even the parameters of the scheme were also
modified on the recommendation of the Working Group completely
sidelining the IMSC. The Committee do not find any justification in
keeping two Governmental bodies viz. IMSC and Working Group of
Planning Commission on Textiles and Jute Industry to review the
functioning of TUFS when both these bodies are represented more or less
by same members. This is a futile exercise wasting time and money
besides delaying the timely decision on TUFS. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that a clear and well thought out strategy be
formulated for the operation of the scheme. Instead of loading TUFS with
unwieldy bodies to review its functioning, a lean, expert and focused
Committee of professionals be constituted to keep a tab on the scheme
and suggest modifications whenever and wherever essential.
Reply of the Government
 In this regard it may be mentioned that the Working Group of Planning
Commission on Textiles and Jute Industry had a limited tenure confined
only to offer recommendations regarding strategies to be adopted during
the 11th Plan period to meet challenges of the Indian textiles industry so
that its growth and development may be ensured.  After the acceptance of
the recommendations of the Working Group by the Government, the
work  of the  Working Group is complete and it is now not in the
existence.  The IMSC under the TUFS has been duly reconstituted by
incorporation of new members to suit the needs of the scheme during the
11th Plan period.
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
 The Committee note that TUFS was introduced to provide fina ncial assistance in
the form of interest payment on the loans taken by entrepreneurs to upgrade the
technology of their textile units. For the purpose, the budgetary provision of Rs.
1,140 crore have been made for the year 2008-09. On the question of suffi ciency
of allocation, it has been stated that the budgetary allocation of Rs.1,140 crore
will be inadequate to meet the requirements of the scheme. However, at RE
stage, the Ministry of Finance is expected to provide more funds on the lines it
was done in the year 2007-08. It has also been stated that there is still a backlog of
approximately Rs.1,149.96 crore and BE allocation for the year 2008- 09 is not
sufficient to meet even the spill over of the previous year. The Committee
observe that there is some s erious malfunctioning in the planning and operation
of TUFS otherwise the backlog could not have mounted to such an astronomical
figure surpassing the budgetary allocation for the year 2008- 09. If the backlog is
not cleared immediately the scheme may loose  its sheen and it will become a
laggard. The Ministry has also received letters from the textile units complaining
that huge amount of subsidy under the scheme still remains unpaid. The
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Government that since the results of the
scheme are encouraging, sufficient funds should be allocated to clear the backlog
and keep the momentum going.
Reply of the Government
 In this regard, it may be mentioned that the TUF scheme is demand-
driven. There is no cap on the funding of the projects under this scheme.
It is all India applicable and also includes all the textiles segments, except
synthetics.  These features make this scheme very attractive.  On account
of phasing out of textile quotas in developed countries followed by
conducive policy measures taken by the Government, the investment
climate in the textile sector after the years 2003-04 became extremely
attractive.  As a result, the demand under the scheme increased
tremendously.  This has to be seen as a positive functioning of the scheme
and not as a malfunctioning.  Though this has led towards a mismatch
between  budgetary provisions  under the scheme and the needs,
Government has successfully cleared a major portion of the backlog.  It is
expected that break-even will be achieved by the next financial year.
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
 The Committee observe that TUFS is a flagship scheme of the
Government. The implementation of the scheme has been envisaged
through the length and breadth of the country. Although the scheme has
picked up in the rest of the country, it is virtually a non-starter in the
North-Eastern States of the country. Since the year 2005-06 not even a
single paisa has been spent under the scheme in North-Eastern States of
the country. This is a lopsided implementation of the scheme and failure
of the planning of the Government. The Government has done nothing so
far to make the scheme popular in that region of the country. Now the
Government proposes to initiate the process of awareness programme for
the proper exposure of the scheme there. The Committee welcome this
belated step. The Committee recommend that every step should be taken
to popularize the scheme in that region so that not only the compulsory
allocation of 10 per cent of the scheme but the previous unspent amount
are also spent there for the successful operation of the scheme.
Reply of the Government
 In this regard, it may be mentioned that the scheme is entirely demand-
driven.  The design of the scheme is non-discriminatory and all- inclusive.
There is no cap on projects under the scheme.  The major reason behind
non- utilisation of TUFS funds in North-Eastern region is it that is not a
textile region.  There is neither easy availability of raw materials nor
markets exist  for  sale of production.  However, the suggestions of the
Committee have been noted for compliance.
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation (Sl. No. 11)
 The Committee note that a new scheme named Handlooms Weavers
Comprehensive Welfare Scheme has been initiated with Mahatma Gandhi
Bunkar Bima Yojana becoming one of its components. The Committee is
happy to note that various benefits under the scheme has been
substantially enhanced for the benefit of the weavers, yet the coverage of
weavers under the scheme remains an area of concern. As per the census
of 1995-96 the approximate number of weavers is more than 65 lakh. This
census is more than 12 years old and hence does not reflect the correct
number of the weavers in the country as on date. So far only 9.87 lakh
weavers of 18 States have been covered under Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar
Bima Yojana. This number is just inadequate. The raise in the benefits will
not be meaningful unless it reaches all the intended beneficiaries by
bringing them within the insurance coverage. Regarding coverage of
weavers from all the States it has been stated that they are eligible for the
benefit of the scheme and LIC has been requested to cover weavers from
all the States. All State Governments have also been advised to enroll
maximum number of weavers of their States under this Scheme. This is
only a perfunctory approach and do not reflect the seriousness of the
issue it merits. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
special drives should be launched to identify the weavers and cover them
under Insurance Scheme in all those States which are hitherto uncovered.
Efforts should be intensified to identify the weavers for the purpose of
coverage in the rest of States so that maximum number of weavers can be
brought within the fold of Insurance coverage under Mahatma Gandhi
Bunkar Bima Yojana
Reply of the Government
 The Government of India has been making strenuous efforts to enroll the
maximum possible number of weavers under the Mahatma Gandhi
Bunkar Bima Yojana (MGBBY). LIC and State Governments have been
advised to generate awareness amongst the local weaver population
about the scheme.  Many publicity campaigns and awareness camps are
being held through the field offices for maximizing enrolments. During
the State Director meeting held on 30.4. 2008, all the State Governments as
well as LIC were advised to ensure higher enrolment under MGBBY from
all the States.
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Comments of the Committee
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13)
 The Committee take note of the fact that National Institute of Fashion
Technology was set up as an apex body of human resource development
for textile garment and allied sectors to cater to the growing needs of the
fashion industry both in domestic and international arena. With the
passage of time NIFT has been successful in so far as the objective of its
establishment is concerned. Its courses are becoming increasingly popular
and the demands of the students for joining the institute is growing year
after year. To meet the growing demands of the students from across the
country, NIFT has undertaken an expansion plan wherein eleven more
branches will be opened in other parts of the country and abroad. This
will be in addition to seven branches already functioning  in various cities
of the country. This is a praiseworthy step, yet the desired progress is not
being achieved due to one or the other reason in all the proposed centres.
All the eleven projects are plagued by one or the other problem and are
not progressing on the expected lines. The Committee are distressed at
the state of affairs prevailing in the expansion of NIFT. They therefore,
strongly recommend that due care and coordination should be ensured
among various agencies which are involved in the establishment of the
centres of NIFT in various parts of the country so that these centres come
up within a specific time frame and start their academic session benefiting
the students from all sections of the society.
Reply of the Government
 Eleven new Centres to be opened in different States.  Correspondence
with 11 different states was going on for opening of new NIFT Centres.
NIFT has seven centres at the under noted places and one new centre
was  opened at Rae-Bareilly(UP) from the Acadmic Year 2007-08:-
1.  New Delhi
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2.  Bangalore
3.  Chennai
4.  Gandhinagar
5.  Hyderabad
6.  Kolkata
7.  Mumbai
8.  Rae- Bareilly
In addition to the above, four new centres are to be opened in India, and
one in  Mauritius, from the next Academic Session 2008-09.  The four new
Centres are  to be opened in:-
1. Patna   2.Bhopal  3.Kannur 4.Shillong
The progress is satisfactory.  Correspondence is underway with other
states to open more centres,  and the progress shall be put up before the
Committee.
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
-NIL-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDASTIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
 The Committee observe that the Government launched the Scheme for
Integrated Textile Parks (SITP) in August 2005, by merging the two
existing Schemes viz. Scheme of Apparel Park for Export and the Textile
Centres Infrastructure Development Scheme. The Scheme, a public
private partnership, is being implemented through Special Purpose
Vehicles (SPVs). The industry associations/group of entrepreneurs are the
main promoters of SITP. The primary objective of SITP is to facilitate
world class infrastructure for setting up textile units. The Government of
India provides assistance @ 40 per cent of the project cost subject to ceiling
of Rs.40 crore. So far only 30 Textile Parks have been sanctioned (during
the Tenth Plan) and out of 50 Textile Parks which were initially
considered for development during the Eleventh Plan Period only 10
Parks have been taken up in the first instance. Sanction of additional
projects have been subjected to completion of critical analysis and
evaluation of four projects approved in the year 2005-2006. Although, it is
a flagship scheme of the Ministry, the pace of progress in the
development of these parks is far from satisfactory. Only one park is fully
functional out of 12 projects sanctioned under erstwhile APES, while
work in only three projects have been completed out of 18 sanctioned
under TCIDS. This itself speaks about the poor functioning of the scheme.
No doubt, the entire process of developing a Textile park involves
enormous efforts at least till it is sanctioned, yet these formalities and
timely development of these parks cannot be protracted on any ground
whatsoever more so, when enterprising entrepreneurs and other
industrial associations form Special Purpose Vehicle (Promoters of Textile
Park) and the assistance of the Government of India is to the tune of 40
per cent of the project cost. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that a time bound action plan be drawn up for ensuring that
the sanctioned Textile Parks become fully operational as any delay in this
regard may not only involve the cost overrun but also run the risk of
meeting the same fate which its earlier components, viz. i.e. APES and
TCIDS met, besides disenchanting the focused and result oriented
entrepreneurs.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Reply of the Government
 Under the Scheme for Integrated Textiles Parks (SITP), the development
of infrastructure is the responsibility of the group of entrepreneurs, who
will be putting up their units in the park and will be the actual users of
the facilities thus created. Apart from contributing a minimum 60% of the
cost of common infrastructure / facilities, these entrepreneurs also make
investment for their individual units. This group of entrepreneurs, thus,
has a commitment not only for proper and timely development of
necessary infrastructure with appropriate technology, but also for
running it properly and effectively in future.
In SITP projects, the entrepreneurs come together and decide their
proposed activities upfront. The groups of entrepreneurs take
considerable time before making such huge investments. Procurement of
land by the SPV and transferring this in its name, conversion of  land use,
and  obtaining statutory clearances take considerable time. But, once these
are finalized, the project moves at a faster pace.
Government of India support is released in a phased manner after
ensuring appropriate matching contributions by the member
entrepreneurs.
The Project Management Consultant (PMC) is helping the SPVs f or the speedy
implementation of the projects in a professional manner right from formulation
of project report to the execution of the project.
Representatives of the Government of India and PMC have been
nominated on the Board of Directors of the project SPVs to oversee the
execution of projects.
Implementations of the projects are being regularly monitored to ensure
timely completion.
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
 The Committee observe that SITP (a flagship scheme of Government of
India) aims to develop world class infrastructure for setting up textile
units. All the items of work coming under textile will be undertaken in
these parks. Entrepreneurs and Industrial Associations have been
identified as the main promoter of the Textile Parks but the Scheme looses
sight of the fact that besides entrepreneurs and industry it is the worker,
weaver, crafts persons who form backbone of the entire chain in the
textile sector. Notwithstanding the primacy given to entrepreneurs, the
people associated with the primary and elementary work to make these
parks functional cannot be ignored if these parks are to run successfully.
Therefore, it will be in the fitness of things if the role to be played by this
section is also given due recognition. The Committee are distressed to
note that the Government feels disinclined to provide any kind of
infrastructural facilities to the groups of artisans, weavers, textile workers,
etc. either in the individual capacity or to their representative bodies,
Cooperatives, Associations, etc. to enable them to carry out their
profession. The response of the Government that interested artisans,
weavers may join hands and form a special purpose vehicle to develop a
textile park as per their business plan, is not acceptable to the Committee.
The development of textile parks through SITP may be the utmost
priority yet we cannot be oblivious of the plight of persons who will be
the main factors for success of these textile parks. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that infrastructural facilities under SITP
should also be made available to the Cooperatives and other
representative bodies of the artisans, weavers, textile workers, etc.
providing them with an opportunity to contribute their mite in their own
way in the development of textile sector. Nevertheless, the interest of
entire chain of workforce associated with the textile parks are well taken
care of as far as their wages, social security coverage and exact money
value of their products is concerned.
Reply of the Government
 Scheme for Integrated Textiles Park (SITP) does not exclude Cooperatives
and other representative bodies of the artisans, weavers, textile workers,
etc. to develop infrastructure facilities. In fact, Metro Hi Tech Co-
operative Textile Park, Pride India Cooperative Textile Park and Shri
Dhairyashil Mane Textile Park Cooperative Society in Maharashtra are
some of the projects  being developed by Cooperative Societies. Further,
an exclusive Handloom Park, namely Pochampally Handloom Park in
Andhra Pradesh is also being developed by Handloom Weavers.
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)
 The Committee take note of the fact that Government propose to set up
`Fashion Hubs’ with a view to strengthen the entire textile value chain
and to provide an interface between the stakeholders by creating a
permanent market place for the Indian Fashion Industry. It would also
serve as a single stop fashion business point, show casing Indian fashion
trends, craftsmanship and design legacy of India. It would also involve
strengthening of the entire supply chain which would include
establishing, backward linkages with suppliers. However, it appears that
the entire plan is still in conceptual stage as the Ministry itself is not
aware of the availability and the cost of the land. The size of land and cost
would determine the facilities to be created and also the methodology of
the operation of the entire project. The concept of creation of `Fashion
Hub’ is laudable  as it   will  help   in   the generation of employment
opportunities in addition to displaying the skills and talents of Indian
crafts persons and providing them an opportunity to create a niche for
themselves in the global arena. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the
Government to take all necessary steps for establishing the `Fashion Hub’
at the earliest. If feasible, land for fashion hub may either be acquired
through outright purchase by the Government or a private agency or may
be taken on lease from private parties or such land owners may be
associated as partners with specific percentage of their shareholding in
the project. Search of land cannot be prolonged indefinitely lingering on
the project for want of land from Government agencies.
Reply of the Government
 The Government proposes to set up ‘Fashion Hubs’ with a view to
strengthen the entire textiles value chain and to provide an interface
between the stakeholders by creating a permanent market place for the
Indian Fashion Industry.  It would also serve as a single stop fashion
business point, showcasing Indian fashion trends, craftsmanship and
design legacy of India.  It would also involve strengthening of the entire
supply chain which would include establishing, backward linkages with
suppliers.  However, the entire plan is still in conceptual stage as the
Ministry is not aware of the availability and the cost of land.  The size of
land and the cost would determine the facilities to be created and also the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

methodology of the operation of the entire project.  The concept of
creation of ‘Fashion Hub’ is laudable as it will help in generation of
employment opportunities in addition to displaying the skills and talents
of Indian crafts persons and providing them as    opportunity   to   create
a    niche   for themselves in the global arena.  Search of land has
prolonged indefinitely on the project for want of land from Government
agencies.
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER V
REDOMMENDASTIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
The Committee note that ‘Health Insurance Scheme’ for handloom weavers was
launched in the year 2005 with the  ICICI Lombard General Insurance Company
Limited as the implementing agency of t he scheme. 23.17 lakh weavers have
been covered till date under the Insurance Scheme. As regards  pending cases for
settlement under the scheme, it has been stated that 12,572 cases involving
Rs.3.38 crore are still to be settled. The present Health Insura nce Scheme does
not provide coverage for critical illness of the weavers. On being enquired on
this aspect, it has been stated that the proposal for covering critical illness was
placed before the EFC on 5 July 2007 while considering the Handloom Weavers
Comprehensive Welfare Scheme. It was suggested that this could be covered
under a new scheme to be launched by LIC and negotiations are going on with
LIC as to the rate of premium payable by the Ministry. For the purpose of
covering general ailments and cri tical illness the engagement of two separate
insurance companies defies all logic. It will be more appropriate if only one
insurance company, preferably LIC, is entrusted with the responsibility of
covering both kind of ailments i.e. General Ailment and Cr itical Illness. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the appropriate steps be taken in this
regard. The Committee further recommend that immediate steps be taken to
settle all the pending cases of claims under the scheme and devise a proper
mechanism t o make the process of claim settlement quick and hassle free in
future.
Reply of the Government
 The critical illness cover was proposed to be included under Health
Insurance Scheme under the new Handloom Weavers Comprehensive
Welfare Scheme (HWCWS) of 11th Plan, as there was a demand to provide
extra benefits to cover seven critical illnesses.  The limit of such illness
was proposed as Rs.30,000/- i.e. double the limit of Rs.15,000/- per
family.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

This proposal was discussed in the EFC meeting held on 5.7.2007.  During
the discussions, Ministry of Finance (Financial Services) felt that a
provision for critical illness need not be kept as part of the Health
Insurance Scheme as LIC will be offering a similar product at a much
cheaper cost within next month.  Therefore, coverage of critical illnesses
under the Health Insurance Scheme was not accepted by the EFC and it
was decided that this could be covered under the new scheme to be
launched by the Life Insurance Corporation.  In  line  with  th is  decision,
the  issue  of critical illness cover was taken up with the LIC.  Initially, LIC
proposed that the premium for critical illness will be fully paid by the
Ministry @ Rs.4/-per thousand for a maximum cover of Rs.30,000/-.  The
LIC was requested to consider lowering the premium.  However, LIC
vide their letter-dated 5.3.2008 proposed an even higher rate of Rs.8/-to
Rs.10/-per thousand for a maximum cover of Rs.30,000/-.  Therefore, LIC
was again requested to reconsider their earlier quote of Rs.4/-per
thousand or lesser to enable consideration of their proposal.
Now the LIC has given a final quote of Rs.4/-per thousand for a
maximum cover of Rs.30,000/-provided the premium charged for critical
illness cover will be fully paid by the Ministry with the caveat that in case
of claim over premium, the loss will be made good by the Ministry.  The
proposal is under examination.
As regards the pending claims under Health Insurance Scheme, it is
stated that as per the report furnished by the ICICI Lombard, there were
12572 claims pending amounting to Rs.3.38 crore up-to February 2008.  As
per the report up to March 2008, there are only 6866 claims pending
amounting to   Rs. 2.63 crore.  From this it may be seen that the pending
claims are being settled.  However, the ICICI Lombard has been advised
to settle the remaining claims also.  The Government of India is reviewing
the implementation of the scheme regularly at the Central level as well as
at the State level.
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation (Sl. No. 12)
 The Committee are distressed to note that despite repeatedly stressing the
need to raise the upper age limit from 58 to 70 for coverage under
MGBBY, the Government is not taking up the issue with the seriousness it
deserves. It is simply quoting the replies of LIC which are evasive in
nature to shirk its responsibility. The Government has stated that the
matter was taken up with the Ministry of Finance and LIC. The LIC
informed that for raising the age limit the premium would be Rs.1,650/-
per weaver. Since the premium was very high, the Ministry of Finance
and the LIC were again and again requested to reduce the premium. It
has also been stated that at present the annual premium for the weaves in
the age group of 18 to 59 years is Rs.330/- per weaver per annum. The
premium proposed by the LIC for the age group between 60-70 years is
Rs.1,500/- per annum. The Committee are not convinced by the logic of
Insurance Company and the Ministry of Finance as it is prima-facie
untenable. Going by this yardstick there is no justification for keeping a
uniform premium for beneficiaries of all ages i.e. 18 to 58 years as
mortality rate  in   the lower  age     group        of      the beneficiaries is far
less than in the higher age group. Hence, the rate of premium should be
structured accordingly in the light of the perceived mortality rate for
different age groups of beneficiaries. Therefore, high rate of premium for
beneficiaries of 59 to 70 years does not hold any ground.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the issue of
increasing the age of weavers from 58 to 70 years for the purpose of
coverage under insurance be immediately decided without any further
delay. Being a public sector company, LIC should not shirk its social
responsibility towards the handloom workers who are from the poor
section of the society. However, the Government may, if necessary, create
a fund to indemnify LIC in case the claim outgo of LIC in this segment (i.e
between 59 to 70 years) is more than the premium collected by the
company.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Reply of the Government
 The matter reg arding raising the upper age limit under the Mahatma Gandhi
Bunkar Bima Yojana was taken up with the LIC.  The premium proposed by the
LIC for the age group between 60 and 70 years was Rs.1500/-  per annum.  Since
this premium was very high, the LIC was requested to lower the premium.  Now
the LIC has given two options for lowering the premium as under:
A premium of Rs.1,000/- per person will be charged for the persons aged
above 59 years with the caveat that in case of claim over premium, the
loss will be made good by the Ministry.  Alternatively, a premium of
Rs.450/- be paid for all the persons being covered under MGBBY (age
group 18 to 69).
The matter is under examination.
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2(8)/2008-Parl, dated 18.07.2008)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
New Delhi; SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,
September, 2008 CHAIRMAN,
Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

MINUTES OF THE  FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR
HELD ON 18TH  SEPTEMBER, 2008
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room No. B,  Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
  Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale,
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot
5. Shri Virendra Kumar
6. Shri Basangouda R. Patil
7. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi
8. Shri Devidas Pingle,
9. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar,
10. Shri Mohan Rawale,
11. Smt. C.S. Sujatha
12. Shri Parasnath Yadav
  RAJYA SABHA
13. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari
14. Shri K. Chandran Pillai
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director
2.  Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2.       XX    XX    XX
3.  XX    XX    XX
4.  XX    XX    XX
5.   XX    XX    XX
6. The Committee then took up Draft Thirty First Action Taken Report on DFG
(2008-09) of the Ministry of Textiles, for consideration and adoption.  After some
discussion, the Committee adopted the Draft Report without any modifications.
7. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the above Report and
present the same to the Parliament.
8. The Committee also placed on records their appreciation for the service rendered
to the Committee by the officers/staff attached to the Committee.
9.  XX    XX    XX
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

      APPENDIX-II
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-NINTH REPORT OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
        Total Percentage
I. Total number of Recommendations      14
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have
been accepted by Government
(Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,7,8,9,11 and 13)         9    64.29%
III. Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
Government’s  replies
Nil                       Nil      Nil
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which  Government’s replies have not been
accepted by the Committee and which requires
reiteration
(Sl. Nos. 5,6   and 14)              3     21.42%
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of Government are of interim in  nature
(Sl. Nos. 10 and 12)             2     14.29%
                       -----------
               1 0 0 %
                      -----------
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages