 
  
 25 
 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2007-08) 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
 
 
THE UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY  BILL, 
2007 
 
 
 
     TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
      
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
November 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)

 2
 
  
 
 
  TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2007-08) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT  
 
 
 
THE UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY  BILL, 
2007 
 
  
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 3.12.2007 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3.12.2007 
 
       
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
        
                        November 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)  

 3
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
          
                                                               PAGE (s) 
   
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………...     (iii) 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N     … … … … … …     ( i v )  
 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                      ………………    1  
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I THE UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY BILL, 2007 
II. THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY BILL, 2007 AS 
DRAFTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
III LIST OF TRADE UNIONS WHO APPEARED BEFORE COMMITTEE OR 
SUBMITTED MEMORANDA 
IV LIST OF EMPLOYERS’ GROUPS WHO APPEARED BEFORE COMMITTEE 
OR SUBMITTED MEMORANDA 
V LIST OF NGOs WHO APPEARED BEFORE COMMITTEE OR SUBMITTED 
MEMORANDA 
VI NAMES OF INDIVIDUALS WHO APPEARED BEFORE COMMITTEE OR 
SUBMITTED MEMORANDA 
VII SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED FROM VARIOUS MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS 
OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
VIII COMMENTS RECEIVED FROM STATE GOVERNMENTS/UT 
ADMINISTRATIONS 
IX SUMMARY OF MEMORANDA RECEIVED FROM VARIOUS TRADE 
UNIONS/EMPLOYERS’ GROUPS/NGOs/INDIVIDUALS/ 
ASSOCIATIONS 
X MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
HELD ON 8 OCTOBER 2007 
XI        MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
HELD ON 16 OCTOBER 2007 
XII MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
HELD ON 25 OCTOBER 2007 
XIII MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
HELD ON 5 NOVEMBER 2007 
 XIV MINUTES OF  THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  ON   
 LABOUR HELD ON 29 NOVEMBER 2007 
    
  

 4
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (2007-2008) 
  
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 .  S h r i  F u r k a n  A n s a r i         
3. Shri Subrata Bose    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot    
6. Shri Munawar Hasan    
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
8. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar     
10. Shri Basangouda R. Patil   
11. Shri Devidas Pingle  
12. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar 
13. Shri Mohan Rawale  
14. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat   
    15. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat   
16. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
17. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
                   *18. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
 19. Vacant 
 20. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
  21. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam 
  22. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  23. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
24.     Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
25.     Shri Gandhi Azad 
26.     Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
27.     Shri Dilip Ray 
   **28.    Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
29.    Vacant 
30. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
         1.    Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri N.K. Sapra   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
5.    Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Deputy Secretary-II 
   6.    Ms. Mili George  - Senior Executive Assistant 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*  Changed the nomination from Committee on Railways to                                     
Committee on Labour w.e.f. 21 August 2007. 
                   ** Nominated w.e.f. 14.9.2007 

 5
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf present this Twenty-Fifth Report 
on “The Unorganised Sector Workers’ Social Security Bill, 2007” of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment. 
 
 
2.  “The Unorganised Sector Workers’ Soci al Security Bill, 2007” was introduced in 
Rajya Sabha on 10 September 2007 and was referred to the Standing Committee on 
Labour  by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E (b) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and report within 
three months from the date of publication of the reference of the Bill in Bulletin Part-II 
of Lok Sabha dated 20 September  2007. 
 
 
3. The Bill aims to provide for social secur ity and welfare of the unorganized sector 
workers’ and deals with matters connected th erewith or incidental thereto.  The Bill 
also, inter alia provides for setting up of a National Social Security Advisory Board by 
the Central Government to recommend suitab le welfare schemes for different sections 
of unorganized sector workers, constitution of a State Social Security Advisory Boards 
by each State Government to recommend suitable welfare schemes for different 
sections of unorganized workers in the States.  
 
 
4. The Committee obtained written informat ion on various provisions contained in 
the Bill from the nodal Ministry, i.e. the Ministry of Labour & Employment.  The 
Committee at their sitting on 8 October 20 07 held a preliminary briefing with the 
representatives of the Ministries of Labo ur and Employment, and Law & Justice 
(Department of Legal Affairs) on the provisions  of the Bill.  Owing to the importance of 
the Bill and the cascading effect it will have on the largest chunk of the working class, 
the Committee at their sitting held on 8 Oc tober 2007 decided to invite the views of 
experts, organizations and individuals thro ugh print and electronic media.  The Bill 
was also made available online for seeking th e views of the enlightened section of the 
society on this important piece of legislation.  A good number of online representations 
from individuals and organisations were recei ved for consideration of the Committee.  
The Committee also invited suggestions from  all former Union Labour Ministers, all 
Labour Ministers of the respective State Governments/Union Territories and heads of 
all major national/regional political parties of the country.  Written suggestions from 
different Ministries/Departments of the Gover nment of India, directly or indirectly 
concerned with the labour of unorganized sector were also sought.  During their 
sitting held on 16 October 2007, the Commi ttee heard the views of the representatives 
of the major Central Trade Unions and Asso ciations working for the welfare of the 
agriculture workers and workers of the un organized sector.  On 25 October 2007, 
representatives of Employers’ Groups and various NGOs working for these workers 
deposed before the Committee on various pr ovisions pertaining to the Bill.  On 5 
November 2007, some more Trade Unions and NGOs appeared before the Committee 
to express their views on the Bill.  Thereafte r, on the same day, the Committee sought 

 6
certain clarifications on the provisions of the Bill from the representatives of Ministry 
of the Labour & Employment. 
 
5. At their sitting held on 25 October 2007, the Committee decided to constitute a 
5 member Drafting Committee from amongst the members of the Committee to 
discuss every aspect of the Bill in the lig ht of the discussions held in the Standing 
Committee.  The Drafting Committee whic h consisted of S/Sh.Suravaram Sudhakar 
Reddy, Arjun K. Sengupta, Furkan Ansari , Thawar Chand Gehlot and  K.Chandran 
Pillai, met five times to deliberate upon the issues.  Apart from giving 
recommendations on the important Clauses of the Bill, the Committee have also 
introduced the concept of having a National Social Security Fund because it was felt 
that in the long run a dedicated fund syst em will ensure permanency, continuity and 
sustainability of the National Minimum Social Security Scheme.  Reliance on annual 
budgetary support could put the National Minimum Social Scheme into jeopardy due 
to changing priorities of the Government of the day.  Again, in order to focus on the 
size and magnitude of the unorganized worker s, it was necessary to have, as in the 
case of Fund, dedicated administrative set up      which would administer and manage 
the National and State Funds and provide policy guidance to the State and the Central 
Governments.  Therefore, the Drafting Committee have proposed that the National and 
State Social Security Boards, instead of bein g just advisory in character, should have 
an administrative role in managing the issues relating to implementation of various 
schemes pertaining to the unorganized workers.   Some additions also made in the Bill 
are Secretariat of the Board, Dispute Redr essal Mechanism, Penal provisions, etc.  
With a view to obviate any scope of uncertainty and ambiguity, it was thought prudent 
by the Committee to prepare a substitute Dr aft Bill incorporating all the necessary 
amendments which the Committee deem essen tial for the welfare of unorganised 
workers and enclose it with the Report of the Committee. 
 
6. In all, five sittings of the full Committee and five sittings of the Drafting 
Committee were held wherein besides the representatives of the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment, Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs), 42 
persons representing various trade unions , NGOs, employers groups, stakeholders, 
etc. appeared before the Committee to ex press their views on the various Clauses of 
the Bill.  Besides, 43 written memorand a were also received by the Committee for 
examination before the finalisation of the Report.  The summarized form of the same is 
appended as Annexure-- VIII. 
 
7. The Committee considered and adopte d the Draft Report on the Bill on 29 
November 2007. 
 
8. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the various Central and 
Regional Trade Unions, Associations and NG Os working for the welfare of workers of 
the unorganized sector, Employers’ Groups, various organisations and individuals, the 
concerned Ministries/Departments of the Go vernment of India for placing their views 
on the Bill before the Committee. 
 
9. The Committee also wish to convey their gratitude to the officers of the 
Ministries of Labour and Employment and Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) 
for assisting the Committee by placing their views and also for furnishing valuable 
materials and information in a very short span of time which the Committee desired in 
connection with the examination of the Bill. 
 

 7
10. The Committee also place on record th eir high appreciation and thanks to the 
Members of the Drafting Committee for constructive contribution and guidance 
rendered towards the drafting the Report. 
 
11. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation of the commitment, dedication an d valuable assistance rendered to them 
from time to time by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
12. For facility of reference and convenie nce, the observations/recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report.  
  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY, 
29 November, 2007      C H A I R M A N ,  
8 Agrahayana, 1929 (SAKA)        STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 

 8
 
 
REPORT 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
 
The Unorganized Sector Workers according to the definition given by the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment are those who have not been able to pursue their 
common interests due to constraints like casual nature of employment, absence of 
definite employer-employee relationship, ig norance, illiteracy, etc.  The unorganized 
workers are also generally low paid and a majority of them are devoid of any of the 
social security benefits like life and medical insurance, health care, maternity benefits, 
old age pension etc. which are available to  the workers in the organized sector under 
the Employees State Insurance Act, 1948; the Employees Provident Fund and Other 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and the Factories Act, 1948, etc. 
 
Magnitude of Workforce in the Unorganised Sector  
 
1. The National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) carried out its 61 st Round 
sample survey in 2004-05 and its results sh owed that out of total workforce of 457.5 
million in the country, only 62.6 million workers are employed in the organized sector 
and remaining 394.9 million workers in the unorganized sector. Ho wever of the total 
workers in the organized sector, 33.4 million workers had some kind of job and/or 
social security, and therefore the remainin g 29.2 million workers should be treated as 
unorganised (often called informal) workers in the organized sector. Further, only 
about 1.4 million workers in the unorganised  sector had some ki nd of job and/or 
social security. This means that the unorganised workers in the Indian economy stood 
at 422.6 million (i.e.393.5 million in the un organised sector an d 29.2 million in the 
organized sector) as on 2004-05. These ar e the unprotected workers in the Indian 
economy. 
 
Characteristics of the Unorganised Sector 
 
2. The unorganized sector workers can be ca tegorized broadly into four categories, 
viz. 
 
(i) Occupation: Small and marginal farmers, landless agricultural 
labourers, share croppers, fishermen, those engaged in animal 
husbandry, in beedi rolling, beedi labeling and beedi packing, 
workers in building and construction, etc. 
 
(ii) Nature of Employment : self employed, attached agricultural 
labourers, bonded labourers migrant workers, contract and casual 
labourers come under this category. 
 
(iii) Specially distressed categories : Toddy tappers, scavengers, 
carriers of head loads, drivers of  animal driven vehicles, loaders 
and unloaders belong to this category; and  
 

 9
(iv) Service categories : Midwives, domestic workers, fishermen and 
women, barbers, vegetable and fruit vendors, newspaper vendors, 
etc., come under this category. 
 
3. The Government has enacted certain le gislations for the protection of these 
workers.  Some of the legislations applicable to the workers in the unorganized sector 
include the Workmen Compensation Act, 1923; the Minimum Wages Act, 1948; The 
Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976; The Inter-State Migrant Workmen 
(RECS) Act, 1979; The Building and other Construction Workers (RECS) Act, 1996.  
 
4. There has been a long pending demand to provide social security coverage to 
the myriad of workers of the unorganized sector from various sections of the society.  
Various versions of the Unorganised Workers’ Welfare Bill, at the rate of almost one 
per year have been emanating from central government from time to time, in addition 
to those formulated by the 2 nd National Labour Commission, the National Campaign 
Committee, the National Commission for En terprises in the Unorganised Sector, etc.  
Various State Governments, such as Karnatak a, have also been attempting the same 
with little success. The National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganised 
Sector (NCEUS) under the Chairmanship of Dr. Arjun K. Sengupta in the year 2006 
examined the issue in its entirety and submitted a report to the Government. The 
Commission, after detailed deliberations in  2007 over every aspect of the issue, 
submitted a detailed Report to the Go vernment on the subject recommending 
comprehensive Bills on social security an d conditions of work separately for 
agricultural workers and non-agricultural workers.   
 
5. In the light of the Report of the NCEUS, a Bill viz, “The Unorganised Sector 
Workers’ Social Security Bill, 2007” incorp orating various measures for the welfare of 
the workers of the unorganized sector was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 10 
September 2007 and subsequently referred to the Standing Committee on Labour on 
20 September 2007 by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha for examination and report.  
 
  
6. The salient features of the Bill are as under:- 
 
(i) Unorganised Sector Worker is on e who is a home-based worker, self-
employed worker or a wage worker in the unorganized sector; 
(ii) The Central Government may formulate, from time to time, suitable 
welfare schemes for different sections of the unorganized sector workers 
on matters relating to life and di sability cover; health and maternity 
benefits; old age protection and any other benefit as may be determined 
by the Central Government. 
(iii) The schemes included in the Schedu le will be deemed to be welfare 
schemes under the proposed legislation and the Central Government 
may amend the Schedule and include or exclude therefrom any welfare 
scheme for the unorganized sector workers. 
(iv) The schemes notified by the Central Government may be wholly funded 
by the Central Government; or partly funded by the Central Government 
and partly funded by the State Government; or partly funded by the 
Central Government, partly funded by  the State Government and partly 
funded through contributions collect ed from the beneficiaries of the 
scheme or the employers as may be prescribed in the scheme by the 
Central Government. 

 10
(v) Every scheme notified by the Central Government shall provide for such 
matters that are necessary for the efficient implementation of the 
scheme, including matters relating to : scope of the scheme; beneficiaries 
of the scheme; resources of the scheme; and agency or agencies that will 
implement the scheme. 
(vi) The State Government may formulate and notify, from time to time, 
suitable welfare schemes for different sections of unorganized sector 
workers, including schemes relating  to provident fund; employment 
injury benefit; housing; educatio nal schemes for children; skill 
upgradation of workers; funeral assistance; and old age homes. 
(vii) Constitution of the Tripartite National Social Security Advisory Board 
representing Central Government, State Governments, representatives of 
trade unions, employers, eminent persons. 
(viii) Adequate representation to person s belonging to the Scheduled Castes, 
the Scheduled Tribes, the Minorities and Women. 
(ix) The functions of the National Social Security Advisory Board, inter-alia, 
include: to recommend to the Central Government suitable schemes for 
different sections of unorganized sect or workers; monitor such social 
welfare schemes for workers in the unorganized sector as are 
administered by the Central Government; review the progress of 
registration and issue of identity  cards to the unorganized sector 
workers; 
(x) The State Government may formulate and notify, from time to time, 
suitable welfare schemes for different sections of unorganized sector 
workers, including schemes of unor ganized sector workers, including 
scheme relating to provident fund; employment injury benefit; housing; 
educational schemes for children; sk ill upgradation of workers; funeral 
assistance; and old age homes. 
(xi) The schemes notified by the State Governments may be wholly funded by 
the State Government; partly funded by the State Government; partly 
funded through contributions collect ed from the beneficiaries of the 
scheme or the employers.  The State Government may seek financial 
assistance from the Central Gover nment and Central Government may 
provide such assistance to the Stat e Governments for the purpose of the 
schemes for such period and on such terms as it may deem fit. 
(xii) Constitution of similar Boards at the State level. 
(xiii) Adequate representation to person s belonging to the Scheduled Castes, 
the Scheduled Tribes, the Minorities and Women in the State Boards. 
(xiv) The functions of the State So cial Security Advisory Board, inter-alia, 
include: recommend to the State Government suitable schemes for 
different sections of unorganized sect or workers; monitor such social 
welfare schemes for workers in the unorganized sector as are 
administered by the State Gover nment; review the progress of 
registration and issue of identity  cards to the unorganized sector 
workers; 
(xv) Every unorganized sector worker who has completed fourteen years of 
age and files a self-declaration that  he/she is an unorganized sector 
worker is eligible for registration an d would be issued an identity card, 
which would be a smart card. 
(xvi) Record keeping functions for the purpose of the Act to be performed by 
the District Administration.  Th e State Government may direct the 

 11
District Panchayat in rural areas an d Urban Local Bodies in urban areas 
to undertake these functions.  
 
7. In order to have the opinion of all the stakeholders on the various provisions of 
the Bill, the Committee invited suggestions/ recommendations through print and 
audio-visual media, internet, etc.  Representatives of the major National Trade Unions, 
NGOs, Employers’ Groups and researchers were invited to appear before the 
Committee to share their considered views on the social security measures proposed 
in the Bill.  The sum and substance of th e various depositions before the Committee 
and memoranda submitted to the Committee was the inadequacy of the definition of 
the terms ‘unorganized sector’ and ‘unorg anised sector worker’.  The Bill adopts a 
segmented approach to the unorganized workers instead of a universal approach. It 
intends to achieve the objective of providing social security through a number of 
schemes instead of one statutory scheme.  It does not provide for a national minimum 
level of social security benefits.  Emphasis was laid on providing national minimum 
social security benefits as a matter of right to all unorganised workers, within a 
defined time frame. Apprehensions were also expressed regarding the nature and 
scope of the proposed National and State So cial Security Advisory Boards as they will 
not have any power and control over the implementation of the various social security 
schemes initiated/to be initiated by the Union and State Governments.  As regards the 
funding of the various social security schemes, it was conveyed by the different 
representatives that the Bill lacks proper and systematic funding pattern, which will 
ultimately erode the efficacy of the schemes, meant for the workers of the unorganized 
sector.  The need was also stressed for creati on of a National Fund with a view to 
ensure uninterrupted flow of funds for these schemes.   
 
8. The Committee after considering the views expressed by several 
representatives of Trade Unions/NGOs/Employers’ Groups/Associations, etc., 
and after going through the memoranda received, are convinced that ‘The 
Unorganised Sector Workers’ Social Security Bill , 2007’ in its present form will 
not be able to meet the aspirations of the millions of worker s in the unorganized 
sector.  It also reflects the unimaginative approach of the Government in 
bringing the Bill without proper and sufficient spadework required for such a 
significant piece of legislation.  The Committee, therefore, propose that 
necessary amendments may be carried out in the title of the Bill, definition of 
various significant terms contained in the Bill, in various clauses of the Bill 
relating to provision of a statutory right for national minimum benefits for all 
unorganised workers and coverage within specified time frame, composition of 
the National and State Social Security Advisory Boards, functions to be assigned 
to these Boards, creation of separate National Fund including method of funding, 
provision of staff for servicing these Boards and constitution of Grievance 
Redressal Machinery, etc.  As these amendments have altogether changed the 
very nature and structure of the Bill, the Committee think it prudent to enclose 

 12
a copy of the Bill itself in the amended form as an Annexure to the Report 
(Annexure-II).  The Committee urge upon th e Government that, keeping in view 
the much-awaited welfare measures for the workers of the unorganized sector, 
the revised Bill may be brought before the Parliament without any further delay.  
 
Short Title, extent and commencement 
 
 
Clause 1 Sub-Clause (1) – Short Title of the Bill  
 
Clause 1 Sub-Clause (1) reads as under:- 
 
 This Act may be called the Unorganised Sector Workers’ Social Security Act, 
2007. 
 
9. During the course of the meeting with the various Central Trade Unions on the 
Bill, a representative remarked that the title of the Bill is misleading. The term 
‘Unorganised Workers’ ordinarily denotes those workers who are not unionized.  Such 
workers may be in the organized sector as well as in the unorganized sector.  To confine 
the benefits of the social security schemes to the workers of a defined sector may 
deprive the workers of similar footing of the other sector from the benefits, which they 
would have been otherwise entitled to had they been working in the unorganized sector. 
Such hapless workers are at crossroads i.e. they are neither getting the benefits of 
organized sector worker nor are they covered within the social security schemes meant 
for the workers of the unorganized sector. The Government has not paid any attention to 
the plight of these workers.  It would perhaps be most appropriate if the title of the Bill is 
modified to include such category of workers within the title and definition of the Bill. 
 
 
10. The Committee take note of the various suggestions received during the 
course of interaction with the stakeholders regarding appropriate amendment 
in the title of the Bill.  After considering the issue in detail and taking a 
holistic view in the interest of the workers, the Committee are of the opinion 
that the title of the Bill needs modification.  With a view to provide social 
security universally for the entire workforce of the country irrespective of the 
sectors, the Committee, recommend that the Bill may be titled as `The 
Unorganised Workers’ Social Security Bill, 2007’.  The word ‘Sector’ may be 
deleted as a consequential change wherever this word occurs in other clauses 
of the Bill and has the import of restricting the coverage of the Bill.     
 
 
 
 

 13
Clause 1 Sub-Clause (3) – Applicability 
Clause 1 Sub-Clause (3) reads as under:- 
 
 It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.    
 
 
11. In this regard, it was suggested by several representatives of the Central Trade 
Unions that the Bill may be notified uniformly in the country.  In this regard, the 
Committee feel that programmes/provisions of this nature can be implemented only in 
phases.  Therefore, different dates for different States and different areas in a State and 
different provisions of this Act may be made applicable taking into account the 
infrastructure and financial constraints of the States.        
 
12. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Act should come into force 
on such date as the Central Government may appoint by notification.  Different 
dates may be appointed for different Stat es and different areas in a State and 
for different provisions of this Act, at the earliest but within six months from 
the date of assent by the President.   
 
Definitions 
 
Clause 2 Sub-Clause (a) – Employer 
 
Clause 2 Sub-Clause (a) reads as under:- 
 
“employer” means a person or an association of persons, who has engaged or 
employed an unorganized sector worker  either directly or otherwise for 
remuneration. 
 
13. The Committee feel that the words “natural or juridical” may be added 
after the words “means a” to make the definition of employer more clear.  
 
Clause 2 Sub-Clause (c) – Identity Card                                                                                     
 
Clause 2 Sub-Clause (c) reads as under:- 
 
 “identity card” means a card, document or  certificate issued to an unorganized 
sector worker by the District Administration under sub-section (3) of section 9. 
 
   
14. The Committee take note of the views expressed by the Members of 
various Representative Bodies who appeared before the Committee and 
recommend that the identity card should be self sufficient and inclusive.  The 

 14
identity card to be issued to the workers should be multi-purpose and multi-
sectoral having  details of all the dependant family members of the worker. It 
should also have the validity for the migrant workers so that they do not face 
any difficulty in case of their migration for seeking job elsewhere.  The 
Committee further recommend that in the issuance of the identity card, Gram 
Panchayats, Nagar Palikas, Municipalities and Corporations should also be 
involved.  For the purpose of the identity of the worker, if it is to be ascertained 
through District Administrative Machinery at all, the certificate given by the 
Gram Panchayats, Nagar Palikas and other similar bodies be taken as a 
testimony of the identity of the worker for issuing identity card to him/her.   
Considering the certificate issued by these bodies, the District Administration 
shall have to issue the identity card to the unorganized worker within a 
maximum period of one month from the date of its receipt.  The Committee also 
recommend that an online network at national level should also be developed 
linking all the district headquarters so that any information about the details 
incorporated in the identity cards issued anywhere in the country could be 
accessed instantly.   
 
Clause 2 Sub-Clause (k) – unorganized sector  
 
Clause 2 Sub-Clause (k) reads as under:- 
 
 “unorganized sector” means an enterprise owned by individuals or self-
employed workers and engaged in the production or sale of goods or providing service 
of any kind whatsoever, and where the en terprise employs workers, the number of 
such workers is less than ten. 
 
15. The Committee find that in the case of agricultural worker, the 
operational holding is treated as an enterprise.  In the rural areas, the 
majority of unorganized/informal workers mostly comprise landless 
agricultural labourers, small and marginal farmers who are holding land less 
than 2 hectares.  In order to make the definition more clear, these classes of 
people may also be explicitly mentioned in the definition of unorganized sector.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the words “and in case of 
agriculture, the landholding is less than 2 hectares” may be added at the end.  
 
 
 
 

 15
 
Clause 2 Sub-Clause (m) – Wage Worker 
 
Clause 2 Sub-Clause (m) reads as under:- 
 
 “wage worker” means a person employed for remuneration in the unorganized 
sector, directly by an employer or throug h any contractor, irrespective of place of 
work, whether exclusively for one employer or  for one or more employers, whether in 
cash or in kind, whether as a home-based worker, or as a temporary or casual worker, 
or as a migrant worker, or workers empl oyed by households including domestic 
workers, with a monthly wage of an amou nt as may be notified by the Central 
Government and State Government, as the case may be.  
 
16. The Committee feel that since the proposed social security measures are 
uniformly applicable to workers whether in agriculture or non-agricultural 
segments, mention of agriculture is essential to make the provision more clear.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that after the words, ‘unorganised sector’, the 
words ‘whether in agriculture or non-agriculture’ may be added .  Similarly, 
after ‘more employers’, the words ‘whether simultaneously or otherwise’ be 
added.  The words ‘wage’ may also be substituted for ‘earning’ in order to 
make the Clause more clear.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that Clause 
2 (m) may be amended accordingly.  
 
Insertion of new Sub-Clause (n) under Clause 2 – unorganized worker 
 
17. The Committee take note of the fact that the definition of unorganized 
sector as given in the Bill is ambiguous as it does not comprise all the sectors 
that are likely to come within its ambit due to continuous change in the 
employment pattern as there is a grow ing trend in the public sector to 
outsource the work or to get it executed through contract/casual workers who 
are popularly known as informal work ers of the formal sector. The all 
important co-operative sector which is a very strong and important segment of 
working class has not found place in the current definition.  The other newly 
created 
ad hoc  employment opportunities like event management, 
entertainment/cultural activities and placement jobs also do not figure within 
the definition of the sector. The Commi ttee observe that the definition of the 
unorganized sector worker has been attempted to be broad based.  It is true 
that any definition cannot be comprehensive and complete as far as 
identification of worker of unorganized  sector for the purpose of bringing 

 16
him/her within the fold of social security network is concerned.  However, any 
class of worker, who is otherwise entitled for social security coverage, should 
be not be left out merely because his class of workers have not been included in 
the definition.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the benefits under 
the proposed Act should also be extended to the uncovered casual/contract 
workers of the organized sector and any class of workers like Anganwadi 
workers, who are not covered either in the organized or unorganized sector, 
within its parameters.   
 
18. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that not only the workers 
of every emerging field of employment in the changing scenario but the workers 
of co-operative sector also without any bar on the number of workers for the 
purpose of social security coverage, be also included.  In view of the foregoing, 
the Committee suggest insertion of a new Sub-Clause 2(n) defining unorganized 
worker to be incorporated as under:- 
“unorganised worker” means an unorganized sector worker and also 
includes workers in the organized sector not protected by the existing laws 
relating to social security.  
    
Explanation: For the purposes of this Act, unorganised workers would also include any 
class of voluntary workers like Anganwadi workers who are not covered or protected or 
benefited by the existing laws relating to social security either in the organized sector or 
unorganised sector.  
 
19. The Committee believe that the social security benefits under the Act 
should also be made admissible to the retired unorganised workers. However 
considering their age, some of the pr oposed benefits may not be practically 
feasible. But wherever it is feasible, the Government should extend the 
proposed benefits to them as far as possible. 
 
Social Security Schemes  
 
 
Clause 3 Sub-Clause (1) – Framing of Schemes by Union Government  
 
Clause 3 Sub-Clause (1) reads as under:- 
 
 The Central Government may formulate, from time to time, suitable welfare 
schemes for different sections of unorganized sector workers on matters relating to – 

 17
 
(a) life and disability cover; 
(b) health and maternity benefits; 
(c) old age protection; and 
(d) any other benefits as may be determined by the Central Government. 
 
20. The Committee observe that the Bill does not make it mandatory for the 
Central Government to introduce schemes for the welfare of unorganized sector 
workers.  The Committee desire that the schemes should be so framed as to be 
within the realm of certainties and benefits which are to flow therefrom should 
not be left to any contingencies and whimsical interpretations.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the word ‘may’ in the above mentioned clause may 
be substituted with ‘shall’. 
 
Insertion of new Sub-Clauses (1A) to (1D) under Clause 3 – National Minimum 
Social Security Benefit. 
 
21. The Committee find that the Bill fails to provide any timeframe for 
coverage of all workers and it is wide open that different segments of 
unorganized workers will be provided with different schemes at different times.  
The Committee further take note of the fact that India is yet to evolve a 
comprehensive National Social Security Policy for its entire working 
population.  The Committee are of the view  that fiscal burden of the proposed 
scheme should be minimal.  Moreover, these benefits should be covered in 
phases within a time frame of three years, which can be both supplemented 
and progressively enhanced.  The Committee also call upon the Government 
that the concept of National Minimum Benefits should be made part of the Act 
and State Governments be allowed to add on the benefits, if they deem it 
necessary.  Furthermore, the existing schemes included under the purview of 
the Act are very few.  In this regard, the Committee observed that ILO 
Convention No.102 has laid down the minimum standards of social security 
comprising the following:-medical care, sickness benefit, unemployment 
benefit, old age benefit, invalidity benefit and survivors’ benefit. 
   
22. The Committee feel that the Act should statutorily provide for national 
minimum benefits creating a justiciable right in favour of all unorganised 
workers. The national minimum benefits should be extended to all the 
unorganised workers within a period of three years. Depending on availability 

 18
of infrastructure and finance, the Government may introduce national 
minimum in terms of benefits to be provid ed or, class of workers to be covered. 
Presently, the Committee has quantified and recommend benefits in matters 
relating to life and disability, health and maternity, and old age protection in 
the Bill itself. The quantum of benefits proposed are to be adjusted for inflation 
every two years by the Government of India. In addition, the Government of 
India may announce separate welfare schemes (which would not be part of 
national minimum) for welfare of workers. The list of schemes which would be 
part of national minimum are specified in Schedule 1 of the Bill. 
 
23. In view of the foregoing, the Committee call upon the Government that 
suitable provisions under Clause 3 (1A) to (1D) may be incorporated in the Bill.  
The proposed changes have been reflected in the draft Bill as enclosed with the 
Report.   
 
24. The Committee, further recommend that a new Schedule 2 showing more 
welfare schemes may also be incorporated in the Bill.  Consequential changes 
in Sub-Clauses (2), (3) and (4) of Clause 3, may also be carved out as shown in 
the draft Bill appended with the Report.    
 
Clause 3 Sub-Clause (3) – Addition/Deletion/Alteration of schemes 
 
Clause 3 Sub-Clause (3) reads as under:- 
 
 The Central Government may, by notifica tion, amend the Schedule referred to 
in sub-section (1), and include therein or  exclude therefrom any welfare scheme for 
the unorganized sector workers.   
 
25. The Committee note with apprehension the intention of the Government 
to arrogate to itself those sweeping powers which are purely legislative in 
nature.  The Committee very well appreciate the difficulties, which may arise 
in the day-to-day administration of the welfare schemes.  In the garb of 
overcoming operational difficulties on day-to-day basis, the Government cannot 
be allowed to make substantial changes including addition or deletion of the 
schemes from the Bill itself.   However, the Committee are not averse to minor 
changes in the schemes to overcome administrative difficulties with a view to 
facilitate quick and effective delivery of social security benefits. For any major 

 19
changes or addition/deletion/alteration of any of the schemes, the proper 
course of action, i.e. seeking approval of legislature for such measures should 
be made mandatory.      
 
26. The powers for amendment of schemes specified under section 3(2) (i.e. 
welfare schemes which are other than the national minimum) by notification 
are, however, considered appropriate by the Committee. 
 
Clause 4 Sub-Clause (1) – Funding of Central Government Schemes 
                                                                                                                                                 
Clause 4 Sub-Clause (1) reads as under:- 
                                                                                                                                                       
 Any scheme notified by the Central Government may be— 
 
(i) wholly funded by the Central Government; or 
(ii) partly funded by the Central Government and partly funded by the State 
Government; or 
(iii) partly funded by the Central Gover nment, partly funded by the State 
Government and partly funded throug h contributions collected from the 
beneficiaries of the scheme or the empl oyers as may be prescribed in the 
scheme by the Central Government.  
 
 
27. The Committee have since recommended that National Minimum Social 
Security Benefit may be provided under Clause 3 of the Bill, consequential 
changes in Clause 4 (1) and 4 (2) may be carried out as shown in the draft Bill 
appended with the Report.   
 
28. The Committee further recommend that the National Minimum Social 
Security Benefits like life and accident cover, health insurance and maternity 
benefit should be wholly funded by the Central Government.   
 
Insertion of new Clauses – Constitution of National and State Social Security and 
Welfare Fund 
 
29. The Committee express their serious reservation about the pattern of 
funding for the various social security schemes of the unorganized workers as 
laid down in the Bill.  Without any definite mechanism and source, the 
schemes have been proposed to be (i) funded wholly by the Central Government, 
(ii) partly funded by the Central Government and partly funded by the State 

 20
Government or (iii) partly funded by the Central Government, partly funded by 
the State Government and partly funded through contributions collected from 
the beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers as may be prescribed in the 
scheme by the Central Government.   
 
30. The Committee feel that social security schemes cannot just work 
without any statutory backing and assured resource allocation.  It would not 
be proper to tailor the schemes or reduce their number on the consideration of 
funds.  Fund flow system for the sche mes has been kept virtually undefined 
and wide open thereby allowing total flexibility to the Government in the 
matter of deciding and operationalising the schemes as per its convenience. 
Thus, the Committee are inclined to infer that an 
ad hoc  approach has been 
adopted on such an important aspect of the Bill. This will only make the 
schemes dysfunctional.  We should not be oblivious of the fact that the 
contribution of the workers of unorganised sector in the GDP of the country, 
according to the Central Statistical Organisation is more than 60%.  Hence, it 
becomes our bounden duty, both morally and legally, to ensure that minimum 
social security benefits are provided to the unorganised workers. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a proper, transparent and 
institutional mechanism devising clear and unambiguous methodology for 
generating resources be laid down paving the way for creation of a National 
Social Security and Welfare Fund.  The Committee are of the opinion that 
creation of National Social Security and Welfare Fund will ensure permanency, 
continuity and sustainability of social security benefits.  The method to be so 
adopted for mobilizing resources may vary from earmarking of a definite 
percentage of GDP to levy ing of cess on various fo rms of taxes, grants and 
loans from the Union and State Governments, monthly collection of 
contributions from employers and benefici aries on the lines of ESIC and EPFO, 
making provisions for cross subsidy of certain percentage of benefits from 
national, financial and developmental institutions or from any of such 
companies which have been directly or indirectly benefiting from the 
unorganised workers, etc.  All contributions made to the National Social 
Security and Welfare Fund should be exempted from the payment of income tax 
or any other tax under the different tax laws.  The fund so collected will be 
utilized to meet the expenditure on the implementation of various social 

 21
security schemes for welfare of unorganized workers and on all such matters 
related to the enhancement of the scope of various schemes meant for such 
workers.   
 
31. The Committee, therefore, recommend that new Clauses for creation of 
National Social Security and Welfare Fund and State Social Security and 
Welfare Funds may be inserted in the Bill itself.          
 
Clause 5 Sub-Clause (1) & Clause 6 Sub-Clause (1) – Constitution of 
National/State Social Security Advisory Boards 
 
Clause 5 Sub-Clause (1) reads as under:- 
 
 The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a National Board to 
be known as the National Social Security Advisory Board to exercise the powers 
conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.  
 
Clause 6 Sub-Clause (1) reads as under:- 
 
 Every State Government shall, by notifi cation, consitute a State Board to be 
known as (name of the State) State Social Security Advisory Board to exercise the 
powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.  
  
32. The Committee find that the Boards to be constituted at the National and 
State level will not have any power per se .  It is clear from the title of the 
Boards itself i.e, ‘The National Social Security Advisory Board’, ‘State Social 
Security Advisory Board’ that its functions will be only advisory in nature.  
This will inherently make the Board an infructous body as it will not have any 
power to ensure implementation of the schemes. While the Bill provides that 
one of the functions of the Board will be ‘to monitor such social welfare 
schemes for workers in the unorganized sector as are administered by the 
Central Government’, the Government has categorically stated in one of the 
replies that the Board has not been assigned the task of implementation of the 
scheme.  The Committee is distressed to note that the 
raison d'être  of the 
constitution of the  Board stands defeated particularly in view of the 
contradictory and irreconciliable stand of the Government.  This also speaks 
about the lack of clarity and sincerity on the part of the Government.  Hence, it 
will be essential to enumerate and illustrate the functions of the Board to make 
it worth its existence.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Board 
should be vested with adequate powers, for ensuring the proper implementation 

 22
and monitoring of the schemes, to revi ew the performance of the schemes and 
to make suitable amendments accordingly. The Committee further recommend 
that the word ‘Advisory’ may also be deleted in heading of the Boards.    
 
Clause 5 Sub-Clause (2) & Clause 6 Sub-Clause (2) – Representation in the 
National/State Boards 
 
Clause 5 Sub-Clause (2) reads as under:- 
 
The National Board shall consist of the following members, namely:- 
  
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government; 
(b) the Director General (Labour Welfar e)-Member Secretary, ex-officio; and 
(c) thirty one members to be nominated by the Central Government, out of 
whom- 
 
(i) seven representing unorganized sector workers; 
(ii) seven representing employers of unorganized sector; 
(iii) seven representing eminent persons from civil society; 
(iv) five representing State Governments; and 
(v) five representing Central Governm ents Ministries and Departments 
concerned.  
 
 
Clause 6 Sub-Clause (2) reads as under:- 
 
 The State Board shall consist of the following members, namely:- 
 
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the State Government; 
(b) the Principal Secretary or Secretar y (Labour) – Member – Secretary, ex 
officio; and 
(c) twenty-six members to be nomina ted by the State Government, out of 
whom— 
(i) seven representing the unor ganized sector workers; 
(ii) seven representing employer s of unorganized sector; 
(iii) five representing eminent persons from civil society; and 
(iv) seven representing State Gover nment Departments concerned. 
 
33. The Committee, after having seen the various constituents of the 
proposed National Board, deduce that important se gments representing the 
unorganized sector worker like elected representatives of the people to 
Union/State Legislatures, National and Regional Trade Unions, various civil 
society organisations and Associations have not been taken into the Board.    
The Committee are of the opinion that ex perts in the areas of management of 
insurance, finance, social security, researchers, etc., would do yeoman service 
to the cause of the unorganized worker, if included in the Board.  Similarly, 

 23
whether the representatives from only five State Governments in the Board   
would be adequate is a matter of debate and raises many questions.  The Board 
in its present form will only have the lop- sided representation of the various 
sections of the society.  Absence of political executive functionaries of the 
Union Government in the Board will further erode its credibility in carrying out 
the various functions assigned to it.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the composition of the Board should invariably have a 
political executive functionary of the Union Government who can be its ex-
officio Chairman. Elected representatives of the people should also get 
adequate place in the Board and it should be done in such a manner that they 
do not attract the provisions of Office of Profit Act till any decision on this 
issue is taken in the light of the report to be given by a Committee of 
Parliament.  Simultaneously, it should also be ensured that the representatives 
of various sections of unorganized sector  worker also get due representation in 
the Board. There should also be a full time chief executive officer of the 
national and State Boards who shall function as ex-officio Member Secretary of 
the Board concerned.              
 
Clause 5 Sub-Clause (8) & Clause 6 Sub-Clause (8) – Functions of the 
National/State Boards 
 
34. The Committee are of the view that in order to make the National/State 
Boards more effective and result-oriented, the present functions entrusted to 
them may be enlarged.  Some of the functions like reviewing the working of the 
State Boards and the Central Welfare Boards every three years and making 
suitable recommendations to the Government(s) concerned for further 
improvement, managing and maintaining the National Social Security and 
Welfare Fund, providing financial assistance to State Boards; recommending 
new schemes, programmes and projects for implementation through the Fund; 
assisting in capacity building of the State Boards, etc. may be entrusted to the 
National Board.  Similarly, in order to strengthen the State Boards, some 
functions like implementing the national scheme for unorganized workers 
through appropriate organizational arrangements, negotiating with the 
providers for the best possible offers and stipulate norms for the evaluation of 
the work done by the Workers’ Facilitation Centres; framing guidelines to 
ensure portability of benefits to workers; providing financial assistance to 

 24
other member organizations implementing  social security programmes, etc. 
may be assigned to them.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that new 
items from (viii) to (xv) under Sub-Clause (8) of Clause 5 and new items (h) to (r) 
under Sub-Clause (8) of Clause 6 may be added.  
 
Clause 9 – Registration 
 
35. The Committee feel that some ceiling on monthly earning of worker may 
be included as a criterion to become eligible for registration to avail the 
facilities under the Bill.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a new 
Clause fixing income in case of non-agricultural workers and a ceiling on land 
holding in the case of agricultural workers be fixed as recommended by the 
Indian Labour Conference.   
 
Clause 15 – Benefits under the Act 
 
36. The Committee are of the opinion that in case an unorganized worker is 
eligible for superior or better benefits under any existing law in force, the 
worker shall continue to be entitled for such benefits.  Moreover, the 
unorganized worker shall also be allowed to retain the option of membership of 
the scheme(s)/fund with the highest benefit.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Clause 15 may be amended as shown in the draft Bill 
appended with the Report.  
 
Miscellaneous 
 
(a) Absence of Grievance Redressal Machinery 
 
37. The Committee note with surprise that there is no mention of any 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism in the instant Bill.  The institution of GRM is 
an essential component of any welfare-oriented legislation as there should be 
some platform wherein the workers can take recourse to for giving vent to their 
legitimate grievances/complaints.  The absence of such a forum takes away the 
spirit of welfare as enshrined in the legislation because the workers do not get 
an opportunity to ensure the fair and prope r implementation of the Act.  It is 

 25
left to the whims of the concerned authorities to implement it the way they 
desire.  The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Government to incorporate 
sufficient provision in the Bill itself for institution of a Grievance Redressal 
Machinery wherein workers can approach and get their problems resolved 
within a specific timeframe.      
 
(b) Penal Provisions for violations  
 
38. The Committee are distressed to note that there is nothing in the Bill, 
which stipulates any kind of penal ac tion against violators of the various 
provisions of the schemes to be formulated following the Bill becoming an 
enactment.  The absence of penal provisions will not only encourage its 
violations but also greatly impair the efficacy of the schemes.  The Committee 
call upon the Government that in order to ensure prompt and efficient delivery 
system of various social security sc hemes, adequate penal provisions be 
enshrined in the Bill itself to deter the possible violators of the provisions of 
the schemes.     
 
(c) Secretariat of the Board 
 
39. The Committee take note of the fact  that National and State Social 
Security Boards are to be constituted to carry out the functions assigned to 
these Boards as ordained in the Bill.  For the purpose of the execution of the 
various social security schemes for the unorganized workers, an administrative 
machinery is required to be put in place so that all the social security schemes 
are properly implemented and their monitoring is also ensured with the 
carrying out of periodic review of these schemes, whenever and wherever 
deemed essential for effective delivery of the benefits.  The absence of such 
machinery will jeopardize the unhindered flow of benefits to the unorganized 
workers, which is the prime objective of this Bill.  The Committee, therefore, 
are of the strong opinion that an appropriate body with sufficient number of 
officials be also constituted at the National and the State levels to execute the 
schemes framed for the unorganized workers.  The rules of the Union 
Government and the respective State Governments may be made applicable in 
so far as the regulation of their empl oyment and conditions of services are 

 26
concerned.  The expenditure on their salaries, allowances and other benefits 
shall be met from the budgetary grant of the respective Ministries under which 
the overall administration of the schemes vests. 
 
(d) Workers’ Facilitation Centres 
 
40. The Committee feel that the schemes to be framed for the welfare of 
unorganized workers require a network which is far and wide enough to deliver 
the intended benefits to the beneficiaries.  In view of the enormity of the task, 
it will not be feasible to lay down a uniform network to perform the assigned 
duties.  The unorganized workers are spread over the entire length and breadth 
of the country.  To reach them for making available the benefits is indeed a 
Herculean task.  To achieve the objective, it will perhaps be  logical to engage 
the services of various bodies spread over every nook and corner of the country.  
Such bodies can work as facilitation centres for the purpose of the schemes 
framed/to be framed under the Act.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that sustained efforts should be made to set up workers’ 
facilitation centres in those areas where the unorganized workers can have 
easy access and/or from among the entities which are working among the 
masses.  The facilitation centres shall 
inter-alia make the intended 
beneficiaries aware of various scheme s/programmes of the Government and 
help them in procedural matters to avail themselves of the benefits.        
 
(e) Separate Legislations for Agricultural Workers & Conditions of 
Services/Regulation of Employment of Workers of the Unorganised Sector  
 
41. The Committee, during their interaction with the various sections of the 
stakeholders on the Bill, have observed that there is an urgent need for a 
separate legislation for the workers engaged in the agricultural sector.  
Similarly, any social security measure meant for the unorganised workers will 
be incomplete without regulation of their employment and the conditions of 
their services. Virtually, every group that appeared before the Committee or 
submitted memoranda containing their view points emphasized the need for 
these steps as being the corner stone for any meaningful welfare of the 
unorganized workers.  Even otherwise, myriads of the problems are plaguing 

 27
the workers working in the agricultural and unorganized sector.  The 
Committee feel that there is already an inordinate and avoidable delay in the 
matter.  The Committee express their unhappiness over the fact that the 
Government did not take any cognizance of the recommendations of the 
National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector (NCEUS) 
regarding need to bring two separate legislations for workers of the 
agricultural sector and for regulating the employment and conditions of service 
of the workers of unorganized sector as the workers of the agricultural sector 
constitute an altogether different group vis-à-vis the workers of the 
unorganized sector. The legislation on these aspects can be the real harbinger 
for the genuine welfare of the sizable, yet neglected and deprived sections of 
the working class.  Keeping in view the legitimate demand from every quarter 
of the stakeholders and its utmost importance, the Committee calls upon the 
Government to bring two separate legislations simultaneously alongwith the 
present Bill after carrying out the necessary amendments.  
 
 
 
 
 
     
      SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY 
NEW DELHI;                                              CHAIRMAN 
29 November 2007                STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
8 Agrahayana, 1929 (SAKA)  

 28
ANNEUXRE-I 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
 
10 SEPTEMBER 2007 
 
BILL NO.LXVII OF 2007 
 
 
 
THE UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY BILL, 2007  
 
 
 
A 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
to provide for the social security and welfare of unorganised sector workers and for 
other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-  
 
CHAPTER I 
 
PRELIMINARY 
 
 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.(1) This Act may be called the Unorganised Sector Workers’ 
Social Security Act, 2007.  
 
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.  

 29
 
 
Definitions.  
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -  
(a) “employer” means a person or an association of persons, who 
has engaged or employed an unorganised sector worker either 
directly or otherwise for remuneration;  
 
(b) "home-based worker" means a person engaged in the production 
of goods or services for an employer in his or her home or other 
premises of his or her choice other than the workplace of the 
employer, for remuneration, irrespective of whether or not the 
employer provides the equipment, materials or other inputs;  
 
                            (c) “identity card” means a card, document or  
                                  certificate issued to an unorganised sector  
                                  worker by the District Administration under sub- 
                                  section (3) of section 9 of this Act;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 30
 
2 
 
 
                     (d) “National Board” means the National Social Security    
                           Advisory Board for unorganised sector workers  
                         constituted under sub-section (1) of section 5 of this  
                         Act;  
 
                    (e) “notification” means a notification published in the  
                          Official Gazette;  
 
                    (f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this 
                          Act by the Central Government or the State     
                         Government, as the case may be;  
 
                    (g) “registered worker” means an unorganised sector  
                         workers registered under sub-section (3) of section 9;  
 
                    (h) “Schedule” means the Schedule annexed to the Act; (i)  
                         “State Board” means the (name of the State) State     
                          Social Security Advisory Board for unorganised sector  
                          workers constituted under sub-section (1) of section 6  
                         of this Act; (j) "self-employed worker" means any    
                         person who is not employed by an employer, but    
                         engages himself or herself in any occupation in the  
                         unorganised sector subject to a monthly earning of an  
                        amount as may be notified by the Central Government  
                        or   the State Government from time to time or holds    
                        cultivable land subject to such ceiling as may be  
                        notified by the State Government; (k) “unorganised  
                       Sector” means an enterprise owned by individuals or  
                       self-employed workers and engaged in the production or  
                       sale of goods  or providing service of any kind   
                       whatsoever, and where the enterprise employs workers,  
                       te number of such workers is less than ten.  

 31
 
 
                 (l)  “unorganised sector worker” means a home based   
                       worker, self-employed worker or a wage worker in the  
                       unorganised sector;  
 
                 (m) “wage worker” means a person employed for  
                         remuneration in the unorganised sector,  
                         directly by an employer or through any contractor,  
                         irrespective of place of work, whether exclusively for  
                         one employer or for one or more employers, whether in  
                         cash or in kind, whether as a home-based worker, or as 
                         a temporary or casual worker, or as a migrant worker,  
                         or, workers employed by households including   
                         domestic workers, with a monthly wage of an amount  
                         as may be notified by the Central Government and  
                        State Government, as the case may be.  
 
 

 32
3 
 
CHAPTER II SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS 
Framing of 
scheme.  
3.(1) The Central Government may formulate, from time to time, 
suitable welfare schemes for different sections of unorganised 
sector workers on matters relating to - (a) life and disability cover; 
(b) health and maternity benefits; (c) old age protection; and (d) 
any other benefit as may be determined by the Central 
Government.  
 
(2) The schemes included in the Schedule to this Act shall be 
deemed to be the welfare schemes under sub-section (1) of this 
Act.  
 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, amend the 
Schedule referred to in sub-section (1), and include therein or 
exclude therefrom any welfare scheme for the unorganised sector 
workers.  
 
(4) The State Government may formulate and notify, from time to 
time, suitable welfare schemes for different sections of 
unorganised sector workers, including schemes relating to - (a) 
provident fund ; (b) employment injury benefit ; (c) housing ; (d) 
educational schemes for children; (e) skill upgradation of workers; 
(f) funeral assistance; and (g) old age homes.  

 33
Funding of 
Central 
Government 
Schemes.  
4.(1) Any scheme notified by the Central Government may be - (i) 
wholly funded by the Central Government; or (ii) partly funded by 
the Central Government and partly funded by the State 
Government; or  
(iii) partly funded by the Central Government, partly funded by the 
State Government and partly funded through contributions 
collected from the  
beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers as maybe prescribed 
in the scheme by the Central 
Government. 
  
 
  (2) Every scheme notified by the Central Government shall provide for such matters 
that are necessary for the efficient implementation of the scheme including the 
matters relating to,- (i) scope of the scheme; (ii) beneficiaries of the scheme; (iii) 
resources of the scheme; (iv) agency or agencies that will implement the scheme; and 
(v) any other relevant matter.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY ADVISORY BOARD FOR WORKERS IN THE 
UNORGANISED SECTOR 
 
 

 34
 
National 
Social 
Security 
Advisory 
Board.  
5.(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a 
National Board to be known as the National Social Security Advisory 
Board to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the 
functions assigned to, it under this Act.  
 
(2) The National Board shall consist of the following members, 
namely: - (a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central 
Government; (b) the Director General (Labour Welfare) – Member 
Secretary, ex officio; (c) thirty one members to be nominated by the 
Central Government, out of whom – (i) seven representing 
unorganised sector workers; (ii) seven representing employers of 
unorganised sector; (iii) seven representing eminent persons from civil 
society; (iv) five representing State Governments; and (v) five 
representing Central Government Ministries and Departments 
concerned.  
 
(3) The Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be from 
amongst persons of eminence in the fields of labour welfare, 
management, finance, law and administration.  
                     (4) The number of persons to be nominated as members    
                           from each of the categories specified in clause (c) of  
                          sub-section (2), the term of office and other conditions 
                          of service of, the procedure to be followed in the  
                         discharge of their functions by, and the manner of  
                         filling vacancies among the members of the National  
                         Board shall be such as may be prescribed: Provided  
                         that  adequate representation shall be given to persons 
                       belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled  
                      Tribes, the Minorities and Women.  
 
 
                   (5) The term of the National Board shall be three years. (6)     The National 
Board shall meet atleast thrice a year, at such time and place and shall observe such 
rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be 
prescribed.  

 35
(7) The members may receive such allowances as may be prescribed for attending the 
meetings of the National Board. (8) The National Board shall perform the following 
functions, namely:- (a) recommend to the Central Government suitable schemes for 
different sections of unorganised sector workers; (b) advise the Central Government on 
such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as may be referred to it; (c) 
monitor such social welfare schemes for workers in the unorganised sector as are 
administered by the Central Government; (d) review the progress of registration and 
issue of identity cards to the unorganized sector workers; (e) review the record keeping 
functions performed at the State level; (f) review the expenditure from the funds under 
various schemes; (g) undertake such other functions as are assigned to it by the 
Central Government from time to time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
STATE SOCIAL SECURITY ADVISORY BOARD FOR WORKERS IN THE 
  
UNORGANSED SECTOR  
 
 

 36
State Social 
Security 
Advisory 
Board.  
6.(1) Every State Government shall, by notification, constitute a State 
Board to be known as ---- (name of the State) State Social Security 
Advisory Board to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform 
the functions assigned to, it under this Act.  
 
(2) The State Board shall consist of the following members, namely: - 
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the State Government; (b) the 
Principal Secretary or Secretary (Labour)- Member- Secretary, ex 
officio; (c) twenty-six members to be nominated by the State 
Government, out of whom – (i) seven representing the unorganised 
sector workers; (ii) seven representing employers of unorganised 
sector; (iii) five representing eminent persons from civil society; and 
(iv) seven representing State Government Departments concerned.  
 
(3) The Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be from 
amongst persons of eminence in the fields of labour welfare, 
management, finance, law and administration.  
(4) The number of persons to be nominated as members from each of the categories 
specified in clause (c) of sub-section (2), the term of office and other conditions of 
service of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, and the 
manner of filling vacancies among the members of the State Board shall be such as 
may be prescribed: Provided that adequate representation shall be given to persons 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Minorities and Women.  
 
(5) The term of the State Board shall be three years.  
 
 
(6) The State Board shall meet atleast once in a quarter at such time and place and 
shall observe such rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business at its 
meetings, as may be prescribed.  
  

 37
(7) The members may receive such allowances as may be prescribed for attending the 
meetings of the National Board.  
 
(8) The State Board shall perform the following functions, namely:- (a) recommend the 
State Government in formulating suitable schemes for different sections of the 
unorganised sector workers; (b) advise the State Government on such matters arising 
out of the administration of this Act as may be referred to it; (c) monitor such social 
welfare schemes for workers in the unorganised sector as are administered by the 
State Government; (d) review the record keeping functions performed at the District 
level; (e) review the progress of registration and issue of cards to unorganized sector 
workers; (f) review the expenditure from the funds under various scheme; (g) 
undertake such other functions as are assigned to it by the State Government from 
time to time.  
Funding of State 
Government 
Schemes.  
7.(1) Any scheme notified by the State Government may be - (i) 
wholly funded by the State Government; or (ii) partly funded by 
the State Government, partly funded through contributions 
collected from the beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers 
as may be prescribed in the scheme by the State Government.  
 
(2) The State Government may seek financial assistance from 
the Central Government for the schemes formulated by it.  
 
(3) The Central Government may provide such financial 
assistance to the State Governments for the purpose of schemes 
for such period and on such terms and conditions as it may 
deem fit.  
 
 
Record keeping by 
District 
Administration.  
 
 
8. The record keeping functions for the purpose of this Act shall 
be performed by the District Administration:  
  

 38
Provided that the State Government may direct that the record keeping function shall 
be performed by - (a) the District Panchayat in rural areas; and (b) the Urban Local 
Bodies in urban areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
REGISTRATION 
 
 
Eligibility for 
registration and 
social security 
benefits.  
9.(1) Every unorganised sector worker shall be eligible for 
registration subject to the fulfilment of the following conditions, 
namely:- (a) he or she shall have completed fourteen years of 
age; and (b) a self-declaration by him or her confirming that he 
or she is an unorganised sector worker.  
 
(2) Every eligible unorganised sector worker shall make an 
application in the prescribed form to the District Administration 
for registration.  
 
(3) Every unorganised sector worker shall be registered and 
issued an identity card by the District Administration which 
shall be a smart card carrying a unique identification number 
and shall be portable.  
 
(4) If a scheme requires a registered unorganized sector worker 
to make a contribution, he or she shall be eligible for social 
security benefits under the scheme only upon payment of such 
contribution.  
 
(5) Where a scheme requires the Central or State Government to 
make a contribution, the Central or State Government, as the 
case may be, shall make the contribution regularly in terms of 
the scheme.  

 39
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VI  
 
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
 
Power of Central 
Government to give 
directions.  
 
 
10. The Central Government may give directions to- (i) the 
National Board; or (ii) Government of a State or the State Board 
of that State, in respect of matters relating to the 
implementation of the provisions of this Act.  
 
Vacancies, etc. not 
to invalidate 
proceedings.  
 
11. No proceedings of the National Board or any State Board 
shall be invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any 
vacancy or defect in the constitution of the National Board or, as 
the case may be, the State Board. 
  

 40
 
 
Power to make 
rules by Central 
Government.  
 
 
12.(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules 
to carry out the provisions of this Act. (2) In particular, and 
without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- 
(a) the contributions to be collected from the beneficiaries of the 
scheme or the employers under sub-section (1) of section 4; (b) 
the number of persons to be nominated, the term of office and 
other conditions of service of members, the procedure to be 
followed in the discharge of functions by, and the manner of 
filling vacancies of, the National Board under sub- section (4) of 
section 5; (c) the rules of procedure relating to the transaction of 
the business at the meeting of the National Board under sub-
section (6) section 5; (d) the allowances for attending the 
meetings of the National Board under sub-section (7) of section 5; 
(e) the form for making an application for registration under sub-
section (2) of section 9; and (f) any other matter which is required 
to be, or may be, prescribed.  
 
 
Power to make 
rules by State 
Government.  
 
 
13.(1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. (2) In particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-  
(a) the number of persons to be nominated, the term of office 
and other conditions of service of members, the procedure to be 
followed in the discharge of functions by, and the manner of 
filling vacancies of, the State Board under sub-section  
 
 
  
  

 41
(4) of section 6; (b) the rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business at the 
meetings of the State Board under sub-section (6) section 6; (c) the allowances for 
attending the meetings of the State Board under sub-section (7) of section 6; (d) the 
contributions to be collected from the beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers 
under sub-section (1) of section 7; and (e) any other matter which is required to be, or 
may be, prescribed.  
Laying of 
rules.  
14.(1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under that rule. (2) Every rule 
made under this Act by State Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is notified, before the State Legislature.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Saving of 
certain laws.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the operation of any 
corresponding law in a State providing welfare schemes which are 
more beneficial to the unorganised sector workers than those 
provided for them by or under this Act.  

 42
 
 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.  
 
 
16.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the 
expiry of a period of two years from 
 
                         commencement of this Act. (2) Every order made under  
                         this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is  
                         made, before each House of Parliament.  

 43
SCHEDULE 
 
Social Security Schemes for the Unorganised Sector Workers {See section 3} 
 
 
S.No.   Name of the Scheme 
 
1.  
 
 
National Old Age Pension Scheme.  
 
2.  
 
 
National Family Benefit Scheme.  
 
3.  
 
 
National Maternity Benefit Scheme .  
 
4.  
 
 
Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana.  
 
5.  
 
 
Health Insurance Scheme for Handloom Weaver.  
 
6.  
 
 
Scheme for pension to Master Crafts persons.  
 
7.  
 
 
Group Accident Insurance Scheme for Active fishermen.  
 
8.  
 
 
Saving-cum-Relief for the fishermen.  
 
9.  
 
 
Janshree Bima Yojana.  
 
10.  
 
 
Aam Admi Bima Yojana.  
11. 
 
Swasthya Bima Yojana.  

 44
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
           It is estimated that the workers in the unorganised sector constitute more than 
ninety-four per cent. of the total employment in the country. On account of their 
unorganised nature, these workers do not get adequate social security. Some welfare 
schemes are being implemented by the Cent ral Government for specific groups of 
unorganised sector workers such as beedi workers, non-coal mine workers, cine 
workers, handloom weavers, fishermen, etc. State Governments are implementing 
welfare programmes for certain categories of unorganised sector workers and some 
Non-Government Organisations also provide so cial security to certain categories of 
workers. Despite all these efforts, there is a huge deficit in the coverage of the 
unorganised sector workers in the matter of  labour protection and social security 
measures ensuring the welfare and well-bein g of workers in the unorganised sector, 
such as agricultural workers, construction workers, beedi workers, handloom workers, 
leather workers, etc. 2. The Unorganised S ector Workers’ Social Security Bill, 2007 
aims to provide for social security and we lfare of the unorganised sector workers and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Bill, inter alia, provides for 
the following matters, namely:- (i) The Centra l Government shall constitute a National 
Social Security Advisory Board to recomme nd suitable welfare schemes for different 
sections of unorganised sector worker s, and upon consideration of these 
recommendations, the Central Governmen t may notify suitable welfare schemes 
relating to life and disability cover, health and maternity benefits, old age protection, 
or any other benefits. (ii) The State Government shall constitute the State Social 
Security Advisory Board to recommend suitable welfare schemes for different sections 
of unorganised workers in that State and the State Government may notify suitable 
schemes for one or more sections of the unorganised workers. (iii) A worker of an 
unorganised sector shall be eligible for social  security benefits if, he is duly registered. 
Every registered worker in the unorganised sector shall be issued an identity card 
which shall be a smart card carrying a unique identification number and shall be 
portable. (iv) The Central Government and the State Government shall have the power 
to make rules for the purposes of carrying out the objects of the Bill. 3. The Bill seeks 
to achieve the above objectives.  
 
New Delhi,  
T h e  7 t h  S e p t e m b e r ,  2 0 0 7                                      ( O S C A R  F E R N A N D E S )  

 45
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National Social Security Advisory 
Board to recommend the Central Governmen t on formulation of suitable welfare 
schemes for different sections of the unorga nised sector workers relating to life and 
disability cover, health benefits, old age pr otection, etc. The al lowances etc. to the 
members of the National Board for attending the meetings of the National Board shall 
be made by the Central Government. Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the schemes 
notified by the Central Government may be funded wholly by the Central Government 
or partly by the Central Government and pa rtly by the State Government; or partly 
through contributions collected from th e beneficiaries of the scheme and the 
employers as may be specified in the scheme. Clause 6 of the Bill envisages for 
constitution of a State Social Security Advisory Board to recommend the State 
Government on formulation of suitable we lfare schemes for different sections of the 
unorganised sector workers. Sub-clause (3) of clause 7 of the Bill also provides for 
giving financial assistance to the State Governments for the purpose of schemes 
framed by those Governments. The financia l implications for funding of the schemes 
would be determined as and when such schemes are formulated.  
 
2. The allowances to the Members of the National Board shall be made out of the 
regular budget of the Ministry of Labour and Employment. The National Board will be 
serviced by the existing staff in the Minist ry of Labour and Employment. The Fund for 
the schemes, as and when they are anno unced, will be channelised through the 
existing channels of funding as is being done for other schemes of the Government. 
The fund flow system will be defined in ea ch scheme and it will vary from scheme to 
scheme.  
 
3. The provisions of the Bill will not invo lve any other expenses of recurring or non-
recurring nature. 
 
 
 

 46
 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
            Clause 12 of the Bill empowe rs the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the proposed legislation. The matters with respect to 
which rules may be made has been set out in sub-clause (2). The matters, inter alia, 
relate to (a) the contributions to be collect ed from the beneficiaries of the scheme or 
the employers under sub- clause (1) of clau se 4; (b) the number of persons to be 
nominated, the term of office and other conditions of service of, the procedure to be 
followed in the discharge of their functi ons by, and the manner of filling vacancies 
among, the members of the National Board un der sub-clause (4) of clause 5; (c) the 
rules of procedure relating to the transact ion of the business at the meeting of the 
National Board under sub-clause (6) of clause 5; (d) the allowances for attending the 
meetings of the National Board under sub- clause (7) of clause 5; (e) the form for 
making an application for registration under sub- clause (2) of clause 9; and (f) any 
other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 2. Clause 13 of the Bill 
empowers the State Governments to make ru les for carrying out the purposes of the 
proposed legislation. The matters with respect to which rules may be made has been 
set out in sub-clause  
 
(2). The matters, inter alia, re late to (a) the number of persons to be nominated, the 
term of office and other conditions of servi ce of, the procedure to be followed in the 
discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the 
members of the State Board under sub- clause (4) of clause 6; (b) the rules of 
procedure relating to the transaction of bu siness at the meetings of the State Board 
under sub- clause (6) clause 6; (c) the allowances for attending the meetings of the 
State Board under sub- clause (7) of clause  6; (d) the contributions to be collected 
from the beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers under sub- clause (1) of clause 7 
and (e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
 
 3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are essentially matters of detail 
or procedure. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

 47
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
    
 
 
BILL 
 
 
 
to provide for the social security and welfare of unorganised sector workers and for 
other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
 
  
 
 
 
_______ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Oscar Fernandes, Minister for Labour and Employment) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MGIPMRND-3955RS(S3)-08.0902007  
 
 
 
 

 48
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
THE UNORGANISED WORKERS SOCIAL SECURITY BILL, 2007 
           A 
      B I L L   
 To provide for the social security and welfare of unorganised workers and for 
other matter connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:- 
 
    C H A P T E R  I  
 
    P R E L I M I N A R Y  
   
   
1. Short title, extent and commencement: 
           (1)This Act may be called the Unorganised Workers’ Social Security Act, 2007. 
 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint [and different dates may be appointed for 
different States and different areas in a State and for different provisions of this Act, ] 
within six months from the date of the assent.  
 
 
2. Definitions: 
      In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires- 
 
(a) “employer” means a natural or juri dical person or an association of 
persons, who has engaged or employed an unorganised worker 
either directly or otherwise for remuneration: 
(b) “ home-based worker” means a person engaged in the production of 
goods or services for an employer  in his or her home or other 
premises of his or her choice ot her than the workplace of the 
employer, for remuneration, irresp ective of whether or not the 
employer provides the equipment, materials or other inputs; 
(c) “identity card” means a card, document or certificate issued to an 
unorganised worker by the District Administration under sub-
section (3) of section 9; 
(d) “National Board ” means the National Social Security Board for 
unorganised workers constituted under sub-section(1) of section 5; 
(e) “notification” means a notification  published in the Official Gazette’ 
(f) “prescribed” mean prescribed by  rules made under this Act by the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be; 
(g) “registered worker” means an un organised worker registered under 
sub-section (3) of section 9; 
(h) “Schedule” means the Schedule annexed to the Act; 

 49
(i) “State Board” means the (name of the State) State Social Security 
Board for unorganised  workers constituted under sub-section (1) of 
section 6 of this Act; 
(j) “self-employed worker” means any person who is not employed by 
an employer, but engages himself or herself in any occupation in 
the unorganised sector subject to a monthly earning of an amount 
as may be notified by the Central Government or the State 
Government from time to time or holds cultivable land subject to 
such ceiling as may be notified by the State Government; 
(k) “unorganised sector” means enterprises owned by individuals or 
self-employed workers and engaged in the production or sale of 
goods or providing service of any kind whatsoever, and where the 
enterprises employs workers, the number of such workers is less 
than ten; and in case of agriculture, the landholding is less than 2 
hectares. 
(l) “unorganised sector worker” me ans a home-based worker, self-
employed worker or a wage workers in the unorganised sector;  
(m)  “wage worker” means a person employed for remuneration in the 
unorganised sector, whether in agriculture or non agriculture, 
directly by an employer or thro ugh any contractor, irrespective of 
place of work, whether exclusively for one employer or for one or 
more employers, whether simultaneo usly or otherwise, whether in 
cash or in kind, whether as a home-based worker, or as temporary 
or casual worker, or as a migran t worker, or workers employed by 
households including domestic workers, with a monthly  earning of 
an amount as may be notified by the Central Government and State 
Government, as the case may be. 
(n) Unorganised worker”means an unorganised sector worker and also 
includes workers in the organize d sector not protected by the 
existing laws relating to social security  
Explanation: For the purposes of this Act, unorganised workers would 
also include any class of workers like Anganwadi workers who are 
not covered or protected or benefited by the existing laws relating to 
social security either in the organized sector or unorganised sector.  
 
CHAPTER II 
 
SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS 
 
3. Framing of Schemes  
(1) The Central Government shall formulate, from time to time, suitable welfare 
schemes for different sections of unorganised workers on matters relating to –  
(a) life and disability cover;  
(b) health and maternity benefits;  
(c) old age protection; and  
(d) any other benefit as may be determined by the Central Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 50
 
(1A)  The Central Government shall formulate and notify in the Official Gazette 
Schemes entitling all the unorganised workers to the following national minimum 
social security benefits within a period of three years. The value of the benefits shall be 
adjusted for inflation every two years. A list of existing schemes is specified in 
schedule 1 to this Act. 
 
 (i) Life and disability cover for natural or accidental death of the worker;  
• On natural death prior to the terminal date                          Rs.30,000/-  
• On death due to accident                                      
Rs.75,000/- 
• Permanent total disability due to accident                        Rs.75,000/- 
• Loss of two eyes or two limbs  or one eye and one limb Rs.75,000/- 
• Loss of one eye or one limb in an accident   Rs.37,500/-
[m1] 
 
(ii) Health benefits for self, spouse and ch ildren below the age of 18 years, and 
maternity benefits for women workers or spouse of men workers: 
•  Coverage for unorganized worker and his family (unit of five) with 
total sum insured of Rs. 30,000/- per family per annum on a family 
floater basis. 
• Cashless attendance to all covered ailments 
• Hospitalization expenses, taking ca re of most common illnesses with 
as few exclusions as possible 
• Coverage of all pre-existing diseases 
• Transportation costs (actual with ma ximum limit of Rs. 100 per visit) 
within an overall limit of Rs.1000.  
• Coverage of health services related to hospitalization and services of a 
surgical nature which can be provided on a daycare basis.  
• Provision for reasonable pre- and post-hospitalization expenses for 
one day prior and 5 days after hospitalization, but subject to a maximum 
share of the total costs of the hospitalization. [m2] 
 
• Maternity benefits for women worker s or spouse of men workers for 
home delivery of Rs. 500 per pregnancy upto two births , and for 
Institutional delivery in low performi ng states of Rs1000 (in Rural areas) 
and Rs1400 (in urban areas); and in high performing States of Rs 700 (in 
Rural areas) and Rs 600 (in urban areas); [m3] 
 
 
(iii) Old age protection in the form of Old age Pension of Rs 200/- per month for 
Unorganised workers above the age of 60 years,[m4] or, Provident Fund for all 
unorganised workers providing for an assured rate of interest (which shall not be 
less than the EPF rate of interest) an d the Government’s contribution to the 
Provident Fund at twice the sum as that of the worker.  
 
(1B) The national minimum may be introduced in phases in terms of benefits or 
coverage of workers..  
 

 51
(1C ) The Central government may also enlarge the scope of the national minimum, by 
notifying additional schemes for the welfare of the unorganised workers on matters 
such as : 
 
(a) housing; 
(b) educational schemes for children; 
(c) skill upgradation of workers; 
(d) funeral assistance;  
(e) old age homes: and 
(f) marriage of daughters. 
 
(1D) In addition to the schemes to be formulated in Section 3(1)& (1A), the Central 
Government may  specify or formulate, from time to time , suitable welfare schemes 
covering the matters mentioned in 3(1) (a), (b), ( c) or any other benefit for specific 
sections of unorganised workers. 
 
(2) The schemes included in Schedule 2 to this Act shall be deemed to be the welfare 
schemes under sub-section (1D)  of this Act.  
 
(3) The Central Government shall, by notification, amend the Schedule referred to in 
sub-section (2), and include therein or exclude therefrom any welfare scheme for the 
unorganised workers. 
 
(4) The State Governments may formulate and notify, form time to time, suitable 
welfare schemes for different sections of unorganised workers, including schemes 
relating to- 
  
(a) provident fund; 
(b) employment injury benefit; 
(c) housing; 
(d) educational schemes for children; 
(e) skill upgradation of workers; 
(f) funeral assistance;  
(g) old age homes: and 
(h) marriage of daughters. 
 
4. (1) Any scheme notified by the Central Government including those providing for 
National Minimum Social Security benefits as per section 3(1A) may be- 
      (i) wholly funded by the Central Government; or 
  (ii) party funded by the Centra l Government and partly funded 
by the State Government, or 
  (ii) party funded by the Centra l Government and partly funded 
by the State Government and partly funded through contributions collected from the 
beneficiaries of the scheme or the employer s as may be prescribed in the scheme by 
the Central Government. 
(2) Every scheme notified by the Central Government including those providing for 
National Minimum Social Security benefits as per section 3(1A) shall provide for such 
matters that are necessary for the efficient implementation of the scheme including 
the matters relating to;- 
   
  (i) scope of the scheme; 
  (ii) Coverage and phasing of the scheme; 

 52
  (iii) resources of the scheme; 
  (iv) Manner of implementation of the scheme; and 
  (v) any other relevant matter. 
 
Insert the following Chapter: 
 
Constitution of a National Social Security and Welfare Fund (NSSWF) 
 
The Central Government shall create a National Social Security and Welfare Fund to 
which contributions shall accrue from the following sources: 
 
a) Grants and loans from the Central Government; 
 
b) Contributions from workers, employ ers and Governments in the form and 
manner to be prescribed in the specifi ed Scheme, provided that the Central 
government may exempt any class of un organised workers or employers from 
making their contribution under such conditions as may be specified; 
 
c) Any tax or cess that the Central Government may impose for the purpose of 
providing social security for unorganized  workers; 
 
d) Any tax or cess that the Central Government may impose on commodities 
and/or services in lieu of employers’ contri butions (which are either difficult to 
collect or appropriate employers in th e unorganised sector are not directly 
identifiable). 
 
In addition to the above, contributions may also accrue from the following sources: 
 
e) Contributions from the national financial/developmental institutions; and 
 
f) Any voluntary contribution from individuals or institutions. 
 
Exemption from Income Tax 
All financial contributions made by individuals and institutions to the National Social 
Security and Welfare Fund will be exempt ed from the payment of income tax under 
the Income Tax Act. 
 
Utilisation of the National Social Security and Welfare Fund 
 
All contributions accruing to the National Board shall be credited to the Fund, which 
shall be applied for meeting the following: 
 
a) Expenses on the social security schem es covering National minimum of the 
Central Government  as specified; 
 
b) Grants to the State Boards, including for the purposes of the functioning of the 
Workers’ Facilitation Centres; 
 
c) Expenses on the administration of the schemes;  
 
d) Investment in permitted schemes; 
 

 53
e) Any other item in connection with the administration of this Act. 
  
   
  CHAPTER III 
 
NATIONAL SOIAL SECURITY BOARD FOR UNORGANISED WORKERS  
 
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a National 
Board to be known as the National Social  Security Board to exercise the powers 
conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to , it under this Act. 
 
 (2) The National Board shall consist of the following members, namely:- 
  
(a) Union Minister for Labour and Employment to be the  
Chairperson ; 
(b) a full tine chief executive officer to be appointed by the 
Central Government who shall also function as  the Member 
Secretary, ex officio; and 
(c) thirty four members to be nominated by the Central 
Government, out of whom- 
  
 (i) seven consisting of Central Trade Unions and 
Unorganised Worker Unions; National level organizations, 
including federation of such organizations,  of unorganised 
workers including the self-employed; 
 (ii) seven consisting of national Level organisations of 
employers of unorganised workers; 
 (iii) seven representing eminent persons from civil 
society and experts in the area of management of insurance 
products and services; social security and related issues in the 
unorganized sector; manageme nt of finances, and other 
organizations and stakeholders working with the unorganized 
sector; 
 (iv) five representing State Government ;  
 (v) five representing Central Government Ministries and 
Departments concerned, and 
 (vi) two representing Members of Lok Sabha and one 
representing the members of Rajya Sabha 
 
(3) The members of the Board shall be from amongst persons of 
eminence in the fields of labour welfare, management, finance, law 
and administration. 
(4) The number of persons to be nominated as members from each 
of the categories specified in clause ( c)  of sub-section (2), the 
term of office and other conditions of service of member, the 
procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, 
and the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the 
National Board shall  be such as may be prescribed: 
  Provided that adequate representation shall be given to persons  
  belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the  
  Minorities  and Women. 
 

 54
(5) The term of National Board shall be three years. 
(6) The National Board shall meet at least thrice a year, at such 
time and place and shall observe such rules of procedure relating 
to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be 
prescribed. 
(7) The member may receive such allowances as may be prescribed 
for attending the meeting of National Board. 
(8) The National Board shall perform the following functions, 
namely:- 
i. recommend to the Central Government suitable 
schemes for different sections of unorganised workers; 
ii. advise the Central Government on such matter arising 
out of the administration of this Act at the national level 
and on policy matters relating to social security, and 
extension of schemes of social security such as ESI and 
EPF to unorganised workers; and health,  safety and 
welfare of worker    
iii. monitor such social welfare schemes for unorganised 
workers as are administered by the Central 
Government; 
iv. review the progress of registration and issue of identity 
cards to the unorganised workers; 
v. review the record keeping functions performed at the 
State level; 
vi. review the expenditure from the funds under various 
schemes; 
vii. undertake such other functions as are assigned to it by 
the Central Government from time to time.  
viii. Review the working of the State Boards and the Central 
Welfare Boards every three years and make suitable 
recommendations to the Government(s) concerned for 
further improvement; 
ix. manage and maintain the National Social Security and 
Welfare  Fund, provide financial assistance to State 
Boards; recommend new schemes and programmes and 
projects for implementation through the Fund;  
x. Assist in capacity building of the State Boards 
xi. Collect, compile and publish statistics relating to the 
unorganised sector and undertake such promotional 
activities as may be decided from time to time; 
xii. Monitor and review the impact of existing schemes, 
policies and programmes of various Ministries and 
Departments of Government of India on the unorganised 
workers and make appropriate recommendations  
xiii. Hold public hearings to entertain petitions submitted by 
the unorganized workers and make appropriate 
recommendations;  
xiv. Advise government on special protection measures for 
migrant workers and their families in providing the 
ration cards, housing and education to their children. 
xv. Administration of this Act and formulation of policies at 
the national level, and shall have such powers as may 

 55
be laid down to direct, co-ordinate, supervise, and 
monitor the functioning of State Boards and the Central 
Welfare Boards; 
 
Secretariat of the Board 
 
The National Board shall have a secretariat with adequate professional and other staff.  
The staff of the National Board shall be governed by the Central Government rules and 
regulations existing from time to time. The annual budget of the National Board shall 
be prepared by the Secretariat and placed before the full Board for approval. 
 
    CHAPTER IV 
 
  STATE SOCIAL SECURITY BOARD FOR UNORGANISED WORKERS  
       
6. (1) Every State Government shall , be notification, constitute a State 
Board to be known as (name of the St ate) State Social Security Board to 
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned 
to it, under this Act. 
(2) The State Board shall consist of the following members, 
namely:- 
 (a) Minister for Labour and Employment of the concerned 
state to be the Chairperson ; 
 (b) a full tine chief executive officer to be appointed by the 
State Government who shall also function as  the Member- 
Secretary, ex officio; and 
(c) Twenty-nine members to be nominated by the State 
Government, out of whom- 
 
(i) seven consisting of Trade Unions an d unorganised Worker Unions; State 
level organizations, including federation of such organizations of 
unorganised workers including the self employed ; 
(ii) seven consisting of State Level organi sations of employers of unorganised 
workers; 
(iii) five representing eminent persons from civil society and experts in the area 
of management of insurance products and services; social security and 
related issues in the unorganized sector; management of finances, and other 
organizations and stakeholders working with the unorganized sector; and 
(iv) seven representing state government de partment concerned, Welfare Boards 
and Public Agencies.  
(v) two representing Members of Legisl ative Assembly and one representing the 
members of Legislative council if any of the State concerned. 
 

 56
(3)  The members of the Board shall be fr om amongst persons of eminence in the 
fields of labour welfare, management, finance, law and administration. 
(4)  The number of persons to be nominated as members from each of the categories 
specified in clause (c) of su b-section (2), the term of office and other conditions of 
service of members, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their 
functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the State 
Board shall be such as may be prescribed: 
 
 Provided that adequate representation shall be given to persons belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Minorities and Women. 
 
(5)  The term of the State Board shall be three years. 
(6)  The State Board shall meet at least on ce in a quarter at such time and place and 
shall observe such rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business at its 
meetings, as may be prescribed. 
 
(7)  The members may receive such allowances as may be prescribed for attending 
the meetings of the State Board. 
(8) The State Board shall perform the following functions, namely:- 
(a) Frame and implement social security schemes, in addition to the national 
schemes, that the State Board may design  in consultation with the State  
government; 
 
(b) advise the State Government on such matters arising out of the 
administration of this Act and on policy matters relating to social security, 
health and safety and welfare of unorganised workers ; 
(c) monitor such social welfare schemes for unorganised workers as are 
administered by the State Government; 
(d) review the record keeping functions performed at the District level; 
(e) review the progress of registration and issue of cards to unorganized workers. 
(f)  review the expenditure from the funds under various schemes; and 
(g) undertake such other functions as are assigned to it by the State Government 
from time to time. 
(h) Implement the national scheme for unorganised workers through appropriate 
organisational arrangements, negotiate with the providers for the best possible 
offers and  stipulate norms for the evaluat ion of the work done by the Workers’ 
Facilitation Centres;  

 57
(i) Frame guidelines to ensure portability of benefits to workers;  
(j) Provide financial assistance to other member organisations implementing 
social security programmes; 
(k) Create awareness among the unorgani sed workers about the need for social 
security registration and the existence of various social security schemes; 
(l) Collect, compile and publish statisti cs, with the help of statistical 
organisations, regarding unorganised workers and employers who engage these 
workers at the Panchayat/Municipal, District, State levels with such details as 
gender and age, nature of occupation, level of earnings, etc.; 
(m) Review the working of the Welfare Boards and other implementing agencies 
on the basis of annual reports and statements of audited accounts or specially 
commissioned reports and make suitable recommendations to the 
government(s) concerned for further improvement; 
(n) Assist in capacity building of Workers Welfare Boardsand Workers’ Facilitation 
Centres; 
(o) Initiate innovative approaches, through interaction across sectors and 
constituencies, for the enhancement of welfare of unorganised workers;  
(p) Monitor and review the impact of existing schemes, policies and programmes 
of various Ministries and Departments of the concerned State Government on 
the unorganised workers and make appropriate recommendations; 
(q) Hold public hearings to entertain petitions submitted by the unorganised 
workers and make appropriate recommendations; 
(r ) Carry out surveys to determine the safety and health standards required in 
different occupations and employments in the unorganised sector, and publish 
manuals and outreach programmes for worker safety; 
 
 
7. (1)  Any scheme notified by the State Government may be –  
 (i) wholly funded by the State Government; or   
(ii) partly funded by the State Governmen t, partly funded through contributions 
collected from the beneficiaries of th e scheme or the employers as may be 
prescribed in the scheme by the State Government. 
(2)  The State Government may seek fi nancial assistance from the Central 
Government for the schemes formulated by it. 
(3)  The Central Government may provide such financial assistance to the State 
Governments for the purpose of schemes for such period and on such terms 
and conditions as it may deem fit. 
8.  The record keeping functions for the purpose of this Act shall be performed by 
the District Administration: 
 Provided that the State Government may direct that the record keeping 
function shall be performed by – 
(a) the District Panchayat in rural areas; and 
(b) the Urban Local Bodies in urban areas. 

 58
 
 Secretariat of the Board 
 
The State Board shall have a s ecretariat with adequate professional and other staff.  
The staff of the State Board shall be go verned by the State government rules and 
regulations existing from time to time. 
 
State Fund  
 
(1) The State government shall create a Stat e Social Security and Welfare Fund to 
which contributions shall accrue from the following sources: 
            
          (i) Grants and loans from National Board and the State government; 
          
(ii) Any tax or cess that the State government may impose on               
commodities and/or services in lieu of empl oyers’ contributions (which are either 
difficult to collect or appropriate empl oyers in the unorganised Sector are not 
directly identifiable); 
 
 (iii) Contribution toward additional social security scheme (if any) formulated by 
the State Board; 
 
 (iv) Contributions from the national financial/developmental institutions; and 
  
(v) Any voluntary contribution from individuals or institutions. 
 
(2) All financial contributions made by indivi duals and institutions to the State Social 
Security and Welfare Fund will be exempt ed from the payment of income tax under 
the Income Tax Act. 
 
(3) All contributions accruing to the Stat e Boards shall be credited to the State 
Social Security and Welfare Fund which shall be applied for meeting the following: 
 
a) Expenses on the implementation of the national schemes and additional social 
security schemes of the State Government; 
 
b) Grants to the Welfare Boards an d the Workers’ Facilitation Centres; 
 
c) Expenses on the administration of the State Board as per the annual budget; 
 
d) Investment in permitted schemes; and 
 
e) Any other item in connection with the administration of this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 

 59
CHAPTER V 
Registration 
 
9. (1) Every unorganized worker shall be eligible for registration subject to the 
fulfillment of the following conditions, namely:- 
(a) he or she shall have completed fourteen years of age; and 
(b) a self-declaration by him or her confirming that he or she is an unorganized 
worker.  
(c) He or she has a monthly earning of an amount (presently it may not exceed 
Rs.7000/- in 2007 which is roughly equivalent to Rs. 6500/- per month 
recommended by the Indian Labour Confer ence held in December 2005) as may be 
notified by the Central Government or the State Government from time to time or 
holds cultivable land subject to such ceiling as may be notified by the State 
Government; 
(2)  Every eligible unorganized worker shall make an application in the prescribed 
form to the District Administration for registration. 
(3)  Every unorganized worker shall be regist ered and issued an identity card by the 
District Administration which shall be a smart card carrying a unique 
identification number and shall be portable. 
(4)  If a scheme requires a registered unor ganized worker to make a contribution, 
he or she shall be eligible for social security benefits under the scheme only 
upon payment of such contribution. 
(5)  Where a scheme requires the Cent ral or State Government to make a 
contribution, the Central or State Government, as the case may , shall make 
the contribution regularly in terms of the schemes. 
Workers’ Facilitation Centres 
 
(1) In order to extend coverage and reach the unorganised workers in remote areas, 
the State Boards may designate any one or mo re of the following at the local level as 
Workers’ Facilitation Centres (WFC): 
 
a) Existing Worker Welfare Bo ards and their local offices; 
 
b) Local Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRI); 
 
c) Organisations of workers including  trade unions, associations and co-
operatives in the uorganised sector; 
 
d) Self-help Groups (SHGs); and 

 60
 
e) Non-profit organisations working among the unorganised workers. 
 
 (2) Such designated Workers’ Facilitat ion Centres shall perform the following 
functions: 
 
a) Disseminate information on available social security schemes for the 
unorganised workers; 
 
b) Facilitate the filling, processing and forwarding of application forms for 
registration of unorganised workers; 
 
c) Obtain registration from the District  administration and deliver the Identity 
Cards to the registered unorganised workers; 
 
d) Facilitate the enrollment of the regi stered unorganised workers in social 
security schemes; and 
 
e) Facilitate the delivery of social secur ity benefits through the institutions 
designated to deliver such social secur ity (insurance companies, post offices, 
Departments of the State/Central Go vernment and other institutions 
concerned). 
 
(3) The State Boards shall compensate the co sts incurred by the Workers’ Facilitation 
Centres for performance of its functions. 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
Miscellaneous 
 
10.  The Central Government may give guidance to- 
(i) the National Board; or 
(ii) the Government of a State or the State Board of that State. 
 In respect of matters relating to the implementation of the provisions and 
administration of this Act. 
11. No proceedings of the National Board or  any State Board shall be invalid on the 
ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of 
the National Board or, as the case may be, the State Board. 
12. (1) The Central Government may, by no tification, make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- 

 61
(a) the contributions to be collected from  the beneficiaries of the scheme or the 
employers under sub-section (a) of section 4; 
(b) the number of persons to be nominated, the term of office and other conditions 
of service of members, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of 
functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies of, the National Board under 
sub-section (4) of section 5;  
 
       ©   The rules of procedure rela ting to the transaction of the business at the 
meeting of    the National Board under sub-section (6) of section 5; 
 
(d)  the allowance for attending the meetings of the National Board under sub-
section           (7) of section 5; 
 
                   (e)   the form for making an application for registration under sub-section (2) of     
 
 (f)   any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
 
13.  (1)  the State Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the       
 
                   (2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,   
 
(a) the number of persons to be nominated, the term of office and other       
 conditions  of service of members, the procedure to be followed in the 
 discharge of functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies of, the State 
 Board under sub-section(4) of section 6;  
 
(b) the rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business at the meetings of 
the  State Board under sub- section (6) of section 6; 
 
(c) the allowances for attending the meetin gs of the State Board under sub-section 
(7)  of section 6; 
 
(d) the contributions to be collected from  the beneficiaries of the scheme or the 
 employers under sub-section (I) of section 7; and  
 
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
 
14. (1)  Every rule made by the Central Go vernment under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
houses after in making any modification in the rule or both House agree that 
the rule should  not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as th e case may be so, however, that nay such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
 

 62
(2) Every rule made under this act by State Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is notified, before the State Legislature. 
(15)  (1)This law will not affect the applic ation of any other State or Central Acts 
which applies to the unorganised worker or to the employer under this Act.  
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, wherever any unorganised worker 
is eligible for superior or better benefits under any existing law in force the worker 
shall continue to be entitled for such benefits. 
 
(3) In case, any unorganised worker is eligible for benefit under one or more existing 
Central or Welfare Boards, in addition to his eligibility for the  specified schemes 
under 3(1),  
 
(a)  The unorganised worker shall retain the option of membership of the Scheme(s) 
/ Fund with the highest benefit. 
 
( b ) The National/State Board may decide the criteria on which the unorganised 
worker can be eligible for benefit under the specified scheme in addition to 
membership in other Boards/schemes. 
 
Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act 
 
(1) The provisions of this Act shall have ef fect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law or in  the terms of any award, agreement or 
contract of service, whether made before or after the coming into force of this Act. 
 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude a unorganised worker 
from entering into an agreement with his/her employer for granting him/her rights or 
privileges in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him/ her than those 
to which he/she would be entitled under this Act. 
 
(16) (1) If any difficulty arises in giving affect to the provisions of this act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in  the Official  gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provis ions of this act, as may appear to it 
to be necessary removing the difficulty: 
 
   Provided that no such order shall be  made under this section after the expiry 
of a       period of two years from the commencement of this act. 
 
 (2)  Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is       made, before each House of Parliament.  
 
 
 

 63
 
Chapter to be included before the miscellaneous chapter 
 
 
DISPUTE RESOLUTION BODIES AND THEIR CONSTITUTION 
 
 
Resolution of disputes 
 
The State government shall constitute at least one Dispute Resolution Council 
in each district for resolution of disputes re lating to the non-observance of provisions 
of this Act, arising amongst the unorganise d workers, employers, Workers’ Facilitation 
Centres and State Boards. 
 
 
Reference of disputes  
 
(1) Any unorganised worker or employer  or Workers’ Facilitation Centres or 
organisation representing such worker or St ate Boards may raise a dispute relating to 
the non-observance of provisions of this Ac t by filing a complaint before the Dispute 
Resolution Council in the manner prescribed by the State Government. 
 
(2) Upon reference of such dispute, the Di spute Resolution Council shall at the first 
instance proceed to arrive at a conciliated settlement to the satisfaction of all parties. 
Upon failure of such conciliation proceedi ngs, the Dispute Resolution Council shall 
adjudicate on the matter as expeditiously as possible. 
 
 
(3) The Dispute Resolution Council shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (of 1908). 
 
 
Consequences of contravention of provisions of this Act 
 
Whoever contravenes any provisions of this Act or the rules made there under, other 
than those made punishable under any other law, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend 
to Rs. 5000/-, or with both, and in case of continuing contravention, with additional 
fine which may extend upto Rs. 100/- for every day during which such contravention 
continues. The Dispute Resolution Council shall be authorised to give the fine so 
collected either in whole or in part to the aggrieved party.  

 64
SCHEDULE 1 
 
(See section 3(1A)) 
 
NATIONAL MINIMUM SOCIAL SECURI TY SCHEMES FOR THE UNORGANISED 
WORKERS 
 
 
S. No.  Name of the Schemes 
       
      1. Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme. 
      2. Aaam Admi Bima Yojana. 
3. Swasthya Bima Yojana. 
[4. Janani Suraksha Yojana 
5. Provident Fund Scheme] 
 
 
SCHEDULE 2 
 
(See section 3(1D)) 
 
SOCIAL SECURITY SCHEMES FOR THE UNORGANISED WORKERS 
 
S. No.  Name of the Scheme 
 
1) National Family Benefit Scheme. 
2) National Maternity Benefit Scheme. 
3) Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana. 
4) Health Insurance Scheme for Handloom Weaver. 
5) Scheme for pension to Master Crafts persons. 
6) Group Accident Insurance Scheme for Active fishermen. 
7) Saving-cum-Relief for the fishermen. 
8) Janshree Bima Yojana. 
 

 65
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
It is estimated that the workers in the unorganised sector constitute more than 
ninety-four per cent of the total employment in the country.  On account of their 
unorganised nature, these workers do not get adequate social security.  Some welfare 
schemes are being implemented by the Cent ral Government for specific groups of 
unorganised workers such as beedi workers,  non-coal mine workers, cine workers, 
handloom weavers, fishermen, etc. Stat e Governments are implementing welfare 
programmes for certain categories of  unorganised workers and some Non-
Governments Organisation also provides social security to certain categories of 
workers.  Despite all these efforts, there is  a huge deficit in the coverage of the 
unorganised  workers in the matter of soci al security measures ensuring the welfare 
and well-being of workers in the unorgani sed sector, such as agricultural workers, 
construction workers, beedi workers, handloom workers leather workers, etc. 
 
 2. The Unorganised Workers’ Social Security Bill, 2007 aims to entitle the 
unorganised workers with national minimum social security benefits and to provide 
for schemes for welfare of the unorganised workers and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  The Bill, inter alia, provides for the following matters, 
namely:- 
 
(i) The Central Government shall constitute a National Social Security  
Board to administer the National Social Security and Welfare Fund & the 
schemes entitling the national minimum social security benefits at the 
national level and recommend suitable welfare schemes for different 
sections of unorganised workers.. 
(ii) The State Government shall constitute the State Social Security  Board 
to administer the State Social Security and Welfare Fund & the schemes 
entitling the national minimum social security benefits at the state level 
and recommend suitable welfare schemes for different sections of 
unorganised workers in that State and the State Government may notify 
suitable schemes for one or more sections of the unorganised workers. 
(iii) A unorganised worker shall be eligible for social security benefits if, he is 
duly registered.  Every registered unorganised worker shall be issued an 
identify card which shall a smart card carrying a unique identification 
number and shall be portable. 
(iv) The Central Government and the State Government shall have the power 
to make rules for the purposes of carrying out the objects of the Bill. 
 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                         OSCAR FERNANDES. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 66
FINANCIAL MEMORNDUM 
 
 Clause 5 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National Social Security  
Board to recommend the Central Government on formulation of suitable welfare 
schemes for different sections of the unorganised workers relating to life and 
disability cover, health benefit, old age pr otection, etc. The allowances, etc., to 
the members of the National Board for attending the meetings of the National 
Board shall be made by the Central Government.  Clause 4 of the Bill provides 
that the schemes notified by the Centra l Government may be funded wholly by 
the Central Government or partly by the Central Government and partly by the 
State Government; or partly throug h contributions collected from the 
beneficiaries of the scheme and the employers as may be specified in the 
scheme.  Clause 6 of the Bill envisages for constitution of a State Social 
Security Board to recommend the State Government on formulation of suitable 
welfare schemes for different sections of the unorganised workers.  Sub-clause 
(3) of clause 7 of the Bill also provides for giving financial assistance to the 
State Governments for the purpose of schemes framed by those Governments 
through the respective funds.  The financial implications for funding of the 
schemes would be determined as and when such schemes are formulated. 
 
 2. The allowances to the Members of the National Board shall be made out of 
the regular budget of the Ministry of Labour and Employment.  The National 
Board will be serviced by the existing staff in the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment.  The Fund for the schemes, as and when they are announced, will 
be channelised through the National Fund and the State Funds. 
 
 3. The provisions of the Bill will not in volve any other expenses of recurring or 
non-recurring nature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 67
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
 Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Ce ntral Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the proposed legislation.  The matter with respect 
to which rules may be made has been set out in sub-clause (2).  The matters, 
inter alia, relate to (a) the contributions to be collected from the beneficiaries of 
the scheme or the employers under sub-clause (1) of clause 4; (b) the number of 
persons to be nominated, the term of office and other conditions of service of, 
the procedure, to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, and the 
manner of filling vacancies among, the members of the National Board under 
sub-clause (4) of clause 5; (c) the rules of procedure relating to the transaction 
of the business at the meeting of the National Board under sub-clause (6) of 
clause 5; (d) the allowances for attendin g the meetings of the National Board 
under sub-clause (7) of clause 5; (e) the form for making an application for 
registration under sub-clause (2) of clau se 9; and (f) any other matter which is 
required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
 
 2. Clause 13 of the Bill empowers th e State Governments to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the proposed legislation.  The matters with respect 
to which rules may be made has been set out in sub-clause (2) The matters, 
inter alia, relate to (a) the number of persons t be nominated, the term of office 
and other conditions of sse4rvice of, the procedure to be followed in the 
discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the 
members of the State Board under sub-clau se (4) of clause 6; (b) the rules of 
procedure relating to the transaction of  business at the attending the meetings 
of the State Board of the scheme or the employers under sub-clause (1) of 
clause 7; and (e) any other matter whic h is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
 
 3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are essentially matters 
of detail or procedure.  The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a 
normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 68
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
to provide for the social security and welfare of unorganised workers and for 
other connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 
 
 
_______ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Oscar Fernandes, Minister for Labour and Employment) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MGIPMRND-3955RS(S3)-08.0902007  
 
 
 

 69
ANNEXURE-III 
 
LIST OF TRADE UNIONS   
 
  
1. United Trade Union Centre (LS) 
2. Hind Mazdoor Sabha 
3. Centre of Indian Trade Unions 
4. All India Agricultural Workers Union 
5. Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh 
6. National Alliance of Agricultural Workers Union 
7. New Trade Union Initiative 
8. Unorganised Workers Federation  
9. Tailoring Workers Forum of India 
10. All India Anganwadi Workers Federation (AITUC) 
11. All India Federation of Anganwadi Workers and Helpers 
12. Bhartiya Krishi and Gramin Mazdoor Mahasangh, Delhi and Madhya 
Pradesh 
13. Akhil Bhartiya Krishi Gramin Mazdoor Mahasangh 
14.       All India Brick and Tile Manufacture Federation 
15.       Labour Progressive Federation 
16.       Indian National Trade Union Congress 
17.       National Front of Indian Trade Unions 
18.       United Trade Union Congress 
19.       Bhartiya Khet Mazdoor Union (BKMU) 
20.       All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) 
21. All India Rural Health workers 
22.       Bhartiya Krishi Gramin Mazdoor Maha Sangh 
23.      Anganwadi BMS Federation 
24.      Tamil Nadu Agricultural Labourers Union (TALU), Chennai 
25.       Uttar Pradesh Gramin Mazdoor Union 
 
 
The above list contains the names of all th e Trade Unions who were represented before 
the Committee, who sent their memoranda without physical appearance and who appeared 
before the Committee and submitted their memoranda as well.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 70
 ANNEXURE-IV 
 
 
 
LIST OF EMPLOYER GROUPS 
 
 
 
1. All India Manufacturers Organisation 
2. The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India 
3. Confederation of Indian Industry  
4. All India Organisation in Service of Small Scale Industries 
(Laghu Udyog Bharati) 
5. Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE) 
6. Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce & Industry 
7. Council of Indian Employers 
8. All India Organisation of Employers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------The 
above list contains the names of all the Em ployer Groups who were represented before 
the Committee, who sent their memoranda without physical appearance and who 
appeared before the Committee and submitted their memoranda as well.  
 
 

 71
ANNEXURE-V 
 
 
LIST OF NGOs   
 
1. Social Security Now 
2.       National Centre for Labour 
(i) National Hawker Federation 
(ii)  NFF 
3.         National Campaign Committee  
1. Nirmala Niketan  
2. National Alliances of Agricultural Worker Unions 
3. Unorganised Workers’ Federation  
4. NCC-USW Domestic Workers Forum 
5. Delhi Shramik Sangathan 
4. All Assam Motor Workers Joint Council, Guwahati, Assam 
5. Pudukkottai Mavatta Annaithu Amaippu sara Thozhilalar Sangam, Pudkkottai, 
Tamil Nadu 
6. Karamchari Sangh, Kanpur 
7. Angmehnati Kashtkari Sangarsh Samiti, Pune 
8. Representatives of Agricultural Workers Alliances 
9. Joint Action Committee of NCC-USW, Tamil Nadu 
10. Delhi Unorganised Sector Union 
11. Kamani Employees’ Union 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
The above list contains the names of all the NGOs who were represented before the 
Committee, who sent their memoranda without ph ysical appearance and who appeared before 
the Committee and submitted their memoranda as well.  
 
 
 
 
 

 72
ANNEXURE-VI 
 
 
NAMES OF INDIVIDUALS 
 
 
 
1. Shri Raj, Social Activist  
2. Gita Dewan Verma 
3. Shri S.S. Natarajan 
4. Professor Rajkumar Roy Chodhury  
5. Shri B.K. Sahu 
6. Ms. Anuradha Sharma 
7. Shri S. Subbiah 
8. Shri Kathyayini Chamaraj 
9. A Women representative 
10. Shri M.P. Aggarwal 
11. Amarnath, Unorganised worker 
12. Shri Diwan Chand Saxena 
13. Shri Sarvesh Kumar Suyash 
14. Shri Tularam 
15. All casual workers of Indian Airlines 
16. Shri Ganesh Chaudhary 
17. Shri Jagat Narain Singh and Shri P. Goswami 
18. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
19. Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
                               
 
 
 
     ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
The above list contains the names of all the Individuals who were represented 
before the Committee, who sent their memoranda without physical appearance and 
who appeared before the Committee and submitted their memoranda as well.  
 
 

 73
ANNEXURE - VII 
 
 
SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED FROM VARIOUS  MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS OF THE 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
COMMENTS OF MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
(i) The sub-clauses (1) and (4) of Clause 3 provide for matters on which 
suitable welfare schemes by Central Government and State Governments 
can be formulated respectively.  However, these do not seem to be under 
exclusive purview of the respective Go vernments.  Hence, there may be 
duplication of schemes formulated by Central and State Governments. 
 
(ii) Although the financial memorandum mentions that the Bill in sub-clause (3) 
of Clause 7 of the Bill provides for Central Government to give financial 
assistance to the State Governments fo r the purpose of schemes framed by 
those Governments, it does not clearly provide for any ceiling or limit to the 
assistance to be provided.  It is true  that the sub-clause mentions “on such 
terms and conditions as it may deem fit” .  However, it would be better if this 
aspect is clarified and kept less open-ended.  After all, States may seek more 
and more Central contribution in their own schemes. 
 
(iii) Clause 9 (Chapter-V) pr ovides that every unorganized worker shall be 
eligible for registration if he or she has completed 14 years of age.  This is in 
contradiction with the UN Convention on the rights of the child which treats 
a person as a child until he or she has completed 18 years of age and such a 
person is not expected to be a worker. 
 
(iv) The definition of “unorganized sector as given in Clause 2 (k) does not seem 
to be in  consonance with the statement of object and reasons which 
includes agricultural workers. 
 
(v) Planning Commission is in the process of creating an authority for issuing a 
unique identification (UID) to residents which would be used primarily as 
the basis of efficient delivery of welfar e services.  The UID should be denied 
from entitlement of social security to unorganized workers. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE 
 
 As there are no tax related issues in “T he Unorganised Sector Workers’ Social 
Security Bill, 2007”  Department of Revenue have no comments to offer. 
 
 
 
COMMENTS OF PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
  The views of the Planning Commission are summarized below: 
 
1. In pursuance of the commitment of the National Common Minimum 
Programme to discuss welfare of the unorganized sector workers, Hon’ble 
Prime Minister took a meeting on 18 De cember 2005.  In this meeting, PM 

 74
directed that a Committee of Secret aries be constituted to (i) verify the 
numbers; (ii)to estimate possible GOI contribution; (iii) to list of various 
issues relating to modalities of implementation; and (iv) to collage and 
evaluate various State level initiatives.  Committee of Secretaries meet under 
the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary on 25.7.06.  After the deliberations 
in the Committee of Secretaries, a Gr oup of Ministers was constituted on 
18.1.07 with Hon’ble Finance Minist er as the Chairperson.  The GOM 
discussed the issue and proposed a draft Bill for introducing welfare 
schemes for the unorganized sector workers.  The Cabinet approved the 
version of the Bill proposed by the GOM on 24.5.2007. 
 
2. Thereafter, upon the directions of the Hon’ble Prime Minister, the terms of 
reference of the GOM were extended on 25.7.07 to further consider the 
following aspects (i) Hold formal discussions with the Chairman and 
Members of he NCEUS on the two Bills prepared by the Commission; (ii) 
Consider the following proposals and schemes being drawn up by the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment  including (a) bringing certain 
amendments to the Bill to incorporate the provisions for a minimum level of 
benefits, central state funds, provisio n for imposing ‘cess’ and adding a 
schedule of the schemes to the Act; (b) identifying existing central social 
schemes for unorganized sector workers to be included in the Schedule of 
the Act; and (c) formulating two new schemes for Health Insurance and 
Pension that would cover all  sectors and be introduced on a pilot basis in a 
few districts in each State. 
 
3. In the three meetings followings the addition to the terms of reference, the 
matter was discussed and Chairman and Members of the NCEUS were 
formally consulted.  The Group of Mini sters in its final meetings on 28.8.07 
has approved the propos als to amend the Draft Bill (which was earlier 
approved by the Cabinet on 24.5.07).  The new Draft Bill, after taking into 
account the decisions of the GOM was approved by the Cabinet for 
introduction in Parliament.  After vetting by the Ministry of Law on drafting 
aspects, te Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 7.9.2007, and has 
since been referred to the Standing Committee on Labour.  The Committee 
in its sitting held on 8.10.07 had decided to have wider consultations with 
all the stakeholders and has hence sought the comments of the Planning 
Commission on the above noted three aspects. 
 
Comments of the Planning Commission 
 
Section 3, 5 and 6 
  
There is no specific role for the Nation al Board or the State Board before a 
scheme is notified for inclusion or exclusio n from the schedule although such Boards 
can recommend to the appropriate Governments suitable schemes and monitor the 
schemes administered by the respective Governm ents.  In other words, on the basis of 
review and continuous monitoring if any sc heme has served its purpose fully or is to 
be discontinued for other reasons, or is to be modified mid-course, power in that 
respect should be conferred in the section to  be performed after taking into account 
the advise of the respective boards. 
 

 75
 Section 5 (5) and 6 (5) may be modified to indicate that the term of office of the 
non-official members on National Board/State Board will be three years.  
 
Section 9 
 
The desirability of prescribing a standard form with a solemn 
affirmation/undertaking for the declaratio n under Section 9 (1) (b) may also be 
considered.  To stipulate liability on the Ce ntral and State Governments to ‘puctually’ 
make payment to the schemes in an Act of Parliament may not be appropriate, as it 
presumes a habitual delay.  Even otherwise, Section 9 (5) will only be a bar declaration 
because the custody of the Consolidated Fund of the State is with the State 
Legislature. 
 
Financial Implications and Work Environment 
 
3. Financial contributions by the Employ ers and Employees (beneficiaries) may be 
dealt with according to the rules to be made under the Act.  The implementing 
Departments, viz., Labour Departments of the State Governments and the Union 
Ministry of Labour and Employment with the advice of National and State Boards, 
which will continuously monitor and review  the implementation of the schemes, will 
take steps to ensure that the schemes work smoothly and bring the desired results. 
 
 

 76
 
 
 
 
 
COMMENTS OF MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE  
 
National Rural health Mission (NRHM) 
 
 The NCMP mandates an increase in expenditure in health 
sector, with main focus on primary Health Care from the current level of 0.9% of GDP 
to 2-3% of GDP over the next five years. 
 
Health Insurance 
 
 The National Rural Health Mission has also made commitment regarding 
effective and viable risk pool and social heal th insurance to provide health security to 
the poor by ensuring accessible, affordable, accountable and good quality hospital 
care.  Based on the recommendations of the Task Force a framework for developing 
health insurance programme (some suggestions for the States) have been developed 
and this Ministry has advised the State/UT  Governments to prepare Health Insurance 
models as per their local needs to be run on pilot basis.  Some of the States have 
initiated the process for developing Health Insurance Scheme. 
 
 New and flexible products/insurance scheme need to be develop[ed  and 
marketed innovatively, to make community based health insurance popular including 
the insurance schemes proposed in the bill fo r workers of the unorganized sector.  
This will be effective when simultaneous efforts are made to strengthen the health 
delivery system through public private partnership. 
 
 
Comments of the Ministry: 
 
1. The existing Universal Health Insuranc e Scheme (UHIS) for BPL families, which 
was subsidized by Ministry of Finance could not be successful due to inadequate 
coverage, poor benefits and higher premiu m.  Health Insurance under the overall 
National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) framework of this Ministry is largely an effort to 
reduce the distress and duress of house holds in seeking health care by reducing out 
of pocket expenditure through risk pooling.   This Ministry has prepared a framework 
for developing health insurance programme with few models and sent to all States for 
making their state-specific proposal which could be considered for funding under 
NRHM on pilot basis for both BPL and AP L families.  The premium for BPL families 
would be subsidized and the APL families would be making full payment of premium.  
After the success of few models, the same could be extended further.  In this 
framework, the emphasis is on the process rather than the product. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 77
 
2. As regards the proposal for inclusion of health component for the workers of 
un-organised sector, this Ministry is not in favour for having an uniform 
scheme of health insurance for the entire country as the need and the health 
facilities available differs across the country.  Without the detailed process 
planning at the household level, national level initiative may only have a 
limited impact on the poor.  As such States may be given the flexibility to 
modify and implement the scheme to suit the health needs of the 
States/Districts.  
 
3. In case of proposal of NCEUS including health insurance components is 
agreed to, the health insurance should not be taken up with 250 districts in 
first year due to complex nature of th e subject which require large amount of 
preparation.  Therefore, it could be taken up in maximum of 100 districts 
during the first year and same number could be added every year, so that their 
may not be more than 5-6 districts in State every year this may also be linked 
to the improvement of public health facilities under NRHM. 
 
4. The health component of NCEUS propos al need up gradation in respect of 
adequate coverage of maternity bene fit and inclusion of out of pocket 
expenses, transportation, loss of wages during hospitalization etc. 
 
5. The Ministry of Health and Family We lfare would be willing to advice on the 
formulation of component on Health Insurance but would have nothing to do 
with its implementation. 

 78
COMMENTS OF MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT, DEPARTMENT OF RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT ON THE UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS’ SOCIAL 
SECURITY BILL, 2007 
 
 
The various provisions of the propos ed Bill on “The Unorganised Sector 
Workers’ Scoial Security” were examined by Ministry of Rural Development.  
This Ministry has no specific comments  on the proposed bill except that the 
name of the Scheme “National Old Age Pension Scheme” as mentioned in 
Schedule under Section 3 of the propos ed bill has been changed to “Indira 
Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme” effective from 19th November, 2007.    

 79
ANNEXURE – VIII 
 
COMMENTS RECEIVED FROM STATE GOVERNMENTS/UNION 
TERRITORIES ADMINISTRATION 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF MIZORAM ON THE 
UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY BILL, 2007 
 
 
 There is yet no major organized Sector  Establishment to absorb the growing 
manpower in the State of Mizoram.  Havi ng no option, the persons who enter the 
Labour Force have to work for livelihood in the unorganized Sector of employment 
only.  In view of the above, the Government of Mizoram is appreciative and 
subscribe to the objectives and reasons of the “Unorganised Sector Workers’ Social 
Security Bill, 2007”.  However, the State Government is fully aware that for want of 
financial resources, it has no capacity to satisfactorily implement the proposed 
legislation under the Central Government provide substantial assistance for the 
purpose of the Scheme speculated in the Bill. 
 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE UNION TERRITORY OF 
LAKSHADWEEP ON THE UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY 
BILL, 2007 
 
 
  Lakshadweep is a small Union Territory and there are no major factories 
or commercial establishments in Lakshadweep.  As such this administration has 
no particular comments to offer on th e Unorganised Sector Workers’ Social 
Security Bill, 2007”. 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF UTTAR PRADESH ON THE 
UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY BILL, 2007 
 
  The provisions of this Bill relate to welfare of workers of unorganized 
sector and it seeks to ensure that the benefits available to workers do reach them.  
About 93% of the total workforce of Uttar Pradesh is  working in unroganised 
sector.   State Government of Uttar Pradesh have welcomed the Bill meant for 
providing social security coverage to the workers of unorganized sector.  As most of 
the workforce of the State work in unorganized sector, the benefits under the 
present Bill for these workers are relevant  and appropriate.  State Government 
have no objection on any provision of the Bill. 
 

 80
 
COMMENTS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN ON THE 
UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY BILL, 2007 
 
   
1. The definition of worker of self- employed worker does not include any 
occupation and livelihood.  This should be included in the definition.   
 
2. Wage ceiling for self employed persons for the purpose of this bill should 
be left for the decision by the respective State Government. 
 
3. The schemes should either be fully funded by the Union Government or 
no scheme should be implemented without the concurrence of the State 
Government. 
 
4. The minimum contribution of the Union Government for the schemes 
formulated by the  State Governments should be  decided so that the 
State Government could frame their schemes accordingly. 
 
5. Cess and Taxes should be levied to generate resources.  The revenue so 
collected should be made available to the State Governments. 
 
6. Adequate number to employees and resources should be made available 
for the purpose of record keeping.   
 
7. The expenditure over smart cards to be issued to the workers of 
unorganized sector should be borne by the Union Government. 
 
8. Clear and specific mechanism should be laid down to generate resources, 
revenues for funding and implementing the various schemes for the 
welfare of workers. 

 81
LIST OF TRADE UNIONS   
 
  
 
1.  United Trade Union Centre (LS) 
2.  Hind Mazdoor Sabha 
3.  Centre of Indian Trade Unions 
4.  All India Agricultural Workers Union 
5.  Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh 
6.  National Alliance of Agricultural Workers Union 
7.  New Trade Union Initiative (Shri Ashim Roy) 
8.  New Trade Union Initiative (Shri M.Subbu) 
9.  Unorganised Workers Federation  
10.  Tailoring Workers Forum of India 
11.  All India Anganwadi Workers Federation (AITUC) 
12.  All India Federation of Anganwadi Workers and Helpers 
13 (a)    Bhartiya Krishi and Gramin Mazdoor Mahasangh, Delhi and Madhya  
        Pradesh 
13 (b)    Akhil Bhartiya Krishi Gramin Mazdoor Mahasangh 
14.        All India Brick and Tile Manufacture Federation 
15.        Labour Progressive Federation 

 82
ANNEXURE-IX 
 
SUMMARY OF MEMORANDA RECEIVED FROM VARIOUS TRADE 
UNIONS/EMPLOYERS GROUPS/NGOS/INDIVIDUALS 
 
 
IMPORTANT POINTS OF VARIOUS MEMORANDA RECEIVED FROM TRADE 
UNIONS ON THE UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS SOCIAL SECURITY BILL, 
2007 
 
 
Sl.No. Name of the 
Organisation 
Name of the 
office bearer 
Important points 
1. United Trade Union 
Centre (Lenin Sarani) 
Shri  Sankar 
Saha 
General 
Secretary 
 
1. The reason for this huge number 
of unorganized sector workers is 
informalisation of formal sector-
designed to ruthlessly exploit the 
masses of workers.  There is need for 
formalisation of informal sector to 
ensure justice and equity to the 
workers. 
2. The Bill fails to make provision for 
universal application of the proposed 
Social Security Scheme covering all 
sectors of unorganized workers and 
conspicuously maintain silence on 
defined contribution for funding of 
the scheme-a scheme without 
defined contribution or resources 
cannot provide defined benefits. 
3. The scheme also fails to provide 
any time frame and it is wide open 
that different segments of 
unorganized workers will be provided 
with different schemes at different 
times. 
4. The criteria for determination of 
monthly earning/ages to all sections 
including self-employed 
workers/agriculture workers are 
absent in the Bill. 
5. The Bill provides for constitution 
of Central Boards and State Boards 
giving them the power of merely 
recommending various schemes 
covering different categories of 
Unorganised Sector Workers. 

 83
 
2. Hind Mazdoor Sabha Shri Umraomal 
Purohit 
General 
Secretary 
1. The approach of the legislation 
both for the Unorgaised Sector and 
the Agricultural workers should 
not merely be welfare oriented but 
also provide for regulation of 
employment, provision of 
minimum employment earnings 
guarantee wherever practicable, as 
well as a role of the workers for 
proper enforcement of the law and 
the schemes. 
2. Provision must be made in the law 
for payment of minimum wages on 
the basis of the recommendations of 
the 15 th ILC supplemented by the 
Raptakos Brett judgement of the 
Supreme Court.  Mention of ‘floor’ 
with regard to Minimum Wage should 
not be there.  There should be a 
National Minimum Wages, below 
which no state level Minimum Wage 
can go.  The fixation of piece rate 
wage for unorganized workers must 
be such as would enable an ordinary 
worker to earn a time rated wage. 
3. There should be legal 
entitlement of a minimal Social 
Security and working conditions to 
all unorganized sector workers. 
4. To cover all unorganized sector 
workers within a period of 5 
years. 
5. Providing the minimal Social 
Security and working conditions is 
the sole responsibility of the Central 
Government. 
6. The questions of Social Security 
and working conditions like wages 
etc. Could always be increased by the 
State Governments.  
7.All unorganized workers including 
home-based, wage workers, migrant 
workers and self-employed workers 
whose average monthly earnings do 
not exceed Rs.6500/- per month 
should be covered. 
8. The floor level social security 
schemes like life and accident cover, 
health insurance and maternity 
benefit should be funded by the 
Central Government. 

 84
 
3. Centre of Indian 
Trade Unions 
 1. The Bill in its content totally 
ignored the labour protection issues. 
2.  In respect of so cial security, the Bill 
contains nothing substantive but an 
open ended indication on some welfare 
schemes without any enforceable and 
justiceable measures for universal 
coverage, justice ability and funding 
mechanism. 
3. The Bill only provides for constitution 
of National Social Security Advisory 
Boards and similar Boards at the State 
level, basically advisory in character, 
which would recommend the welfare 
schemes on which the Central 
Government “may formulate from time 
to time suitable welfare schemes for 
different sections of the unorganized 
sector workers”.  The Bill contains 
neither a compelling provision regarding 
the floor level social security and its 
universal coverage to all unorganized 
sector workers, nor a clearly defined 
funding obligation and a time frame. 
4. Coverage of the unorganized sector 
workers by all basic labour laws viz., 
Minimum Wages Act, Bonded Labour 
System (Abolition) Act, Equal 
Remuneration Act etc. 
5. Central Government should notify a 
National Minimum Wage. 
6. A comprehensive National Social 
Security Scheme should be framed 
within a time frame for coverage of all 
workers.   
7.Constitution of a National Social 
Security & Welfare Fund. There is need 
for defined delivery/implementation 
machinery and enforcement and dispute 
resolution bodies.  
 

 85
 
4. All India Agricultural 
Workers Union 
Shri P.Ramayya 
(MLA) President 
 
1. A comprehensive legislation is 
required to regulate working 
conditions and working hours, 
ensure minimum wages, and equal 
wages for equal work, machinery 
for dispute settlement for different 
sections of workers, and floor level 
comprehensive social security 
benefits to be funded by the 
Central Government with clearly 
defined funding provided for the 
enforcement of the legislation, not 
just ‘welfare’ the present legislation 
barely goes beyond existing LIC 
schemes and other such measures 
listed in the schedule, is 
redundant. 
2. Agricultural labour who form the 
majority of so called ‘unorganized’ 
labour need a comprehensive 
central legislation based on the 
Kerala legislation of 1974. 
3. Section 3 (3) in Chapter-II gives 
the Central Government sweeping 
powers to include or exclude welfare 
schemes at will by notification or 
amending the schedule.  The 
following schemes must be included 
in the text in section 3.  4. (4) in 
which medical expenses, pension 
schemes, financial assistance for 
marriage and support to educate 
oneself must be added to the 
existing list.  Section 7 (1) (ii) states 
funding from the beneficiaries of the 
scheme or the employers’.  We 
believe that this funding should be 
both from the beneficiaries and the 
employers.  Section 9 2) does not 
make it clear that every applicant 
will be issued an identity card.  We 
demand that the application for an 
identity card be allowed on plain 
paper and not on a ‘prescribed 
form’.  Section 9 (4) the words 
“which should not exceed Rs.10/- 
per year in toto” be added at the 
end of the line. 
4.The bill is not clear as to which 
agency will implement the 
provisions affectin g different 

 86
sections of workers. 
5. Bharatiya Mazdoor 
Sangh 
Shri R.V. Subba 
Rao Vice 
President 
1. There should be a 
comprehensive legislation covering 
the twin requirement of service 
regulations and social security and 
the Bill in the present form is a 
negation. 
 
2. The duplication of providing life 
and disability cover and old age 
protection by Central Government 
and employment injury benefit and 
old age homes by State Government 
shall be replaced by single window 
system. 
3. The workers should be registered 
as beneficiaries basing on the 
certificate issued by the Trade 
Unions. 
4. Representatives of registered 
unions affiliated to central trade 
union organization be included in 
the Boards. 
5. The Advisory  Boards,  National & 
State level   shall be vested with 
authority to formulate welfare 
schemes, to execute, to enforce and 
to monitor implementation of the 
provisions of the legislation for 
implementation of the welfare 
schemes. 
6. An independent machinery be set 
up on the lines of EPFO & ESIC 
which should function 
dispassionately, ensuring 
transparency. 
7. The schemes shall cover all the 
workers in the unorganized sector 
and there should not be any 
phasewise implementation on the 
grounds of BPL & APL. 
8. The restrictive clauses of a 
minimum number of workers and 
calling the workers as casual, 
contract, trainee, on probation etc. 
be removed from the existing laws, 
and all the wage workers be covered 
in the existing laws. 

 87
 
 
 
 
  Additional Suggestions: 
 
1. Definition of the unorganized 
Sector Worker 
 
(a) A schedule of employment in the 
unorganized sector be provided in the 
Bill. The schedule shall include all the 
employments of both wage & self 
employed workers, and all 
unincorporated establishments and 
avenues of employment/earnings in the 
unorganized sector.  A provision shall be 
made to include employments or avenues 
of employments in the times to come. 
 
(b) The legislation shall cover all wage 
workers & self employed workers, in the 
unincorporated sector  of establishments 
and avenues of employment and 
earnings, irrespective of the number of 
workers employed or the amount of 
waged or income. 
    
2. Definition of the Unorganised 
Sector 
 
‘Unorganised Sector’ means an 
unincorporated enterprise owned by 
Individuals or group of individuals of self-
employed workers, without any limit for 
the number of workers employed or the 
wage rate or earnings or income. 
 
   3  Welfare Schemes 
 
(a) The existing schemes are very 
few, hence may more schemes 
shall be included in the schedule.  
The existing schemes are limited 
to only two  categories of workers 
and all the categories of workers 
in the unorganized sector shall be 
included in the schedule.  There 
shall not be any sealing in the 
number of schemes, and there 
shall be a provision to formulate 
many more schemes as per the 
exigencies, and the needs of 
workers. 
 

 88
(b) Analysis of existing schemes. 
 
 
(i) The quantum of benefit is quite 
inadequate, there is every need 
to increase the quantum to 
make the scheme worthwhile. 
(ii) The conditions are very 
cumbersome and fulfillment of 
which is not with in the reach 
of the workers.  There is every 
need to make the conditions 
reasonable and practicable. 
     (iii)  Registration of Cooperative 
Societies or   formation of 
groups of workers is totally 
stopped.  The plea is that there 
was a society or group some ten 
or fifteen years ago and that 
some four or five members have 
not returned the dues.  The 
cooperative movement itself 
came to a standstill and 
alongwith the operation of 
welfare schemes. 
   4. Multiplicity of schemes 
 
(i)All the categories of workers 
engaged in about 140 different and 
distinct works/jobs shall be covered 
under the scheme. 
 
(ii) The Government shall provide 
funds equivalent to 3% of GDP and 
levy tax to augment funds.  Funds 
shall be provided to meet the 
requirements of workers and it is not 
proper to tailor the schemes or reduce 
the number of schemes on the 
consideration of funds. 
 
   5. Single window system be adopted 
to avoid confusion. 
   6. Boards at State and Central level 
 
(a) The Boards shall not be advisory 
alone.  The boards shall have 
authority to formulate schemes, 
execute schemes and monitor 
implementation. 
(b) Representatives of Central Trade 
Unions shall be included in the 

 89
Boards. 
(c) Boards shall be constituted for 
every category of employment and 
for every category of works/jobs in 
the self employed sector  
   7 &8. Benefit delivery machinery 
 
(a) Implementation of welfare 
schemes shall not be entrusted to 
the Government Administration or 
Panchayat Raj Institutions as they 
are over burdened with many 
schemes of Central & State 
Governments.  Also due to the ban 
on recruitment and creation of 
posts in the Government and 
quasi Government and Local Self 
Administrative units and 
Government Corporations the staff 
strength is very depleted.  An 
independent organisation be set 
up to conduct registration of 
beneficiaries record keeping and 
benefit delivery on the lines of 
EPFO and ESIC. 
(b) The Bill proposed to constitute the 
Central or State Board with the 
Principal Secretary of Labour  or 
Labour Secretary as Member 
Secretary, ex-officio.  A full time 
Member Secretary be provided 
from the Government, not below 
the rank of Principal Secretary 
Labour. 
(c) The cost of the Administration of 
legislation, welfare schemes, and 
the cost of establishments shall be 
born by the Government and the 
welfare be spared from the 
expenditure on this score. 
   9. (a) Welfare Fund shall be set up 
and the welfare schemes shall be 
specified and leaving these matters to 
be decided later would result in delay 
and denial. 
 
(b) The Welfare schemes shall be 
specified in the legislation. 
 
(c) The legislation shall be 
comprehensive containing the 
provisions regarding the Re gulation of 

 90
Employment and service conditions.  
If it not possible, a separate Bill 
concerning the Regulation of 
employment and service conditions be 
placed in the Parliament and passed 
concurrently.  
6. National Alliance of 
Agricultural Workers 
Unions 
Shri Swapan 
Ganguly 
Organising 
Secretary 
1. There should be separate legislations 
for workers in the agricultural sector and 
for those in the non-agricultural sector. 
2. The Unorganised sector workers social 
security Bill 2007 is a legislation that 
only covers social security and does not 
talk about regulation of employment.  
There should be a comprehensive 
legislation guaranteeing workers rights 
regulation of employment and social 
security. 
 
3. In Section 3 (1) and Section 3 (4) the 
word “may formulate be replaced by the 
words “shall formulate” and that a time 
period of three years be fixed It should be 
mandatory for the Central Government or 
State Government to introduce schemes 
for the welfare of unorganized sector 
workers and a time period of three years 
be fixed. 
4.  In section 4 and section 7, a 
clear provisions may be made for the 
State and Central Government’s share in 
funding of schemes, alongwith clear 
formulation for worker and employer 
contribution. 
5. The funds made available for the social 
security scheme should be in parity with 
the contribution and number of the 
workers in the unorganized sector.  They 
must be therefore considerably more than 
less than 1% of the GDP that the NCEUS 
report promises for 95% of the work 
force. 
6. A separate board for agricultural 
workers and an outreach that ensured 
the implementation mechanism are 
within close reach of the workers eg. One 
implementation center for every 5000 
workers in the agricultural sector.  We 
also insist that all boards, councils, 
committees, workers facilitation centers 
or any other implementation mechanisms 
formed under any law for workers rights 
should have ma
jority representation from 

 91
trade unions of the workers. 
7. There should be inclusion of provisions 
within the law that make any 
contravention of the social security 
legislation a serious criminal offence 
which is not bailable. 
8. Transparency and accountability to 
workers should also be an integral part of 
the law. 
7. New Trade Union 
Initiative 
Shri Ashim 
Roy 
General 
Secretary 
1. Government having recognized the 
need for a National Minimum Social 
Security Benefit must accept that this 
National Minimum cannot be in any way 
linked to either the contribution of 
workers or be subject to the availability 
of funds. 
 
2. In the event of funds raised 
through employers’ contribution, taxes 
and levies falling short, then the costs of 
the national Minimum must be met 
through the Central Government’s 
budgetary funds. 
 
3. In 3 (1) (c ) must  be conceptualized as 
and provisioned for as a pension; wherein 
the computation of the pension must be 
clearly and unambiguously based on the 
principle of 50% of last wages drawn) 
employed for Government employees’ 
pension.  Therefore, the pension must be 
linked, as a National Minimum, to the 
statutory minimum wage. 
4. Section 4 – In keeping with the 
principle of the National Minimum to the 
prescribed fund should be named 
National Fund.  Further apart from 
contribution from Government and 
employers there must be provision for an 
additional special tax or levy that may be 
decided upon by the Government. 
 
5. Section 5 (a) The establishment and 
incorporation of the prescribed National 
Social Security Board must include that 
the said Board must at all times remain 
the property and responsibility of the 
Central Government and that its corpus 
must come exclusively from the Central 
Government.  
6. (b) The composition of the executive 
council and secretariat of the 

 92
prescribed National Social 
Security Board and its 
functioning needs closer and 
detailed security in terms of 
the representation of trade 
unions as also from the point 
of accountability and 
transparency. 
7. Registration of workers, issuance of 
identity cards in order for uniformity 
there must be adequate clarity on 
registration of workers laid out in the 
Central Government. 
8. The provision for merger of existing of 
welfare schemes and funds with schemes 
and funds under the bill may be allowed 
with a clear provision that any merger of 
schemes must at least in the beneficiary 
obtaining the quantum of benefit under 
the existing scheme and not result in a 
loss of welfare. 
 
8. 
 
 
New Trade Union 
Initiative 
Shri M. Subbu 
Treasurer 
Shri Gautam 
Mody 
Secretary 
Definitions under the Bill: 
 
(1) On the definition of 
Agricultural Workers: 
 
            Agricultural workers represent 
the single largest category in the informal 
sector and are also the most deprived. 
 
Hence, if legislation fails to understand 
and internalize the specificities of this 
category it is going to be unable to reach 
out to them. 
 
 
 
   (2) On defining the 
Unorganized Sector: 
 
The original definition that included all 
private enterprises employing less than 
10 workers engaged in the production 
and sale of goods and service has 
undergone change.  The modification 
leads to the exclusion of the entire 
workforce that is informally employed in 
the organized sector from the purview of 
this Act thereby defeating the very 
purpose of this Act in the present context 
of increasing contractualisation and 
outsourcin
g o f  w o r k  i n  t h e  o rganized 

 93
sector. 
 
   (3) Protection under the 
provisions of the Employees’ 
Provident Fund Act, 1952: 
 
EPF Act must be amended to include 
enterprises employing 10 or more 
employees or the threshold of 
employment under the social security bill 
be raised to 20. 
   (4) Definition of a wage 
worker: 
 
The bill leaves the monetary ceiling of a 
wage worker to be decided upon the 
Government.  This is delegated legislation 
without precedent.  Furthermore, in that 
powers in this matter under the Bill are to 
be left to either the Central or to State 
Government. 
   (5) Benefits under the Bill 
 
Benefits under the Bill laid out in Section 
3 (1) (a) (b) and (c ) need to be spelt out 
clearly. 
 
In 3 (1)  (a) life and disability cover must 
include employment injury benefit, 
including provision for wages when 
recovering from employment injury. 
 
In 3 (1) (a) health benefits must include 
hospitalization charges and all benefits 
should include their dependents. 
 
In 3 (1) (c ) must be conceptualized as and 
provisioned for as a pension; wherein the 
computation of the pension must be 
clearly and unambiguously based on the 
principle of 50% of last wages drawn 
employed for Government employees’ 
pension. 
 
The provisions related to women workers 
should be adequately compensate for the 
reproductive and nurturing 
responsibilities that society has placed 
upon them. 

 94
 
   (6) Financial social security 
 
In keeping with the principle of the 
National Minimum, workers should be 
exempt from contributing to the 
National Minimum. 
   (7) Implementation of the 
Act 
 
No agency or authority is defined by the 
bill for the implementation of social 
security provisions.  Implementation of 
the social security provision needs to be 
handed over to specialized department 
of Government at every level-National, 
State and Local that is imbued with the 
spirit of social security as a universal 
right rather than an anti-poverty hand 
out. 
   (8) Dispute Resolution 
Machinery and Provisions for 
Violations of Legislation 
 
The bill provides no machinery for 
raising of disputes and dispute 
resolution.  Nor does it provide for any 
penalties for violations of the act.  
Furthermore, it places the entire burden 
of proof of violation on beneficiaries. 
 
   (9) Enforcement of the Act 
 
There should be compulsory 
enforcement of employers to employ only 
registered workers and violation should 
be made a criminal offence.  However, 
the benefits under the social security 
bill should not be contingent on or 
linked to enforcement. 
   (10) Existing Social Security 
Schemes 
 
The Bill makes no reference to existing 
social security schemes of either the 
Central or the State Government.  New 
social security legislation must protect 
existing schemes and no new scheme 
should be created under this bill that in 
anyway results in an entitlement that is 
less than an existing scheme. 

 95
 
   (11) Representation of Trade 
Union 
 
The composition of advisory boards 
assumes an enormous role of experts.  
The bill envisages no role for trade 
unions.   
9. Unorganized 
Workers Federation 
State 
Secretary  
1. The Central Government should stop 
categorizing within unorganized workers 
as BPL and APL workers.  The proposed 
social security bill should be amended 
and a comprehensive legislation 
comprising regulation of employment 
and wages, ESI health insurance, 
housing and crèches, just and fair 
pension schemes, dispute resolution 
mechanisms, sexual harassment 
complaints committees, rights over 
resources should be enacted. 
2. The comprehensive bill to be 
implemented by Sect oral Boards should 
be modeled based on the bill drafted by 
National Campaign Committee for 
Unorganized Sector Workers and based 
on the Tamil Nadu Manual Workers Act. 
3. A separate comprehensive bill for the 
agricultural workers comprising 
employment protection for agricultural 
workers, minimum wages, land reforms, 
social security and rights over resources 
should be enacted. 
4. The implementation mechanism 
should be sect oral tripartite boards for 
groupings of employments and 
representation of workers should be 
50% in the boards with adequate 
representation of women. 
 
5. Bonded labour and child labour in 
existing industries should be abolished 
and their rehabilitation as well as 
enforcement of minimum wages act, 
contract labour law central act on 
construction workers and all labour 
legislations must be intensified. 
6. (a) Both the State and Central 
Government should allocate 3% of the 
budget for social security 
implementation. 
(b) 2% levy on construction work 
and 1% lev y on all forms of production 

 96
and distribution must be imposed for 
the social security of unorganized 
workers. 
7. For all unorganized sector workers, 
ESI medial insurance, monthly pension 
of Rs.1000, family pension, maternity 
benefit for Rs.10,000, Rs.50,000 for 
natural death, marriage benefit of 
Rs.15,000, education allowance from 1
st 
standard to college must be 
implemented and all benefits must be 
given within one month of the 
application.  
10. Tailoring Workers 
Forum of India 
President  
Shri K. 
Bhargavan 
The Unorganized Sector Worker’s Social 
Security Bill, Chapter-11 Social 
security benefits, paragraph (1) (c ) old 
age protection. 
The board have to announce monthly 
pension to the registered members who 
cross 60 years of age.  And also the 
pension will be given to the spouse, 
minor child and dependants of the 
registered members after his or her 
death. 
2.The board have to give the retirement 
benefit to registered members, if the 
board have collected the contribution 
from the members 
3. The Government to announce that 
the members who completed 3 years of 
membership in the board shall be 
eligible to get the monthly pension. 
 
 
 
4.The board have to also announce the 
monthly pension to unorganized worker 
who is not able to register as member in 
the board as he/she has already 
 
crossed 60 years of age. 
5. The board have to give the marriage 
benefits to the registered members and 
the children of the member. 
6.No age limit has been specified for the 
purpose of registration.  The 
Government have to declare the sealing 
of age. 
7.In this bill, the National Social 
Security Advisory Board is to be 
constituted by the Central Government 
(Chapter-III). 
 

 97
The representations may be modified  
as follows: 
 
Ten representing unorganized sector 
workers. 
Four representing employers of 
unorganized sector. 
Chairperson to be appointed by the 
Central and State Governments from the 
unorganized sector workers represented 
in the Advisory board. 
Change the contents in Chapter-V 
(Registration) Para (1) (b) as “the 
concerned Trade Union for each and 
every trade in unorganized sector 
worker in particular trade”. 
11. All India Anganwadi 
Workers Federation 
(AITUC) 
Dr. B.V. 
Vijayalakshmi 
General 
Secretary 
1. The women workers, in 
particular are suffering more in the 
unorganized sector without minimum 
wage and without any social security 
measures whatsoever. 
  2. There is necessity for 
recognizing them as workers first and 
also as Government employees as any 
other employee working under the ICDS 
project. 
3. Secondly, they have to be given 
wages and not honorarium.   
4.  Thirdly, Anganwadi workers 
and helpers have to be given all the 
social security measures, such as PF, 
pension, gratuity, group insurance, 
ESI, etc. 
 
 
5.  Lastly, the introduction of 
contract system into the supervisory 
cadre of ICDS scheme should be 
abolished and they be given scales at 
par with others of the same cadre.   
6.We further request you to cover other 
women workers working in various 
sectors, for example, in the schools, as 
MID-Day Meal workers who are not 
considered for any wages.  This system 
of taking their services and calling them 
volunteers should be dispensed with. 
7.Lastly, we also request you to 
bring domestic workers into the 
category of workers and social security 
measures should be applicable to them.  
8. The women workers have been 

 98
taken on contract system for 
construction area like hospitals but they 
are not getting any social security 
benefits because of the contract system.  
So, this system has to be totally 
dispensed with and everybody should 
get the social security benefits. 
 
 
12. All India Federation 
of Anganwadi 
Workers and Helpers 
Dr. K. 
Hemalata 
General 
Secretary 
1.The Statement of Objects and 
Reasons appended to the Bill notes that 
“there is a huge deficit in the coverage 
of the unorganized sector workers in 
the matter of labour protection and 
social security measures”. But the Bill 
does not cover the conditions of work of 
the unorganized sector workers and 
provides no remedy to correct this ‘huge 
deficit’ in labour protection. 
 
2. Even in respect of social 
security, the Bill does not guarantee 
any concrete social security benefits for 
the unorganized.  There is no provision 
for compulsory floor level social security 
benefits covering all the unorganized 
sector workers within a specific time 
frame. 
3. The Financial Memorandum 
appended to the Bill provides for “the 
allowances to the members of the 
National Board to be made out of the 
regular budget”.  Only but makes no 
mention of the financial resources for 
the actual provision of the social 
security benefits for the unorganized 
sector workers.  Social security 
schemes cannot work without statutory 
backing and concrete allocation of 
financial resources. 
4. The Bill completely ignores the 
basic content of the unanimous and 
concrete suggestions repeatedly made 
by all the Central Trade Unions.  
 13. Bhartiya Krishi and 
Gramin Mazdoor 
MahaSangh, Delhi 
and Madhya Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
Shri Sultan 
Singh 
Shekhawat 
President 
Shri Hira Lal 
Pati Lal  
General 
Secretary 
1. The issues of agricultural workers 
and workers of unorganized 
sector in urban areas should be 
considered separately. 
2. Anganwadi workers, health 
workers and chowkidars working 
in rural areas should also be 
included. 

 99
Akhil Bhartiya Krishi 
Gramin Mazdoor 
Mahasangh 
 
 
Shri 
Vishambar 
Baghmare 
   
3. The schemes of the Union and 
State Governments should be 
separate. 
4. The marginal farmers should also 
be brought within the network of 
social security. 
 
14. Shri Rajendra Pratap 
Singh Chandel  
President,  
All India Brick 
and tile 
Manufacture 
Federation 
1. Brick and kiln workers are migratory 
workers.  
Social security to these workers can be 
ensured from the revenues which the 
Government receives from this sector 
i.e. Brick and Kiln sector. 
2.  In case Government cannot provide 
social security to workers, all the taxes 
levied on the sector be waived off and 
brick and kiln owners should be given 
the responsibility to provide social 
security coverage to their workers.   
3. Rs.30,000/- for accidents and 
ailments insurance, Rs.1 lakh for 
accidental death be given to workers of 
unorganized sector. 
 
15. Shri.C.K.Kuppusami, 
M.P. 
Labour 
Progressive 
Federation 
1. Central Government do not have 
any machinery to implement the 
schemes.  State Governments should 
be given the power to decide the agency 
for implementing the schemes or issue 
of identity card.  
2. For self-employed worker, the 
word ‘enterprise owned’ may be deleted. 
3. The cap of less than ten may be 
removed for the purpose of social 
security benefits.  
4. There should be mandatory 
provision for contribution to the fund 
from the employer irrespective of the 
fact whether they are employing 
manual labour or not.  
5. The total membership of the 
board should be not more than 1/3 rd 
from the Government side and rest of 
the members may be from the trade 
unions, eminent persons, NGOs, etc.  
6. Penal provisions should be there 
for violations.  
7. Dispute redressal mechanism 
should also be incorporated.  
8. Provision should also be made for 
recovery of arrears in case the  
em
ployer fail to pay their due on 

 100
time.  
 
 
 
 

 101
LIST OF EMPLOYER GROUPS 
 
 
1. All India Manufacturers Organisation 
 
2. The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India 

 102
 
 
 
IMPORTANT POINTS OF MEMORANDA RECEIVED FROM VARIOUS EMPLOYERS 
ORGANISTIONS  ON THE UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS SOCIAL SECURITY 
BILL, 2007 
 
Sl.No. Name of the 
Organisation 
Name of the 
office bearer 
Important points 
1. All India 
Manufacturers 
Organisation 
Shri Babulal 
B. Todi 
1 Point 9 Clause (3) on Page 6- The 
District Administration has to be 
very careful or else it may give rise to 
lot of corruption and high 
handedness and power in the hands 
of the Administration. 
 
2.Under Chapter 6, Section 13 (d) on 
Page 7 – Nothing is specified 
regarding contribution to be 
collected from the employers which 
remains vague and could be 
anything which again might lead to 
generation of unemployment. 
 
3. Chapter V- the process of 
registration – it starts from the age 
of fourteen, at this age the young 
man may not be able to understand 
the application form (2) – an 
application to be made in the 
prescribed form- the target group are 
mainly illiterate – how do you expect 
them to apply?  But if we employ any 
non registered person, will we be 
penalized? 
 
2. The Associated 
Chambers of 
Commerce and 
Industry of India 
Shri D.S. 
Rawat 
Secretary 
General 
1. No new scheme has been 
added. 
 
2. Most of the State Governments 
are not very well of financially.  How 
they will participate in welfare 
schemes of the Central Government 
where they are required to 
contribute a share of the total cost of 
the scheme or initiate their won 
schemes. 
 
3. Implementation of the schemes 
will be another important problem as 
how one would reach to workers 
living in far-flun g areas of the 

 103
country. 
 
4.    The cost of administering the 
schemes will also be high if proper 
monitoring is to be done. 
 

 104
 
 
LIST OF NGOs 
 
 
 
1.  Social Security Now 
2.       National Centre for Labour 
(i) National Hawker Federation 
(ii)  NFF 
3.    National Campaign Committee  
1. Nirmala Niketan  
2. National Alliances of Agricultural Worker Unions 
3. Unorganised Workers’ Federation  
4. NCC-USW Domestic Workers Forum 
5. Delhi Shramik Sangathan 
4. All Assam Motor Workers Joint Council, Guwahati, Assam 
5. Pudukkottai Mavatta Annaithu Amaippusara Thozhilalar Sangam, 
Pudkkottai, Tamil Nadu 
6. Karamchari Sangh, Kanpur 
7. Angmehnati Kashtkari Sangarsh Samiti, Pune 

 105
IMPORTANT POINTS OF VARIOUS MEMORANDA FROM NGOS RECEIVED  
ON THE UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS SOCIAL SECURITY BILL, 2007 
 
 
 
 
Sl.No. Name of the 
Organisation 
Name of the office 
bearer 
Important points 
1. Social Security 
Now 
Shri J. John 1.  This bill does not confer or provide any 
right to social security to unorganized 
workers. 
2. The Bill pertains to a few elusive 
schemes, in reality is a compilation of 
existing schemes as provided for in the 
Scheduled. 
3. Wages, Minimum Wages & Living 
Wages: 
 
We propose that for the purposes of 
calculating wages and social security 
provisions under the comprehensive social 
security law for unorganized workers, 
minimum wages fixed by the Central 
Government for construction workers 
under MW Act 1948 should be used as a 
base. 
4. Social Security funding:  The 
Government should fund base level social 
security that ensures all citizens their basic 
rights, additionally, a one time contribution 
from workers can be charged as a 
registration fee renewal every three years.  
This should not be more than Rs.50. 
5. Dispute Settlement:The comprehensive 
social security legislation should prescribe 
simplified time bound dispute resolution 
mechanism through mediation, conciliation 
and arbitration.  
 
 
 
 
 
6. Equality and Non-discrimination: Steps 
should be taken to guarantee social security 
to everyone without any discrimination. 
7. Administration of Social Security :The 
comprehensive social security legislation 
should prescribe for tripartite boards at 

 106
Central and State levels with enabling 
provision for the constitution of Industry or 
occupation wise sub-boards for better social 
security protections considering the 
peculiar and special conditions of industry 
or occupation. 
 
2. National Centre 
for Labour  
Labour  
Movement  
National 
Hawker 
Federation 
Shri R.A. Mital 
HMS 
Shri N.P.Samy 
(NCL) 
Shri Harekrishna 
Debnath (NFF) 
Shri Shaktiman 
Ghosh 
1. Legal entitlement of social security 
2. Universal application without numerical 
limits of workers in establishments  
3. The social security should atleast include; 
death benefit, disablement benefit, old age 
protection, maternity benefit, medical and 
sickness benefits. 
4. Clear provisions for the coverage of the 
total cost towards social security by the 
State 
5. Participation of workers’ organizations in 
the registration, delivery of the benefits and 
implementation 
6. Specific date for the commencement of 
the legislation. 
7. A grievance redressal mechanism within 
the framework of the legislation. 

 107
3. National 
Campaign 
Committee 
 
Nirmal Niketan 
National 
Alliances of 
Agricultural 
Worker Unions 
Unorganised 
Workers’Federa
tion & NCC-
USW         
Domestic 
Workers Forum, 
Delhi Shramik 
Sangathan 
 
Shri S. Bhatnagar, 
Coordinator  
1. The Bill’s definition of the wage worker 
as having a certain monthly income is 
misleading and should be changed and 
defined clearly as daily wage worker and 
piece rate worker. 
2. The need for the implementation of the 
Bill through sectoral tripartite boards has 
been changed to implementation through 
urban local bodies and rural district 
administration.  Also the call for the sector 
wise tripartite board has been disregarded 
and a single advisory board at the national 
level and state level has been proposed. 
3. The Bill also ignores the conditions and 
needs of the bonded labourers and child 
workers who are still employed in different 
industries and the need for minimum wage 
to be formalized in the different sectors 
including domestic worker, hand 
embroidery, etc. 
4. Disregarding the E.S.I. scheme which is 
better suited for the unorganized workers, 
the Government has paved the way for 
privatization in its launch of Swasthya 
Bima Yojana which we object strongly. 
5. There are no proper provisions for the 
raising of adequate funds from Central and 
State governments as well as from various 
classes of employers to meet the Social 
Security needs of the Unorganised Sector 
Workers. 
6. The 1996 law on building and 
construction workers needs to be amended 
and made comprehensive on the lines 
suggested by the National Campaign 
Committee for construction workers under 
the Chairmanship of Justice V. R. Krishna 
Iyer, retired Judge of the Supreme Court of 
India. 
 

 108
3. National 
Campaign 
Committee 
 
Nirmal Niketan 
National 
Alliances of 
Agricultural 
Worker Unions 
Unorganised 
Workers’Federa
tion & NCC-
USW         
Domestic 
Workers Forum, 
Delhi Shramik 
Sangathan 
 
Shri S. Bhatnagar, 
Coordinator  
1. The Bill’s definition of the wage worker 
as having a certain monthly income is 
misleading and should be changed and 
defined clearly as daily wage worker and 
piece rate worker. 
2. The need for the implementation of the 
Bill through sectoral tripartite boards has 
been changed to implementation through 
urban local bodies and rural district 
administration.  Also the call for the sector 
wise tripartite board has been disregarded 
and a single advisory board at the national 
level and state level has been proposed. 
3. The Bill also ignores the conditions and 
needs of the bonded labourers and child 
workers who are still employed in different 
industries and the need for minimum wage 
to be formalized in the different sectors 
including domestic worker, hand 
embroidery, etc. 
4. Disregarding the E.S.I. scheme which is 
better suited for the unorganized workers, 
the Government has paved the way for 
privatization in its launch of Swasthya 
Bima Yojana which we object strongly. 
5. There are no proper provisions for the 
raising of adequate funds from Central and 
State governments as well as from various 
classes of employers to meet the Social 
Security needs of the Unorganised Sector 
Workers. 
6. The 1996 law on building and 
construction workers needs to be amended 
and made comprehensive on the lines 
suggested by the National Campaign 
Committee for construction workers under 
the Chairmanship of Justice V. R. Krishna 
Iyer, retired Judge of the Supreme Court of 
India. 
 

 109
   7. The law for unorganized sector workers 
should not be merely welfare oriented but 
also include:- 
 
a) Compulsory registration of the 
employers and of the workers, identified by 
registered trade unions in all the scheduled 
groupings of employments. 
 
b) Prohibition of employment in 
unorganized sector by employers, without 
registration under the law. 
 
c) Employment guarantee for a minimum 
number of days in a month. 
 
d) Inbuilt tripartite dispute resolution 
mechanism and appellate authority. 
8. The central and state governments 
should allocate 3% of the GDP for the 
implementation of social security Bill. 
 
4. All Assam 
Motor Workers 
Joint Council, 
Guwahati,  
Assam 
Shri Sarbeswar Das, 
General Secretary 
1. For unorganized workers, it would be 
appropriate to appoint insurance 
companies/NGOs as nodal agencies who 
will issue unorganized worker welfare 
number and account to workers directly.  
Then each month the contractor will deduct 
premium from wages for that month and 
deposit into the account.  The absent period 
will not be included.  The insurance 
company can then distribute premium to 
mediclaim, annuity, emergency and 
unemployment provisions. 
2. Thus even if the worker leaves one 
employer and joins another, he shall 
continue to have a permanent account, for 
this scheme it will be mandatory for 
workers to get account if they want to be 
employed and enjoy benefits. 
 
 
 
3. The NGOs will have opportunity to 
interact and spread awareness about aids, 
personal hygiene, family planning and 
vaccination. 
5.   Pudukkottai 
Mavatta 
A.Athappan, 
Secretary 
Allocation of 3% of GDP to provide social 
security including minimum wages to the 

 110
Annaithu 
Amaippusara 
Thozhilalar 
Sangam, 
Pudukkottai, 
Tamil Nadu 
workers of unorganized sector. 
Regulation of employment and wages 
should be done through boards. 
Separate Comprehensive Bill for workers of 
Agricultural Sector. 
There should be no distinction of workers 
living below poverty line and above 
poverty line. 
Implementation mechanism should consist 
of Sectoral Tripartite Board. 
2% levy on construction work and 1% levy 
on other production for generating 
resources to provide social security to 
unorganized workers. 
6. Shri Ganshyam  
Sharma 
Secretary,  
Karamchari Sangh,  
HAL Division, 
Kanpur 
Minimum wages are not paid to the 
workers of unorganized sector. 
They are also not covered under social 
security schemes. 
They are exploited because they are not 
united. 
Registration of workers should be made 
compulsory. 
Register of temporary  workers working for 
perennial nature of work should be 
maintained. 
Instead of daily wages monthly salary 
should be given. 
 Workers of all sectors whether agricultural, 
industrial or contractual should not be 
retrenched. 
 
7. Angmehnati 
Kashtkari 
Sangarsh 
Samiti, Pune  
Dr. Baba Jadav 
Shri B.J. Kerkar 
There should be no distinction between 
below and above poverty line pensioner. 
Clear provision of funding from Union 
Government for various benefit of 
unorganized worker. 
This should be 3% of the total GDP.   
The social security benefits should be 
handed over to LIC and other public sector 
insurance companies.  
Matters like working conditions and 
livelihood should be dealt by the Labour 
Department. 
 
 

 111
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS 
 
 
1. Shri Raj, Social Activist  
2. Gita Dewan Verma 
3. Shri S.S. Natarajan 
4. Professor Rajkumar Roy Chodhury  
5. Shri B.K. Sahu 
5. Ms. Anuradha Sharma 
6. Shri S. Subbiah 
7. Shri Kathyayini Chamaraj 
8. A Women representative 
9. Shri M.P. Aggarwal 
10. Amarnath, Unorganised worker 
11. Shri Diwan Chand Saxena 
12. Shri Sarvesh Kumar Suyash 
13. Shri Tularam 
14. All casual workers of Indian Airlines 
15. Shri Ganesh Chaudhary 
16. Shri Jagat Narain Singh and Shri P. Goswami 
17. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
18. Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
                               

 
 IMPORTANT POINTS OF INDIVIDUALS RECEIVED ON THE UNORGANISED 
SECTOR WORKERS SOCIAL SECURITY BILL, 2007 
112
 
 
Sl.No. Name of the 
Organisation 
Name of the 
office bearer 
Important points 
1. Shri Raj, Social 
Activist 
Tamil Nadu 
Individual 
opinion 
1.  All Unorganized Workers shall 
be covered by a contributory 
pension scheme.  The Welfare 
Scheme sanctioning financial 
assistances should be extended 
only to the workers who are not 
capable of securing themselves 
through contributory insurance 
services provided by the insurance 
companies. 
2. The unorganized sector workers 
above poverty line may be provided 
separate medical assistances 
through the wards created in 
Government medical institutions 
for which the Central Government 
may grant additional funds to the 
States. 
3. Registration and record keeping 
of the unorganized workers need to 
be handled by the EPF 
organization.  Not to be given to the 
State Administration. Like PAN No. 
each person in the country need to 
be given National Social Security 
Identity Number.  Biometric cards 
need to be introduced from the day 
one to prevent securing multiple 
benefits 
4. Definitions of ‘establishments’ in 
labour legislations for organized 
sector need to be synchronized.   
5 The persons trading in secondary 
market need to be taxed more, if 
their capital gain is more than 
prescribed sum.   
6. Schemes for educational 
assistances should be 
implemented only through the 
Education Department. 

 113
2. Gita Dewan Verma  Individual 
opinion 
1. The Bill may be re-titled 
“Unorganized Sector Workers 
(Registration) Bill” or “Unorganized 
Sector Workers (Advisory Boards) 
Bill”   
 
3. Savings clause may be 
redrafted to make Advisory 
Boards functions subject to 
all corresponding law. 
 
4.  Certain unorganized sector 
sections and/or schemes 
may either be specifically 
excluded or be included with 
special provisions. 
 
 
3. Shri S.S. Natarajan Individual 
Opinion 
To identify and register maid 
servants and make it 
Government’s responsibility 
with built-in, effective oversight 
machinery to provide free 
wholesome, nutritious meals to 
their minor children and 
compulsorily educate them upto 
Plus 2 and give  their daughters 
vocational training for 3 more 
years to obviate their ending up 
as next generation of maid 
servants. 
4. Professor Rajkumar 
Roychodhury 
Emeritus 
Scientist 
CSIR, Kolkata 
One of the most neglected and 
overlooked section of people in 
the unorganized sector is the 
group of teachers in private 
schools. The government should 
control these schools and 
ensure that the employees get a 
minimum salary depending on 
their qualifications and also 
they get job security and no 
harassment. 

 114
5. Shri B.K. Sahu Additional 
Commissioner & 
Regional Director 
Employees’ State 
Insurance 
Corporation, 
Kolkata 
Since, unorganized workers 
consist of very low paid workers, 
it is necessary to evolve a 
scheme where cost of delivery of 
services is minimum and to that 
effect the unutilized 
infrastructure of ESI can be 
utilized on payment of user 
charges which will benefit in 2 
ways i.e. Unutilized 
infrastructure of ESI will be 
utilized.  In the process ESI will 
earn some revenue but most 
importantly the workers in the 
unorganized sector will get 
services both medical and cash 
benefit under one umbrella. 

 115
6. Ms. Anuradha 
Sharma 
Researcher 1. There should be an universal 
social security for the entire 
workforce of India 
irrespective of the sector.  
There is a need for 
amendment so that each 
worker of the country can 
securely bargain through 
any collective effort. 
2. There should be a directive 
to regulare the amount of  
capital investment as per job 
creation. 
3. During the unemployed 
phase the worker needs 
some amount to satisfy the 
family’s basic needs. 
4. The Government should be 
responsible for social 
security on behalf of the 
unidentified or absent 
employer. 
5. The role of employment 
exchange.  The exchanges be 
strengthened for registering 
not only the unemployed but 
the employed workers also, 
so that all workers whether 
organized or unorganized 
can be issued identity cards. 
6. Efficient skill upgradation 
centers: Education and non-
formal institutions and non-
government organization be 
also mandated to provide 
such centers to be properly 
regulated by the Labour 
Department. 
7. Provisions for self employed 
workers: A large number of 
unorganized wokers are 
engaged in self employed 
occupations and should also 
be entitled to social security. 
 
For such workers the basic 
demands are for credit, 
legality and identity.  
Provisions for these be 
clearly made in the proposed 
bill. 
8. Occupational health and 
safety: It should be 
mandatory for the employer 
to follow the rules to ensure 
occupational health and 
safety at the workplace in all 
sectors. 

 116
   9. Right to natural resources: 
Provision in the Social Security 
Bill to protect their right to work 
through access to the required 
resources. 
 7. Shri S. Subbiah, 
SBI Pensioner 
3/2, CPWD Qts. 
Besant Nagar,  
Chennai 
 Individual 
opinion 
The Unorganised Sector Bill 2007 
dated 10.9.2007 had many legal 
defects, hindering meanings, 
hindrance of legal rights etc.  It 
does not include piece rate worker, 
contract labour, trustee etc.  The 
definitions of various terms given in 
the Bill are incomplete.    
 
8. Shri Kathyayini 
Chamaraj 
 
Independent 
Labour 
Researcher & 
Freelance 
Journalist 
Panchayat Raj Institutions and 
Nagarapalikas under the 73 rd and 
74th Constitutional Amendments 
are best suited for regulating 
working conditions and providing 
social security for unorganized 
workers.   
 
   The NCEUS came up with two fresh 
composite bills in  2007, one for 
agricultural and other for non-
agricultural workers.  The logic of 
some trade unions is demanding 
this separation is unclear as an 
agricultural worker today is a non-
agricultural worker tomorrow when 
he works during the off-season at 
quarries, construction sites, brick 
kilns, etc.  Registration of the same 
worker under two different Acts 
may lead to confusion.   A better 
separation may have been between 
wage-workers and self-employed 
workers. 
9.  A Women 
representative 
Rohtak, Haryana 1.  Creation of more and more 
employment opportunities. 
2.  Special attention for 
development of infrastructure. 
3.  Regulation of conditions of 
service.   
10. Shri M.P. Aggarwal Betul, Madhya 
Pradesh 
1.  Employment guarantee of 
180 days in a year to landless 
labourers and other poor 
unemployed youth. 
2. Establishment of Bio-gas 
plant in villages of the country. 

 117
 
11.  Amarnath, 
Unorganised worker 
 All the benefits of Sixth Pay 
Commission be made available 
to the work force of unorganized 
sector. 
 
12. Shri Diwan Chand 
Saxena 
Sarai Bazaar, 
Achhalda, 
Auraiya, U.P 
1. The plight of domestic 
worker/maid is extremely 
pathetic.   
2. In case of natural calamity 
and serious ailments 
workers of unorganized 
sector are not given any 
assistance.   
3. There is no exhaustive list 
of workers working in 
unorganized sector. 
4.  
13. Shri Sarvesh Kumar 
Suyash  
Hanspuram, 
Navasta, Kanpur 
1. The workers of unorganized 
sector are not getting 
minimum wages at Kanpur. 
2. They are also not covered 
within the social security 
network. 
3. There is no guarantee of 
employment to these 
workers. 
4. They are also not been 
allowed to get united to 
bargain their demands. 
5. An authority be set up to 
implement the Acts relating 
to various social security 
schemes of the 
Government. 
6. National Minimum Wages 
be fixed. 
 

 118
 
14. Shri Tularam President, 
U.P. Gramin 
Mazdoor 
Sangathan 
1. Identity cards should be issued 
to unorganized workers. 
2. Implementation of Provident 
Fund Scheme in small 
factories. 
3. Issuance of Health card to 
gramin workers. 
4. Pensions for people below 
poverty line and old age 
pension should be given. 
5. Equal salaries to women 
should also be ensured. 
15. All casual workers of 
Indian Airlines 
 
 Denial of salaries and bonus, 
provident fund etc. to these workers. 
16. Shri Ganesh 
Chaudhary 
Ex-PRO, 
Dainik Jagran, 
Indore 
1. A policy be framed for the 
welfare of hawkers so that they 
are covered under different 
social security schemes. 
2. Loan be made available to 
hawkers on minimum interest 
rates. 
3. Financial assistance for 
education may be provided. 
4. Assistance in case of 
accidental death be made 
available. 
5. Identity cards to every hawker 
should be issued. 
 
17. Shri Jagat Narain 
Singh &  
Shri P. Goswami 
153V, Dara 
Nagar, 
Kanpur, U.P. 
1. Workers in the factories are 
not getting their dues and 
wages. 
2. Unorganised labour have no 
unions and they cannot take 
recourse to judicial process to 
redress their grievances. 
3. The relationship between the 
workers and employers should 
be flexible. 
4. Casual and temporary workers 
should be given social security 
benefits. 

 119
 
18. Shri.Rajendra Kumar Raipur  Sahora, 
District Una, 
Himachal 
Pradesh  
1. Social security benefits like 
ESI and EPF should be 
universally applicable 
irrespective of the number of 
the workers.  
2. Wage ceiling should be 
dispensed with for the 
purpose of social security 
coverage.  
3. Every worker should be given 
a registration number. 
4. Unorganised sector worker 
should be consulted while 
framing the law.  
19. Shri Devendra Pratap 
Singh 
Navodaya Academy, 
Awas  
Vikas Colony, 
Chhiparamu, 
Kannauj, U.P 
 1. India will be a country of 
unemployed youth by the 
year 2020.   
2. Child Labour is rampant in 
the country.   
3. Money meant for various 
development projects do not 
reach to the targeted people.   
4. More and more schools 
should be opened in the rural 
areas of the country. 
5. Technical education should 
be provided free of cost to the 
students of the country. 
6. Centre should take steps to 
abolish child labour from the 
country. 

 120
 MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
 
The Committee sat on 8 October 2007 from 1100 hours to 1320 hours in 
Committee Room `C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Subrata Bose 
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
6. Smt. Sushila Kerketta 
7. Shri Virendra Kumar 
8. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil 
9. Shri Devidas Pingle 
10. Shri Mohan Rawale 
11. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
12. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
13.       Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
14. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
15. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
16. Shri Gandhi Azad 
17. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
18. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.  Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
2. Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Deputy  Secretary-II 
        
  

 121
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT  
 
1. Smt. Sudha Pillai, Secretary (L&E) 
2. Shri Anil Swarup, Joint Secretary, DG(Labour Welfare) 
3. Ms. Gurjot Kaur, Joint Secretary, 
4. Shri Suraj Bhan, Director, 
5. Shri B. K.Sanwariya, We lfare Commissioner (HQ) 
 
    REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE 
 
   Shri D. R. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta,  MP the 
newly nominated member  of  the Committee for the year 2007-08 and the 
representatives of the Ministries of Labour and Employment and Law & Justice to the 
sitting of the Committee being held to have briefing on the Unorganised Sector 
Workers’ Social Security Bill, 2007.         
 
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment  briefed the 
Committee about the various provisions of the Bill.  The Chairman  and other 
Members of the Committee raised several qu estions pertaining to the Bill.   The 
Secretary and DG (Welfare) responded to th e queries of the Members.  The Chairman 
requested the Secretary to send written replies of those questions within ten days to 
the Committee whose replies were not readily available.    
 
  The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
5.  XX    XX    XX   XX 
 
6. The Committee then decided to hold the next meeting on 16 October 2007 to 
hear the views of the various Central Trade Unions on the Bill.  The Committee also 
decided to invite suggestions/reactions of  all the State Governments on the various 
provisions of the bills as proposed by th e Government.  The Committee also decided to 
gauge the public opinion on the bill throug h website, advertisement in Audio/Visual 
and print Media and by having access to other stakeholders through visits, having 
meeting, interaction with them.    
 
7. XX    XX    XX   XX 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 122
  
  
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR  
 
The Committee sat on 16 October 2007 from 1100 hrs. to 1305  hrs. and again 
from 1415 hrs. to 1605 hrs. in Committee Room `D’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi.   
  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Subrata Bose 
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
8. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
9. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.  Shri S. K. Sharma   -Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri N. K. Sapra   -Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri R.K. Bajaj   -Director 
4. Shri N. K. Pandey   -Deputy Secretary-II 
5. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  -Deputy  Secretary-II 
        
 
 
  

 123
 
 
PART-I 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CENTRAL TRADE UNIONS 
 
    (From 1100 hrs. to 1305 hrs.) 
 
1. Shri R. A. Mital, Secret ary, Hind Mazdoor Sabha, 
 
2. Shri R. B. Subarao, Vice Presi dent, Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh, 
 
3. Shri M. K. Pandhe, President, Centre for Indian Trade Unions, 
 
4. Shri Shyam Singh Chouhan, Secretary, Indian National Trade Union 
Congress (INTUC), 
 
5. Shri P. J. Raju, Secretary Indian Na tional Trade Union Congress (INTUC), 
 
6. Shri D. L. Sachdeva, General Secretary, AITUC 
 
 
PART-II 
 
(From 1415 hrs. to 1605 hrs.) 
 
 
1. Shri Abani Roy, General Secretar y, United Trade Union Congress, 
 
2. Shri O. P. Verma, Sr. Vice President, National Front of Indian Trade 
Unions, 
 
3. Shri R. K. Sharma, secretary of De lhi Unit, United Trade Union Centre, 
 
4. Shri Suneet Chopra, Joint Secretar y, All India Agricultural Workers’ 
Union, 
 
5. Shri Vijendra Singh Nirmal, National  Secretary, Bhartiya Khet Mazdoor 
Union (BKMU) 
 
 
 
  

 124
 
Part-I 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the 
Central Trade Unions to the sitting of th e Committee and invited their attention to 
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speake r, Lok Sabha.  He sought their opinion on 
the provisions of the Bill in question i.e.,  “The Unorganised Sector Workers’ Social 
Security Bill, 2007”. 
  
3. The representatives of the Trade Unio ns deposing before the Committee made 
crucial observations/suggestions regarding the various provisions of the Bill for 
consideration of the Committee.  According to  them, the legislation in its existing form 
does not fulfil the commitments made in the National Common Minimum Programme.  
The Government while drafting the legislations had overlooked recommendations 
made by NCEUS, a Commission that it had constituted in 2004.  They further desired 
that the Bill should include scientific fo rmulation of fixing minimum wages for 
unorganized sector and agricultur e workers based on the unanimous 
recommendations of the 15 th Indian Labour Conference to give it a statutory force, 
setting up of a National Social Security & Welfare Fund, Defination of enforcement and 
dispute resolution bodies and delivery and implementation machinery. 
 
4. The queries raised by a few Members pe rtaining to the Bill were also responded 
to by the representatives. 
 
5. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman aske d the representatives of the Trade Unions 
to send their comments/suggestions or any other relevant information in writing, 
within 10 days to the Committee.  The Ho n’ble Chairman further requested to send 
the replies of the questionnaire given to them during the meeting.  
 
6. The Hon’ble Chairman thanked the representatives of the Trade Unions for 
giving valuable information to the Committee on the Bill. 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
PART-II 
 
7. The second half of the meeting resumed at 1415 hrs.  Before the witnesses were 
asked to depose before the Committee, the Chairman welcomed them and drew their 
attention to the provisions of Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha. 
  
8. The representatives of the Trade Unions then briefed the Committee about the 
various provisions and their shortcomings in  the Bill. The suggestions tendered before 
the Committee were almost on the same lin es as suggested by representatives of other 
Central Trade Unions in the earlier session of the sitting. 
 
9. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman aske d the representatives of the Trade Unions 
to send their comments/suggestions or any other relevant information in writing 
within 10 days to the Committee.  The Ho n’ble Chairman further requested to send 
the replies of the questionnaire given to them during the meeting.  
 
  

 125
 
 
  
 
 
10. The Hon’ble Chairman thanked the representatives of Trade Unions for giving 
valuable information to the Committee on the Bill. 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
11. Verbatim record of the proceedings held during both the sessions have been 
kept.  
 
12. The Committee then decided that a letter inviting memoranda containing 
suggestions/comments on the provisions of the Bill may be sent to all former 
Union Labour Ministers, Labour Minister s of all the State Governments and all 
major National political parties/groups  in Lok Sabha.  The Chairman also 
requested the members to suggest the na mes of rganizations/individuals from 
whom memoranda might be invited. 
 
 
13.  XX    XX   XX   XX 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 

 126
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
 
The Committee sat on 25 October 2007 from 1040 hrs. to 1150  hrs. and again 
from 1210 hrs. to 1320 hrs. in Committee Room `D’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi.   
  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
4. Smt. Sushila Kerketta 
5. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan 
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil 
8. Shri Devidas Pingle 
9. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
10. Shri Mohan Rawale 
11. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
12. Smt. C. S. Sujatha 
13. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
14. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
15. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
16. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri N. K. Sapra   -Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri R.K. Bajaj   -Director 
3. Shri N. K. Pandey   -Deputy Secretary-II 
4. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  -Deputy  Secretary-II 
  

 127
 
 
PART-I 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE EMPLOYERS’ GROUPS  
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Name of the Organisation Name of the 
representative  
 Designation 
1. 
  
Confederation of Indian 
Industry 
13. Shri D.L. Sharma
 
 
 
 
 
14. Ms. Jayashri Singh  
 
  (iii) Shri Mohit Gandhi 
Chairman, 
CII Core Group on 
Labour and 
President & 
Executive Director, 
Vardhman Group 
 
Director Public 
Policy 
 
Director, HR/IR & 
ER 
 
 
2. All India Organisation in 
Service of Small Scale 
Industries 
(Laghu Udyog Bharati) 
15. Shri Shriram 
Aggarwal 
 
(ii)Shri Ravi Bhushan 
Khatri 
 
 
(iii)Shri Gopal Sharan Garg 
 
 
 
3. 
 
Standing Conference of 
Public Enterprises 
(SCOPE) 
 
 
 
16. Shri S.K. Chaturvedi 
 
 
 
17. Shri Ram Mohan 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Director (Personnel) 
National 
Hydroelectric Power 
Corporation Limited 
 
General 
Manager (Personnel) 
Steel Authority of 
India Limited 
 
4.  Shri B.P. Pant Secretary 
 

 128
 
  
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the 
Employers’ Groups to the sitting of the Committee. He sought their opinion on the 
provisions of the Bill in question i.e.,  “The Unorganised Sector Workers’ Social 
Security Bill, 2007”. 
  
3. The representatives of the Employers’  Groups briefed the Committee about  
their views regarding the various provisions of the Bill.  The Employers Groups broadly 
welcomed the Bill while suggesting some alte rations in its provisions.  They further 
desired that the Bill should include scientific method of fixing minimum wages for 
unorganized sector workers based on the unanimous recommendations of the 15 th 
Indian Labour Conference, setting up of a National Social Security & Welfare Fund, 
Constitution of Enforcement and Dispute Resolution Bodies.  
 
4. The queries raised by a few Members pe rtaining to the Bill were also responded 
to by the representatives. 
 
5. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman aske d the representatives of the Employers’ 
Groups to send their representations/Memoranda or any other relevant information in 
writing, within 10 days to the Committee.  The Hon’ble Chairman further requested to 
send the replies of the questionnaire given to them during the meeting.  
 
6. The Hon’ble Chairman thanked the re presentatives of the Employers Group for 
giving valuable information to the Committee on the Bill. 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
PART-II 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Name of the 
Organisation 
Name of the representat               Designation 
1. National Campaign 
Committee for 
Unorganised Sector 
Worker. 
 
                 Shri Subhash  
Bhatanagar 
 
 
Coordinator
2. Representatives 
Agricultural Workers 
Alliances 
 
Ms. Anuradha 
Talwar 
 
Office Bearer  
   
3. Nirmala Niketan, 
Cooperative Society of 
Domestic workers 
 
Shri Bibiani Mini 
 
 
Organizing Secretary 
    
4. Joint Action 
Committee of NCC-
USW, Tamil Nadu 
 
Ms. R. Geetha 
 
Additional Secretary 
5. Delhi Unorganised Shri Ramendra President 

 129
Sector Union 
 
6. Domestic Workers 
Forum, Delhi 
 
Sister Leona Coordinator  
 
  
 
7. The second half of the meeting resumed at 1210 hrs. with the Chairman 
welcoming the representatives of the Workers’ Organisations.  
 
8. The representatives of the workers’ rganizations then briefed the Committee 
about their perception on  various provisio ns of the Bill and  shortcomings, therein, 
viz. Minimum Wages, regulation of employment, the definition of unorganized sector 
and worker, issue of identity cards, constitution of boards and the nature of schemes 
for welfare of workers of unorganized sector. 
 
9. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman as ked the representatives of the Workers’ 
Organisations to send the replies to the questionnaire given to them during the 
meeting within 10 days.  The Hon’ble Ch airman further requested to send their 
comments/suggestions or any other relevant information in writing to the Committee. 
 
10. The Hon’ble Chairman thanked the repr esentatives of Workers’ Organisations 
for giving valuable information to the Committee on the Bill. 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
11. Verbatim records of the proceedings held during both the sessions have been 
kept.  
 
12. The Committee then decided that th e next meeting of the Committee may be 
held on 05.11.07 to interact with the Trad e Unions and NGOs and also to have oral 
evidence with the representatives of the Mini stry of Labour and Employment.  It was 
also decided to constitute a drafting Commi ttee to draft report on the Bill.  Shri 
Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy and Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta will be the Chairman 
and Convenor of the drafting Committee respectively and   Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot, 
Shri K. Chandran Pillai and Shri Furkan Ansari will be its members.  
 
  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 130
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
 
The Committee sat on 5 November 2007 from 1030 hrs. to 1300  hrs. and again 
from 1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room No. `139’, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi.   
  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
  
14. Shri Furkan Ansari 
15. Shri Subrata Bose  
16. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
17. Smt. Sushila Kerketta 
18. Shri Virendra Kumar 
19. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil 
20. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
21. Smt. C. S. Sujatha 
22. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
23. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
12. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
13. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
14. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
15. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri N. K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
3. Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
4. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Deputy  Secretary-II 
 
   
 
 
 

 131
 
PART-I 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF TRADE UNIONS/NGO’S 
 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Organisation Name of the representative 
 Designation 
 
1. All India Anganwadi Smt. B.V. Vijayalakshmi  General Secretary 
 Workers Federation & 
 A.I.T.U.C 
 
2. All India Rural Health  Smt. K. Aruna   President 
 workers 
  
3. Bhartiya Krishi Gramin (i)  Shri Sultan Singh Shekhawat   
 Mazdoor Maha Sangh  (ii)  Shri Hira Lal Patidar 
 Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (iii) Smt. Premwati 
   &   
Anganwadi BMS Federation 
 
4. New Trade Union Initiative (i) Shri M. Subbu  Treasurer (NTUI) & 
         G e n e r a l  S e c r e t a r y  
         T a m i l  M a h i l a  K a t t i d a  
         T h o z h i l a l a r  S a n g a m  
 
     (ii) Shri Gautam Mody Secretary (NTUI) & 
         W o r k i n g  P r e s i d e n t ,  
  Kamani Employees’  
Union 
 
5. Social Security Now  (i) Shri J. John  Centre for Education 
         &  C o m m u n i c a t i o n  
 
 
     (ii) Shri Arun Khote  NCDHR 
 
     (iii) Dr. R.S. Tiwari  Centre for Education 
         &  C o m m u n i c a t i o n  
 
6. National Centre for  (i) Shri N.P. Samy  
 Secretary/Coordinator 
 Labour (NCL)    
     (ii) Shri K.Loganathan President, Tamil Nadu 
         A g r i c u l t u r a l  L a b o u r e r s  
         U n i o n  ( T A L U ) ,  C h e n n a i  

 132
 
 
 
 
 
  
   (iii) Shri Shaktiman Ghosh  All India Hawkers  
Federation (NCL) 
 
 
    (iv)Ms. Kartiyayni Chamaraj  Journalist (NCL)  
  
   (v)  Dr. Pravin Sinha    Labour Functionary  
          &  R e s e a r c h e r  ( N C L )   
 
7. Uttar Pradesh Gramin Shri Tularam Sharma   President 
 Mazdoor Union 
 
PART-II 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
  
(i).  Smt. Sudha Pillai, Secretary  
  
(ii).  Shri Anil Swarup, Joint S ecretary/DG (Labour Welfare) 
 
(iii).  Ms. Gurjot Kaur, Joint Secretary 
 
 
PART-I 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Trade 
Unions & NGOs working for the welfare of the workers of unorganized sector to the 
sitting of the Committee and drew their attention to Direction 55 of Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha.  The Chairman, therea fter sought their opinion on the various 
provisions of the Bill in question, i.e., “The Unorganised Sector Workers’ Social 
Security Bill, 2007”. 
 
3. The representatives of the Trade Unions & NGOs deposing before the 
Committee spelt out their views/suggestions regarding the various provisions of the 
Bill alongwith the shortcomings therein, viz. Minimum wages, regulation of 
employment, definition of the unorganized se ctor/worker, issue of identity cards to 
beneficiaries, etc.  They further desired th at the proposed Bill should be restructured 
incorporating the provisions regarding regulation of employment and service 
conditions based on the recommendations made by NCEUS, a Commission 
constituted by the Government in 2004, and added that the adequate funds may be 
made available to meet the social obligations as ordained in the Bill.   
 
4. The queries raised by a few Members pe rtaining to the Bill were also responded 
to by the representatives. 
 

 133
5. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman re quested the representatives of the Trade 
Unions and NGOs to send their representa tions/Memoranda or any other relevant 
information in writing within 10 days as well as the replies to the questionnaire given 
to them during the meeting. 
 
 
6. The Hon’ble Chairman then than ked the representatives of the Trade 
Unions/NGOs for giving valuable suggestions on the various provisions of the Bill. 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
PART-II 
 
  
7. The second half of the meeting resumed at 1430 hrs. with the Chairman 
welcoming the representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment.  He drew their 
attention to Direction 55 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
8. The Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment then briefed the Committee 
about their perception on various provisions of the Bill.  DG (Labour Welfare) also gave 
his views on certain issues concerning the Bill.  The Hon’ble Chairman and members 
of the Committee raised several questions pert aining to the Bill, which were replied to 
by the witnesses. 
 
9. The Hon’ble Chairman then asked the re presentatives of the Ministry of Labour 
& Employment to reply to the questions.  If the Ministry was not able to reply to any of 
the questions for want of information/data,  they may send replies to them within 10 
days. 
 
10. The Hon’ble Chairman thanked the repr esentatives of the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment for giving their valuable views to the Committee on the Bill. 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
11. Verbatim records of the proceedings held during both the sessions have been 
kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 134
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR  
 
The Committee sat on  29 November 2007 from 0930 hrs. to 1100  hrs.   in 
Committee Room `E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Subrata Bose 
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
6. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan 
7. Shri Virendra Kumar 
8. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
  
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
9. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
10. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
11. Shri K.Chandran Pillai 
12. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1. Shri N. K. Sapra   -Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri R.K. Bajaj   -Director 
3. Shri N. K. Pandey   -Deputy Secretary-II 
4. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  -Deputy  Secretary-II 
        
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 135
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman we lcomed the Members to the sitting  and 
apprised them about the draft Twenty-fifth report on “The Unorganised Sector 
Workers’ Social Security Bill, 2007”.   
 
3. The Committee then took up the draft Twenty-fifth report for consideration and 
adoption.  After detailed discussion on all the recommendations, the Committee 
adopted the report with the following modifications: 
 
(i) Page No.8, Para No.12, Line 2 : Insert “ at the earliest but” after 
“Act”. 
 
(ii) Page No.12, Para No.18,  Line 3: Insert “or benefited” after 
“protected” 
 
(iii) Page No.13, Para No.22, Line 4 : replace  “five” by “three” 
 
(iv) Page No.14, Para No.22, Lines 2 & 3: insert “of India” after 
“Government” 
 
(v) Page No.14, Para No.22, Line 5: delete  “existing” 
 
(vi) Page No.14,  Para No.25, For     “However, those difficulties are 
likely to be administrative in nature.  In the garb of overcoming 
these difficulties on day-to-day basis, powers like addition or 
deletion of the schemes altogether from the Schedule or from the 
Bill cannot be vested with the Government.  It will certainly be a 
welcome move for the welfare of the workers of the unorganized 
sector, if some National Minimum Social Security Benefits are 
ensured to them statutorily.  The scope of these National Minimum 
Social Security Benefits may be enlarged in a phased manner 
reviewing their success over a period of time.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government may take appropriate 
steps including minor changes in the schemes, if deemed essential, 
with a view to facilitate the quick and effective delivery of social 
security benefits.  However, for any major changes or 
addition/deletion/alteration of any of the schemes, the proper 
course of action, 
i.e. seeking approval of legislature for such 
measures should be made mandatory”. 
Substitute 
 
“In the garb of overcoming operational difficulties on day-to-day 
basis, the Government cannot be allowed to make substantial 
changes including addition or deletion of the schemes from the Bill 
itself.   However, the Committee are not averse to minor changes in 
the schemes to overcome administrative difficulties with a view to 
facilitate quick and effective delivery of social security benefits. For 
any major changes or addition/deletion/alteration of any of the 
schemes, the proper course of action, 
i.e. seeking approval of 
legislature for such measures should be made mandatory” .   
         
 

 136
(vii) Page No.16, Para No.28, as revised may be read as  “The Committee 
further recommend that the National Minimum Social Security 
Benefits like life and accident cover, health insurance and 
maternity benefit should be wholly funded by the Central 
Government”. 
 
(ix) Page No.16, insert “Social Security and Welfare” after “State” in 
heading 
 
(x) Page No.17, Para No.30, Lines 7, 9 & 20 after “Security” insert “and 
Welfare” 
 
(xi) Page No.17, Para No.30, Line 4 from bottom replace 
“administration” by “implementation” 
 
(xii) Page No.17, Para No.31,  Line 2, for National Fund and State Funds 
substitute “National Social Security and Welfare Fund and State 
Social Security and Welfare Fund” 
 
(xiii) Page No.20, Para No.33, Line 5 replace “NGOs” by “civil society 
organizations” 
 
(xiv) Page No.20, Para No.33, Line 3 from bottom replace “classes” by 
“sections” 
 
(xv) Page No.23, Para No.37, add “within a specific timeframe” at the 
end. 
 
 
4. The Committee then authorised the Chai rman to finalise the above Report and 
present the same to the Parliament on their behalf. 
 
  
  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 