 
  35 
  
 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-09) 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
 
GENERAL CONDITIONS OF WEAVERS IN THE COUNTRY- 
                    A CASE STUDY OF SIRCILLA CONCENTRATION ZONE OF                         
WEAVERS 
  
 
 
   THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
                                               
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
November  2008/Kartika, 1930 (Saka)

 2
 
  
 
 
  THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2008-09) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
GENERAL CONDITIONS OF WEAVERS IN THE COUNTRY- 
A CASE STUDY OF SIRCILLA CONCENTRATION ZONE OF                         
WEAVERS 
 
 
 Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12 November, 2008  
 
  Presented in Lok Sabha on 12.12.2008  
   
                     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2008 
 
 
       
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
       
November  2008/Kartika, 1930 (Saka) 

 3
CONTENTS 
     PAGE (S) 
 
Composition of the Committee             (iii) 
 
Introduction                       (iv) 
 
        REPORT PART I        Narration analysis and,    1 
    
PART II       Recommendations/Observations   15 
     of the Committee      
    
  
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
1.     List of individuals who appeared before the Committee during their 
study visit to Sircilla and Hy derabad (Andhra Pradesh) on 5 th 
October, 2008. 
 
 
2. Gist of Organisations/Indivi duals who made written/oral 
submissions before the Committee during the study visit of the 
Committee to Sircilla and Hyderabad on 5th and  6th October 2008. 
 
 
3.   Minutes    of    the    Sitting    of   the   Committee   held  on  
3rd November, 2008.  

 4
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-2009) 
 
               Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy-CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
2. Shri Furkan Ansari  
3. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale  
4. Shri Subrata Bose  
5. Shri Santasri Chatterjee  
6. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
7. Shri Munawar Hasan  
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta  
9. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan  
10. Shri Virendra Kumar  
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi  
12. Shri Basangouda R. Patil  
13. Shri Devidas Pingle  
14. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar  
15. Shri Mohan Rawale  
16. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat  
17. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat  
18. Smt. C. S. Sujatha  
19. Shri Paras Nath Yadav  
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant  
   
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam  
23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany  
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari  
25. Shri K. Chandran Pillai  
26. Shri Gandhi Azad  
 27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
 28. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta  
 29. Vacant  
30. Vacant  
31. Vacant  
  

 5
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
         1.    Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Secretary 
2.    Shri Brahm Dutt   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.K. Bajaj    - Director  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary 
 

 6
 
INTRODUCTION 
                               
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour 2008-09 having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Re port on their behalf, present this Thirty-
Fifth Report on the subject “General conditio ns of weavers in the country- A case study 
of Sircilla concentration zone of weavers”. 
  
2.  The Committee   undertook an on -the-spot visit to Sircilla on 5 th October, 2008 to 
have the first hand information regardin g the problems/issues being faced by the 
handloom weavers.  The Committee also heard the views of the Hyderabad based 
Associations/Individuals at Hyderabad on 6th October 2008.     
 
3. The Committee wish to express their th anks to the representatives of various 
organizations concerned with weavers, trade unions, political parties, NGOs, experts, 
individuals, powerloom owners associations , officials of the State Government of 
Andhra Pradesh and representatives of the Ministry of Textiles for placing before them 
their views and also for providing detailed  written notes on the subject as well as 
furnishing the information as desired by  the Committee in co nnection with the 
examination of the subject. 
  
4. The Committee would also like to pl ace on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the valuable assistance rend ered to them from time to time by the 
officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
5. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sittin g held on                        
3rd November 2008. 
 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report.  
                               
                
 
 
  
New Delhi;                   SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,   
3rd   November, 2008                                CHAIRMAN,  
12  Kartika, 1930 (Saka)                              STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR    

 7
 
PART – I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
 
General conditions of weavers in the country - A case study of Sircilla concentration 
zone of weavers 
 
Handloom sector is one of the largest empl oyer in the country second only to the 
agriculture in the rural economy.  As per the joint census of Handlooms and 
Powerlooms 1995-96, 65.51 lakh persons are engaged in weaving and associated 
activities in the Handloom Sector .  The Handloom reflects a wide variety of traditions 
and techniques from the simple cotton dhotis  to the rich silk saris of Banaras and 
Kancheevaram.  Handloom weaving is part of the socio-cultural life style of the 
weaving community. With the advent of mechanized textile production, the 
contribution of handlooms to cloth production has been declining but even today 
handlooms contribute over 5,000 million square meters of cloth production in the 
country.  However, the Sector is beset with manifold problems such as obsolete 
technologies, unorganized production system, low productivity, inadequate working 
capital, conventional product range, weak marketing link, overall stagnation of 
production and sales and above all, competition from powerloom and mill sector.  High 
employment in this sector is beset by the cost disadvantages faced by handlooms due to 
manual nature of production.   
 
2. As per the last census large popula tion of handloom weavers belong to 
disadvantaged sector of society, with 10.76% of weavers belonging to Scheduled Castes 
and 25.50% belonging to Scheduled Tribes and 42.65% belonging to Other Backward 
Classes.  As per the Working Group of Te xtile Industry for X Plan, about 120 lakh 
persons are engaged in the handloom weaving and allied activities in the country. 
 
 
3. In view of the vulnerability of the persons engaged in the sector’, the 
Government of India had been following a policy of protection of the Handlooms Sector 
since long.  This policy consisted of subsidy for production and yarn supply, marketing 
rebate as well as exemption from excise on the hank yarn, which is the main raw 
material of the cotton handloom sector.  Th e Handloom (Reservation of Articles for 
Production) Act, 1985 also extends statutory pr otection to the Sector, by reserving 11 
items of textile products for production only on handlooms.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 8
 
4. The Government of India has been im plementing a number of Developmental 
and Welfare Schemes for the benefits of the handloom sector.  Previously, there were as 
many as 11 such Schemes, which have now being reduced to five by merging various 
components of the scheme or the scheme itse lf into the new one.  The five Schemes, 
which the Government is impl ementing for the developmen t of handloom sector and 
for benefits of handloom weavers, are:- 
   
 
(i) Integrated Handlooms Developmen t Scheme consisting of essential 
components of Deen Dayal Hathkarg ha Protsahan Yojana, Integrated 
Handloom Training Project, Worksh ed-cum-Housing Scheme and Cluster 
Development Scheme. 
(ii) Handloom Weavers Comprehensive Welfare Scheme consisting of two 
components viz. Health Insurance Scheme and Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar 
Bima Yojana. 
(iii) Mill Gate Price Scheme 
(iv) Marketing and Export Promotion Scheme consisting of two components 
viz. Marketing Promotion and Handloom Export Promotion 
(v) Diversified Handloom Developm ent Scheme consisting of three 
components viz. Strengthening of  Weavers Service Centres/Indian 
Institutes of Handloom Technology, National Centre for Textile Design, 
Research and Development, conducting of Third Census and Issue of 
identity Cards to Handloom weavers. 
 
5.      However, during their visit to Sirc illa the Committee observed  that there was 
hardly any impact of these schemes on the ground.  For instance, the Mill Gate Price 
Scheme was introduced with an objective to  provide all type of yarn to the handloom 
weavers organizations at the Mill Gate Pr ice.  National Handloom Development 
Corporation (NHDC), a Government of In dia Undertaking is the only agency 
authorized to implement the scheme.  All types of yarn required for production of 
handloom items are covered under the schem e.  The yarn is being arranged by NHDC 
from the mills as per the requirement of the user agencies and transported to the 
godown of the agency.  There is also a prov ision for supply of yarn to the individual 
weavers through the yarn depots approved by the NHDC.  659 yarn depots have been 
established throughout the country till December 2007 but there is no yarn depot at 
Sircilla on the ground that there has been no  demand for it.  Besides, the individual 
weavers of Sircilla have also not been supplied the yarn through mobile vans which is 
one of the mechanism to supply the yarn to the weavers.   
 
 
 
 

 9
 
6. As far as the skill upgradation of wea vers under the Diversified Handloom 
Development Scheme through training/workshops and exhibitions, design 
development etc. is concerned, not even a single weaver has been benefited during the 
last three years in Sircilla which is one of the concentration zone of weavers.   
 
7. With regard to question of providing financial assistance to the individual 
weaver for purchase and sale of yarn and for production, procurement and marketing 
activities during the last three years, an ev asive response has been given that financial 
assistance is being provided by the Central  Government to the individual weavers for 
the purchase and sale of yarn and producti on, Procurement and Marketing activities.  
The State Government have introduced a scheme name Yarn Support Scheme to the 
individual weavers w.e.f. 1.4.08 for providing a ssistance of 10% subsidy on purchase of 
yarn with maximum eligibility of Rs.600/- per quarter.   This is being so when the 
Government have agreed that lack of fina ncial assistance has been one of the main 
reasons for the suicide of weavers.  
 
8. Similarly, the coverage of weavers un der Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana 
at Sircilla is only 96 handloom weavers and none of weaver have been given the benefit 
under the scheme as it has been stated that  the scheme does not permit the relief for the 
suicide victims.  
 
9. Regarding efforts of the Government fo r ensuring minimum job guarantee to the 
handloom and powerloom weavers/workers with a view to avoid such mishaps in 
future as also whether the Government has any plan to provide looms and other 
associated machinery to the powerloom workers and raw material to the handloom 
weavers on subsidized rates, the Government have stated the powerloom service centre 
at Hyderabad is organizing va rious training activities.  The weavers in that area can 
avail the benefit of this training programme  so that they can get employment to the 
industry after the training.  
 
10. In the recent past, PSC Hyderabad also started garment training in association 
with Apparel Sewing Techniques, Hyderabad, which will be helpful to the workers in 
that cluster.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 10
 
11. There is a Powerloom Service Center at Sircilla managed by the State 
Government which is giving training to weavers in and around Sircilla.  This Centre 
needs to be strengthened by provid ing additional equipments, manpower, 
infrastructure facilities.  If proposal in  this regard is received from the State 
Government, the same would be considered to  provide all possible he lp.   There is no 
proposal to provide looms and other associ ated machinery to the powerloom workers 
on subsidized rates despite of the fact that Government concurs with the view that such 
a step can go a long way in solving the pr oblems of weavers/workers throughout the 
country.   
 
12. On the question whether the Government  has any plan to provide soft loans 
without interest or at subsidized rates to the weavers/workers to enable them to 
develop themselves as entrepreneurs, it has been replied that Government has no plan 
at present to provide soft loan without interest or at subsidized rates to the powerloom 
weavers.  However, the entrepreneurs can avail the benefit of 20% Margin Money 
Scheme.  Under the Scheme, subsidy upto a maximum limit of Rs.20.00 lakh is being 
provided by the Government of India for the installation of specified machinery, for the 
SSI powerloom units.    
 
13. On a question regarding causes of problems of handloom and powerloom 
weavers alongwith the remedial measures to solve the problems of the weavers, 
Government, that in respect of handloom wea vers have stated that the various schemes 
implemented by the Office of the Develo pment Commissioner for Handlooms address 
the felt needs of the weavers who consti tute the disadvantage social strata and 
occupational groups and thus are at the bo ttom of the economic hierarchy.  Concerted 
efforts are being made to enhance producti on, productivity, and efficiency in the 
handloom sector and enhance the income and social-economic status of the weavers by 
providing skill upgradation,  infrastructure and input supply support to them.  
 
14. It has further been stated that the O ffice of the Development Commissioner for 
Handlooms has been liberally funding the State Governments for implementing various 
Schemes of Handloom Sector.      
  
15. During the last three years, Government of  India has released fund to the tune of 
Rs.52.08 crore to State Government of Andh ra Pradesh under various Plan and Non-
Plan Schemes of Development Commissioner for Handlooms.  State Government have 
initiated the following measures at Sircilla:- 
 
• Counseling 
• 50% Power Tariff Concession 
• Upgradation and modernization of Powerloom Scheme with State 
Governmenet grant of Rs.30,000/- for two powerlooms 

 11
• Establishment of Powerloom Service sub. Centre in Sircilla Textile Park. 
• Sanction of Textile Park under Textile  Cluster Infrastructure Development 
Schemer (TCIDS) with an outlay of Rs.7.73 crore.  
• Sanction of Rs.21.00 lakhs as grant to  Netha Cheyutha Trust –NGO to 
educate and rehabilitate the bereaved families. 
• Sanction of exgratia of Rs.1.50 lakh  to each one of the suicide case, 
fulfilling the norms. 
• Conducting of Mega Health Camps. 
• Implementation of Health Insurance Scheme covering 5954 Powerloom 
workers by paying the premium of Rs.800/- on behalf of all the Powrloom 
Weavers by State Government. 
• Implementation of Group Insurance Scheme for Powerloom Workers by 
contributing premium of Rs.90/- per he ad under add on GIS.  Covering 
(4500) powerloom workers. 
• Sanction of Old Age Pensions reducing the age limit from 65 to 70 years 
reduction of eligibility age of Oldage pensions from 65-50 years. 
• House sites and Houses (102) 
• Modernisation/Upgradation of Po werlooms (407 beneficiaries) Rs.91.39 
lakhs 
• Anthyojana Anna Yojana Cards – 3538 
• Old Age Pensions-2331 
• Widow Pensions-589 
• Sewing Machines-49 
• IAY Houses-52 
• Financial assistance under National Family Benefit Scheme-258 
• Financial assistance to rejected suicide cases @Rs.25000/- per head-122 
• Construction of Netha Bazar-Rs.15.00 lakhs. 
• White Ration Cards-10788 
• Formation of MAC Society with 50 members and training on Juki 
machine-400 (Women trained) 
• Training in Powerloom Weaving Technology with placements-323 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 12
16. Besides, the status of various handl oom schemes being implemented in Andhra 
Pradesh are as under: 
  
1. Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme 
 
• The “Integrated Handloom Cluster Development Scheme” was launched 
in 2005-06 for comprehensive and holistic development of 20 selected 
clusters.  Out of 20 clusters, two  cl usters namely (i) Chirala and (ii) 
Madhavaram were sanctioned in the State of Andhra Pradesh. 
• During the XI Plan, a new scheme called “Integrated Handlooms 
Development Scheme” has been introduced. 
• The target and number of clusters sanctioned in the State of Andhra 
Pradesh are as under:- 
 
Year Target Number of Clusters 
sanctioned 
Amount 
Released 
(Rs.in crore) 
2005-06 2 2 1.73 
2006-07 10 10 1.57 
2007-08 15 16 2.33 
2008-09 09 09 1.39 
  TOTAL 7.02 
 
* Under the Group Approach, 73 Group Approach Projects have been 
sanctioned to the State Government  of Andhra Pradesh and a sum of 
Rs.180.85 lakh has been released as first installment towards Central 
Government’s share. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 13
2. Marketing and Export Promotion Scheme 
 
• Number of events sanctioned/organ ized under Marketing and Export 
Promotion Scheme are as under: 
 
Year Name of the events 
sanctioned/organized 
Amount 
sanctioned/r
eleased 
(Rs.in lakh) 
2005-06 01- National Handloom Expos 
06-Special Handloom Expos, 01-
Craft Mela and  
26-District Level Events organised 
115.99 
2006-07 08-Special Handloom Expos, 
01-Craft Mela & 
30 District level events organized 
120.17 
2007-08 08-Special Handloom Expos 
01-Crafts Mela and  
30-District level events organized 
95.78 
2008-09 30 District level and  
04 Special Handloom Expos 
111.85 
 
3. Handloom Weavers Comprehensive Scheme 
 
• During the XIth Plan a Handloom  Weavers Comprehensive Welfare 
Scheme is being implemented with the components of (i) Health Insurance 
Scheme and (ii) Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana.  The number of 
weavers enrolled under these schemes from Andhra Pradesh is as under:- 
 
Health Insurance 
Scheme 
No. of weavers enrolled 
2005-06 54253 
2006-07 34831 
2007-08 127594 
2008-09 (Upto 
September, 2008) 
19406 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 

 14
 
Receipt and settlement of claims 
 
• The claims received and settled as August, 2008 is as under:- 
 
     Claims received            Claims settled 
 Number Amount (In 
crore) 
Number  Amount (in 
crore) 
1st Policy 
(2005-06) 
53701 11.79 31929 5.77 
2nd Policy 
(2006-07) 
16600 3.99 15968 3.52 
3rd Policy 
(2007-08) 
38112 3.73 36357 3.07 
 
TOTAL 108413 19.51 84354 12.36 
 
Settlement of OPD and IPD Claims 
 
 OPD  IPD  
 Number Amount (in 
crore) 
Number  Amount (in 
crore) 
1st Policy 
(2005-06) 
24912 2.96 7017 2.81 
2nd Policy 
(2006-07) 
13190 2..33 2778 1.29 
3rd Policy 
(2007-08) 
34906 2.38 1551 0.69 
 
TOTAL 73008 7.57 11346 4.79 
 
Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana 
 
  
Year No. of weavers 
enrolled 
2005-06 14238 
2006-07 89293 
2007-08 83590 
2008-09 (Upto July 
2008) 
21247 
 
 
 
 

 15
Number of claims settled  
 
Claims 
settled 
  
Number Amount (Rs. in lakh) 
2005-06 to 2006-07 
Natural death  
584 292.00 
Accidental death 4 3.20 
2007-08-Natural death 1316 668.90 
Accidental death  16 12.70 
2008-09 (Upto July, 
2008) Natural death 
689 273.89 
Accidental  death 3 3.50 
TOTAL 2612 1254.19 
 
Scholarship provided 
 
 
 Number Amount (Rs. in 
lakh) 
2005-06 to 
2006-07 
5882 53.08 
2007-08 9038 91.97 
2008-09 (Upto 
July, 2008) 
5523 55.99 
TOTAL 20443 201.04 
 
4. Mill Gate Price Scheme 
 
• Under the Mill Gate Price Scheme all types of yarn is made available at the 
Mill Gate Price to the eligible Hand loom weavers.  The scheme is being 
implementing throughout the country through the NHDC Ltd., Lucknow.  
The Supplies of yarn made by the Co rporation to Andhra Pradesh for the 
last 2 years is as under:- 
 
Year Quantity in lakh kg. Value in Rs. Lakh 
2005-06 23.14 2735.66 
2006-07 26.68 3689.31 
2007-08 34.73 4660.98 
2008-09 (upto 
August, 2008) 
7.740 1078.22 
 
So far 77 yarn depots are operational in Andhra Pradesh.   

 16
 
5. Marketing Incentive and Basic Input components of Intensive Handlooms 
Development Scheme 
 
Year Marketing Incentive 
Component (Rs. in 
lakh) 
Under Basic Input 
Component of 
DDHPY (committed 
liabilities) (Rs. in 
lakh) 
2005-06 656.12  - 
2006-07 984.87 6.27 
2007-08 1296.62  - 
2008-09    -  - 
TOTAL 2937.61 6.27 
 
• No claims pending under Marketing Incentive Component in respect of 
Government of Andhra Pradesh. 
• During the current financial year, we have received total 137 proposals 
under basic input component of DDHPY  scheme.  In this regard, some 
clarification has been sought from th e State Government vide this Office 
letter dated 4th August, 2008. 
 
 
6. 10% Rebate Scheme 
 
Year 10% Rebate 
Scheme (Rs. in 
lakh) 
2005-06 567.67 
2006-07 200.63 
2007-08 587.40 
2008-09 626.62 
TOTAL 1982.32 
 
* No claims pending under 10% Rebate scheme in respect of Government of 
Andhra Pradesh. 
 
However, in respect of powerloom weavers there was no clear cut response as to 
the causes of the problems of the weavers.  
 
 
 
 

 17
17. Despite these measures by the Government there have been press reports on 
regular basis about the spate of suicides by the weavers in Sircilla of Karim Nagar 
District in Andhra Pradesh.  Taking suo-moto cognizance of unabated suicides by the 
weavers, the Committee decided to make an emergency on-the-spot study visit to 
Sircilla on Sunday, 5
th October, 2008 to ascertain the causes of extreme steps taken by 
weavers.   
 
18. The Committee, in an open house session , had direct one to one interaction with 
the widows/families of those weavers who committed suicides to know about the 
reasons of suicides, assistance provided by  the Central and State Government agencies 
and their problems regarding arranging and managing their families again after the loss 
of their bread earners.  Weavers/workers, Powerloom owners, various associations 
concerned with the several aspects of powerl oom weaving like yarn, dyeing etc., local 
representatives of various political outfits and trade unions including local MLA had an 
interaction with the Committee to share th eir views about the reasons for general 
ailment of poweloom weaving in Sircilla and causes for the suicides by the weavers.   
The weavers, widows of the deceased weavers , representatives of various associations 
connected with weavers, handloom/powerloom industry in and around Sircilla, placed 
before the Committee the following main problems being faced by the poor weavers: 
 
1. Lack of continuous work for the wea vers. Limiting the work to 6 months 
or so. 
2. Non-lifting of finished products stoc ks leading to stoppage of production 
by the Powerloom/units. 
3. 10-15 big traders from Hyderabad cont rol the marketing of products from 
the area. 
4. Lack of training facilities for improvement of skill. 
5. Non-revision of minimum wages for the workers. 
6. Due to poverty workers are unable to send their children to schools. 
7. Scores of women workers including hundreds of widows work as beedi 
workers on paltry daily wages. 
8. Entire weavers community under heavy debt and being exploited by the 
local moneylenders. 
9. Lack of housing sites/homes to atleast 30% of weavers. 
10. Non-allocation of sufficient rice under PDS. 
11. Free availability of adulterated arracks/country liquors. 
12. Lack of counselling centres. 
13. Lack of medical facilities.  Employees State Insurance Corporation and 
Employees Provident Fund Organisation presence sought. 
14. Lack of proper coordination between Central and State Departments for 
an integrated approach for socio- economic upliftment of the weavers 
community. 

 18
15. Non-availability of ex-gratia for the weavers family for those who died on 
account of poor health/natural death. 
16. Demand for making Sircilla a Specialized Textile Zone. 
17. Heavy debts to each  households of weavers upto one lakh to two lakhs. 
18. High interest rates for credit fr om micro-finance companies which are 
main credit providers. 
19. Malnutrition and unhealthy conditio ns for women who are beedi workers. 
 
19. Subsequently, the Committee heard th e views of various Hyderabad based 
individuals/NGOs/others.  These also ec hoed the points brought out by various 
individuals at Sircilla. The Committee had a meeting with the officials of the various 
Departments of the Central and State Govern ments.  Representatives from the Union 
Ministries of Textiles, Labour and Employment, Deputy Commissioner of the District, 
Officials from Labour, Textiles and Excise Departments of the State Government were 
present during the meeting.  They were as ked to respond to various issues raised 
during the open-house session .  District Commissioner gave the details about ex-gratia 
paid to the families of the victims, their action plan about providing housing sites, 
dismantling of toddy supply network, more  foodgrains on ration cards and other 
necessary steps to help the weavers.  It was also assured that necessary steps would be 
taken by the Government of India in cons ultation with the State Government to 
facilitate the sale of unsold stock within a fortnight, training to powerloom workers and 
owners at Government cost, availability of he alth through network of ESIC, revision of 
minimum wages, giving Antodaya ration cards and provision of social security 
network to weavers wherever possible.  
 
20. It also came out that there are no wel fare scheme as such for the weavers of 
powerloom sector, except Insurance, as are  available for the weavers of handloom 
sector.  The classification of weavers into handloom and powerloom restricts them to be  
eligible for various schemes of the Government.  The Office of the Textile Commissioner 
is responsible to cater to the development of all sectors of Textile industry through 
various developmental schemes under the po licy framework of Ministry of Textiles, 
Government of India.  Considering the soci al security needs of the de-centralised 
powerloom workers, since 2003 the Office  of Textile Commissioner, Mumbai in 
collaboration with LIC of India covered a large number of powerloom workers under 
the Group Insurance Scheme of LIC of Indi a.  Out of the yearly premium of Rs.330/-, 
the Ministry of Textiles contributes Rs.150, LIC contributes Rs.100 and Rs.80 are borne 
by the workers.  However, the benefit of Group Insurance Scheme is not available in the 
event if death by suicide as per the LIC regula tions.  This is also one of the reasons why 
the suicide deaths are not reported to the Office of Textile Commissioner, Mumbai.  
 
 
 
 

 19
21. As far as suicides of the powerloom weavers in Sircilla are concerned, the 
Government have replied that as per the information given to  the team at the time of 
interaction, the main reason for the suicides was due to financial debt from the private 
moneylenders, chronic illness and addiction to country adulterated liquor.  No one 
among the suicides is reported due to lack of work in the powerloom industry.  
 
 
22. Regarding supporting measures taken by the Government to curb the incidents 
of suicides the following steps have been proposed are: 
 
(i) Special camp for enrollment of more and more number of 
powerloom weavers of Sircilla under Group Insurance Scheme for 
a period of 2 weeks from 13.10.2 008 to 25.10.2008 at Sircilla, which 
will be repeated in due course of time. It may be noted that 
considering the incidence of suicide deaths in the past, prior to 
1.1.2008, the Government of Andhra P radesh through the Director 
of Handlooms & Textiles was contributing Rs.90 per worker (i.e. 
entire workers contribution) under the then Add on Group 
Insurance Scheme (AGIS).  However, since 1.1.2008 the support 
(contribution) of the State Government in Group Insurance Scheme 
has been suspended by which the enrollment of the worker under 
Group Insurance Scheme has been drastically reduced.  In the 
present Group Insurance Scheme, the worker contribution is Rs.80.  
Considering the economic status of the powerloom workers in 
Sircilla and the increase in incident s of suicide, it is need of the 
hour that the State Government sh ould continue contributing Rs.80 
in the Group Insurance Scheme on behalf of powerloom workers.  
This was already brought to the no tice fo the State Government in 
January, 2008for extending their cont ribution in the enrollment of 
powerloom workers under Group Insurance Scheme being 
implemented by the office of Textile Commissioner.  The State 
Government is being persuaded for resuming such contribution, as 
it would increase enrollment of weavers under the Group 
Insurance Scheme.  
 
(ii) During the interaction it was brought to the notice of the Textile 
Commissioner and his team that the powerloom industry in Sircilla 
has accumulated unsold fabric on account of which they are forced 
to curtail the production.  Income generation of workers was thus 
affected.  Considering this, the Textile Commissioner has already 
directed the Powerloom Development and Export promotion 
Council (PDEXCIL) and his field Offices covering Andhra Pradesh 
to organize a Buyer Seller Meet during 22
nd and 23 rd November, 

 20
2008 at Hyderabad wherein the powerloom producers of Sircilla 
would be given stalls free of cost to promote marketing.  Buyers 
would be appealed through advertisement for the proposed Buyer 
Seller Meet to prefer Sircilla powerloom products in the wake of 
calamity suffered through recent suicides in large number. 
 
(iii) It was seen during the visit of the team that the poweloom 
producers in Sircilla are engaged in production of low value cloth 
in outdated looms on account of which there may be less demand 
to their fabric elsewhere.  If the powerloom industry in Sircilla 
upgraded gradually, the cluster employment and income 
generation may increase by which the economic status of workers 
in the cluster will improve.  Keeping this in view the Textile 
Commissioner has decided to organize an exposure visit to the 
powerloom weavers of Sircilla to the mdoernised powerloom 
clusters of Solapur, Ichalkaranji, Bh iwandi etc., so that they can 
diversify their production and also some entrepreneurs may invest 
in installation of latest Technological weaving machines and 
processing.  This exposure visit will be conducted in the month of 
November/December, 2008.  Towards exposure visit, the Office of 
Textile Commissioner will provide financial support to the 
powerloom weavers @ Rs.2000/- towards incidental expenses and 
to and fro railway fare. 
 
(iv) In order to upgrade and mode rnize the powerloom industry in 
Sircilla, awareness programme for the benefit of Textile industry in 
and around Sircilla will be conducted at Sircilla repeatedly in order 
to make them aware about the various subsidy schemes 
implemented by the Office of th e Textile Commissioner in this 
regard namely Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS)_, 
20% Margin Money Subsidy Scheme for Powerlooms, 15% Margin 
Money Subsidy Scheme for SSI unit s, Modified Group Work Shed 
Scheme, Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks (SITP), Integrated 
Textile Cluster Development Programme.  Under some of the 
Schemes, the Sircilla industry ca n take up new activities like 
investment in apparel sector. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 21
 
23. Handloom Sector is a highly decentra lized and dispersed sector.  Handloom 
weavers can be found in most parts of the country and large concentrations are found in 
over 200 clusters in the country, a majority of the handloom weavers operate as 
household units.  Only 1,98,590 ha d been identified as commerc ial units as against total 
of 34,87,146 units in the Sector as per the cens us conducted in 1995-96.  This emphasizes 
that handloom weaving is practiced more as vocation than as a purely commercial 
activity.  In fact, there is a considerable la ck of entrepreneurship and profit motive in 
the Sector. 
 
24. As per the current estimate only about 17% of the handloom weavers are within 
cooperative fold.  This could also an over estimation since may of the cooperatives are 
defunct either due to financial mis-manageme nt or due to accumulation of stock and 
are therefore unable to provide yearn to the handloom weavers for cloth products.  
Most of the handloom rich States also have their State Handloom Development and 
State Apex Cooperatives.  However, these organizations have also been facing 
difficulties due to over staffing, poor marketing activities and over dependence on 
Government purchases and rebates. 
 
25. Regarding implementation of Central  Schemes to weavers, the Committee were 
informed that prior to introduction of  Deen Dayal Hatkargha Protsahan Yojana 
(DDPHY) most of the Schemes were aimed at benefiting the weavers under cooperative 
fold only.  Even under  DDPHY, the Central Government releases assistance to agencies 
recommended by the State Directors of Handlooms.  In general, the State Directors have 
been recommending projects in respect of cooperative agencies.  In this regard, the 
Secretary, Textiles was candid before the Co mmittee that the Government of India for 
the last 30 years has taken the cooperative approach to handloom sector.  All the 
schemes are operated basically through the c ooperative sector.  In certain parts of the 
country the cooperative sector is very strong, in other it is not so strong and in still 
others it is weak. 
 
26. On being asked about the conditions of weavers remaining far from satisfactory 
despite the fact that there are numerous sc hemes for the welfare of weavers, both in 
organized and unorganized forms since last many decades ranging from their social 
security to making them available of raw material and loan to weavers to carry out their 
activities, the Government of India stated that the reasons are strenuous.  Powerloom 
weavers are addicted to drinking and debt ridden and their health is deteriorating due 
to occupational hazards.  Workers get addicted to drinking more during the period of 
unemployment, under employment and helple ssness with utter poverty.  Bankers are 
not providing the required finance to the weavers on account of poor repayment 
capacity.  There is need to relax norms fo r coverage of weavers under P.F., ESI, Age 
relaxation for coverage under Group Insurance Schemes. 
 

 22
27. In reply to a question whether the Government propose to provide similar 
infrastructure on a lower level, to the group of artisans/weavers/handloom workers 
etc. to enable them to carry out their profe ssions on the line that has been envisaged in 
Textile Parks, the Ministry replied that at present there is no provision for higher or 
lower level of assistance.  Interested art isans/weavers/handlooms workers may join 
hands and form a Special Purpose Vehicle to develop a Textiles Park as per their 
business plan.  It may be noted that an excl usive Handlooms Park is being developed at 
Pochampally, Andhra Pradesh, under SITP.  Surprising local handloom workers are not 
very optimistic with these schemes and parks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 23
 
 
PART II 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
 
 
 
Suicide by Weavers 
 
28. The Committee note that there are 2,50,805 handlooms and 45,064 powerlooms in the 
State of Andhra Pradesh.  Sircilla is predominantly a powerloom center as there are 22,168 
powerlooms whereas the number of handloom units there is only 220.  13,500 weavers are 
working as powerloom weavers in Sircilla and there is no figure of handloom weavers. 
During their visit to Sirci lla,  the Committee were informe d that over a period of time 
handloom units have been converted to powe rloom units and consequently the weavers 
have shifted to powerloom units. There have been greater and unusual incidents of suicides 
by the powerloom weavers in Sircilla and the reasons attributed for these suicides are (i) ) 
Lack of regular jobs, (ii) inadequate wages, (iii) indebtedness and resultant harassment by 
the micro-finance companies, (iv) closure of  powerloom units on account of piling of 
unlifted stock, (v) ill health and other domestic reasons  (vi) prolonged addiction to alcohol.  
Out of the reported 314 cases of  suicides, 161 cases of assistance have been rejected and 8 
cases are pending decision.  Reasons for rejectio n of cases have been stated to be (i) natural 
death, (ii) accidental death, (iii) suicides due to family disputes etc. etc.  However, an 
amount of Rs. 25,000/- has been released to 122 cases from CM Relief Fund as a special case.  
Other benefits sanctioned to suicides families are 70 widow pensions, 54 houses, 47 
upgradation of powerlooms, 122 AAY Cards, 18 old aged pensions, 49 sewing machines and 

 24
25 IAY houses.  As far as the assistance to powerloom weavers is concerned, Group 
Insurance Scheme for powerloom workers appear to be the only scheme which is directly 
related to them.  No other meaningful scheme exists which can provide succor to 
powerloom weavers at the time of their need.  The Central Government provided fund of 
about Rs. 52 crores to the State Government of Andhra Pradesh during last three years for 
running various plan and non-plan schemes fo r the weavers.  The State Government also 
inter-alia initiated the various measures viz. (i) 50% power tariff concession, (ii) 
upgradation of powerloom with grant of Rs. 30,000/- for 2 powerlooms, (iii) sanction of 2 
Textile Parks, (iv) sanction of Rs. 21,00,000/- to an NGO, NETHA Cheyutha Trust, (v) 
coverage of 5,954 powerloom workers under H ealth Insurance Scheme, (vi) sanction of ex-
gratia of Rs. 1.5 lakh to each one of the suicide case fulfilling the norms etc. etc.  Besides the 
Government propose to conduct awareness progr amme for the benefit of textile industry 
around Sircilla to make weavers aware about the various subsidy schemes implemented by 
the Government.   They are Technology Up gradation Fund Scheme (TUFS), 20% Margin 
Money
 Subsidy Scheme for powerlooms, 15% Margin Money Scheme for SSI units, 
Modified Group Workshed Scheme, Scheme for Integrated Textile Park (SITP) and 
Integrated Textile Cluster Development Programme etc. etc.  The Committee, however, feel 
that these schemes are in vogue in one form or the other for last many years.  However, the 
primary and direct beneficiary of most of these schemes have been mainly the owners of 
the powerlooms and textile industry rather than the poor weavers/workers. Delay in 
implementation, improper implementation, lack of monitoring, procedural wrangles etc. 
have deprived the weavers from the intended benefits of all these schemes.  Had the 

 25
intended benefits actually reached them, the conditions of weavers in  Sircilla might not 
have been what it is today.  The suicide ca ses are the result of severe distress wherein 
weavers are left with no hope but to resort to such an extreme step.  The conditions of 
weavers, whether in powerloom or in handloom  more or less, remains shaky and lacking 
very essential minimum requirements of lif e, threatening the very survival of the 
community.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the incidents of suicides 
by weavers should be an eye-opener to the Government to become pro-active in protecting 
the interests of the weavers both from ha ndloom and powerloom sector.  Instead of 
distributing ex-gratia after the suicides and salvaging actions, it will be in the fitness of 
things if suo-motto initiatives are taken in right earnest to promote weavers’ welfare while 
formulating policies and schemes for the textile sector as a whole.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 26
 
 
 
Conducting of Census  
 
29.  Handloom sector is one of the largest employer in the country.  However, 
there are no authentic figures with rega rd to the number of weavers and allied 
workers engaged in this sector.  Like all informal sectors in the country, especially 
the rural non-formal sector, information about the statistical base on handloom sector 
is based more on estimates or assumptions , which could be incorrect.  However, the 
policies of the Government are formulated on  the assumptions based on this data.  
Resultantly, not only the policy and programme formulations become unrealistic, the 
Government is not in a position to exactly assess the impact of implementation of 
these policies and programmes on the weaver s, not to say of the benefits whether 
these weavers have actually got or not.  As per the census conducted in 1995-96, about 
65 lakh persons are engaged in weaving and associated activities in the Handloom 
sector.  The Working Group of Textile Industry for X Plan indicated 120 lakh persons 
engaged in handloom weaving and allied activities.  Considering 100% difference 
between the two estimates by the Govern ment, immediate action is required to 
determine the number of persons directly or indirectly involved with this sector.  
This exercise should not be re stricted to counting of head s only but other issues like 
gender proportion, their economic status, dependent family members, self dwelling 
space, education to children and all rela ted issues which could form basis of 
formulating plans/schemes for development of  the weavers, be taken into account.  
This will also help in preparing a data base about the weavers and other persons 

 27
engaged in this sector so as to enable the Government to frame new schemes, recast 
existing schemes and synchronising them with the need of the weavers.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend th at with an identified objective, urgent 
steps should be taken to conduct a survey of weavers and other workers engaged in 
the handloom and powerloom sector in the country not only to ascertain their figures 
but also to identify the real problem plaguing the weavers’ community.  Needless to 
emphasis this exercise should be done in a time bound manner under intimation to 
the Committee. 
 
 

 28
 
 
Organising Weavers 
 
30. The Committee find that handloom sect or is a highly decentralized and 
dispersed sector.  Handloom weavers can be  found all over the country and majority 
of them are operating as household units.  However, their large concentrations are 
located in about 200 clusters in the count ry.  Against the total estimated 34, 87,146 
units, only 1,98,590 units are working as co mmercial units.  This shows that 
handloom weaving is still not a commercial activity and is practiced more as a 
vocation lacking entrepreneurship and profit motive.  Only about 17% of their total 
population is stated to be within the cooperative fold as of now.  Moreover, many of 
the cooperatives are defunct due to one r eason or the other.  As assistance under 
central schemes is routed through coopera tives, it is anybody’s guess whether such 
assistance really reach the intended class of people.  The cooperative structures need 
a revisit so as to make it weaver friendly.  Besides, the weavers should also be 
encouraged to act more as a self help group and the Government assuming the role of 
a catalyst in such an endeavour.  The ob jective behind such a move should be to 
unite the weavers for availing the benefits of the various schemes of the 
Government.   The Committee would also like to underline that the welfare schemes 
of the Government aimed at weavers should not be regimented as the conditions of 
the weavers working in handloom or in powerloom are equally miserable, as many 
places handloom units are being converted to powerloom units and workers/weavers 
remain the same.  Moreover, Developmental schemes for powerloom sector are 

 29
meant for upgradation of the powerlooms thereby benefiting the powerloom owners.  
There is no denying the fact that weavers working there hardly get even the 
prescribed minimum wages.  With the existing schemes of the Government for 
powerloom sector, the sector as such may grow but the conditions of weaver/worker 
working there may not improve.  Hence, regimentation of schemes between 
handloom weavers and powerloom weaver/worker will deprive one segment of 
weavers/workers for the benefits which th ey strongly deserve.   Therefore, the 
weaver community should be identified as one irrespective of th e sector they are 
working in.  Accordingly, the Committee st rongly recommend that efforts should be 
made to form cooperatives, Associations and Self Help Groups of the weavers with a 
view to cover the maximum number of weavers so that the benefits of various 
welfare schemes are ensured to them and there should be no classification of weavers 
(between handloom or powerloom) as far as  the benefits of the Government schemes 
to the individual weavers are concerned.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 30
 
 
 
Formulation of welfare schemes  
31. The Committee take note of the fact th at there are multiple schemes aimed at 
improving the conditions of weavers.  They vary from training projects to workshed-
cum-housing, cluster developments, weavers comprehensive welfare inclusive of 
health insurance, mill get price scheme, marketing and export promotion, 
strengthening of weavers service centre, etc.  etc.  The primary objective of all these 
schemes is to improve the condition of weavers. With the sizeable presence of 
Government machinery throughout the country and handsome expenditure of public 
money on this Governmental set-up as well as on the schemes framed in this regard, 
the condition of common weavers in the country has remained desperate and 
distraught.   Schemes are introduced without proper spade work and thereafter 
withdrawal, modifications and merger of schemes with other schemes keep going on 
and every time some or the other excuse is put forward for such display of 
incompetence and un-imagination.  The wors t sufferer for this kind of goof-up is the 
poor weaver who is not even aware as to what is being done by the Government for 
weavers in the country.  Moreover, because of  the procedural difficulties most of the 
weavers remain outside the reach of the sy stem.  The Government should appoint a 
high level Committee to evaluate the performance of the existing welfare schemes for 
the workers.  Based on findings by such Committee necessary follow-up action 
should be taken by the Government.   The thrust of such schemes should be on the 

 31
problem of weavers relating to minimum wages, sickness, maternity, housing, 
education of children, employment injury, unemployment, subsistence allowance 
when owners are  not  giving work on  account of temporary closure of units, 
invalidity, old age and death.   
 

 32
Availability of finances to weavers 
 
32. The Committee note that self investment or private investment in the 
handloom sector has been the mainstay for production of handloom.  As most of the 
weavers belong to very poor section of the society, they manage finances from the 
private parties/credit companies at great cost  in terms of the interest.  Because banks 
do not finance them or provide loans without counter guarantees or due to weak 
repaying capacity of weavers, they do not have any option but to take money from 
private finance companies for raising their working capital or to run their household. 
Private micro finance units exploit poor weav ers to the hilt and sometimes they even 
work under wage bondage to these private companies.  Cooperative system has also 
failed miserably in terms of arranging finances to the individual weavers.  Even 
informal system of marketing did not help in attracting public investment into the 
sector due to its inherent shortcomings like risk of defaults and reneging of 
promises, etc.  Therefore, the Committee st rongly recommend that with a view to 
overcome the problem, it will be most appr opriate if formation of handloom bank on 
the pattern of NABARD and SIDBI is given thought of.  To start with specialized 
branches could be set-up in the highly co ncentrated zone of weavers from amongst 
nationalized/cooperative banks.  Loan to weavers from these banks should be made 
available on soft terms.  Some mechanism be devised to waive the existing loan of 
the weavers who are heavily indebted and ar e not in a position to repay the loan to 
the local money lenders. This will not only go a long way in bringing out the poor 

 33
weavers from the clutches of micro finance units/individuals ending their 
exploitation, but will also pave the way for the healthy growth of textile sector as 
well as of the weavers in the country.  
 

 34
Raw material to weavers 
 
33. Another area where the Committee would like to pin-point is inadequate 
access to raw material in handloom sector .  Hank yarn availability has been the 
principal problem since decades.  To overcome the problem, it will be appropriate to 
encourage development and grounding of decentralized spinning technology which 
would enable the production of hank yarn at places where cotton is produced.  This 
will also establish direct linkage betwe en cotton farmers and handloom weavers 
enabling availability of hank yarn at competitive rates.  As the Mill Gate Price 
Scheme has failed to meet the objective of supplying yarn either through its depot or 
through mobile vans, it will be purposeful to develop a network of yarn depots 
which can ensure the supply of yarn to  Handloom clusters.  National Handloom 
Development Corporation (NHDC) has grossl y and squarely failed in meeting the 
demands of hank yarn for the handloom se ctor.  There is an urgent need for 
revamping the work of NHDC making it more efficient in supply of yarn to weavers 
and also making it accountable for any laps e in this regard.  The Committee strongly 
recommend that to ensure the availability of raw material to clusters and to 
individual weavers, raw materi al depots should be opened on the lines of shops of 
public distribution system so that individua l weavers may also avail the facility of 
getting yarn at reasonable prices from thes e shops.   This will also end of the 
reported unholy nexus among the official s of NHDC, master weavers and other 
unscrupulous persons to manipulate the supply of raw material to weavers.   
 

 35
Institutional structure 
 
34. The Committee note that the Government have introduced many schemes and 
established institutions like Weavers Service Center (WSC), Indian Institute of 
Handloom Technology (IIHT), National Handloom Developmental Corporation 
(NHDC) and National Inst itute of Fashion Technology  (NIFT) etc. to provide base 
support for the growth of handloom sector  in the country.  Despite such a wide-
ranging infrastructure there is no improveme nt as far as growth of handloom sector 
is concerned. Besides, the conditions of weavers have become more miserable from  
every yardstick.   The institutional structure established for promotion of handloom 
sector has squarely failed in responding to the needs of the sector in general and 
weavers in particular.   NHDC and NIFT have been unable to inspire the sector.  It 
will, perhaps, not be out of place to ment ion that NIFT has become the spring board 
for self promotion and self aggrandizement despite the fact that the growth of NIFT 
has been enabled by the Government in the name of handloom promotion and 
development.  Similarly, NHDC has not been  able to respond to the expectations of 
the weavers in supplying yarn to them on ti me.  There is a strong need of a thorough 
review of these institutions with the obje ctive to re-dedicate their efforts for 
promotion of the sector and make them effective in promoting handloom sector by 
addressing the sector’s problems.  Local, traditional and indigenous designs need to 
be promoted through training programmes,  exposure visits, scholarships and other 
incentives.  The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that the performance of 
WSC, IIHT, NIFT and NHDC needs a thorough reappraisal so as to make them 

 36
accountable as far as the performance of their responsibility towards weaver and 
handloom sector is concerned.  A comp rehensive, sensitive and result oriented 
institutional network be set up with a view  to improve working/living conditions of 
weavers. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 37
 
 
 
Proper working/living condition 
 
 
 
 
35. In most of the handloom clusters, handloom weavers, workers are working in 
dismal conditions and are  living  in extreme inhospitable conditions.  Many families 
with more than two couples have been staying in one room for years. Workshed-cum-
housing scheme have not been able to address the problem of weavers in this regard.  
It is high time that Government should  increase allocation  under the scheme so that 
proper  changes may be brought in the dwelling pattern of the weavers  and they are 
provided with basic minimum requirements of  living. Unlike, in any other housing 
schemes, weavers tend to hold on to their houses given by the Government and as 
such it is only one time affair to settle  the weavers as far as their housing is 
concerned.   Cluster development programme should necessarily include creation 
and maintenance of houses and basic amenities like provision of drinking water, 
toilets, bathrooms, proper ventilation in the working space, etc.  Th is will also help 
in improving the productivity and competitiveness of the sector.   
 
 
 

 38
 
 
 
 
 
Wage Revision 
 
36. The Committee find that weavers are one of the most exploited segment of 
workers in the country.  Lack of proper working conditions, non-payment of 
minimum wages wherever applicable, non-re gulation of working hours etc. are the 
most rampant form of exploitation they are subjected to.  Reportedly, debt related 
wage bondage is also most prevalent form of exploitation in the sector. Stipulated 
minimum wages are not being paid to weav ers.  Their indebtedness is so baneful 
that it does not allow them to come out of the vicious circle of poverty.  Their wages 
have not been revised for the last many years.  Implementation of Minimum Wages 
Act is a statutory requirement and these should be revised periodically taking into 
account various factors relating to price index.  As women constitute a major 
workforce in the handloom and powerloom sector, and at times they are 
discriminated in term of wage payment it becomes more essential that minimum 
wages to them are also ensured.  Similarly, their need revolve around access to proper 
health care, education, housing, food and work security.   The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that minimum wages to weavers across the country be ensured 
and it should be revised from time to time taking into consideration the price index 
and other related factors.    

 39
Market development and Handloom promotion 
 
37. The Committee note that despite the fact that a number of events organized 
under marketing and export promotion scheme, the conditions of handloom sector is 
not improving.  National Handloom Expos, Special Handloom Expos, District level 
events, Craft Mela etc. have not yielded the desired results.  The allocations for 
organizing these events in Andhra Pradesh during the last three years is to the tune 
of Rs.120.17 lakh in the year 2006-07, Rs.95.78 lakhs in the year 2007-08 and Rs.111.85 
lakhs in the year 2008-09. The Committee are not convinced that incurring an 
expenditure of about Rs. 1 crore annually  for such events in a major handloom 
cluster state like Andhra Pradesh,  has really helped the handloom sector in any 
manner not to speak of  the weavers.  Innova tions is left to be much desired in the 
marketing of handloom products.  NHD C and other concerned wings of the 
Government should devise more innovati ve schemes for promotion of the handloom 
sector.  The proposed activities  should in ter-alia include catchy advertisements, new 
designs, developing trend images to promot e handloom in the country and abroad.    
Such steps will retain the existing consumer base.  The cost of production of 
handloom cloth    is more than the cost  of production in powerloom and hence the 
concept of 20% rebate on sale of pro duction of weavers cooperatives, individual 
weavers be continued with.  
 
 
 
 

 40
38. The Committee understand that Kerala Government at the behest of 
Handloom Cooperative has advised the school s in the State to ask the students and 
teachers to wear handloom dress at least once a week.  The Committee desire that 
Central Government may send similar advisory requests to all the States/UTs.  This 
will go a long way in inculcating the use of handloom clothes in the Country.   
   

 41
 
Formulation of proper Economic policies of the Government for handloom sector 
 
 
39. The Committee find that handloom sector is not getting the due attention of 
the Government.  Despite its contribution,  handloom sector is not acknowledged in 
various reports related to GDP, Exports, Development and Economic Policies as a 
distinct sector.   Moreover, due to th e duality of administration, overlapping 
responsibilities between the Union and State Governments even the existing 
schemes and policies do not deliver the desired results. Recognizing its potential in 
employment generation and contribution to Gross Domestic Product, handloom 
sector has to be recognized appropriately and this recognition should help in 
formulation of appropriate policy responses.  Being environmental friendly products, 
Government should consider providing subs idy and incentives to handloom sector 
on the lines it is provided to powerloom in the form of 20% margin money subsidy 
scheme and also under Technology Upgrada tion Fund Scheme available to textile 
sector.   This will help not only in the development of handloom but also enable it to 
compete successfully with powerloom sect or.  The Committee, therefore recommend 
that handloom sector should get the attention of the Government it merits so that it is 
provided with the thrust it requires for its  development by making provisions for 
appropriate incentives and subsidies whenever necessary.   

 42
 
Protection to Handloom markets 
 
40.  The Committee note that handloom markets are under threat from 
unscrupulous business practices.  Reportedly Powerloom products are being 
extensively sold as handloom products.  This is impinging not only the consumer 
confidence but also preventing the genuine handloom products in entering the 
market.  To obviate this, there should be  strict implementation of the Handloom 
(Reservation of Articles for Production) Act, 1985 and proper machinery should be set 
up for its enforcement.  There should also be proper labeling of the handloom 
products and powerloom products so that these have distinct identities.  
To sustain the  market and to give a fillip , if necessary, some buy back arrangements 
by the Government should also be made for the products of handloom. This will 
help in reducing the monopoly of a few to manipulate and influence the handloom 
market according to their whims and fancies.  The Committee, therefore recommend 
that appropriate and necessary steps should be taken to protect the handloom market 
from the invasion of other non-handloom products.  Besides, more and more articles 
should be reserved for production in handloom sector along with the institutional 
buy back arrangements by the Government.   
  

 43
 
Campaign for social awareness among the weavers 
 
41. The Committee during their recent visit to Sircilla noticed th at entire weaving 
community is under heavy debt and is being exploited by local money lenders.  The 
Committee are of the view that besides the ongoing problems like lack of continuous 
work for weavers, non-lifting of finished  products, non-receipt of minimum wages 
etc.,  their exploitation by money lenders  followed by social humiliation coupled 
with lack of medical facilities have compo unded the problems gravely.  To save the 
poor and hapless weavers from this self dest ructive vicious circle of poverty, it is 
essential that proper social awareness ca mpaign at appropriate level be launched 
forthwith.  This should be introduced in all concentration zones of weavers.  The 
Committee, therefore recommend that simultaneously with other policies and 
programmes for weavers, social awareness campaign about the ill effects of the 
liquor be initiated.  The cooperation of local administrative set up should be enlisted 
to dismantle such network which is de trimental to the weavers and which is 
exploiting the weavers/workers for their own end.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 44
 
 
42. In the foregoing paragraphs, the Committee, have recommended various 
measures for welfare and uplift of the weavers. The Committee also recommend that 
following steps are essential for the overall improvement in the conditions of 
weavers throughout the country: 
(i) Issue of identity cards to  all the eligible weavers. 
(ii) Scholarship to school going children from class I onwards as against 
class IX as of now. 
(iii) Bridge school for school drop outs. 
(iv) Anthodaya ration cards for households with adequate ration. 
(v) Health care centers in major handloom clusters. 
(vi) Housing sites/Houses. 
(vii) Review of insurance schemes w ith a view to have minimum ensured 
amount of Rs. One lakh for health insurance and life insurance, 
respectively,  to increase age of weavers for eligibility upto 72 years and 
adequate enhancement in , widow pension and old age pension. 
(viii) Encourage genuine NGOs to work in weavers clusters. 
(ix) Regular mechanism to review/monitor the schemes for taking 
corrective/remedial measures. 
(x) Presence of ESI/EPFO in handloom/powerloom clusters. 
  New Delhi;              SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,   
 3rd  November, 2008                                                 CHAIRMAN,  
12 Kartika, 1930 (Saka)                               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR    
 

 45
Annexure -I 
 
List of individuals who appeared before the Committee during their study visit to 
Sircilla and Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh) on 5th October, 2008. 
 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation/Organisation 
1. 2. 3. 
1. Ms. T. Lakshmi 
        
Widow of a  Weaver 
2. Ms. T. Sharada 
 
Widow of a  Weaver 
3. Ms. K. Annapurna 
 
Widow of a  Weaver 
4. Ms. K. Latha 
 
Widow of a  Weaver 
5. Ms. A. Rama Devi 
 
Widow of a  Weaver 
6. Ms. D. Madhavi 
 
Widow of a  Weaver 
7. Shri Ramachandraiah  
 
Ex-MP 
8. Prof. G. Lakshminarayana Former Vice-Chancellor, 
Dravidian University, 
 
9. Shri Mandala Sriramulu Chairman, 
Andhra Pradesh State Handloom 
Weavers Co-operative Society 
Ltd. 
10. Shri U. V. Rao Vice Chairman, 
Handloom Promotion Council 
 
11. Shri Surya Prakash Reddy All India Powerloom Board 
 
12. Shri D. N. Reddy Handloom 
 
13. Shri Mohan Rao Rastra Chenetha Jana Samakhya 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 46
Annexure -II 
 
Gist of representations received from various organizations/individuals during the 
study visit of the Committee to Sircilla  and Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh) on 5 th 
October, 2008. 
 
Sl. No. Subject Name of the individual/ Organization 
1. 2. 3. 
1. Waiving off loans to small industries and re-
sanctioning loan @ 0.25% interest rate 
(i) M/s Laxmi Textiles 
      
(ii) M/s Srija Textiles 
       
(iii) M/s Sri Sai Textiles 
        
(iv) M/s Rama Devi Textiles     
 
(V) M/s Madhavi Textiles 
  
 
 
2. Request for financial assistance from 
Government to the family of Late Rampally 
Rajender who committed suicide 
Rampally Savitri 
 
 
 
 
3. Request for loan to construct house Goshe Pushpala 
 
 
 
4. Request to withdraw ban on sale of Toddy in 
Sircilla Town 
Toddy Workers’ Association 
 
(Geetha Paarishramika Sahakaara 
Sanghaala Samakhya) 
 
(i) Burrapedda Sathaiah Goud 
(ii) Cherpally Mallaiah Goud 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 47
 
1. 2. 3. 
5. Request to look into reasons behind suicides 
committed by powerloom workers 
 
Ambala Mallesham,  
 
President 
JD(U) Party 
 
6. Request to waive off loans taken by weavers 
under PMRY Scheme 
J. Ravi  
 
G. Vishnu 
7. Request to withdraw Circular No. 
G4/28595/01 dated 26.11.01 disallowing 
mortgage of house sites sanctioned by State 
Government 
Nandi Shankar, 
 
BJP Councillor 
Sircilla 
 
8. Request to make Sircilla a Special Power 
Loom Zone 
Polyester Cloth Manufacturers’ 
Association 
Sircilla 
 
9. Request to solve the problems faced by 
powerloom industries and industries related 
to cloth manufacturing 
K. K. Mahender Reddy, 
General Secretary 
 
Telangana Rashtra Samiti 
Sircilla 
 
10. Request to extend help to weavers of Rajeev 
Nagar and Thangallapally on the outskirts of 
Sircilla  
Regulapati Subhash Rao, 
President 
 
Mandal Praja Parishad 
Sircilla 
11. Request to announce special package to the 
weavers of Sircilla 
Marri Venkata Swamy, 
Secretary 
 
Communist Party of India 
Sircilla 
 
12. Request to extend financial aid to the 
children of late Chilukala Devaraju who 
committed suicide alongwith his wife. 
 
Chilukala Mallaiah  

 48
 
13. Request to issue Antyodhya cards to Dalits 
and financial aid to families which witnessed 
hunger deaths 
Raaghula Ramulu, 
District President 
Mala Mohanadu 
Karim Naga 
 
14. Request to provide work and appropriate 
wages to weavers. 
Cherupalli Seetharamulu  
MLC 
A.P.  Handloom Workers Association 
15. (i) Financial assistance to Dalits and  
backward castes. 
 
(ii) Issue of Antyodhya cards to poor Dalits 
and backward castes.  
 
(iii) Job assurance to unemployed. 
 
(iv) waiver of loans to scheduled castes and 
backward castes. 
 
Reddimalla Srinivas, 
District President 
 
Republican Party of India 
Karimnagar 
 
16. (i) The financial support is very meager and 
banks adopt highly security oriented 
approach for which the poor and marginal 
weavers fail to provide sufficient security 
and collateral.  
 
(ii) All the Powerloom Weavers should be 
assured through   Group insurances for 
providing  coverage. 
 
(iii) The old age pension should be enhanced 
from the existing  Rs. 200 to Rs. 1000 to the 
persons of above 50 years of age. 
 
(iv)  Need to provide linkages between 
production and markets. 
 
 (v)   Need to increase the  financial support 
to at least 60% of the project cost under the 
scheme for integrated textile parks for the 
development of infrastructure etc.  
 
 (vi) Need to ensure proper and re gular 
Andhra Pradesh State Powerloom 
Weavers’ Association 
 
Narasiah R Uppala,   
President 

 49
supply of raw material  for weavers at 
reasonable prices through Government 
outlets. 
 
 

 50
 
17. 
(i) Need to waive all the loans taken from 
banks and money lenders. 
 
(ii) Need to provide year long market 
facilities and to provide 30% rebate. 
 
(iii)  To cover all the weavers under ESIC and 
EPF benefits. 
 
(iv)  Compulsory purchase of handloom 
cloths by all  State and Union Government 
departments at production cost without the 
tender system. 
All India Weavers United Front 
 
G. Rama Moorthy 
Working President 
18. Following  areas need to be looked into for 
the welfare of the weavers: 
 
(i) Upgradation of technology of the old 
looms being used by the weavers. 
 
(ii) Proper supply of raw material at 
reasonable prices. 
 
 
(iii) Strengthening  of marketing facilities. 
 
(iv)  Proper training and testing facilities to 
the weavers to enable them to improve 
quality and designs of  products as per the 
requirements of the market.  
 
Narasiah R Uppala,   
Chairman  
 
Hyderabad Hi-Tech Textile Park 
 
19. (i) Outstanding loans should be waived  for 
both , Cooperative and non-cooperative 
segments of handloom sector. 
 
(ii) Government should announce a special 
scheme to ensure a minimum income of 
Rs.6000 per handloom family per month. 
 
(iii) Separate departments should be 
established for handloom and powerloom. 
Y. Venkanna Netha 
Chairman  
 
Handloom Promotion Council 
 
 
20. (i) Declare Sircilla  as a Texrile special 
economic zone. 
 
(ii) Government should buy the piled up 
stocks of cloth and assure employment to 
those engaged in 26000 powerlooms. 
 
Memorandum submitted by All Party 
Committee (A.P.) 
  
Shri Ch. Rajeshwar Rao, MLA and 
others. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 51
 
1 2 3 
 (iii) Providing free and continuous electricity to  
powerlooms. 
 
(iv) Waiver of lo ans taken by powerloom  
cooperatives. 
 
(v)  Establish  special labour officer to supervise 
labour welfare laws. 
 
(vi) Expedite the  work of sanctioning a nd 
disbursement of pensions, Hou se sites and house 
constructions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 52
Annexure III 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR  HELD ON MONDAY, 3RD NOVEMBER,  2008  
 
The Committee met from 1130 hours to 1300 hours in Committee Room `C’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt draft Thirty-Fourth and 
Thirty-Fifth  Reports. 
 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
4. Shri Subrata Bose 
5. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
6. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta 
8. Shri Virendra Kumar 
9. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
10. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar 
11. Shri Mohan Rawale 
12. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
13. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
               
 RAJYA SABHA  
  
 14. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
15. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
16.       Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
   
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2.         Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
 3.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary  
  

 53
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman wel comed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them about the thr ee referred Bills i.e., (i) The Workmen’s 
Compensation (Amendment) Bill, 2008, ( ii) The Employees’ State Insurance 
(Amendment) Bill, 2008 and (iii) The Planta tions Labour (Amendment) Bill, 2008 as 
introduced in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha an d referred to the Standing Committee on 
Labour for examination and Report within a period of three months and about draft 
Thirty-Fourth and Thirty-Fifth Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour on the subject `Sickness/Closure of Textile Mills’ and 
the “General Conditions of Weavers in the country- A case study of Sircilla 
concentration zone of weavers” respectively.  
  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee  took up the fo llowing draft reports for consideration:- 
 
(i) Draft Thirty-Fourth Report on th e action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations containe d in the Twenty-Seventh Report 
on the subject `Sickness/Closure of Textile Mills’   
 
(ii) General conditions of weavers in the country-A case study of 
Sircilla concentration zone of weavers. 
 
4. The Committee adopted the above reports with some verbal modifications. 
 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chai rman to finalise the above Reports and 
present the Thirty-Fifth Report to Hon’ble Speaker. 
 
 
6. The Committee also placed on records th eir appreciation for the service rendered 
to the Committee by the officers/staff attached to the Committee. 
 
7 .   X X     X X      X X  
 
8 .    X X     X X      X X  
    
  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 