  32  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-09) 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Twenty Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants for 
the year 2008-2009] 
 
 
 
     THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
                    
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
October, 2008/Asvina, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 

 2
 
 
 
THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2008-09) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Twenty Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants for 
the year 2008-2009] 
 
 
 
  
 
            Presented to Lok Sabha on  24.10.2008 
       
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.10.2008 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
October,  2008/Asvina, 1930 (Saka) 

 3
  
CONTENTS 
 
       
     
 P A G E ( S )      
     
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (iii) 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N         ( i v )   
       
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………   1   
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
accepted by the Government………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Obser vations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s reply…………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration…………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
which  replies of the Government  are interim  
in nature    …………. 
 
APPENDICES 
   
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held 
on 21.10.2008.  
   
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-2009) 
 
               Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy-CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
2. Shri Furkan Ansari  
3. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale  
4. Shri Subrata Bose  
5. Shri Santasri Chatterjee  
6. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
7. Shri Munawar Hasan  
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta  
9. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan  
10. Shri Virendra Kumar  
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi  
12. Shri Basangouda R. Patil  
13. Shri Devidas Pingle  
14. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar  
15. Shri Mohan Rawale  
16. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat  
17. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat  
18. Smt. C. S. Sujatha  
19. Shri Paras Nath Yadav  
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant  
   
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam  
23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany  
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari  
25. Shri K. Chandran Pillai  
26. Shri Gandhi Azad  
 27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
 28. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta  
 29. Vacant  
30. Vacant  
31. Vacant  
  

 5
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
         1.    Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Secretary 
2.    Shri Brahm Dutt   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.K. Bajaj    - Director  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary 
5.    Ms.Mili George                 - Senior Executive Assistant 

 6
   
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been authorised by 
the Committee to submit the Thirty-second Report  on their behalf, present this Report on 
the action taken by the Government on th e recommendations contained in the Twenty-
Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Labour and Employment for the year 2008-2009. 
 
 
2. The Twenty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in  Rajya 
Sabha on 22 nd April, 2008.   The Ministry of Labo ur and Employment furnished their 
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 27 th 
August, 2008.  The report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Labour at their sitting held on 21.10.2008.                  
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by  Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,       
October, 2008                                                 CHAIRMAN,  
 Asvina 1930 (Saka)                              STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.    
  

 7
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1. This Report of the Standing Committee on  Labour deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations/obse rvations contained in the Twenty-Eighth 
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants for the year 2008-09 relating to the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 22nd April, 2008. 
 
2. The Ministry of Labour and Employment were requested to furnish action taken 
replies to the recommendations contained in  the Twenty-Eighth Report within three 
months from the presentation  of the Report i.e. by 22 nd July 2008.  It contained 15 
recommendations/observations.  The action taken replies of the Government in respect 
of all the   recommendations containe d in the Report were received on 27 th August 2008.  
These have been categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government—Rec. Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 13 and 14.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply – NIL. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration—
Rec. Sl.Nos. 6, 11, 12 and 15. 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in  respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature—Rec. Sl.No.8.  
 
  
3. The Committee desire that action taken replies in respect of recommendations 
contained in Chapter I and final action taken replies in respect of recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V for which only in terim replies have been given by the 
Government may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later than 3 
months of the presentation of the Report.   
 
4.      The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations which need reiteration or merit comments in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
 
 

 8
 
A. Overall Performance-Improving Pl anning Process and Strengthening 
Monitoring Mechanism  
 
(Rec. Sr. No.1, Para 3.10) 
 
5. The scrutiny of Demands for Grants (2008- 09) of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment revealed that the total outlay of Rs.2,498.03 crore (Plan Rs.771.50 crore & 
Non-Plan Rs.1,726.53 crore) for the year 2008-09 marked an increase of more than Rs.600 
crore over the allocation for the previo us year 2007-08  (Rs.1,897.27 crore). However, the 
scheme-wise/programme-wise scrutiny brought out that the percentage of expenditure 
incurred on execution of some of the impo rtant schemes during the year 2007-08 was far 
from satisfactory.  Holding of Lok Adalats, Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour, Elimination 
of Child Labour, Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana, Information Technology, Grants-in-
aid to research and academic institutions, etc. were some of the glaring examples in this 
regard.  In this context, the Committee asked the Ministry to take immediate steps to 
improve its planning process and strengthen its monitoring mechanism for optimum 
utilization of funds.   
 
6. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has inter-alia 
stated as follows:- 
 
“It has been the constant endeavour of the Ministry to formulate plan schemes 
with utmost care and monitor their effective implementation.  The position relating to 
individual schemes are mentioned below:- 
 
……. The ‘Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana’ fo r BPL families in Unorganised Sector was 
launched on 1st October, 2007. The unorganized sector worker and his family (a unit of five) will 
be covered under the scheme.  The scheme will be implemented in a phased manner and all 6 
crore BPL workers are to be covered in five years starting with 1.2 crore in 2008-09 and   6 crore 
by 2012-13. The total sum insured would be  Rs.30,000/- per family pe r annum on a family 
floater basis. The premium will be shared on 75:25 basis by Centre and State Government. The 
beneficiary would be entitled to cashless transa ctions through smart card. The benefits under 
the scheme have started accruing w.e.f 01.04.2008.  An Inter-Ministerial Approval and 
Monitoring Committee has been constituted. The Committee assesses th e State government 
proposals and grants approval to ensure that credible implementation arrangement are in place.  
Apart from that, the regional officers of Di rectorate General Labour Welfare (DGLW) would 
address the Grievances of the concerned. During the year  2007-08 amount given as Grants-in-
aids was re-appropriated to MH 2230 to incur administrative expenses to implement the 
scheme. The administrative expenses were incurre d on National and State level workshops to 
sensitize the representatives of State Governme nts/ Nodal Agencies, Insurance Companies and 
other stakeholders with regard to smart card operations, specially the Key Management System, 
purchase of hardware/software and SCOSTA smart card…..” 
 
 

 9
7. The Committee notice that the Rashtriy a Swasthya Bima Yojana was launched 
for BPL families in the Unorganised Sector on 1 st October 2007 to cover all the 6 crore 
BPL workers in a phased manner in a time frame  of five years.  The total sum insured 
would be Rs.30,000/- per family per annum.   To assess the proposals from State 
Governments, grants approval and to ensure the existence of credible implementation 
machinery, an Inter-Ministerial Committee has been constituted. Even though the 
benefits have started accruing  to the beneficiaries since 1 st April, 2008, no details have 
been made available to the Committee rega rding the actual number of beneficiaries 
under the scheme covered so far.  The Ministry in their reply has given only the details 
regarding administrative processes involved in the implementation of the scheme and 
re-appropriation in Grants-in-aid to in cur these administrative expenses for the 
purpose. The Committee feel that the prelim inary exercise for the scheme should have 
been completed well before the launch of the scheme.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that annual targets should be fixed for the purpose and all out efforts 
should be made to achieve the targets with a view to achieve the main objective of the 
Scheme to cover the 6 crore BPL workers within a period of five years.   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 10
 
B. Judicious spending of allocated amount in North – Eastern States 
(Rec. Sr. No.3, Para 3.12) 
 
8. The Committee had expressed their concern to find various schemes approved for 
implementation in the North Eastern States  were not being implemented properly.  The 
budget allocation of Rs.34.50 crore for the year 2007-08 was subsequently reduced to 
Rs.26.50 crore at RE stage.  Even this amount  could not be spent as the total actual 
expenditure on various schemes of North Ea stern States is just Rs.15.88 crore. The 
reasons for shortfall in expenditure were due to certain administrative/technical 
constraints. The Committee were not at all inclined to accept the explanation given by the 
Ministry in this regard.  The Committee, th erefore, recommended that every effort be 
made by the Ministry to judiciously expe nd the entire allocated amount for the 
development and welfare of the North Eastern States to avoid reduction at the RE stage. 
 
9. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated as 
follows:- 
 
“During 2007-08, Plan allocation for Ministry of Labour and Employment was 
Rs.345.00 crore (including Rs.19.52 crore as CW). Out of this amount, as per 
Government directives, 10% of the bu dget i.e. 34.50 crore was earmarked for 
North-Eastern, which was reduced to Rs .26.50 crore at RE stage. The Ministry, 
however, was able to spend Rs.31.14 crore during 2007-08. 
 
Under the scheme `Establishment of new Industrial Training Institutes 
(ITIs) in the North Eastern States and Sikkim’, 25 new ITIs are being established 
and 35 existing ITIs are being strengthened  and modernized with an outlay of 100 
crore. A budget provision (BE) of Rs.25 Crore was made in Financial Year 2007-08.  
Out of the above budget provision, an amount of Rs.21.01 Crore (84% of the BE) 
was released to various North Eastern States  for completing the activities on civil 
construction, equipment procurement and recurring expenditure component. 
 
Under another Centrally Sponsored Scheme namely  “Reforms and 
Improvement of Vocational Training Serv ices rendered by the Central and State 
Government” – Vocational Training Improvement Project [VTIP] with World Bank 
assistance, 12 ITIs from the North Easter n State were taken up for funding during 
2007-09 and an amount of Rs. 9.97 crore was released to  these ITIs. It is therefore 
submitted that, in all, an amount of 30.98 crore was releas ed to ITIs in the North 
Eastern States [Rs.21.01 crore towards CSS on NE States and Rs. 9.97 crore for 12 
ITIs of North Eastern States under VTIP  scheme], thereby utilizing the full budget 
allocation of Rs.25 crore. Further, addition al requirement was met by re-allocating 
of funds from other schemes. 
         
Implementation of plan schemes in North-East is being monitored constantly.” 
 

 11
10. The Committee note that as against BE of Rs.34.50 crore, actual expenditure 
during the year was Rs.31.14 crore.  The Committee have also been informed that 
establishment of 25 new ITIs and upgradatio n of 35 existing ITIs with an outlay of 
Rs.100 crore have been the core areas of spending of funds.  Under another scheme, 
‘Vocational Training Improvement Project’, World Bank assistance was ensured to 12 
ITIs in these States.  The Committee feel th at this will provide an  opportunity to the 
youth of North-Eastern States to acquire skill to earn their livelihood.  The Committee 
expect the Ministry to provide necessary funds to make 25 new and 35 upgraded ITIs 
functional at the earliest. Needless to re-emphasise that constant monitoring should be 
done for timely completion of these projects.  Efforts should also be made to plan 
more such schemes for vocational trai ning to cover Information Technology, 
Communication and Computer related areas so that educated population get good 
jobs.    

 12
 
 
C Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) - Action against defaulting 
establishments 
 
(Rec. Sr. No.5, Para 3.27) 
 
11. The Committee’s examination had revealed  that there was persistent default on 
the part of the employers’ to deposit the prov ident fund contribution in the Office of the 
Provident Fund Commissioner (EPFO) though the amount is deducted from the wages of 
the employees regularly.  The Committee were given to understand that on identification 
of default in remitting the employees’ share  on the basis of Computerized Compliance 
Tracking System (CCTS) action is taken un der Section 7A of the Employees’ Provident 
Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952.  However, EPFO has no system of 
blacklisting the defaulting establishments.   The periodical and regular scrutiny is 
undertaken only in respect of the major defaulters.  The Committee, therefore, desired 
that a suitable mechanism apart from Co mputerized Compliance Tracking System 
(CCTS) be devised to identify the   defaulti ng establishments for initiating penal action 
against them including black listing. 
 
 
12. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated as 
follows:- 
 
“The employer is required to comply wi th the provisions of the Act suo-moto, 
which includes timely remittance of dues .  However, inspite of various deterrents 
provided in the Act (i.e. penalties unde r section 14 of the Act, etc) certain 
establishments still tend to default.  Nonetheless, the recommendations made by 
the Committee are being placed before  the Sub-Committee on “Strategic 
Adjustments in Compliance 2001 programme ” for consideration and evolving a 
suitable mechanism for checking default.” 
   
 
13. The Committee had deprecated the persistent default on the part of the 
employers’ to deposit the provident fund cont ribution in the office of the Provident 
Fund Commissioner (EPFO) though the amo unt is deducted from the wages of the 
employees regularly.  The Ministry has now come out with the fact that so called 
punitive measures provided for in the Act ar e not effective in deterring possible 
offenders.  Otherwise, establishments would not have shown such defaulting 
tendency.  The Committee, therefore, earnestly  urge the Government to impress upon 

 13
the Sub-Committee on “Strategic Adjust ments in Compliance 2001 Programme” to 
devise a suitable mechanism apart from Co mputerised Compliance Tracking System 
(CCTS) to identify and initiate stringent penal action against defaulting 
establishments.  The Committee may be apprised of the decision taken by the Sub-
Committee within three months.  

 14
D Enhancement in wage ceiling 
   
(Rec. Sr. No. 6, Para 3.28) 
 
14. The Committee noted that the present wage ceiling of Rs.6,500/- for the purpose 
of coverage under Employees’ Provident Fund  Organisation is in vogue since 1 June 
2001.  The Government also does not propose to enhance the wage ceiling on the plea 
that raising of wage ceiling would have a wider impact on the Employees’ Pension 
Scheme, 1995 (EPS) and hence unless the impact on the pension scheme is fully taken 
care of, the rise in the wage ceiling may not be appropriate.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommended that the assessment of  the impact of rise in wage ceiling on 
pension scheme be carried out in a time bound manner and the rates of pension under 
EPS, 1995 accordingly be revised at the earliest.  The Committee further recommended 
that the rate of contribution could be structured in such a way that it nullifies the possible 
adverse impact on Employees’ Pension Sc heme, 1995 after the wage ceiling for the 
purpose of coverage is increased.   
 
15. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated as 
follows:- 
 
“As enhancement of wage ceiling would result in an increase in Actuarial deficit in the 
Employees’ Pension Fund, an appropriate deci sion to increase wage ceiling could be 
taken as soon as a suitable solution is arrived at.  The Committee’s recommendation that 
the rate of contribution can be restructured to nullify the impact on the Employees’ 
Pension Scheme, 1995 would be placed befo re the ‘
Pension Implementation Committee ’ 
and the ‘ Committee for Comprehensive Re view of the Employees’ Pension Scheme, 
1995’. “ 
  
 
16. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Government that 
enhancement of wage ceiling would result in an increase in Actuarial deficit in the 
Employees’ Pension Fund. Accordingly, they should re-examine the whole issue in the 
context of the Committee’s recommendation.  The Committee would await the 
Government response.   

 15
 
E Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) - Increase in beneficiaries -
Augmenting existing infrastructure  
 
(Rec. Sr. No.8, Para 3.38) 
 
17. The Committee noted that there has been a substantial increase of 8,38,004 employees, 
10,08,968 Insured Persons (IPs), 3,91,473 beneficiaries as on 31 March 2007 against their number 
in 31 March 2006.  However, the Committee were pain ed to note that th e number of Branch 
Offices have decreased from 646 to 620, beds in other hospitals from 3,128 to 2,896, Employees 
State Insurance Corporation dispensaries fr om 1,422 to 1,388, medical officers from 6,992 to 
6,890 and Insurance Medical Practitioners from 2,041 to 1,942 during the same period.  The re-
organisation and rationalization undertaken by the States to ensure optimum utilization of 
existing infrastructure which was necessitated due to gross under-utilisation of Employees State 
Insurance Corporation dispensaries, hospitals, etc. was cited to be the reason behind the 
reduction in infrastructural facilities. The Committee were given to understand that the 
augmentation of the infrastructural facilities in case of requirement would be done as per the 
norms and requirements of the State Governme nts.  The Committee recommended that all out 
efforts should be made to put an  end to the system of duality in administration to the extent 
possible with regard to the execution of ESI Sc heme so that the health  needs of the insured 
persons are well taken care of. 
 
18. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated as 
follows:- 
“ ESIC has taken number of steps to remove the difficulties being faced by 
duality of control in administration of Medical Scheme in the States:-  
1. Revolving Fund Scheme has been introduced to ensure smooth flow of 
funds.  Under this Scheme, the part of  the fund is kept with the Sr. State 
Medical Commissioner / SMC at the level of Regional Office and the 
payments are issued by the Regional Office on receipt of valid sanctions of 
the State Govt.  Under this Scheme, the funds are being released for 
provision of super specialty treatm ent to insured persons and their 
families, drugs and dressings, repair and maintenance of equipments etc. 
2. ESI Corporation has taken over one Hospital in each State to be run as 
Model Hospital under the Model Hospital Scheme.  The total expenditure 
on running of the Model hospital is being borne by the ESI Corporation 
outside the ceiling.  These Model hospitals are being staffed as per norms 
and are being modernized with latest equipments.  
3. ESI Corporation has approved taking over of ESI Scheme in the States who 
give the consent for the same.  Stat e Govt. of Madhya Pradesh and Bihar 
have given the consent for take over of the Scheme.”  

 16
19. The Committee have taken note of the steps taken by the ESIC in removing the 
difficulties faced due to duality of administ ration.  However, they are apprehensive 
about the results of such a move as there is  still overlapping of jurisdiction as far as 
the benefits to the ensured persons are concerned.  The Committee regret to oberve 
that Ministry in their reply has not provi ded the reasons for gross-underutilization of 
the existing infrastructure which has led to the sharp decrease in beds, dispensaries, 
medical officers, etc. while the number of beneficiaries availing various services of the 
ESIC are increasing manifold year after year.  The Committee are deeply distressed to 
note that even when the existing infrastru cture would be insufficient in meeting the 
ever growing medical requirements, the Corp oration has drastically reduced the same.  
The Committee expect the Ministry to have pr oper and strict monitoring of the model 
hospitals being run by the ESIC. 
 

 17
F       Contract Labour - Ascertaining exact number of Contract Workers   
 
(Rec. Sr. No.11, Para 3.53) 
 
20. The Committee had expressed their unhappiness to find that no estimate of 
contract workers in the country was availa ble with the Government.  Although the 
Ministry has stated that the contract labour is employed to meet the exigencies of the 
situation and their number varies, it is an  established fact that contract workers are 
mostly employed by establishments in the jobs that are perennial in nature.  Their 
services are being availed of for decades toge ther without being provided with the bare 
minimum facilities and wages, not to speak of social security coverage and regularization 
of employment. The Committee, therefore, st rongly recommended that all the essential 
steps should be taken henceforth to devi se a suitable and foolproof mechanism to 
ascertain the exact number of contract worker s employed in the various establishments 
of the public and the private sector.  To achieve this objective, the services of the Regional 
Labour Commissioners, Trade Unions and other bodies representing the contract 
workers may be requisitioned.  
          
21. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated as 
follows:- 
 
“The Central Government is the appropri ate Government in respect of only a 
small number of establishments under v arious labour enactments including the 
Contract Labour (R&A) Act, 1970. Consider ing the fact that State Governments 
are the appropriate Governments in respec t of the majority of the establishments, 
the States/UTs have also to be necessarily associated so as to give effect to any 
mechanism for ascertaining the exact numb er of contract workers in the country. 
Since, labour is state subject, it is not feasible for Central Government to evolve 
any mechanism on its own. In fact Mi nistry of Labour & Employment has 
initiated action for associating the State Govts. but that is likely to take 
considerable time.” 
 
22. The Committee find the reply of the Government evasive and entirely 
unsatisfactory.   The Committee feel that  contract workers are one of the most 
neglected sections of the workforce but without whom working of most of the 
establishments would come to a standstill.   They are employed in large number in 
various sectors, but are not given their dues they are entitled to.    The Government in 
their reply has placed the onus of ascertaining the exact number of these workers on 
the respective State Governments.  Even the figures of contract workers working in the 

 18
offices of the Union Government are also not available.   The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and call upon the Government to initiate 
suitable steps to ascertain the number of contract workers in  the country.  This being a 
massive exercise, the cooperation of all concerned, viz., State Governments, RLCs, 
Trade Unions and other bodies representing the contract workers, etc. may be sought 
to achieve the target.   
 

 19
G Payment of wages through cheques 
 
(Rec. Sr. No. 12, Para 3.54) 
23. The Committee’s examination had revealed that there was a steady increase in the 
number of irregularities that have been detect ed over the last couple of years regarding the 
implementation of Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970. Of these, the most 
important had been the payment of  proper wages to the contract workers.  Since they do not 
have any bargaining power, contract workers are  exploited by paying them less than the 
minimum wages and coercing them to sign on higher amounts.  Payment of wages to the 
workers through cheques will drastically reduce their chances of exploi tation. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommended the payment of wages to the contract workers must be 
mandatory disbursed through cheques to en d their exploitation.  The Committee had 
recommended that in cases where work done by the contract labour is pe rennial in nature, the 
concerned principal employer/contractor should en sure that the contract worker get fair wage 
i.e. equivalent to basic pay + DA of a fresh regular employee of the organization. 
 
 
24. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated as 
follows:- 
  
 “ In the context of the above recommendat ion of the committee the effect on the 
existing legal provisions regarding th e mode of payment to workers are as 
follows:-  
  
(i)               Rule 69 of Contract Labour (Regulation & Abolition) External Rule, 
1971 
  
                   “All wages shall be paid in current coin or currency or in both.” 
  
 (ii)             Section 11(1) of Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
             
                 “Minimum wages payable under this Act shall be payable in cash.” 
  
 (iii)            Section 6 of Payment of Wages Act, 1936 
  
                 “All wages shall be paid in current coin or currency notes or in both. 
   
 Provided that the employer may afte r obtaining the written authorisation 
of the employed person pay him wages ei ther by cheque or by crediting the 
wages in his bank account. 
  
 Hence, a case involving change in th e any mode of payment of wages to 
contract labour will attract all the three enactments mentioned above 
simultaneously, it is not felt feasible to effect any change in all these legislations. 

 20
  
 Apart from the legal requirements it is also pointed out that illiterate 
contract labourers may not be in a position to open accounts in the bank 
particularly in places outside their home after going through the ordeal and 
hassles involved in opening an account. Their problems again get aggravated 
when they are required to stay at one pl ace for a short duration. The workers also 
face liquidity problem also. The time involved in encashing the cheques may 
compound the same. Lastly, if for any reason whatsoever, the cheque remains 
unencashed, the worker will not have any money to meet his daily chores, 
thereby defeating the very purpose of payment of wages by cheque.” 
 
25. The Committee are unable to accept the vi ew of the Government that it is not 
feasible to effect any change in all these le gislations.     The prohibitive interpretation 
of various statutes, i.e, Rule 69 of Contract  Labour (Regulation & Abolition) External 
Rule, 1971, Section 11 (1) of Minimum Wages Act, 1948 and Section 6 of Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936 appears to be an attempt on  the part of the Government to remain 
rigid as these clauses do not preclude the Government from taking any reformative 
and progressive measures facilitating the end of the exploitation of the contract 
workers.  Other reasons for not disbursi ng payment through cheque are illiteracy 
among the contract workers and the ordeal  and hassles in opening of the bank 
accounts.  These arguments are an exercise aimed at fishing for excuses for an act of 
omission by the Government.  After all, banking exercise has nowadays become so 
common that it will be preposterous to infe r that any individual will not be able to 
open and operate his/her bank account.          
 
 
 

 21
It is a known fact that the workers are made to sign on amounts higher than 
what they are actually paid, thereby exp loiting the hapless workers of their due 
statutory benefits.  Therefore, appropriate mechanism will have to evolved to check 
these kind of malpractices.  Taking note of these facts, the Government should not shy 
away in going for amending age old related Acts of 1936, 1948 and 1971.  The 
Committee would await conclusive action taken by the Ministry in the matter.    

 22
H Determining number of child workforce 
  
(Rec.Sr. No.14, Para 3.72) 
 
 
26. The Committee were unhappy to note that  there was no mechanism to determine 
the number of child labour in the country other than the census carried out by the 
Registrar-General of India which is treated as au thentic.  The periodicity of census by the 
Registrar-General of India was after a gap of  ten years.  However, the Government had 
decided to conduct a district-wise child labour survey in the country with the help of the 
NSSO.  The move, though belated, is commendable.  The Committee, therefore, urge 
upon the Government to draw a strategy wherein the periodical survey of child labour is 
automatically taken care of.   
 
27. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated as 
follows:- 
 
“The Government of India has already initia ted process to conduct a nation-wide 
child labour specific survey.   Modalities of detailed survey are being worked out 
with NSSO. It may be mentioned here th at as per the NCLP Scheme, the project 
Societies are given funds twice during a Plan Period to conduct child labour survey in 
their districts. These surveys are conducted by the districts with the help of NGOs 
and other stakeholders, like universities, trade unions, employers, etc.” 
  
28. The Committee are satisfied to note th at the Government has already initiated 
the process to conduct nation-wide child labour specific survey to determine the 
number of child labour in the country.  Keep ing in view the enormous task ahead, the 
Committee call upon the Government to draw a foolproof strategy for the purpose in 
order to achieve the desired results.  The Committee also expect that Ministry of 
Labour and Employment will take necessa ry steps to accomplish the desired 
objectives within a time bound manner. 

 23
I. Eradication of child labour menace 
 
 
(Rec. Sr. No.15, Para 3.73) 
 
 
29. The Committee observed that the figure of child labour continues to remain 
worrisome despite all efforts under the Nation al Child Labour Policy (NCLP) Scheme to 
eliminate it.  Although the Government ha d framed a policy to eliminate the child 
labour, it had not borne the desired fruits.  Hence, a thorough review and revision of the 
policy is the need of the hour.  The involvement of multiple agencies, i.e.various 
Ministries of the Government of India and other agencies may not only delay the 
finalisation of the reviewed scheme but may also  make it more complicated.  Hence, the 
Committee called upon the Government to take steps, honestly and positively, in such a 
way that all efforts undertaken in this regard involving multiple agencies commensurate 
with the enormity of the task for the successful achievement of the desired results. 
  
30. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated as 
follows:- 
“Review of policy of the Government towards elimination of child labour is a 
continuous process.  Since child labour is primarily a socio-economic problem, 
Government is laying lot of stress on mult i-pronged and holistic approach to tackle 
the problem.  Various efforts are being made for convergence of national Child 
Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme with the welf are schemes of other Ministries, to that 
the families of these child workers get cove red under the schemes for their economic 
empowerment.  As a result of the active c oordination with other Ministries, they are 
issuing instructions to the State Governments to cover child labour and their families 
under their Schemes.” 
 
31. The Committee are not satisfied with the general reply of the Ministry that 
Government is laying stress on multi-prong ed and holistic approach to tackle the 
problem.  Evidently, in the execution of any scheme which involves more than one 
Ministry, the entire process tends to be cumbersome and time consuming.  The 
Committee feel that for the successful implementation of the policies and schemes for 
the elimination of child labour, steps should  be taken by the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment in right earnest enlisting the support of the other bodies.  The Committee 

 24
would like the Ministry of Labour and Em ployment to fix specific objectives and 
targets on yearly basis under the NCLP and 11 th Five Year and all efforts should be 
made to achieve them.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 25
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Rec. Sr. No.1, Para 3.10) 
 
    
  The scrutiny of Demands for Grants (2 008-09) of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment reveals that the total outl ay of Rs.2,498.03 crore (Plan Rs.771.50 crore & 
Non-Plan Rs.1,726.53 crore) for the year 2008-09 marks an increase of more than Rs.600.00 
crore over the allocation for the previo us year 2007-08  (Rs.1,897.27 crore). However, the 
scheme-wise/programme-wise scrutiny displays  that the percentage of expenditure 
incurred on execution of some of the impo rtant schemes during the year 2007-08 is far 
from satisfactory.  Holding of Lok Adalat, Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour, Elimination 
of Child Labour, Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana, Information Technology, Grants-in-
aid to research and academic institutions, etc.  a r e  s o me  o f t h e  g l a r i n g e x amp l e s  i n  th i s 
regard.  The Committee are disappointed to find  that in some of the other schemes like 
construction of houses for beedi workers an d low-income occupation clusters, social 
security for unorganized sector workers, there has been no expenditure. The Committee 
also do not appreciate the reasons put fort h by the Ministry for less spending and no 
spending at all on the Schemes such as no t holding sufficient number of Lok Adalats, 
non-receipt of utilization certificates in respec t of Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour, etc.  
The Committee are of the considered opinion that it is certainly a matter of grave concern 
as it shows that the schemes  were formulated without proper study and home work.  
Monitoring and coordination with other impl ementing agencies is also an area which 
requires utmost attention for improvement.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should take immediate steps to impr ove its planning process and strengthen its 
monitoring mechanism for optimum utilization of  funds.  It will help in achieving the 
objectives of schemes/projects of the Ministry. The Committee desire to be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It has been the constant endeavour of the Ministry to formulate plan schemes with 
utmost care and monitor their effective implementation.  The position relating to 
individual schemes are mentioned below:- 
 
  
 
 
 

 26
The Grants-in-aid Scheme aims at providin g financial assistance in the form of 
Grants-in-aid to Research & Academic Inst itutions, Voluntary Organisations & Non-
Governmental Organisations for undertaking research in approved labour related 
matters for securing policy inputs to enrich future labour policies. There is direct 
relationship between good study proposals received/ approved and expenditure 
incurred. Moreover, the studies so conducted under the Scheme are need based and have 
recommendations, which are relevant to co ncerned subject matter Division(s) in the 
Ministry.  However, releases are made after re ceipt of proper utilization certificates, in 
respect of the earlier releases, their scrutin y and approval of the Competent Authority. 
During 2007-08, an expenditure of Rs.15.00 la kh was incurred in the Scheme against 
Rs.25.00 lakh (BE) and Rs.15.00 lakh (RE) i.e., RE allocation was fully utilized. 
 
 Grants under the Centrally Sponsored Pl an Scheme for rehabilitation of Bonded 
Labour etc. are released to the States/UTs on receipt of complete proposals and clearance 
of utilization certificates for the grants released to the State concerned during the 
previous years. The Budget Estimates are prop osed on the basis of anticipated proposals 
and also the incomplete proposals in which the Ministry had sought clarifications from 
the State Governments. In pursuance of the Supreme Court order dated 11.11.1997, 
National Human Rights Commission (N HRC) has been involved in the 
overseeing/reviewing the implementation of Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 
1976 and the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for rehabilitation of bonded labour etc. Further 
NHRC has appointed Special Rapporteurs to make  periodic visits to district and interact 
with local people. NGOs and Government functionaries to a scertain the position at the 
ground level. Their reports are studied by the NHRC and follow up action initiated. 
Sensitization Workshops are also being he ld at various places by the NHRC in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Labour and Employment for the frontline staff and 
district functionaries. This shows the deep commitment both of the political system and  
bureaucracy towards eliminating the menace  of bonded labour system.  Under the 
direction of the Prime Minister’s Office  , a Special Group constituted under the 
Chairpersonship of Union Labour and Employ ment Secretary has been monitoring the 
implementation of the Bonded Labour Syst em (Abolition) Act, 1976 and the Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme for rehabilitation of bonded labour etc. by holding frequently region 
wise meetings. Twelve region-wise meetings of the Special Group have been held till 
now. 
 
 The ‘Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana’ fo r BPL families in Unorganised Sector was 
launched on 1st October, 2007. The unorganized sector worker and his family (a unit of five) will 
be covered under the scheme.  The scheme will be implemented in a phased manner and all 6 
crore BPL workers are to be covered in five years starting with 1.2 crore in 2008-09 and   6 crore 
by 2012-13. The total sum insured would be  Rs.30,000/- per family pe r annum on a family 
floater basis. The premium will be shared on 75:25 basis by Centre and State Government. The 
beneficiary would be entitled to cashless transa ctions through smart card. The benefits under 
the scheme have started accruing w.e.f 01.04.2008.  An Inter-Ministerial Approval and 
Monitoring Committee has been constituted. The Committee assesses th e State government 

 27
proposals and grants approval to ensure that credible implementation arrangement are in place.  
Apart from that, the regional officers of Di rectorate General Labour Welfare (DGLW) would 
address the Grievances of the concerned. During the year  2007-08 amount given as Grants-in-
aids was re-appropriated to MH 2230 to incur administrative expenses to implement the 
scheme. The administrative expenses were incurre d on National and State level workshops to 
sensitize the representatives of State Governme nts/ Nodal Agencies, Insurance Companies and 
other stakeholders with regard to smart card operations, specially the Key Management System, 
purchase of hardware/software and SCOSTA smart card. 
 
 The funds allocated in 2007-08 for the Plan Schemes for elimination of child labour 
were fully utilized for NCLP Scheme, Grant- in-aid Scheme and INDUS Project.  An 
amount of Rs.140.13 crore was allocated fo r NCLP Scheme, Rs.12.00 crore for INDUS 
Project and Rs.1.47 crore for Grant-in-aid Scheme, i.e., a total of Rs.163.60 crore was 
allocated during 2007-08.  The savings (unspent) amount is less than Rs.1.00 lakh during 
2007-08.  Thus, it can be seen that the funds allocated have been fully utilized.  Efforts 
will also be made to fully utilize the funds allocated during 2008-09. 
  
 
 The Scheme of Lok Adalat has been conceived as an alternate Grievance Redressal 
Machinery for conciliation of Industrial Disputes.  The Lok Adalats provide a platform to 
the litigant parties an opportunity to settle th eir disputes in a short time span thereby 
avoiding the otherwise time consuming proce ss.  However, the settlement of industrial 
disputes through Lok Adalats de pends on the mutual willingness of the litigant parties.  
The CGITs play the role of fac ilitator only.  In the present scenario of Industrial Relations 
there is an increase in awareness of labour  rights among the workers and the scheme is 
gaining momentum gradually.  The scheme is also being promoted by the CGITs as it 
helps disposing of more cases, thereby reduci ng pendency at their end.  Consequently, 
the utilisation of funds allocated for the said  scheme is also increasing gradually (Rs.0.47 
lakh in 2006-07; Rs. 0.50 lakh in  2007-08).  Recently a Conference of Presiding Officers of 
all CGIT-cum-Labour Courts was organised in December, 2007 with a view to encourage 
and to hold more Lok Adalats.  
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
{Please see Paragraph No.7 Chapter-I of the Report} 
 

 28
Recommendation (Sr. No.2, Para 3.11) 
 
 The Committee observe that the financial norms of the Government clearly 
mandate spreading of expenditure evenly during the four quarters and discourage 
the rapid utilization of funds in the la st quarter.  The close scrutiny of the 
progressive quarterly figures reveals a very dismal picture as far as the percentage 
of expenditure of the Revised Estimates duri ng the four quarters is concerned.   It 
was 1.94 % in the first quarter, 6.68 % in the second quarter, 7.78 % in the third 
quarter and 49.50 % in the fourth quarter.  Th is kind of pacing of expenditure is a 
matter of great concern as the efforts to achieve the targets set out under each 
scheme remain tardy during most of the period and the last minute rush of 
spending coupled with half-hearted and haphazard efforts result in skewed 
fulfilment of targets or non-fulfilment of targets.  The Committee have been 
emphasizing time and again in the past al so that pacing of expenditure in every 
quarter should be even to the possible ex tent.  The Committee is unhappy to find 
that the Ministry has not taken any action on their earlier recommendations on the 
matter. While taking a strong view, the Committee reiterates their earlier 
recommendation that the schem es should be drawn in su ch a way to ensure that 
expenditure in every quarter of the financial year be evenly distributed. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
  
 
 The progress of expenditure is reviewed regularly by Bureau Heads. Moreover, 
the progress (financial & physical) of the Pl an Schemes of the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment was reviewed regularly at the level of Member (LEM) in the Planning 
Commission on quarterly basis, now being held on half yearly basis from 2005-06.  
Secretary (L&E) also reviews the pace of expenditure in periodical meetings with 
Divisional Heads and Financia l Adviser to identify the main hurdles and steps to 
overcome them.  However, the reasons for not having even pacing of quarterly 
expenditure during 2007-08 are indicated below. 
 A scheme is being implemented as “Ref orms and Improvement of Vocational 
Training Services rendered by the Central and State Government” –  Vocational 
Training Improvement Project [VTIP] with World Bank assistance. The scheme was 
approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 2 nd August 2007. 
Funds under the scheme were received du ring the month of November under 1 st 
Supplementary Demands for Grant.  Furthe r, the agreement on the scheme with the 
World Bank was signed on 2 nd November 2007 and thereaft er, the project became 
effective from 17 th December 2007. In view of the above, funds to the State 
Governments/UTs could be rele ased only during the fourth  quarter of financial year 
2007-08.    
  

 29
In addition to the above, the scheme on  Up-gradation of 1396 ITIs through Public 
Private Partnership, was approved by CCEA in October 2007 and funds under the 
scheme was received in December 2007. Ther efore all the releases under the scheme 
commenced only in the 4 th quarter of financial year 2007-08.   Similarly the scheme for 
North East and J&K namely  ‘Establishment of new Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) 
in the North Eastern States, Sikkim and Strengthening and modernization of ITIs in 
Jammu & Kashmir”, was approved for continuation by the CCEA on  23 rd August  
2007 and therefore, release of funds to thes e State Governments could commence only 
during the end of 2nd quarter of 2007-08.   
 However, efforts are being made to releas e funds uniformly, in every quarter of 
the financial year 2008-09.    
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sr. No.3, Para 3.12) 
 
 The Committee note with serious conc ern that various schemes approved for 
implementation in the North Eastern States  are not being implemented properly.  The 
budget allocation of Rs.34.50 crore for the year 2007-08 was subsequently reduced to 
Rs.26.50 crore at RE stage.  Even this amount  could not be spent as the total actual 
expenditure on various schemes of North Ea stern States is just Rs.15.88 crore. The 
reasons for shortfall in expenditure are due to certain administrative/technical 
constraints as given by the Ministry. The Commi ttee is not at all inclined to accept the 
explanation given by the Ministry in this regard.  The Union Government accords top 
priority for the development of North Eastern St ates in order to bring them at par with 
other developed States of the country.  To achieve this objective, Government of India 
has earmarked 10% of the total budgetary a llocation every year to the North Eastern 
States.  Any laxity on this front may add to th e problems of this sensitive region of the 
country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that every effort be made by the Ministry 
to judiciously expend the entire allocated amount for the development and welfare of the 
North Eastern States to avoid reduction at the RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 During 2007-08, Plan allocation for Ministry of Labour and Employment was 
Rs.345.00 crore (including Rs.19.52 crore as CW) . Out of this amount, as per Government 
directives, 10% of the budget i.e. 34.50 crore was earmarked for North-Eastern, which 
was reduced to Rs.26.50 crore at RE stage. The Ministry, however, was able to spend 
Rs.31.14 crore during 2007-08. 
 
  
 

 30
 
Under the scheme  ‘Establishment of new Indust rial Training Instit utes (ITIs) in the 
North Eastern States and Sikkim’, 25 new ITIs are being established and 35 existing ITIs are 
being strengthened and modernized with an outl ay of 100 crore. A budget provision (BE) of 
Rs.25 Crore was made in FY 2007-08.  Out of the above budget provision, an amount of Rs.21.01 
Crore (84% of the BE) was released to various No rth Eastern States for completing the activities 
on civil construction, equipment procurement and recurring expenditure component.  
 
 It may however be added here that, under another Centrally Sponsored Scheme namely  
“Reforms and Improvement of Vocational Training  Services rendered by the Central and State 
Government” – Vocational Training Improvement Project [VTIP] with World Bank assistance, 
12 ITIs from the North Eastern State were taken up for funding during 2007-09 and an amount 
of Rs. 9.97 crore was released to th ese ITIs. It is therefore submitted that, in all, an amount of 
30.98 crore was released to ITIs in the North Eastern States [Rs.21.01 crore towards CSS on NE 
States and Rs. 9.97 crore for 12 ITIs of North Eastern States under VTIP scheme], thereby 
utilizing the full budget allocation of 25 crore. Further, additional requirement was met by re-
allocating of funds from other schemes. 
 
 Implementation of plan schemes in No rth-East is being monitored constantly. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
{Please see Paragraph No. 10 Chapter-I of the Report} 
 
 
Recommendation (Sr. No.4, Para 3.26) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to observe that there are about 40 crore workforce 
working in the country, out of which on ly 4.44 crore are covered under Employees’ 
Provident Fund Organisation as on 31
st March 2007. The reasons for low membership 
have been attributed to various constraints regarding coverage of establishments due to a 
number of factors such as employment of minimum of 20 employees, wage ceiling, 
exclusion clause under section 16 of the Act and applicability of the Act to the 
establishment/industries specified in Sche dule I of the Act or notified by the 
Government. Coverage of establishments is a continuous process and for the purpose 
various steps like Compliance 2001 programme, special coverage drives, etc. are resorted 
to for achieving the target.  However, Compliance 2001 programme did not deliver the 
desired results as the establishments to wh ich the Act applies are required to comply 
with the provisions of the Act suo moto.  He nce, some strategic adjustments in the said 
programme are stated to be under consideration of the appropriate authorities (Central 
Board of Trustees, Employees’ Providen t Fund).  The Committee express their 
apprehension whether strategic adjustment s in Compliance 2001 Programme alone will 

 31
help in proper and sufficient coverage of  all the establishments.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that a mult i-pronged and result oriented strategy be 
devised focusing on routine surveys, crea tion of intelligence circles for gathering 
information, earmarking of areas to enforcement officers, launching of special coverage 
drives from time to time and all other steps which are considered proper for enhancing 
the coverage. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  A Sub-Committee under the Chairmanship of Jt. Secretary (Social Security) has 
already been constituted by the Chairman , Central Board of Trustees, Employees 
Provident Fund to examine the issue of strategic adjustments in the Compliance 2001 
programme for enforcing compliance and to formulate a comprehensive proposal for 
placing before the Board.  The Sub-Committee is examining the issue in detail and is 
expected to submit its report shortly.  
As regards recommendations of the Committee regarding Creation of 
Intelligence Circles and launching of Special Coverage Drives, it is submitted that 
Intelligence Circles are already in existence and Special Drives are also launched from 
time-to-time for bringing the coverable establishments under the purview of the Act.  
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sr. No.5, Para 3.27) 
 
 The Committee observe that there has been  persistent default on the part of the 
employers’ to deposit the provident fund cont ribution in the Office of the Provident 
Fund Commissioner (EPFO) though the amou nt is deducted from the wages of the 
employees regularly.  The number of defaul ting establishments (un-exempted sector) as 
on 31 March 2005, 2006 and 2007 was 40,608, 76,476 and 72,554, respectively which 
includes those establishments which had defa ulted in remittance of employees’ share of 
contribution.  The Committee are given to unders tand that on identification of default in 
remitting the employees’ share on the basis of Computerized Compliance Tracking 
System (CCTS) action is taken under Sectio n 7A of the Employees’ Provident Fund and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952.  However, EP FO has no system of blacklisting the 
defaulting establishments.   The periodical and regular scrutiny is undertaken only in 
respect of the major defaulters.  The Commi ttee feels distressed at the present practice 
being adopted towards defaulting employers/ establishments.  This approach not only 
deprives the employees of their rightful claims but also encourages the dishonest 
employer to indulge in malpractices. The Co mmittee, therefore, desire that a suitable 
mechanism apart from Computerized Compliance Tracking System (CCTS) be devised to 

 32
identify the   defaulting establishments for initiating penal action against them including 
black listing. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The employer is required to comply wi th the provisions of the Act suo-moto, 
which includes timely remittance of dues .  However, inspite of various deterrents 
provided in the Act (i.e. penalties under sectio n 14 of the Act, etc) certain establishments 
still tend to default.  Nonetheless, the recommendations made by the Committee are 
being placed before the Sub-Committee on “Strategic Adjustments in Compliance 2001 
programme” for consideration and evolving a suitable mechanism for checking default.  
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
{Please see Paragraph No.13 Chapter-I of the Report} 
 
Recommendation (Sr. No.7, Para 3.29) 
 
 The Committee are distressed to  note that a large number of  vacancies exist in various 
cadres of the Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation.  As against 23,344 sanctioned staff 
strength there were only 19,510 persons in position during 2006-07.  The Committee feel that the 
absence of sufficient staff to carry out the nume rous functions of the or ganization will not only 
erode its efficiency but will also  snuff out the confidence of th e subscribers regarding getting 
services promptly.  The explanation of the Minist ry that appropriate action for filling up of the 
vacant posts is taken from time to time is no t acceptable to the Committee because despite the 
efforts made by the Government for filling up th e positions, a large number of vacancies still 
remain unfilled. Considering the gigantic task ahead to be carried out by the organization due 
to the sharp increase in the number  of beneficiaries coupled with the fact that services are to be 
provided to the satisfaction of subscribers, ad equate staff should be put in place without any 
further delay.  The Committee earnestly desire that all out efforts should be  made to fill up the 
vacant positions in the organization in a time bound manner.    The Committee further desire to 
be apprised of the steps taken in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 For the purpose of increasing staff stren gth at various levels and re-structuring 
the Organisation to make it more efficient and user friendly a Sub-Committee of CBT, 
EPF headed by Additional Secretary (L&E ) is currently seized of the issue and 
considering the study report received from XLRI.  The Committee is completing job on 
fast track basis.  After receiving the re commendations of the Committee, appropriate 
decision would be taken.    
 

 33
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sr. No.9, Para 3.39) 
  
 The Committee observe that at present the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 is 
applicable to all non-seasonal factories us ing power in the manufacturing process and 
employing 10 or more employees and non-power using factories employing 20 or more 
employees. The scheme has also been extend ed to shops and establishments, preview 
theatres, cinemas, hotels, restaurants, road transport undertaking and newspaper 
establishments, etc. employing 20 or more  employees.  The Committee appreciates the 
Government’s proposal for amending the criterion for the purpose of coverage by 
reducing the number of workers under the Co rporation from 20 to 10 irrespective of the 
fact that the establishments are functioning with or without power.  With the passage of 
time and technological advancements even the ceiling of 10 persons in an establishment 
has become redundant. With less number of workers/employees, more volume of work 
with high economic output is now possible due to computerization and mechanization.  
In this scenario, the condition of minimum 10 or more workers in an establishment for 
the purpose of coverage will deprive most of  the workers from the benefits of social 
security.  The Committee, therefore, stro ngly recommends that the social security 
benefits under the Employees State Insurance Corporation should invariably be extended 
to all establishments irrespective of the number of workers engaged therein. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The ESI Act, 1948, has the potential to co ver all wage earners.  However, in view 
of the fact that the provision of medical ca re by the concerned State Governments is a 
pre-requisite before extending the Scheme to  any sector of employment, the scope of 
coverage of the Scheme is being extended  gradually in a phased manner depending 
upon the infrastructure created for providing medical care.  As recommended by the 
Standing Committee of Parliament, v arious Review Committees have also 
recommended that the Scheme should be extended to all establishments by reducing the 
threshold for coverage in a phased manner.  
       
Accordingly, the threshold, which was 20 initially, was reduced to 10 for power 
using factories and 20 for non-power using factories.   A Sub-Committee of the 
Corporation has also reviewed the various provisions of the ESI Act and recommended 
reducing the threshold to 10 irrespective of  whether power is used in manufacturing 
process or not.   Accordingly, necessary amen dment in the ESI Act is under process.  In 
the second phase, the same can be reduced to factories employing 5 or more workers 
and finally, removing the threshold limit altogether depending upon augmentation 
of facilities for providing medical care by all the State Governments.  
 

 34
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sr. No.10, Para 3.40) 
  
 The Committee are constrained to observe that  ESI hospitals at Kolhapur and Bibvewadi 
were constructed at the request of State Government of Maharashtra and are ready for 
commissioning since 1997.  Similarly, the hospital at Chinchwad also remains to be 
commissioned despite being ready since long. The State Government of Maharashtra has not 
taken over these hospitals till date.  Initially, the State Government ha d proposed to run the 
hospital at Kolhapur through third party part icipation. The approval of Employees State 
Insurance Corporation (ESIC) has been sought in  this regard.  The Employees State Insurance 
Corporation, however, has no provision in the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 for 
allowing third party participation to run th e hospital.  Now, Employees State Insurance 
Corporation is taking action for making necessary amendment in the Employees’ State 
Insurance Act, 1948 to make the hospital operational.  The Committee regret to note that this is a 
classic case of lack of coordination between the ESIC and the State Government, besides being 
an act of short sightedness on the part of Employees State Insurance Corporation.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Government to bring forward an amendment in the Act at 
the earliest.  The Committee further recommend that ESIC should also explore all possible 
avenues to make the hospitals operational withou t any further delay even if they are to be 
owned and operated by Employees State Insurance Corporation itself till such an amendment is 
brought forward. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.  ESI Corporation has approved amendments in ESI Act for running of the 
hospitals through third party participation and opening of unutilized capacity in ESI 
Hospitals to general public on user charg es basis.  The Employees’ State Insurance 
Corporation (ESIC), a statutory autonomous  body under the Ministry, has health 
facilities available for the organized sector workers throughout India.  Government has 
decided that the excess capacity of ESIC facilities can be utilized to implement Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojana also.  An Ordinance has been promulgated in this regard.  
2. Regarding commissioning of hospitals,  it is informed that ESI Hospital 
Chinchwad was already commissioned by ES I Corporation in Feb., 2003 and has now 
been handed over to the State Govt. of Maharashtra on 14.4.08.  The ESI Hospital at 
Chinchwad and Bibvewadi will be run by the State Govt. of Maharashtra and in lieu ESI 
Corporation has taken over ESI Hospital, Andheri, Mumbai to be run as Model 
Hospital.  Further, as informed by Director, ESIS, Maharashtra, the proposal to 
commission ESI Hospital, Kohlapur by State Govt. of Maharashtra has been sent to the 
govt. for approval by Director, ESI, Maharashtra.  

 35
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
 Recommendation (Sr. No.13, Para 3.62) 
  
 The Committee are distressed to observe that the organizational set up of the 
Chief Labour Commissioner is riddled with i nherent weaknesses.  The workload of the 
organization is disproportionately heavier vis-à-vis its staff strength.  The responsibilities 
assigned to it are of vital importance as harm onious industrial relations is the touchstone 
of judging the success or otherwise of the organization.  The increasing number of 
establishments and the geographical areas  under various functionaries of the 
organization is a matter of concern as they are  not able to pay as much attention as is 
required to various issues before them.  Only 56 Assistant Labour Commissioners  
(Central) {(ALCs)(C)} who fo rm the backbone of the organization and 162 Labour 
Enforcement Officers {(LEOs) (Central), are curre ntly in position.   They are required to 
perform various functions for maintaining cordial industrial atmosphere through 
mediation and conciliation, enforcement of la bour laws and discharge of quasi-judicial 
functions. Besides, they are also to implement various labour laws.  Even the head of the 
organization is over burdened supervising 15 o fficers who are directly  reporting to him.  
This is against the basic principle of Office  and Management.  On an average, one ALC 
has to handle around 9,000 industrial disput e cases every year.    It is humanely 
impossible to handle these many cases and to do justice to every case. Resultantly, cases 
keep on piling up vitiating the industrial  atmosphere.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the necessary action should begin in right earnest to review the 
functioning of the Office of the Chief Labo ur Commissioner with  a view to bring in 
radical changes in its functioning  and to fill up all the vacant  positions at the earliest to 
make it more efficient and result-oriented. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to secure better conciliation, preventive mediation and more effective 
enforcement of Labour Laws, a scheme to fur ther strengthening th e Central Industrial 
Relations Machinery was approved in the Sixt h Five Year Plan. As a result, three more 
Regions at Guwahati, Chandigarh and Ba ngalore were created during 1981-82. Three 
more new regions with Headquarters at Patna and Nagpur and one post of Deputy Chief 
Labour Commissioner (Central) at Bombay with supporting staff were created during the 
financial year 1988-89 under the Seventh Five  Year Plan. During 1990-91, one post of 
Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) at Bangalore with supporting staff was 
created. Consequent on Cadre Review of  CLS Officers two more Regions with 
headquarters at Dehradun and Raipur were created in the year 2005 by adjusting the 
existing Staff and Officers without creating any new post. 
 
 Consequent to restructuring/cadre review in 2004 up-gradation and resultant 
abolition of 11 posts of ALCs (C) were carried out. LEOs (C) and ALCs (C) are the cutting 
edge of the organization. Now due to incr ease in workload and new challenges in 

 36
industrial relations enforcement of labour la ws posed by liberalization, globalization and 
privatization more posts need to be created. Seeking exemption of the posts required for 
legal and statutory functions pertaining to this organization from the purview of the 
ADRP Scheme is also being considered.  
 
 So far as LEOs (C) are concerned, requisition has been sent to UPSC for filling up 
11 posts. For filling up another 10 posts that have been fallen vacant after June 2005, 
recommendations of Screening Committee are yet to be received. MOL&E has been 
requested to expedite the process of finalisat ion screening and also to fill up vacant post 
in grade V, IV, III as early as possible. 
 
 Regarding Group “C” & “D” posts there are 22 posts of UDC vacant in various 
regional offices in CLC(C) organization. The departmental examination for filling up 
these vacancies has already been conducted an d the posts are expected to be filled up 
shortly on the basis of result of this examination. Besides this, there are 6 posts of Office 
Superintendent vacant at present. Necessary action to convene the meetings of DPC for 
filling up these posts is presently under process and appointments to the vacant posts are 
expected to be made in a few weeks. 
 
 In addition to these promotional posts there are 53 direct recruitment posts of 
LDCs, JHT, Driver and Group “D” posts which are to be filled up on direct  recruitment 
basis. The proposals for obtaining approval of the Screening Committees for the year 
2005-06 and 2006-07 are pending for consideratio n of the Screening Committee as per the 
present policy of the Government. These will be filled up as per the approval of screening 
committee as and when received. 
 
 In the existing organizational structure, 15 numbers of Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioners are directly reporting to Ch ief Labour Commissioner (C), who is the 
head of Department.  Consequent to the Cadr e review of Central Labour Service in year 
2004, 7 number of posts of Dy. Chief Labour  Commissioners was added to the then 8 
number of Dy. CLCs, making the total number to 15, taking into account the  increase in 
workload and administrative exigencies. However, 2 posts viz; Jt. Chief Labour 
Commissioner (C) and Chief Adviser Labour Welfare which existed prior to Cadre 
Review in between CLC (C) & Dy. CLC (C) were abolished. 
 
 It may be mentioned here that the ca dre review of CLS is due in the year 2009 
when the issue of control / supervision by the Head of Deptt. i.e. CLC (C) can be 
befittingly addressed by reviving / upgradin g the required number of posts in between 
CLC (C) and Dy. CLCs (C). 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
 

 37
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sr. No.14, Para 3.72) 
  
 The Committee are constrained to note th at there is no mechanism to determine 
the number of child labour in the country other than the census carried out by the 
Registrar-General of India which is treated as au thentic.  The periodicity of census by the 
Registrar-General of India is after a gap of ten years.  Even this census is not focused on 
child labour only.  This is only one of th e aspects of the numerous functions of the 
Registrar-General of India.  As per the last such census conducted in the year 2001, there 
existed 1,26,66,377 child labour in various States of the country.  Even this figure does not 
reflect the actual number of the child labour  in the country.  However, the Government 
has decided to conduct a district-wise child labo ur survey in the country with the help of 
the NSSO.  The move, though belated, is co mmendable.  The Committee, therefore, urge 
upon the Government to draw a strategy wherein the periodical survey of child labour is 
automatically taken care of.  The involvement of various agencies, viz.  S t a t e  
governments, trade unions, NGOs, employers an d all other bodies directly or indirectly 
associated with child labour, must be consider ed as part of the strategy to determine the 
child workforce in the country so that effe ctive steps may be taken to eradicate the 
menace of child labour in a phased manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Government of India has already initiate d process to conduct a nation-wide child 
labour specific survey.   Modalities of detailed survey are being worked out with 
NSSO. It may be mentioned here that as per the NCLP Scheme, the project Societies are 
given funds twice during a Plan Period to conduct child labour survey in their 
districts. These surveys are conducted by the districts with the help of NGOs and other 
stakeholders, like universities, trade unions, employers, etc. 
  
 [Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
{Please see Paragraph No. 28 Chapter-I of the Report} 
 

 38
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--  N   I   L  --

 39
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES FO THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sr. No.6, Para 3.28) 
  
 The Committee note that the present wa ge ceiling of Rs.6,500/- for the purpose of 
coverage under Employees’ Provident Fund Organi sation   is in vogue since 1 June 2001.  
The Government also does not propose to enhance the wage ceiling on the plea that 
raising of wage ceiling would have a wider impact on the Employees’ Pension Scheme, 
1995 (EPS) and hence unless the impact on the pension scheme is fully taken care of, the 
rise in the wage ceiling may not be appropri ate.  The Committee are of the firm opinion 
that the current ceiling has lost its significance  in the wake of adequate increase in the 
wages of the workers due to changed employ ment scenario.  Therefore, keeping the 
wage ceiling at Rs.6,500/-  no more holds good.  The increase in wage ceiling cannot be 
put on hold for the reason that its impact on  pension scheme is yet to be assessed.  The 
Committee take note of the fact that the rates of pension have not been revised since last 
many years and it is insufficient to fulfill the basic requirements of the pensioners.  
Needless to emphasize, the Ministry will take note of inflation/pric e rise and cost of 
living factors while reviewing the pension sch eme.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the assessment of the impact of rise in wage ceiling on pension scheme 
be carried out in a time bound manner an d the rates of pension under EPS, 1995 
accordingly be revised at the earliest.  The Committee further recommends that the rate 
of contribution can be structured in such a way that it nullifies the possible adverse 
impact on Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995 after the wage ceiling for the purpose of 
coverage is increased.  The Committee feels th at this step will bring a large number of 
workers within the fold of Employees’ Prov ident Fund Organisation providing them 
social security coverage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As enhancement of wage ceiling would result  in an increase in Actuarial deficit 
in the Employees’ Pension Fund, an appropriat e decision to increase wage ceiling could 
be taken as soon as a suitable solution is  arrived at.  The Committee’s recommendation 
that the rate of contribution can be restruct ured to nullify the impact on the Employees’ 
Pension Scheme, 1995 would be placed befo re the ‘Pension Implementation Committee’ 
and the ‘ Committee for Comprehensive Re view of the Employees’ Pension Scheme, 
1995’.  
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 

 40
Comments of the Committee 
 
{Please see Paragraph No.16 Chapter-I of the Report} 
 
Recommendation (Sr. No.11, Para 3.53) 
 
 
The Committee is deeply concerned to observe that no estimate of contract 
workers in the country is available with the Government.  Outsourcing of jobs has 
become the order of the day not only in the pr ivate sector but also in the public sector. 
Although the Ministry has stated that the contract labour is employed to meet the 
exigencies of the situation and their number v aries, it is an established fact that contract 
workers are mostly employed by establishments in the jobs that are perennial in nature.  
Their services are being availed of for decade s together without being provided with the 
bare minimum facilities and wages, not to speak of social security coverage and 
regularization of employment. As per the prov isions of the existing labour Acts, the 
contractors are primarily responsible for wages and other social security benefits of the 
contract workers and the principal employer si mply does not play any role in ensuring 
that all the statutory dues and benefits are being extended to these workers. This segment 
of the workforce is employed even in the strategic sectors like defence, railways, telecom, 
coalmines, petroleum, etc.  Absence of a mechanism to determine the number of such 
workers starkly portrays the apathetic atti tude of the Government towards this 
important but neglected workforce of the country.  Various statutory measures regarding 
the welfare, social security and minimum wages of the contract workers are meaningless 
without the record of the number of such  beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends that all th e essential steps should be ta ken henceforth to devise a 
suitable and foolproof mechanism to ascertain the exact number of contract workers 
employed in the various establishments of th e public and the private sector.  To achieve 
this objective, the services of the Region al Labour Commissioners, Trade Unions and 
other bodies representing the contract workers may be requisitioned.  
 
Reply of the Government 
                         
            The Central Government is the appropriate Government in respect of only a small 
number of establishments under various labour enactments including the Contract 
Labour (R&A) Act, 1970. Considering the fact that State Governments are the 
appropriate Governments in respect of the majority of the establishments, the 
States/UTs have also to be necessarily associ ated so as to give effect to any mechanism 
for ascertaining the exact number of contract workers in the country. Since, labour is 
state subject, it is not feasible for Central  Government to evolve any mechanism on its 
own. In fact Ministry of Labour & Employme nt has initiated action for associating the 
State Govts. but that is likely to take considerable time. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 

 41
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
{Please see Paragraph No. 22 Chapter-I of the Report} 
  
Recommendation (Sr. No.12, Para 3.54) 
 
  The Committee note that there is a steady incr ease in the number of irregularities that 
have been detected over the last couple of years regarding the implementation of Contract 
Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.  In the year 2006-07 itself, there were 77,422 
violations of the Act.  This figure relates only  to the Central sphere. As per the statute, the 
interests of the contract workers are protected in  terms of wages, hours of work, welfare, health 
and social security.  Other amenities include canteen  facilities, rest rooms, first aid facilities and 
other basic necessities at the place of work.  N eedless to emphasize, efforts should be made to 
impart training and provide safety equipments to the workers.  Of these,  the most important is 
the payment of proper wages to the contract work ers.  Since they do not have any bargaining 
power, contract workers are exploited by payi ng them less than the minimum wages and 
coercing them to sign on higher amounts.  This is the most prevalent form of exploitation being 
perpetrated on the contract workers.  The absenc e of legislation making it obligatory upon the 
Principal Employer/Contractor for paying the wages of contract workers through cheques has 
compounded the problem.  Acco rding to the Government there are many workers who are not 
willing to accept the payment by cheque becaus e they are not familiar with bank procedures 
and also due to their migratory/casual nature of job, etc. and hence it would not be appropriate 
to bind the workers for payment by cheques. The Committee, however, feel this approach is 
unfriendly to the interest of the workers.  Payment of wages to the workers through cheques 
will drastically reduce their chances of expl oitation. They will become adept in banking 
procedure after their exposure to it or at th e most after one or two transactions.    The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that firstly the system of contract worker should be 
discouraged.  Wherever it is essential to continue with this practice, it must be the sole 
responsibility of the principal em ployer to ensure that the cont ract worker is getting all his 
statutory dues and social security cover without any dilution. To achieve this goal and to mark 
the beginning, the payment of wages to the contract workers must be mandatory disbursed 
through cheques to end their exploitation.  Th e Committee expect that in cases where work 
done by the contract labour is perennial in na ture, the concerned principal employer/contractor 
should ensure that the contract worker get fair wa ge i.e. equivalent to basic pay + DA of a fresh 
regular employee of the organization. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In the context of the above recommendat ion of the committee the effect on the 
existing legal provisions regarding the mode of payment to workers are as follows :- 
  
(i)               Rule 69 of Contract Labour (Regulation & Abolition) External Rule, 1971 
  
                   “All wages shall be paid in current coin or currency or in both.” 

 42
  
(ii)             Section 11(1) of Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
             
                 “Minimum wages payable under this Act shall be payable in cash.” 
  
(iii)            Section 6 of Payment of Wages Act, 1936 
  
                 “All wages shall be paid in current coin or currency notes or in both. 
   
 Provided that the employer may after ob taining the written authorisation of the 
employed person pay him wages either by cheque or by crediting the wages in his bank 
account.” 
  
 Hence, a case involving change in the an y mode of payment of wages to contract 
labour will attract all the three enactments mentioned above simultaneously, it is not felt 
feasible to effect any change in all these legislations. 
  
 Apart from the legal requirements it is  also pointed out that illiterate contract 
labourers may not be in a position to open a ccounts in the bank particularly in places 
outside their home after going through the or deal and hassles involved in opening an 
account. Their problems again get aggravated when they are required to stay at one 
place for a short duration. The workers also face liquidity problem also. The time 
involved in encashing the cheques may comp ound the same. Lastly, if for any reason 
whatsoever, the cheque remains unencashed, the worker will not have any money to 
meet his daily chores, thereby defeating th e very purpose of payment of wages by 
cheque. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
{Please see Paragraph No.25 Chapter-I of the Report} 
 
Recommendation (Sr. No.15, Para 3.73) 
 
The Committee observe that the figure of child labour continues to remain 
worrisome despite all efforts under the Nation al Child Labour Policy (NCLP) Scheme to 
eliminate it.  As many as 4.57 lakh children are stated to have been rehabilitated after 
withdrawing them from hazardous employment and bringing them into mainstream.  
However, 3.37 lakh children are still enrolled under NCLP scheme for rehabilitation.  It is 
true that child labour is a social and ec onomic problem arising due to poverty and 
illiteracy, but as a nation state of conscience we cannot permit this malaise to continue 
howsoever the reasons may be genuine for its existence.  Although the Government has 

 43
framed a policy to eliminate the child labour, it has not borne the desired fruits.  Hence, a 
thorough review and revision of the policy is the need of the hour.  The Government has 
stated that it will review the policy from time to time in the light of the field level 
experiences, reports and evaluations placing emphasis on convergence of NCLP Scheme 
with the developmental schemes of other Ministries like Rural Employment, Urban 
Development and Poverty Alleviation, Panchayati Raj, Women and Child Development, 
Social Justice and Empowerment to economically empower the families of these child 
labour.    The involvement of multiple agencies, i.e.various Ministries of the Government 
of India and other agencies may not only de lay the finalisation of the reviewed scheme 
but may also make it more complicated .  Hence, the Committee call upon the 
Government to take steps, honestly and po sitively, in such a way that all efforts 
undertaken in this regard involving multiple agencies commensu rate with the enormity 
of the task for the successful achievement of the desired results. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  Review of policy of the Government tow ards elimination of child labour is a 
continuous process.  Since child labour is primarily a socio-economic problem, 
Government is laying lot of stress on multi-pronged and holistic approach to tackle the 
problem.  Various efforts are being made for convergence of national Child Labour 
Project (NCLP) Scheme with the welfare schemes of other Ministries, to that the families 
of these child workers get covered un der the schemes for their economic 
empowerment.  As a result of the active coordination with other Ministries, they are 
issuing instructions to the State Governments to cover child labour and their families 
under their Schemes.  
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
{Please see Paragraph No. 31 Chapter-I of the Report} 
 
 

 44
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sr. No.8, Para 3.38) 
 
  The Committee note that there has been a substantial increase of 8,38,004 employees, 
10,08,968 Insured Persons (IPs), 3,91,473 beneficiaries as on 31 March 2007 against their number 
in 31 March 2006.  However, the Committee are pained to note that the number of branch offices 
have decreased from 646 to 620, beds in othe r hospitals from 3,128 to 2,896, Employees State 
Insurance Corporation dispensaries from 1,422 to 1,388, medical officers from 6,992 to 6,890 and 
Insurance Medical Practitioners from 2,041 to 1,942 during the same period.  The re-organisation 
and rationalization undertaken by the States to ensure optimum ut ilization of existing 
infrastructure which was necessitated due to  gross under-utilisation of Employees State 
Insurance Corporation dispensaries, hospitals, etc. is cited to be the reason behind the reduction 
in infrastructural facilities. The Committee are given to understand that the augmentation of the 
infrastructural facilities in case of requirement will be done as per the norms and requirements 
of the State Governments.  The Committee are distressed to note the escapist approach adopted 
by the Government in toning up the Employees State Insurance Corporation.  As it is, the 
duality of administration with regard to dispen sation of medical facilities and other benefits 
(role and involvement of State Governments) has drastically eroded th e efficiency of the 
organization and confidence of the beneficiaries.  To augment the basic medical facilities at the 
instance of the State Government will hardly do  any good to the beneficiaries as no prompt 
proposal can be expected from the State Govern ments, keeping in view the past experience.  
Moreover, this system will also not make anybod y accountable for the decline in the services.  
The Committee, hence, recommend that all out e fforts should be made to put an end to the 
system of duality in administration to the extent possible with regard to the execution of ESI 
Scheme so that the health needs of the insured persons are well taken care of. 
 
Reply of the Government  
       ESIC has taken number of steps to remove the difficulties being faced by duality of 
control in administration of Medical Scheme in the States:-  
a. Revolving Fund Scheme has been introduced to ensure smooth flow of 
funds.  Under this Scheme, the part of  the fund is kept with the Sr. State 
Medical Commissioner / SMC at the level of Regional Office and the 
payments are issued by the Regional Office on receipt of valid sanctions of 
the State Govt.  Under this Scheme, the funds are being released for 
provision of super specialty treatm ent to insured persons and their 
families, drugs and dressings, repair and maintenance of equipments etc. 
  

 45
b. ESI Corporation has taken over one Ho spital in each State to be run as 
Model Hospital under the Model Hospital Scheme.  The total expenditure 
on running of the Model hospital is being borne by the ESI Corporation 
outside the ceiling.  These Model hospitals are being staffed as per norms 
and are being modernized with latest equipments.  
c. ESI Corporation has approved taking over of ESI Scheme in the States who 
give the consent for the same.  Stat e Govt. of Madhya Pradesh and Bihar 
have given the consent for take over of the Scheme.  
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H-11013/4/2008-Coord. dated 
27.08.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
{Please see Paragraph No.19 Chapter-I of the Report} 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                   SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY ,           
October, 2008                                                    CHAIRMAN,  
 Asvina 1930 (Saka)                                                STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR . 
  

 46
  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
HELD ON TUESDAY, 21ST OCTOBER,  2008  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1600 ho urs in Committee Room `C’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt draft Thirty-Second and Thirty-Third Reports. 
 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
4. Shri Subrata Bose 
5. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
6. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
7. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
               
 RAJYA SABHA  
  
  
 8. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
9.         Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
10. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
   
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
 2.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 47
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them 
about the draft Thirty-Second and Thirty-Th ird Reports on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/obser vations contained in the Twenty-Eighth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment for the year 2008-09 and on the subject ‘Development Schemes 
for Handicraft Sector’ of the Ministry of Textiles. 
  
3.  The Committee first took up the Draft Thirty-Second Report for consideration and 
adopted the same without any amendments/modifications.   
 
4 .   X X      X X     X X   
 
5. The Committee then author ized the Chairman to finalise the above Reports and 
present the same to the Parliament. 
 
6. The Committee also placed on records thei r appreciation for the service rendered 
to the Committee by the officers/staff attached to the Committee. 
 
7 .   X X      X X     X X  
    
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

 48
  
 
APPENDIX II 
 
[vide Para 3 of the Introduction] 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE TWENTY EIGHTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
      
 Total    Percentage  
                                                                                                                   of Total 
I. Total number of Recommendations              15 
 
II.        Recommendations/Observations  which have           10     66.67% 
been accepted by Government 
 
(Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,7,9,10, 13 and 14)  
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which the          --         -- 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s  replies 
 
(NIL) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations in respect of                4      26.67% 
which  Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration 
 
(Sl. Nos.6,11,12 and 15)  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of                  1       6.67% 
 which final replies of Government are interim 
 in  nature 
 
(Sl. No.8) 
 
                                                                                                                         ------ -------- 
                                                                                                                                    100% 
                                                                                                                                     -------------- 
 
 

 49
 
 