 
  22 
 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2007-08) 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
THE MATERNITY BENEFIT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 
 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
      
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August 2007/Sravana 1929 (Saka)

 
  
 
 22 
 
 
  TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2007-08) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT  
 
 
 
 
THE MATERNITY BENEFIT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 16 August 2007 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  16 August 2007 
 
       
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August 2007/Sravana 1929 (Saka) 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
       
            PAGE 
       
  
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE        
 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N           
 
 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE         ……………………      
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I THE MATERNITY BENEFIT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 
 
II DETAILED EXPLANATORY NOTES ON EACH CLAUSE OF THE 
MATERNITY BENEFIT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 
 
III LIST OF WOMEN ORGANI SATIONS & TRADE UNIONS 
 
IV LIST OF ESTABLISMENTS TO WHICH THE PROVISIONS OF THE 
MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961 HAVE BEEN EXTENDED BY STATE 
GOVERNMENTS 
 
V DATA REGARDING DI SBURSEMENT OF MATERNITY BONUS TO 
WOMEN EMPLOYEES IN THE COUNTRY 
 
VI RESPONSE OF THE WOMEN OR GANISATIONS AND TRADE UNIONS 
ON THE BILL 
     
 
VII MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR  HELD  ON   15.6.2007, 3.7.2007, 3.8.2007 and 14.8.2007 
  
 
  
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2006-2007) 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari   
3. Shri Subrata Bose  
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot    
6. Shri Munawar Hassan    
         ****7. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
9. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan   
10. Shri Virendra Kumar     
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
12. Shri Basangouda R. Patil   
13. Shri Devidas Pingle  
14. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
15. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat   
     16. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat   
17. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
* 18. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
                    *** 19.        Shri Mohan Rawale 
             20.       Vacant 
                          21.       Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
  22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam 
  23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
25. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
26. Shri Gandhi Azad 
27. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
28. Shri Dilip Ray 
  ** 29.        Shri  Rahul Bajaj  @ 
      30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*      Nominated w.e.f. 31 August 2006 
**    Nominated w.e.f. 1 September 2006 
***   Nominated w.e.f. 22 February 2007 
@    Nomination changed from Committee on Labour to Committee on    
       Industry w.e.f. 8 March 2007. 
**** Resigned from the Membership of the Committee on Labour vide Bulletin     Part-II 
dated 4.4.2007. 

COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2 .  S h r i  F u r k a n  A n s a r i         
3. Shri Subrata Bose    
7. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
8. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot    
6. Shri Munawar Hasan   
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta   
8. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar     
10. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
11. Shri Basangouda R. Patil   
12. Shri Devidas Pingle  
13. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar 
14. Shri Mohan Rawale  
15. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat   
    16. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat   
17. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
18. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam 
  23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
25.       Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
26.       Shri Gandhi Azad 
27.       Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
28.       Shri Dilip Ray 
29.       Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri N.K. Sapra   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary 
5.    Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Under Secretary 
   6.     Ms. Mili George  - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 
 

 6
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour   having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the report on their behalf present this Twenty-Second Report on “The 
Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Bill, 2007” of the Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 14 May 2007 and was referred to the 
Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E (b) of the Rules of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and report within three months from the 
date of publication of the reference of the B ill in Bulletin Part-II of Lok Sabha dated 17 May 
2007.  Hon’ble Speaker has granted an extension of time till first day of the last week of the 
Eleventh Session (14th Lok Sabha) to present the Report. 
 
3. The Committee at their sitting on 15 June 2007 held a preliminary briefing with the 
representatives of the Ministries of Labour and Employment, Health and Family Welfare and 
Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)  on th e provisions of the Bill.  On their subsequent 
sitting held on 3 July 2007, the Committee hear d the views of the representatives of Women 
Organizations and Trade Unions on the proposed  amendments in the Maternity Benefit Act, 
1961.  On 3 August 2007, the Committee held furthe r discussion with the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officials of ESIC and Chief Labour Commissioner on the 
Bill.   
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report held on 14 August 2007.  
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of  various Women 
Organizations and Trade Unions for placing their views on the Bill before the Committee. 
 
6. The Committee also wish to convey their grat itude to the officers of the Ministries of 
Labour and Employment, Health and Family We lfare and Law & Justice (Department of Legal 
Affairs) for placing their considered views before the Committee and also for furnishing 
detailed notes, replies to questionnaire and othe r desired information  in connection with the 
examination of the Bill. 
 
 
          
           S U R A V A R A M  S U D H A K A R  R E D D Y ,  
NEW DELHI;                  CHAIRMAN 
14  August 2007            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
23  Sravana, 1929 (SAKA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 7
REPORT 
 
The Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Bill, 2007 
 
 
Background 
 
1.1 The Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Bill, 2007 ( Appendix-I) was introduced in 
Rajya Sabha on 14 May 2007 and was referr ed to the Standing Committee on Labour 
on 17 May 2007 for examination and report in terms of Ru le 331E of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
 
1.2 The object of maternity leave and benefit is to protect the dignity of motherhood 
by providing for the full and healthy mainten ance of woman and  her  child when she is 
not working.  With the advent of modern age, as the number of women employees is 
growing, the maternity leave and other ma ternity benefits are bec oming increasingly 
common.   But there was no beneficial piece of legislati on in the horizon which is 
intended  to achieve the objec t of doing social justice to  women workers employed in 
factories, mines and plantation.  With the object of providing maternity leave and benefit 
to women employees, the Maternity Benefit Bill was passed by bot h the Houses  of 
Parliament and subsequently it received the assent of  President on 12 December 1961 
to become an Act under short title,  “The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961( No.53 of 1961)”. 
 
 
 
 
 

 8
Salient Features of the Act 
1.3 (i) The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 regulates  the employment of women in factories, 
mines, the circus industry, plantations and  shops or establishments employing 10 or 
more persons except the employees wh o are covered under the Employees’ State 
Insurance (ESI) for certain periods befor e and after child-birth and provides for 
maternity and other benefits.   
 
 (ii) The Act applies to factories, mines, circus industry, plantations and shops or 
establishments employing 10 or more pers ons except the employees who are covered 
under the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948. 
 
 (iii) With the gradual extension of coverage under the Employees’ State 
Insurance Act, 1948(ESI Act), which also pr ovides for maternity and certain other 
benefits, the area of app lication of the Maternity Benefit Act has shrunk to some extent.  
The coverage under the ESI Act is, however, at  present restricted  to factories and 
certain other specified categories of establishments located in specified areas.  The Act 
is, therefore, still applicable to women employees employed in establishments which are 
not covered by the ESI Act, as also to women employees, employed in establishments 
covered by the ESI Act, but who are out of its coverage because of the wage limit. 
 
 (iv) Under the Maternity Benefit Act, wo men employees are ent itled to maternity 
benefit at the rate of average da ily wage for the period of their actual absence up to 12 
weeks due to the delivery.  In cases of i llness arising due to pregnancy, etc.  they are 
entitled to additional leave with wages for a period of one month.   They are also entitled 
to six weeks maternity benefit in case of miscarriage.  The Maternity Benefit Act also 
makes certain other provisions to safeguard the interests of pregnant women workers.  

 9
 
 (v) Section 8 of the Maternity Benefit  Act, 1961 provides that every woman 
entitled to maternity benefit shall also be en titled to receive from her employer medical 
bonus of Rs.250/-, if no pre- natal confinement and post-natal  care is provided by the 
employer free of charge. 
 
1.4 In the Statement of Objects and Reasons  of  The Maternity Benefit (Amendment) 
Bill, 2007,   it is mentioned t hat in the present economic sc enario, it is felt that the 
medical bonus, which is presently Rs.250/-, is inadequate.  Therefore, it is proposed:- 
 
(i) to raise the Medical Bonus payable under the Maternity  Benefit Act from 
Rs.250/- to Rs.1000/-; and  
 
(ii) to give powers to the Central Gove rnment to revise Medical Bonus from 
time to time subject to a maximum of Rs.20,000/-. 
 
  
1.5 Details of Explanatory Notes on each clause of the Maternity Benefit 
(Amendment) Bill, 2007 are given at Annexure-II 
 
 
1.6 With a view to have certain clarificat ions on the provisions of the Bill, the 
Committee held preliminary meeting with the Ministry of Labour and Employment, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislation 
Department) on  15 June 2007 whereby the Committee were briefed about various 
provisions of the Bill.   
 
 
 

 10
 
1.7 During the preliminary meeti ng with the Ministry, it was learnt that various interest 
groups,  viz. Women Organisati ons, Trade Unions, Social Wo rkers, etc. have not been 
consulted  before finalizing t he draft Bill keeping the expediency factor in view.  The 
Committee, however, felt that before drafting such an import ant legislation, it would 
have been more appropriate if  adequat e spadework  was done.  The Committee 
expressed their displeasure t hat the Ministry did not even bother to consult various 
interest groups and stakeholders and find out ways  to address other related problems 
of working women.  As a result of this, the present legislation is no t only half-baked but 
need to make up the deficiencies.  The Co mmittee, therefore, decided to hear the 
viewpoint of various Wom en Organizations and Trade Unions before finalizing the 
Report.  The Committee  took oral evidence of various Women Organisations and Trade 
Unions on 3 July 2007.  List of such  Women Organisations and Trade Unions is 
enclosed at Appendix-III 
 
Analysis of the Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Bill, 2007 
 
1.8 After having considered the views ex pressed by Women Organisations, Trade 
Unions and Government for and against the va rious proposals contained in the Bill, the 
Committee approve the Maternity Benefit (A mendment) Bill, 2007 subject to certain 
modifications/amendments as indicated in the subsequent paragraphs of this Report:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 11
 
 
Clause-2 Substitution of new  section for section 8 – Payment of medical bonus 
 
 
 
 
 Clause 2 of the Bill reads as under:- 
 
 
“2. In the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, for se ction 8, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
‘8.(1) Every  woman entitled to matern ity benefit under this Act shall also be 
entitled to receive from her employer a medical bonus of one thousand rupees, if 
no pre-natal confinement and post-natal care is provided for by the employer free 
of charge. 
 
(2) The Central Government may from ti me to time, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, increase the amount of medical bonus subject to the maximum 
of twenty thousand rupees.’ ” 
 
Increase in Maternity Bonus [Section 8(I)] 
 
 
1.9 When asked about the basis of decidin g only a paltry sum of Rs.1,000/- as 
maternity bonus, the Ministry in their written reply furnished as under:- 
“The existing provision to give a medica l bonus of Rs.250/- fixed in 1989 is 
proposed to be enhanced to Rs.1,000/- to bring it in tune with rise in prices, 
inflation, etc.  As desir ed by the Hon’ble Committee, the comparative value of a 
unit of money in 1961 and 2007 by taking into account the Consumer Price Index 
for Industrial workers (CPI-IW) has si nce been calculated after obtaining the 
actual Consumer Price Index with 1960 as base year and as revised from time to 
time.  On exact calculation made it is gathered that the actual amount of medical 
bonus that needs to be provided in this  regard as per 2006 CPI-IW (latest 
available) by taking 1960 as base year  comes to Rs.711/-.  We have also 
calculated by taking into account the CPI-IW base in 1988 when the medical 
bonus was raised from Rs.25/- to Rs.250/-.  By taking into account the rise by 
3.56 times in CPI-IW (Base 1982=100) at 569 during 2006 (converted index of 
123 with Base 1982=100) at 160, the amount of maternity bonus comes of 
Rs.889/.  Thus, the proposed amended amount, i.e. Rs.1,000/- is, therefore, in 
tune with the price index.” 
 
 
 

 12
 
1.10 On the other hand, as regards amendment to Section 8(1), Women 
Organisations and Trade Unions while welcom ing the move to enhance the medical 
bonus for women,  stated that proposed hike is too meagre to serve any relief.  During 
the course of evidence, t he Committee were apprised of th e recent findings of the 
National Family Health Survey.  It show s an unacceptable degree of malnutrition 
prevalent  amongst women and a very high  MMR (Maternal Mortality Rate).  The 
Survey further reveals that one-third of a ll women in the country  are malnourished and 
over half of them are anaemic.  Situation for children is also quite pathetic.  Over 45.9% 
children are underweight and 79 .2% are anaemic.  The growth of these underweight  
children is further affected by lack of nutri tion.  Apart from women suffering these 
problems, the cost of medi cal services has also increased manifold since 1989.  
Keeping in view the steep escalation in the pric es of medicines as well as the cost of 
nourishing food which are very essential for the healthy growth of the mother and the 
child, the amount of Rs.1,000/- as proposed in the legislation is not at all commensurate 
with the kind of price rise that has taken pl ace in the country.  Th is amount, therefore, 
should be raised suitably.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 13
1.11 The Committee express thei r satisfaction at the initia tive of the Ministry to 
propose such an important amendment, t hough the step is quite belated.  The 
Committee after considering the sugg estions made by various Women 
Organisations and Trade Unions are conv inced that the proposed hike in the 
medical bonus is least realistic and does not portray the ground reality.  There is 
a huge increase in  medical expenses today which should be taken note of.  They, 
therefore, strongly recommend that th e proposed amount of  medical bonus of 
one thousand rupees should be increased at a realistic level of at least  Rs.5,000/- 
and that  this clause should be amended accordingly. 
Revision of Bonus [Section 8(2)] 
 
1.12 As regards the powers given to the C entral Government under section 8(2) to 
increase the amount of medica l bonus from time to time  subject to maximum of 
Rs.20,000/-,  the Committee enquired whether a provisi on regarding review of the 
adequacy of upper limit of bonus at  periodic intervals could be  incorporated in the Act,  
the representative of the Ministry, thereupon,  replied:- 
“……..the objective of asking for a ceiling of Rs.20,000 is only this that you are 
able to do it from time to time.  We would also need to consult the employers.  As 
you are aware, in this Act, whatever outgo is there, it  is the employer who is 
paying the outgo and not the Government.  So far we had made the calculations 
and come to Parliament,  without fully consulting the employers.  We have 
consulted the Ministries and we have consulted the trade unions, but 
consultations with employers have not taken place because we think that this 
amount is reasonable.  As you are suggesting, if we are having a periodic 
revision contemplated, I think, we would have to take the employers also into 
confidence.  I think, we will definitely face some opposition there, but eventually 
the Government will have to decide what is  to be done.  Certainly, we will study 
that also.” 
 
 
 

 14
 
1.13 On the same issue,  various Women Organisations and Trade Unions were  of 
the opinion that ther e is no need to fix an upper limit of the amount that should be 
payable as medical bonus.  Moreover,  the am ount of Medical Bonus should be directly 
proportioned to the expenses on medi cal services, medicines, etc. at that time so that it 
may not become insignificant by inflationary forces operating in the economy.  However, 
they expressed their apprehensi ons that in the absence of  any specific time frame 
within which the amount of medi cal bonus is to be increased there is likelihood that the 
Government might remain inactive or take a much longer time than desired  to raise this 
amount.  Therefore, a provision for periodic revision  of this amount  should be put in 
place in the Act itself.  
 
1.14 The Committee supports the proposal  that the Union Government should 
be empowered to revise medical bonus, as this step should enable the 
Government to enhance the upper limit r easonably from time to time, without 
amending the Act.  But after consideri ng all aspects pertaining to the proposed  
provision in the Bill recommend that the upper limit of amount of medical bonus 
payable should be done away with.  The y further recommend that the Central 
Govt. should review the medical bonus at pe riodic intervals, as it may think fit, 
but such intervals should not be vague but specific. The Committee, therefore, 
would like that section 8(2) of the Bill should accordingly be amended.  The 
Committee feel that an interv al of not more than thr ee years for review of the 
medical bonus is a reasonabl e period and recommend the Government to accept 
it. 

 15
 
 
 
 
General Recommendations – Miscellaneous 
 
1.15 During the course of deliberations with various experts, Women Organisations 
and Trade Unions, it was emphasized that to  fully achieves the objectives of the 
Maternity Benefit Act , 1961, in addition to amending  section 8 of the Act,  there is an 
urgent need for overall review of the Act itse lf particularly the issues pertaining to  
broadening its scope, making applicability of legislation unive rsal, creation of National 
Corpus Fund, enhancing the number of maternit y leave, provision for paternity leave 
and strengthening the enf orcement machinery so  that   many more working women 
could be benefited and the health  rights of the mother and  the child are legally 
safeguarded.  The Committee, by and large,  concur  with their viewpoint and, therefore, 
desire  that the Government should also take into consideration these points while 
bringing forward a comprehensive and revised Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Bill in the 
Parliament.  The detail of these issues are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs:- 
 
Broadening the Scope of the Act 
1.16 The Committee note that se ction 2 of the Maternity Benefit Act, regulates the 
employment of women in fact ories, mines, the circus indus try, plantations and shops or 
establishments employing 10 or more pers ons except the employees who are covered 
under the Employees’ State Insu rance (ESI) for certain per iods before and after child-
birth and provides for maternity and other benefit s.  Further the Act applies to factories, 
mines, circus industry, plantations and shops or establishments employing 10 or more 

 16
persons except the employees  who are covered under the Employees’ State Insurance 
Act, 1948.    
 
1.17 The Committee  are aware that after globalization, there are now a large number 
of establishments and organizations in the country employing less than 10 persons and 
as such these establishments are  out of the ambit of the Act.  
 
1.18 The Committee further  take note of the fact that a huge majority of working 
women fall within the unorganized sector.    Out of the total workforce of about 460 
million in the country, there are only 24 million people, and the rest are in the 
unorganized sector.  The women workforce is 26 per cent of the total workforce.    Major 
spheres of activities of the women workfo rce are Information Technology Industry like 
Call Centres, retail trade, malls, constructi on of roads, buildings and bridges, domestic 
work,  etc.  The Committee further find that in the absence of any piece of legislation for 
unorganized workers, a large se ction of working women are left out for entitlement of 
maternity  benefit.    While deposing before the Committee, represent atives of all the 
women organizations and Trade Unions pleaded for making the Act applicable 
universally.    A representative of one the women organizations pleaded:- 
“……the application of the Ma ternity Benefit Act needs to be extended to cover 
the contract workers, construction worker s, call center workers and workers of 
the unorganized sector.  All the worker s of the unorganized sector should be 
entitled to have maternity benefits, and the Act should be amended accordingly.” 
 
1.19 The Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment,  during the course of 
evidence clarified the position in this regard as under:- 
“In the  issue of unorganized labour …………When the Bill will come up before 
the Parliament in the Monsoon Session ……..We will be bringing in maternity 
benefit definitely for the unorganized sector.” 

 17
 
 
 
1.20 The Committee are of the opinion that with the fast advancement of 
technologies and computerization, the requirement of employing 10 or more 
persons in establishments to avail the benefi t of the Act has become irrelevant.    
In this era of globalisation there are sever al establishments and organizations in 
the country at present, which are working with seven or eight employees or even 
less than that.  The Committee, ther efore, recommend that the ceiling of a 
minimum ten persons in establishments may be reduced to five for availing the 
benefit of the Act.    
 
 
1.21 Similarly, the present Act may be made applicable universally in order to 
cover the majority of women who fall in the unorganized sector till any such 
legislation covering these women (women  working in unorganized sector) is 
brought forward by the Government.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Section 2 of the Act may be amended acco rdingly.  The Committee also feel that 
the present Bill should not be replaced by ESI Act.  Instead, there is a need to 
formulate a fool proof mechanism for disbursement of medical bonus through 
ESI in order to ensure  that  justice is extended to the targeted groups. 
 
 
 
 

 18
 
 
Creation of National Corpus Fund 
1.22 The Committee take note of the fact that the maternity benef its given under the 
Maternity Benefit Act is the employer’s liabil ity and in case this Act is made applicable 
universally for all women workers, one of the problems is likely to be faced is the 
financial burden on the part of the employers and other stakeholders.  
  
1.23 During the course of evidence, t he Secretary, Ministry of Labour and 
Employment highlighting the enormity of the issue of managing a corpus fund for 
Maternity Benefit stated:- 
 
“One of the issues which I would humbly submit before you is the issue 
pertaining to management of a corpus fund.  At present, as the Hon’ble Members 
are all aware, we have to go to the Employees Provident Fund Organisation 
which manages the corpus for provi dent fund and pension for the organized 
sector.  When we look at the responsib ility that we have taken upon ourselves, 
we find that there is a need to discharge i t.   That responsibility is enormous and 
we have to work out the det ails of management of such a corpus  and locate the 
sources of funding of this corpus?  If it is only from the Government, then what 
would be the shape of the corpus?  If it is  to have contributions from people who 
want to donate some money, then what will be the shape of it?  We have been 
working on these for the last several weeks in the context of unorganized labour.  
It appears to everybody that this could l ead to a big scandal and at the present 
point of time, we need six to eight months  of solid work to come to a proper form 
for creating such a fund.  We should have discussions with the Planning 
Commission, the Finance Ministry and we  have to talk to all the State 
Governments regarding their roles in t he whole scheme and their willingness to 
implement it.  Therefore, t he issue of having a corpus fund is very much on the 
agenda.  We have to do it in a way that  we do not create a problem and we 
should not have a mismanaged fund because our  problem is one of identity.  We 
should identify the person who would be drawing the money and to whom it is 
being  given.  We are working on the possibility  of smart cards.  You have a card 
which contains all the details regarding the identity of the person.  Ours is a large 
country.  We are as big as a country.  It  is as if you club all the European 
countries together.  We have such a large number.” 

 19
 
 
 
 
1.24 The Committee, while taking note of the apprehensions in creation of 
corpus fund, appreciate the efforts made /proposed by the Ministry in this 
direction.  The Committee express their serious concern over several survey 
reports, according to which more than 80 per cent women in our country are 
under-nourished and anaemic and hence vu lnerable to several diseases due to 
less immunity.  They further note with distress that Mate rnity Mortality Rate is 
also one of the highest in India. The Co mmittee strongly feel that this should be 
checked urgently, particularly in a de mocratic welfare st ate like ours. The 
Committee suggest the Government to explo re the possibility  of creating a 
National Corpus Fund involving contribut ion from employees, State Govts. and 
Union Govt.   The fund so created may be  either administered on the pattern of 
ESIC/EPFO or some other suitable mechan ism be evolved to achieve the desired 
objective.  The Committee recommend th at necessary amendment may be 
incorporated in this regard in the Bill itself.   
 
  
Enhancing the number of Maternity leave 
 
 
1.25 The Committee were informed during the course of discussion with various 
women organizations and trade unions that ther e are vast differences in the total 
number of  statutory matern ity leave within the country and globally.  The Fifth Pay 
Commission had recommended 135 days for Cent ral Government employees whereas 
State Government employees in Punjab  get 180 days time off for mo thers.  Denmark, 

 20
Italy, Finland and the UK also have generous provisions, where women are entitled upto 
50, 47, 44 and 40 wee ks’ leave respectively.  In contrast, women employees under the 
Maternity Benefit Act are entitled to maternit y benefit at the rate of average daily wage 
for the period of their actual absence upto 12 weeks only on  delivery. 
 
1.26 The Committee feel that there shoul d not be any discriminatory treatment 
to pregnant women on the basis of their status or the ar ea of their employment or 
position in the society.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the grant of 
maternity leave be enhanced to at least  135 days as available to Central 
Government Employees.  Clause 4 of the Act may be suitably amended 
accordingly.  
 
Provision for Paternity Leave 
1.27 Most of the women organi zations and trade unions were in  favour of granting of 
paid paternity leave.  They felt that this  leave enables fathers to spend their time with 
new borns and help their wives during the period of the maternity in the backdrop of the 
mushrooming concept of nuclear family in the country.  Moreover, a provision for 15 
days paternity leave already exists  for the Central Government employees.   
 
1.28 When the Ministry was ask ed to state the reasons for not making provisions for 
paternity leave in the Act itself, the Ministry in a written reply stated:- 
“The suggestion given by the Hon’ble Committee needs consultation with the 
employers and other stakeholders  as it has far reaching implications as regards 
financial burden on the employers.” 
 
 

 21
 
 
1.29 The Committee recommend that th e Government should give a serious 
consideration to make a provision for grant of 15 days paternity leave as available 
to Central Government Employees in the Act. This will help the women to 
overcome the psychological trauma afte r delivery.  The Government can consult 
the employers and stakeholders to convince them to bring such an amendment in 
the Act. 
  
Strengthening the Labour Enforcement Machinery 
 
 
1.30 The Committee note that under Section 2( b) of the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, 
State Governments are empowered to declare  applicability of law over establishments 
or class of establishments. However, as per the information  made available to the 
Committee, only 7 States (Assam, Gujarat,  Haryana, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu and Madhya Pradesh) have detailed the list of estab lishments to which the 
provisions of the Maternity Benefit Act hav e been extended by their Governments.  The 
categories of establishments that have been covered in t hese States amply portray a 
very dismal picture about the number of establishments that  are within the ambit of the 
Act (Annexure-IV).  Similarly, data regarding number of beneficiaries in different States 
is far from satisfactory (Annex ure-V).  This clearly reflects  that the Union Government 
has miserably failed in monitoring  the proper implementation of the Act.   
 
 

 22
 
 
1.31 The Committee note with deep concer n the lack of genuine willingness on 
the part of many  State Governments in extending the provisions of the Act.  The 
position with regard to even the Stat e Governments which have extended the 
provisions of the Act is not satisfactory since very few women employees have 
received the benefits of the Maternity B onus during the last three years.  This 
state-of-affairs is not merely a refl ection on the State Governments but on the 
Central Government as well who have been charged with the responsibility of 
monitoring of the Act.  Being the Ce ntral Act, the Union Government cannot 
shrug off their responsibility.  The Commi ttee, therefore, call upon the Ministry to 
play a more pro-active role in the matte r and tone up their monitoring system to 
ensure that the benefits envisaged  under the Act reach the beneficiaries.    
 
 
 
 
 
SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY, 
NEW DELHI;        CHAIRMAN, 
 14  August, 2007            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
23 Sravana  1929(SAKA) 
         
         

 23
ANNEXURE-I 
 
As introduced in the Rajya Sabha 
        O n  1 4 th May 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
        Bill No.XXXVIII of 2007 
 
THE MATERNITY BENEFIT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
 
Further to amend the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961. 
 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
 
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Act, 2007.  
 Short  
title and commecement 
 
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification 5 in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
2. In the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, for section 8, the following section shall be  substituted, 
namely:- Substitution of 
new 
section 
for 
section 8. 
Payme
nt of 
medica
l bonus. 
   
 
“8. (1) Every woman entitled to maternity benefit under this Act shall also be 
entitled to receive from her employer a medical bonus of one thousand rupees, if no 
pre-natal confinement and post-natal care is provided for by the employer free of 
charge. 
. 
(2) The Central Government may from time to time, by notification in the  
Official Gazette, increase the amount of medical bonus subject to the maximum of  
twenty thousand rupees”. 
 

 24
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 regulates the employment of women in factories, mines, 
the circus industry, plantations and shops or establishments employing 10 or more persons 
except the employees who are covered under the Employees' State Insurance (ESI) for certain 
periods before and after child-birth and provides for maternity and other benefits. 
 
2.  With the gradual extension of coverage under the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 
(ESI Act) which also provides for maternity and certain other benefits, the area of application of 
the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 has shrunk to some extent. The coverage under the ESI Act is, 
however, at present restricted to factories and certain other specified 
categories of establishments located in specified areas. The Act is, therefore, still applicable to 
women employees employed in establishments which are not covered by the ESI Act, as also to 
women employees, employed in establishments covered by the ESI Act, but who are out of its 
coverage because of the wage-limit. 
 
3.  Under the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, women employees are entitled to maternity 
benefit at the rate of average daily wage for the period of their actual absence up to 12 weeks 
due to the delivery. In cases of illness arising due to pregnancy, etc., they are entitled to 
additional leave with wages for a period of one month. They are also entitled to six weeks 
maternity benefit in case of miscarriage. The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 also makes certain 
other provisions to safeguard the interest of pregnant women workers. 
 
4.  Section 8 of the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 provides that every woman entitled to 
maternity benefit shall also be entitled to receive from her employer medical bonus of Rs. 250, if 
no pre-natal confinement and post-natal care is provided for by the employer free of charge. 
 
5.  In the present economic scenario, it is felt that the medical bonus, which is presently Rs. 
250/-, is inadequate. Therefore, it is proposed— 
 
(i) to raise the medical bonus payable under the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 from Rs. 
250/- to Rs. 1000/-; and 
 
(ii) to give powers to the Central Government to revise medical bonus from time to time 
subject to a maximum of Rs. 20,000/-. 
 
6.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         OSCAR FERNANDES. 
The 1 st May, 2007. 
  

 25
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 regulates the employment of women in factories, mines, 
the circus industry, plantations and shops or establishments employing 10 or more persons 
except the employees who are covered under the Employees' State Insurance (ESI) for certain 
periods before and after child-birth and provides for maternity and other benefits. 
 
2.  Section 8 of the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 provides that every woman entitled to 
maternity benefit shall also be entitled to receive from her employer medical bonus of Rs. 250 if 
no pre-natal confinement and post-natal care is provided for by the employer free of charge. 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks— 
 
(i)  to raise the Medical Bonus payable under the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961from 
Rs. 250 to Rs. 1000; and 
(ii)  to give powers to the Central Government to revise medical bonus from time to 
time subject to a maximum of Rs. 20,000. 
 
The proposed provisions will ensure payment of medical bonus on comparatively higher 
rates than existing rates. 
 
3.  The above-mentioned proposals in their application to the women employed in factories, 
mines, the circus industry, plantations and shops or establishments will involve increased 
expenditure on employers by way of payment of medical bonus. Every woman entitled to 
maternity benefit shall also be entitled to receive from her employer the enhanced 
medical bonus, if no pre-natal confinement and post-natal care is provided for by the employer 
free of charge. 
 
4.  The Bill does not involve any expenditure, whether recurring or non-recurring. 
  

 26
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
 
The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 regulates the employment of women in factories, mines, 
the circus industry, plantations and shops or establishments employing 10 or more persons 
except the employees who are covered under the Employees' State Insurance for certain 
periods before and after child-birth and provides for maternity and other benefits. 
 
Section 8 of the said Act is being amended to enhance medical bonus from Rs. 250 to 
Rs. 1000. Further, the Central Government is also being empowered to increase the said 
medical bonus from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, subject to the maximum 
of Rs. 20,000. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
  

 27
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE MATERNITY BENEFIT A CT, 1961 
(53 OF 1961) 
  
*    *    *    *   * 
 
Payment of medical bonus  8. Every woman entitled to maternity benefit under this Act shall 
also be entitled to 
receive from her employer a medical bonus of two hundred and 
fifty rupees, if no pre-natal confinement and post-natal care is 
provided for by the employer free of charge. 
*    *   *   *    * 
Payment of 
medical bonus. 
6MGIPMRND—2185RS(S5)—10-05-2007. 

 28
RAJYA SABHA 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further to amend the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Oscar Fernandes, Minister of State for Labour and Employment) 

 29
ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
DETAILED EXPLANATORY NOTES ON EACH CLAUSE OF THE MATERNITY 
BENEFIT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 
 
 
Sl.No. Clause Explanatory Note Reasons for proposed 
amendments 
1. Clause 2 of the 
Maternity Benefit 
(Amendment) Bill, 
2007 
Section 8 of the 
Maternity Benefit Act, 
1961 relates to payment 
of medical bonus to a 
woman employee and 
the said Section reads as 
under:- 
 
“Every woman entitled 
to maternity benefit 
under this Act shall also 
be entitled to receive 
from her employer a 
medical bonus of two-
fifty rupees, if no pre-
natal confinement and 
post-natal care is 
provided for by the 
employer free of 
change”. 
 
The Second National 
Commission on Labour 
in its report submitted to 
Ministry of Labour, 
made a recommendation 
relating to the 
enhancement of medical 
bonus payable under the 
Maternity Benefit Act, 
1961.  Keeping in view 
the recommendation and 
the suggestions received 
b y  t h i s  M i n i s t r y  f r o m  
various State 
The existing ceiling of 
Rs.250/- as Medical Bonus 
under the Maternity Benefit 
Act, 1961 is inadequate in 
the present economic 
scenario.  Hence, there is an 
urgent need to increase the 
amount to Rs.1000/- so that 
it is a source of financial 
support to a woman 
employee.  Further, it is 
proposed to insert an 
enabling provision 
empowering the Central 
Government to raise in 
future the said amount by a 
Notification so that 
legislature may not be 
bothered every time for 
enhancement of the medical 
bonus. 

 30
Governments/Union 
Territory 
Administrations/Central 
Government Ministries 
and Departments, an 
amendment has been 
proposed to be made in 
the Maternity Benefit 
Act, 1961:- 
 
Clause 2 of the 
Maternity Benefit 
(Amendment) Bill, 2007 
seeks to carry out the 
following amendments 
in Section 8 of the 
Maternity Benefit Act, 
1961:- 
 
8(1) to raise the Medical 
Bonus payable under the 
Maternity Benefit Act 
from Rs.250/- to 
Rs.1000/-;  and  
 
8(2)to give powers to the 
Central Government to 
revise Medical Bonus 
from time to time subject 
to a maximum of 
Rs.20,000/-. 
 
 
    
 

 31
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
 
LIST OF WOMEN ORGANISATIONS 
 
 
1. All India Women’s Conference 
  
2. All India Democratic Women Association 
  
3. National Federation of Indian Women 
  
4. National Commission for Women 
 
5.       BJP Mahila Morcha 
  
LIST OF TRADE UNIONS 
 
 
1. Indian National Trade Union Co ngress (INTUC) (Indian National 
Congress) 
  
2. All India Trade Union Congress (CPI) 
  
3. Bharatiya Kamgar Sena (Shiv Sena) 
  
4. Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (RSS) 
 
5. Centre for Indian Trade Unions (CPI (M)) 
  
6. Hind Mazdoor Sabha (Socialists) 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 32
ANNEXURE-IV 
 
 
LIST OF ESTABLISHMENTS TO WH ICH THE PROVISIONS OF THE 
MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961 HAVE BEEN EXTENDED BY STATE 
GOVERNMENTS 
 
Sl.No. Name of States Particulars of Establishments 
 
1. Assam Local bodies 
 
2. Gujarat Establishments of local bodies including 
Municipal Committee, Gram Panchayats 
3. Haryana Establishments engaged in constructions of road, 
buildings, canals, bridges etc. which are covered 
under the Contract Labour (Regulation and 
Abolition) Act, 1970. 
4. Maharashtra Conservancy Department of any local authority 
in the State 
5. Rajasthan Establishments in which work relating to 
construction or maintenance of buildings, roads, 
bridges or canals or of water or relating to the 
generation, transmission and the distribution of 
electricity or any form of power is being carried 
on in the State. 
6. Tamil Nadu Catering establis hments as defined in Tamil 
Nadu catering Establishments Act, 1958 
7. Madhya 
Pradesh 
The State has notified th e M.P Maternity Benefit 
Rules, 1965 on 30.9.1965.  It has also notified all 
establishments to which the Madhya Pradesh 
Shops and Establishments Act, 1958 under sub 
section (1) of Section 2 of the Maternity Benefit 
Act, 1961 vide notification dated 16.5.1970. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 33
ANNEXURE-V 
Data regarding disbursement of maternity bonus to women employees in the 
country 
 
Sl.No. Name of 
State/Union 
Territory 
Year No. of 
Women 
Employees 
benefited 
Amount 
disbursed 
(Rs.) 
1. Haryana 2004 
2005 
2006 
112 
130 
115 
      32,151/- 
     19,500/- 
15,57,335/- 
2. *Madhya 
Pradesh  
2004-05 
2005-06 
2006-07 
443 
620 
265 
 
3. Maharashtra 2003 
2004 
2005 
545 
410 
353 
11,53,042/- 
   5,23,812/- 
   9,49,823/- 
4. Punjab 2004 
2005 
2006 
NIL 
01 
03 
NIL 
10,233/- 
55,918/- 
5. Tamil Nadu 
(Factories side) 
 
 
(Labour side) 
2003 
2004 
2005 
71 
23 
72 
 
406 
   32,657/- 
1,00,326/- 
1,60,057/- 
 
17,08,635/- 
 
6. Andhra Pradesh 2003 
2004 
2005 
106 
120 
 60 
19,93,976/- 
20,10,341/- 
11,60,810/- 
7. Karnataka 2003 
2004 
2005 
439 
288 
447 
12,60,425/- 
10,27,850/- 
16,49,192/- 
8. Gujarat 2004 
2005 
2006 
92 
99 
81 
1,69,083/- 
2,02,381/- 
1,69,146/- 
9. Uttar Pradesh 2003 
2004 
2005 
138 
104 
109 
3,29,444/- 
2,76,735/- 
1,79,257/- 
10. West Bengal 2003 
2004 
2005 
157 
169 
 45 
6,78,494/- 
6,98,494/- 
1,77,226/- 

 34
 
11. Kerala 2004-05 
2005-06 
2006-07 
3128 
3282 
3404 
41,85,493/- 
43,89,209/- 
33,61,640/- 
12. Goa There is no separate data of any maternity 
bonus paid to women employees in the 
State.  Women employees during their 
maternity leave period are being paid bonus 
alongwith other co-workers. 
13. Rajasthan Disbursement of maternity bonus may be 
treated as NIL.  However, 3 women 
employees have been benefited and 
Rs.16,596/- disbursed during the last 3 years. 
14. Lakshadweep No schemes for disbursement of maternity 
bonus to women employees exist. 
 

 35
ANNEXURE-VI 
 
 
RESPONSE TO POINTS OF DISCUSSION WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF WOMEN 
ORGANISATIONS ON MATERNITY BENEFIT (AMENDMENT) BILL 2007   
 
SL.
NO. 
QUESTIONS BJP MAHILA MORCHA ALL INDIA WOMEN’S 
CONFERENCE 
1. There is a proposal to 
amend the Maternity 
Benefit Act with a view to 
enhance the medical 
bonus from Rs.250/- to 
Rs.1000/- where no pre-
natal confinement and post 
natal care is involved. 
(Initially, it was Rs.25 in 
1961 and was increased to 
Rs.250 in 1989)   
 
 Do you think that the 
present enhancement is 
sufficient keeping in view 
the present economic 
scenario?  If not, how 
much it should be hiked? 
 
  No, the present 
enhancement is not 
sufficient in view with 
present economic scenario.  
It must be hiked to 
Rs.5000/- 
The proposal to enhance the 
medical bonus from Rs.250 to 
Rs.1000 is insufficient.  It 
should be related to cost of 
inflation-cost of medicine, cost 
of medical services, cost of 
food etc. and this should be 
reviewed periodically.  Till 
such time this is decided, a 
minimum of Rs.2000/- should 
be given as medical bonus. 
 
2. As per the provision of the 
Act, the benefits, which are 
to flow to women workers, 
are the sole responsibility 
of the employer.  The 
proposed hike is likely to 
attract opposition by them.  
Please furnish your 
comments in this regard?   
 
 
Maternity leave is granted 
once or twice in lifetime 
and an amount of 
Rs.5000/- granted twice is 
not an enormous burden. 
Employer’s resentment cannot 
be helped and  
(i) It should be ensured that in 
all organizations, 30% of the 
employees should be women. 
 
(ii) There should be no 
retrenchment of women. 
 
(iii) A mechanism for redressal 
should be inbuilt in the act 
itself. 
 
(iv) Women employees should 
be made aware of their rights. 
 
(v) A grievance cell should be 
compulsorily set up in all the 
work places with ade quate 

 36
representation from NGOs.  
 
3. It has come to the notice of 
the Committee that there is 
an urgent need to 
strengthen the labour 
enforcement machinery.  
What are your views 
regarding setting up  as a 
mechanism  to ensure that 
the benefits under the Act 
do actually reach the 
intended beneficiaries.   
 
Social Workers must be 
involved in any task force 
to administer this. 
Strengthening Labour 
Enforcement Machinery 
On February 1, 2007, the 
Supreme Court pulled up the 
Central and State 
Governments for poor 
implementation of the National 
Maternity Benefit Scheme 
(NMBS).  The People’s Union 
for Civil Liberties (PVCL) 
claimed that NMBS benefits do 
not reach the beneficiaries and 
remain only on paper. 
 
There is urgent need for 
effective enforcement of laws. 
 
Lady inspectors should be 
appointed with power to 
suggest penalties.  The 
grievance cell, the lady 
inspectors and the NGO 
representative should work 
together for effective 
enforcement of the scheme.  
There should be a Committee 
to monitor the enforcement of 
the law.  This Committee 
ought to consist of at least fifty 
per cent women and a 
Member from a NGO. 
 
4. r  The main spheres of 
activities involving 
women hitherto 
uncovered but who may 
be brought within the 
purview of this Act for 
the purpose of  
extending the  benefits 
to them?   
  
(b) The details of the 
steps, which could be 
adopted/taken to identify 
the women workers for 
coverage under the Act.
  
Domestic Help (Maid 
Servant) may be involved 
in the coverage of the Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
Unorganised sector must 
also be included. 
 
Benefits of the act should be 
extended to all women 
working in unorganized 
sectors, such as agricultural 
labourers, construction 
workers, domestic helpers, 
muster roll employees, daily 
wage workers, women 
working in multinational 
organizations, private firms, 
all educational institutions – 
(govt. aided, private & self 
financing women in call 
centers, sales counters, 
balwadies, crèches- in short, 
maternity benefits should be 

 37
 
 
provided for all women 
workers whether they are in 
unorganized or muster roll, 
under contract, corporation or 
government or voluntary 
organizations. 
 
5. (a) Whether you have ever 
received any complaint 
from any quarter 
particularly women 
regarding non-compliance 
of the provisions of the 
Act? 
 
(b) If so, the details thereof 
and specific nature of 
complaints? 
 
(c) What has been your 
impression about the 
causes for these grievances 
and what remedial steps 
do you suggest for 
permanent solution of 
such grievances? 
 
Complaints are often 
received. 
 
 
 
 
 
The Complaints are with 
regards to non-payment of 
dues. 
 
The cause is corruption at 
all levels.  A solution is to 
include a social worker for 
monitoring the 
mechanism. 
 
 
We have received no 
complaint as such but this may 
be due to lack of awareness 
among women workers 
regarding their ri ghts.  
Awareness, sensitization, 
concretization programs about 
the various legislations 
regarding women need to be 
organized. 
6 There is an enabling 
provision empowering the 
Central Government to 
revise the medical bonus 
from time to time subject to 
a maximum of Rs.20,000/- 
However, there is no 
specific timeframe within 
which such amount is to be 
increased.  There is an 
apprehension that in 
absence of periodic 
revision of the amount in 
the Act itself, the 
Government may remain 
inactive or take long time 
to revise this amount.  
Please furnish your 
comments in this respect. 
 
The Central Government 
must review the medical 
bonus amount every two 
years. 
There is no need for any 
provision for fixing any 
maximum limit.  There should 
be periodic revision of the 
amount based on realities of 
the situation. 

 38
 
   Some other suggestions made 
are: 
 
(a) Maternity leave for 1 st as 
well as the second child 
should be 4 and a half months 
to 6 months. 
 
(b) Paternity leave for 15 days 
immediately after delivery. 
 
(c) Paid leave for 6 weeks in 
case of miscarriage. 
(d) Creches in the workplaces 
– as per rules should be set up. 
 
(e) Nursing breaks for the 
lactating mother should be 
available. 
 

 ANNEXURE-VI 
 
RESPONSE TO POINTS OF DISCUSSION WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF TRADE UNIONS ON MATERNITY 
BENEFIT (AMENDMENT) BILL 2007 
 
SL.
NO. 
QUESTIONS BHARTIYA 
KAAMKAR 
SENA 
BHARTIYA 
KAMKAR MAHA 
SANGH 
ALL INDIA TRADE 
UNION CONGRESS 
BHARTIYA 
MAZDOOR 
SANGH 
INDIAN NA
TRADE U
CONGRESS
1. There is a 
proposal to 
amend the 
Maternity Benefit 
Act with a view to 
enhance the 
medical bonus 
from Rs.250/- to 
Rs.1000/- where 
no pre-natal 
confinement and 
post- natal care is 
involved. (Initially, 
it was Rs.25 in 
1961 and was 
increased to 
Rs.250 in 1989)   
 
      Do you think 
that the present 
enhancement is 
sufficient keeping 
in view the 
present economic 
scenario?  If not, 
how much it 
should be hiked? 
 
  The present 
enhancement is 
not sufficient in 
view with present 
economic 
scenario of too 
much money 
chasing too few 
goods in the 
market.  The 
amount of 
medical bonus 
should be hiked 
to Rs.5000/- and 
should be linked 
to the consumer 
price index 
number to 
prevent its 
deterioration of 
real value of 
money. 
 While welcoming the 
amendment, we 
propose it to be 
enhanced to 
Rs.5000/- which 
should be linked to 
cost of price index as 
given in our write up. 
 
(i) The proposal for 
enhancing the 
medical bonus to 
pregnant women 
workers who do not 
have facilities of pre-
natal confinement 
and post-natal care 
from the present 
amount Rs.250/- is 
welcome step. 
 
(ii) According to us 
the proposal of 
enhancing it only 
upto Rs.1000/- 
would be a very 
small increase.  This 
amendment to 
particular section i.e. 
Section-8 is being 
taken up after 19 
years (the last one 
was carried in 1988 
and notified in 1989), 
the price index has 
risen immensely and 
the cost of medication 
has gone very high 
 
(iii) We propose the 
amount should be 
raised to Rs.5000/- 
and accordingly the 
amendment be 
carried. 
 
The proposed 
enhancement to 
Rs.1000/- is quite 
inadequate in view 
of the steep hike in 
the cost of medical 
and health services, 
medicines and the 
hospitalization 
charges. 
 
All India Price 
Index with base 
year 1980 has gone 
from been mark 100 
to around 3000.  But 
the health care has 
been much costlier 
than that.  It could 
be seen that the 
expenses for a 
normal delivery is 
about Rs.10,000/- 
and in abnormal 
conditions it is over 
Rs.30,000/- to make 
it meaningful, the 
hike shall be 
Rs.10,000/- 
In the 
circumstances,
minimum 
ran
ging 
Rs.3000/-  R
absolutely ne c
no ceilin g on 
depending o n
social and 
status of the w
infrastructure 
and clinics a v
play a vital r
many areas 
health center 
and transpor
ma
jor cost fact
2. As per the 
provision of the 
Act, the benefits, 
which are to flow 
to women 
workers, are the 
sole responsibility 
of the employer.  
The proposed 
hike is likely to 
attract opposition 
by them.  Please 
furnish your 
 We agree that the 
benefits, which 
are to flow to 
women workers, 
are the sole 
responsibility of 
the employer and 
proposed hike 
may attract 
opposition from 
the employers.  
However, it 
    With the strict 
provision in Act and 
with out awareness 
campaign, the 
resistance from 
employers will be 
dealt strongly.  
In an environment 
where the family size 
is becoming smaller, 
it is not an 
expenditure, which is 
of regular nature 
with women 
employees who 
otherwise are only 25 
to 30 per cent of total 
labour force, and all 
of them are not in the 
Where ever the 
emoluments of 
women employees 
are at proper level, 
as in the case of 
employees of LIC, 
Banks, PSUs, the 
need for the Act 
and the provisions 
do not arise.  
Wherever, the 
emoluments are 
The employer
maximum r e
in providin g
Benefits to t
however, th e
schemes shoul
certain polici e
the emplo yer
the worker t o
from such 
There are m
benefits sch e

 40
comments in this 
regard?   
 
 
should be taken 
into account that 
due to new 
economic policy 
of Government of 
India of 
globalisation, 
liberalization and 
privatization, 
competition in the 
market has 
increased but at 
the same time the 
profit margins of 
the companies 
has also increased 
to  various cost 
reduction 
measures 
adopted by the 
Enterprises 
including 
separation of 
labour, flexibility 
etc. and hence the 
financial capacity 
of the employers 
in general has 
increased and as 
such the amount 
of Rs.5000/- will 
not put heavy 
burden on the 
employers. 
fertility age to opt for 
medical benefit.  The 
woman needs to be 
taken care of and the 
employers must be 
made to understand 
that the percentage of 
women who would 
need this benefit is 
much less in the work 
place. 
 
We have been 
arguing that vast 
majority of women in 
the informal sector, 
home based piece-
rate worker, daily 
and casual workers 
are out of the 
purview of this Act.  
The onus to help 
these women in pre-
natal and post natal 
care in the form of 
maternity benefit 
would have to be 
provided by the 
Governments, the 
Central and State as 
the case may be. 
 
Universal entitlement 
of Maternity benefit 
has to be focus and 
the Government has 
to show the way to 
impress upon the 
employer. 
inadequate for 
making a living, the 
expenses on 
account of 
maternity are a 
burden and hence  
necessary for the 
Act.  In the 
circumstances, the 
relief shall be 
sufficient to 
alleviate the 
burden. 
 
Now, the hectic 
schedule of life 
does not permit 
repeated 
pregnancies and 
commensurate with 
lowering birth rate 
across the board.  
Now the incidence 
of pregnancy is 
lower.  Now new 
Mantra Hum Do, 
Hamare Ek’ hence 
burden of child 
birth and post natal 
care expenses born 
by employer per 
women worker also 
reduced. 
 
The apprehension 
that it may attract 
the opposition from 
the employer, is 
unwarranted.  The 
beneficiary out of 
the services of 
workers & women 
workers shall not 
hesitate to come to 
the rescue of the 
toiling masses.  
Otherwise, the 
employer’s attitude 
may be termed as 
inhuman, and he 
may be called 
exploiter in all 
fairness, the 
Government that 
felt the necessity for 
assistance during 
maternit
y period 
around the 
benefits in d
e
developing 
One can look i
a role m
incorporate 
Indian 
Government 
s
in identif y
preparing a
which can b e
implemented 
context of Ind
i

 41
and enacted the 
provisions shall 
take the place of the 
defaulting 
employer, and 
fulfill the social 
obligation.  
 
3. It has come to the 
notice of the 
Committee that 
there is an urgent 
need to 
strengthen the 
labour 
enforcement 
machinery.  What 
are your views 
regarding setting 
up  as a 
mechanism  to 
ensure that the 
benefits under the 
Act do actually 
reach the 
intended 
beneficiaries.   
 
 We agree that 
there is a need to 
strengthen the 
labour 
enforcement 
machinery.  
However, the 
employers are 
opposing to this 
proposal and on 
the contrary they 
are suggesting 
that the labour 
enforcement 
machinery should 
behave in a 
democratic 
manner which 
will help 
avoiding 
corruption in the 
labour 
enforcement 
machinery.  This 
argument of the 
employer needs 
no cognizance 
because reaching 
the benefits to the 
workers is more 
important and 
stringent rules 
should be made 
to enforce the 
labor provisions 
and inspectorate 
department of 
labour wing 
should be clothed 
with more 
powers.  
 We propose to have 
a Joint Consultative 
Committee at the 
shop/floor/factory 
and Apex level not 
only for the 
implementation of 
this Act specially but 
for all welfare 
measures under other 
Acts generally 
involving labour 
The issue of 
implementation is 
definitely serious 
issue.  This is not 
much of problem in 
the formal sector, 
Govt./Public 
sector/Private sector 
as regards leave and 
medical benefits are 
concerned, but it is 
the medium and 
small enterprises who 
are covered under the 
Act that the 
implementation is a 
big issue. 
 
In the formal sector, 
the issue of frequent 
feeding of the child 
and the stipulated 
time for that holds no 
meaning because 
there are no 
provisions of crèche 
facilities in the or 
near the workplace 
by the employers as 
required by this Act. 
 
As regards procedure 
to book the defaulters 
the case of 
formal/informal 
sector the process is 
cumbersome, time 
consuming, 
expenditure burden 
on the victim herself.  
The tendency of 
private employers to 
engage unmarried 
girls who would 
work for 3-4 years, 
get married and leave 
the job, and the 
employers being free 
from all the liabilities 
The labour 
enforcement 
machinery is not 
sufficiently staffed, 
i.e. the number of 
employees is less 
than the 
requirement.  There 
are attitudinal 
problems with the 
staff.  The staff are 
obstinate and 
indifferent to the 
sufferings of the 
workers.  There is 
every need to 
strengthen the 
labour enforcement 
machinery in terms 
of numbers and 
change in respect of 
attitudes and 
sincerity. 
If the Gover n
an importan t
the help of it s
supported b y
network of 
trade union o r
and p h
institutions it 
help in 
implementati
o
benefits unde r
reach the 
beneficiaries 
f
the Panchayat
at the grass 
have 
implemented 
Government 
more success
f
are involve d
planning, imp
and monitor
monitoring 
need to pu t
before so 
beneficiaries 
become acco u
its success. 

 42
of ESI, PF etc. 
 
It has been found that 
the girls tend to hide 
their marriages so as 
not to loose job 
opportunity and such 
cases have been 
brought to our notice 
in the industrial areas 
of Okhla, Noida, and 
Mayapuri.  This is 
sham on our society 
that the bliss of 
having partner and 
giving birth to a new 
life is not acceptable 
to the employers as if 
it is crime because it 
comes on the way of 
profit and more 
profit. 
 
These actions of the 
management/ 
employers which are 
violations of laws are 
not taken care of by 
the enforcement 
machinery.  The Act 
needs to be looked 
into thoroughly for 
improvement on 
implementation part. 
 
Also this brings to 
another point that the 
ICDS programmes be 
made universal and 
fulltime work so that 
they could serve as 
child care and 
nurturing centers 
apart from pre-school 
education centers 
with full fledged 
Anganwadi workers 
and helpers being 
regular employees.  
This would give 
justice to women 
workers. 
 

 43
 
4. What are the 
main spheres of 
activities involving 
women hitherto 
uncovered but 
who may be 
brought within the 
purview of this 
Act for the 
purpose of  
extending the  
benefits to them?   
  
(b) The details of 
the steps   which 
could be 
adopted/taken to 
identify the 
women workers 
for coverage 
under the Act.  
 
 
The main spheres 
of activities will 
involving women 
which should be 
brought within 
the purview of 
the Act are 
information 
technology 
industry like call 
centers, computer 
service giving 
centers, in retail 
trade malls, 
women employed 
in construction of 
roads, buildings 
and bridges etc.  
The women 
workers 
employed in 
these industries 
are mostly 
unorganized and 
it is difficult to 
identify them but 
through labour 
inspectorate 
department they 
can be identified.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unorganised 
sector must also 
be included. 
 
(a) Shops 
and  
Establishme
nts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) Unorganised 
Labour in brick kiln 
farms, citrus 
industry, retail trade, 
BPO and allied 
activities viz. mines, 
minerals and health 
and sanitation-
casual/daily wage 
workers. 
 
The women working 
in agriculture 
daily/contract 
workers in 
constructions and 
such other sectors, 
the home based 
workers who work 
on contract for piece 
rate and contract 
workers in the 
medium and small 
scale private sector 
are not getting any 
benefit as muster 
roles are not 
maintained for daily 
casual/contract 
workers, which is 
actually violation of 
labour laws as well. 
 
We are witnessing 
large section engaged 
in private schools, 
nursing homes, even 
in call centers etc. 
who need to be 
covered under the 
Act, even if the 
employees are not of 
regular in nature but 
are on contract basis. 
 
Major issue is 
registration of all 
shops and 
establishments, 
factories, other 
economic activities in 
the field of education 
and health and other 
services, which are 
lacking to large 
extent and hence 
enforcement can’t 
happen for labour 
law implementation. 
 
The compulsion of 
muster role for any 
workers engaged on 
daily/casual/contrac
t basis by any 
establishment/enterp
rise/organisation 
(a) There are certain 
sections of workers, 
where women are 
not identified, 
recognized and 
accounted in the 
number of workers.  
Operations in 
respect of 
handlooms, fishing, 
building and other 
construction of 
beedi come under 
this category.  In 
the Vellore District 
of Tamil Nadu only 
male members of 
the family are 
issued identify 
cards and work by 
the employers.  The 
female members of 
the family 
invariably work 
alongwith the male 
members to 
complete the given 
jobs and the 
production.  Such 
workers are 
estimated to be 6 
crores.  They are 
not entitled to be 
benefits of the Act, 
they are not 
counted as working 
women. 
 
(b) The details of 
steps, which could 
be adopted/taken 
to identify the 
women workers 
for coverage under 
the Act. 
 
(c) It is necessary to 
be registered all the 
pregnant women 
workers. 
(a)The wome n
not been inc o
beneficiaries 
majority of u
workers whi c
in a gricultu
plantation, pr i
domestic, c
labour work e
segment ne e
consideration 
income is v
e
and the y are 
Health &
education is n
them so the
y a
underprivilege
of the s o
subjected t o
physical lab o
the entire 
pre
gnancy p r
post-natal. 
Government 
s
them priorit y
maternity bene
since the y ar e
60% of 
workforce. 
 
(b) To identify
who come 
purview of 
should be v a
taken: 
 
1.Identity ca r
issued to c
workers. 
2.The Trade u
plantation, b
other inform a
be mobilized  
these wome n
Act. 
3.For domes t
Registration 
Government 
mandator
y.  T
enable to redu
rate so comm o
where dome s
are involved. 
a verificatio
n
employer fo r
safety. 

 44
etch has to be 
ensured. 
 
The large number 
again we feel would 
be left out of the Act 
which needs to be 
covered by the 
Government, the 
Central or State 
through Universal 
entitlement with 
National Fund on 
Maternity benefit for 
such women for 
medical bonus and 
hospitalization with 
strengthening the 
Government hospital 
system and primary 
health centers to cater 
to the needs of pre-
natal and post natal 
care of women. 
 
4.Social o r
working in 
should start a n
campaign for 
of educat i
providing th e
the Act.  
workers s h
motivated an d
and r e
expanded to 
cost of Mater n
to the wome n
Electronic med
an important
even the r
e
villages hav e
newspaper an
(Banners and 
also help) 
5. (a)Whether  you 
have ever 
received any 
complaint from 
any quarter 
particularly 
women regarding 
non-compliance 
of the provisions 
of the Act? 
 
(b)If so, the 
details thereof 
and specific 
nature of 
complaints? 
 
(c)What has been 
your impression 
about the causes 
for these 
grievances and 
what remedial 
steps do you 
suggest for 
permanent 
solution of such 
grievances? 
 
 We have not 
received any 
written complaint 
regarding non-
compliance of the 
provisions of the 
Act from our 
women worker 
members.  
However, few 
oral complaints 
were received but 
they were solved.  
These complaints 
were regarding 
the payment of 
medical bonus 
and the pre-natal 
and post natal 
leave to be given 
to the eligible 
women workers. 
  
 
 (a) NO 
 
(b) N.A. 
 
(c) As described 
above and in our 
write up handed over 
to the committee. 
(a) Yes, we have been 
receiving complaints 
from women of some 
private nursing 
homes, some private 
schools 
mushrooming in 
every nook and 
corner of the cities 
and towns, those in 
construction sector or 
small factories and 
now also from the big 
shopping malls etc. 
 
(b) The complaints 
are: 
 
(i) No employment if 
married. 
 
(ii) Or verbal promise 
of no bearing 
children during the 
contract period with 
the employer etc. 
 
(iii) Employer are 
refusing to pay 
medical benefit. 
 
(iv) Or not lettin g to 
The women 
workers are 
terminated from 
service, to avoid 
compliance of Act 
provisions 
 
The greed of the 
employer, collusion 
of the political 
authorities and the 
obstinate 
bureaucracy 
 
 
(a) The 
Workers thr o
country are  
agency whe r
from the vill a
complain at 
points of ti
m
election cam p
illiterate wo m
very aware of 
and openl y c o
the hope th a
elected leade r
give her so m
Living in ho p
more than a 
the complain
t
ending. 
(b) The detai l
the pre-nata l
mother and th
care of the 
child.  There  
schemes 
Government 
nutritious 
sanctioned 
a
supplements t
to the expec t
so that hospi t
ICDS pro gram
Government. 

 45
have sufficient time 
for sibling to be 
breast fed, when the 
child is alongwith the 
women worker near 
the workplace. 
 
This brings again to 
the issue that there is 
lack of awareness in 
regard to this law in 
the society in general 
including employers 
and beneficiaries.  
This has been our 
experience while 
dealing with some of 
the cases. 
 
There is need for 
medial intervention 
in popularizing the  
right to maternity 
benefit of women 
workers and 
obligations of 
employees.  The 
permanent solution 
once again we stress 
would lie in making 
this Act inclusive to 
cover all those 
women left out, and 
to cover rest of the 
women who still 
don’t get space in the 
Act, by the 
Government 
commitments at 
Central and State 
level through 
universal entitlement 
with National Corpus 
Fund for the purpose 
to giving benefits to 
women pre natal and 
post natal care. 
 
very good o n
the implem e
very poor in m
(c)  The rea s
causes of 
grievances is 
responsibility 
accountability
Government o
corruption a t
takes place.  
educate the t a
of their r
unionize the
very much can
is ver y diffi c
illiterate wo m
unorganized 
fight for h
without bein g
union.  Some
rules throu
gh
system s h
provided t o
below the p
which will tric
6 There is an 
enabling provision 
empowering the 
Central 
Government to 
revise the medical 
bonus from time 
to time subject to 
a maximum of 
Rs.20,000/- 
 We agree with 
the apprehension 
expressed in the 
question.  Under 
the Minimum 
Wages Act, the 
Minimum Wages 
are eligible for 
revision after a 
df f
 As suggested, the 
amount should be 
enhanced to 
Rs.5000/- linking it to 
price index for future 
revision.   
There should be 
linkages with the 
price index on the 
annual basis that 
would take care of 
this point. 
 
But we do not agree 
with the upper limit 
fh
The apprehensions 
are not unfounded.  
The revision should 
linked to current 
level of All India 
Price Index and to 
be raised every 
three years be 
recommended. 
The Central G
should revise 
bonus from tim
a ver y good 
but to put 
Rs.20,000/- is  
The medical b
from person 
dependin
g o
hl h

 46
However, there is 
no specific 
timeframe within 
which such 
amount is to be 
increased.  There 
is an 
apprehension that 
in absence of 
periodic revision 
of the amount in 
the Act itself, the 
Government may 
remain inactive or 
take long time to 
revise this 
amount.  Please 
furnish your 
comments in this 
respect. 
 
period of five 
years.  We can 
borrow this 
provision and 
review the 
medical bonus 
and other benefits 
under the Act 
after every five 
years and 
enhance the 
benefits.  The 
inactivity on the 
part of the 
Government will 
be avoided by the 
above provision. 
fixation, as the 
Government cannot 
guarantee us upper 
limit of price rise, 
upper limit of 
corporate houses 
enmeshing wealth. 
health, econom
and circumst a
workplace so
holistic appr
o
should be 
various co
n
Looking into t
and standar d
which is 
tremendously 
time the act w
we should p u
system b y w
revised peri o
every 3-5 year
may b e .   I t  ca
with Price Ind
   Some other 
suggestions made 
are: 
 
(a) Maternity leave 
for 1 st as well as the 
second child should 
be 4 and a half 
months to 6 months. 
 
(b) Paternity leave for 
15 days immediately 
after delivery. 
 
(c) Paid leave for 6 
weeks in case of 
miscarriage. 
 
(d) Creches in the 
workplaces – as per 
rules should be set 
up. 
 
(e) Nursing breaks 
for the lactating 
mother should be 
available. 
Some other issues:- 
 
 
(a) We are of the 
opinion that the 
Paternity leave be 
granted but it should 
run concurrently 
with the women’s 
leave in the post natal 
period and should 
not impinge upon her 
right to total leave 
entitled to her. 
 
(b) We also would 
like to impress upon 
you that the 
maternity lave should 
be enhanced from the 
present stipulated 
period of 12 weeks to 
24 weeks. 
 
(c) The leave granted 
in the Act for the 
women who suffer 
miscarriage be also 
enhanced as she is in 
Trauma and needs 
Psychological 
counseling and care 
and needs as much 
rest as the woman 
who delivers in 
normal 
circumstances. 
 
There is need of 
Paternal leave also 
during post-natal 
care.  30 days leave 
should be given to 
father to look after 
the child after 6 
weeks of post-natal 
period. 
 

 47
 
 
 
(d) The insurance 
schemes should 
include maternity 
benefits for those 
who still remain 
uncovered by any 
rules or laws. 
 
 
 
 

 48
         ANNXURE-VII 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR  
 
The Committee sat on 15 June 2007 from 1430 hours to 1600 hours in Committee Room `B’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot   
5. Shri Munawwar Hasan Chaudhary 
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
8. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil 
9. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
10. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
11. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
12. Shri Mohan Rawale 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
   
13. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
14. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
15. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
16. Shri Gandhi Azad 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director 
3. Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
4. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Under Secretary 
 
 
           
  

 49
 
I    REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer   Designation 
1. Shri S. Krishnan   Additional Secretary (L&E) 
 
2. Ms. Gurjot Kaur  Joint Secretary 
 
3. Shri S. K. Verma Director 
 
4. Shri S. Mukhopadhyay  Chief Labour Commissioner (C) 
 
5. Shri A. J. Pawar  Insurance Commissioner, ESIC 
 
6. Shri Kamlesh Kalra  Medical Commissioner, ESIC 
 
7. Dr. S. K. Jain Deputy Medical Commissioner, ESIC 
 
8. Shri R. C. Sharma Joint Director (P&D), ESIC 
 
9. 
 
Shri K.M. Gupta Director, Social Security 
 
II  REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
  
1. Shri Naresh Dayal  Secretary 
 
2. Shri K. D. Maiti  Director 
 
 
 III  REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE 
  
 Shri D.R. Meena  Joint Secretary 
 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for briefing by the representatives of  M i n i s t r i e s  o f  ( i )   M i n i s t r y  o f  L a b o u r  &  
Employment, (ii)  Health and Family Welfare an d  (iii) Law and Justice  (Department of Legal 
Affairs)  on the  “Maternity Benefit (Amendment ) Bill, 2007” referred to the Committee by the    
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 17 May 2007.  
 
 
 
 

 50
 
 
2. The Committee was then briefed by the representatives of the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment on various provisions of the aforesaid Bill.  Representatives of the Ministries of 
Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) and Health and Family Welfare also assisted the 
nodal Ministry. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Members raised queries whic h were replied to by the witnesses.  The 
Chairman then directed the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment to furnish 
within the fortnight written replies to questions for which the replies were not readily available 
with them during the briefing. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 
   A verbatim record of the briefing has been kept.  
 
 
 4. The Committee then decided to hold the next meeting on 3 July 2007 to hear the views of 
the various Women’s Organizations and Trade Unions on the subject.      
 
 
  The Committee then adjourned.  
 

 51
  
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR  
 
The Committee met on Tuesday, 3 July 2007 from 1100 hours to 1300 hours and again from 1430 
hours to 1600 hours in Committee Room `B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
 
  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot   
5. Smt. Sushila Kerketta 
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
8.          Shri Bassangouda R. Patil 
9.          Shri Devidas Pingle 
10. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
11.        Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
12.        Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
13. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
   
14. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
15. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
16. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
17. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
18. Shri Dilip Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
 2.  Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director 
3. Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
4. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Under Secretary 
  
     
 
       

 52
 
Part-I (1100 Hrs. ) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE WOMEN ORGANISATIONS 
 
 
1. Dr. Jaya Kothai Pillai, Secretary General, All India Women’s Conference. 
2. Ms. Sudha Sundaraman, General Secretary, All India Democratic Women’s Association 
(AIDWA). 
3. (i)    Smt. Annie Raja, General Secretary, National Federation of Indian         
        Women.         
(ii)   Ms. Aruna Sinha,Asstt. Secretary, National Federation of Indian 
                 Women. 
4. Dr. Mridula Sinha, BJP Mahila Morcha. 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the women organizations, 
viz. All India Women’s Conference, All Indi a Democratic Women’s Association (AIDWA), 
National Federation of Indian Women and BJP Mahila Morcha who were invited to express 
their views on the proposed  “Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Bill, 2007” referred to the 
Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 17 May 2007 and invited their attention to 
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
2. The Committee were then briefed by the representatives of the above women 
organizations.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Chairman and the Members raised queries which were replied to by the 
witnesses.  The Chairman then requested th e representatives of the various women  
organizations to forward the written replies to questions for which the replies were not readily 
available with them during the discussion within a fortnight. 
 
 
4. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
 
  The witnesses then withdrew.  
 

 53
Part-II (1430 hrs.) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF TRADE UNIONS 
 
1. Smt. Veena Singh, Chairperson, INTUC Central Women Workers Committee. 
2. Smt. Ranjana Nirula, Memb er, Working Committee of CITU. 
(i)      Shri Suryakant Mahadik, President, Bharatiya Kamgar Sena. 
(ii)    Shri Ajit Salvi, Vice-President, Bharatiya Kamgar Sena 
(iii)   Shri S. L. Kaushik, Member, Bharatiya Kamgar Sena. 
(iv)   Shri Gurcharan Singh, Member, Bharatiya Kamgar Sena. 
3. Smt. Amarjeet Kaur, Secretary, All India Trade Union Congress. 
4. Ms. Suchitra Mahapatra, All India Secr etary, Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh, Member, 
Women Cell & Organiser, All India Anganwadi Women Organisation. 
5. Ms. Payal Sharma, Secretary, Hind Mazdoor Sabha. 
 
 
 5. The second part of the meeting began with the Chairman welcoming the representatives 
of the various Trade Unions, viz.  INTUC, CITU, BKS,AITUC, BMS and HMS who were invited 
for the discussion on the proposed Maternity (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and invited their attention 
to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
 
6. The Committee were then briefed by the representatives of  various Trade Unions on the 
provisions of the Bill.  Thereafter, members raised queries which were replied to by the 
witnesses. Then, the Chairman requested the various Trade Unions to send their written replies 
to the List of Questions provided to them by this Secretariat within a fortnight.  
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
8. The Committee then decided to hold the next meeting on 19 July 2007 to hear the views 
of the representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment and CPFC regarding coverage 
of industrial establishments and recovery of outstanding contribution from the employers in the 
States of Uttar Pradesh, Delhi and Haryana under EPF Scheme. 
 
 
 
  The Committee then adjourned.  
 

 54
  
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR  
 
The Committee sat on 3 August 2007 from 1100 hours to 1200 hours in Committee Room `C’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
  
PRESENT 
  
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Subrata Bose 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
5. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan  
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil 
8. Shri Devidas Pingle 
9. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
10. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
11. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
12. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
   
13. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam 
14. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
15. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
16. Shri Gandhi Azad 
  
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.  Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director 
2. Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Under Secretary 
          
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 55
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
1. Smt. Sudha Pillai, Secretary (L&E) 
2. Shri S.Krishnan, Additional Secretary (L&E) 
3. Shri Prabhat C. Chaturvedi, DG, ESIC 
4. Ms. Gurjot Kaur, Joint Secretary (SS) 
5. Shri S. Mukhopadhyay, Chief Labour Commissioner (C) 
6. Dr. Harcharan Singh, DDG (W&C) 
7. Shri S.K. Verma, Director (SS) 
8. Shri R.C. Sharma, Joint Director, ESIC 
9. Dr. Ashok Sahu, E.A 
10. Shri Suraj Bhan, Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the re presentatives of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment, Chief Labour Commissioner and  officials of ESIC  to the sitting and drew their 
attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker.  The following  issues  were 
discussed with them  in brief: 
 
(i) Payment of Medical Bonus of Rs. 1,000/- as a Maternity benefit under the Act for 
each woman worker  who is not covered under ESIC. 
 
  (ii) Involvement of ESIC in the disbursement of Maternity benefit. 
 
(iii) Non receipt of Information  from th e States and Union territories regarding 
disbursement of benefits as well as prosecutions for violation of the Act. 
 
(iv) Strengthening the enforcement machiner y for proper implementation of the Act. 
 
(v)  Broadening the scope of the Act. 
 
(vi) Enhancing the number of Maternity Leave and provision of Paternity Leave. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of La bour & Employment responded to the queries 
raised by Hon’ble Chairman and other members of the Committee.  The Chairman requested 
the Secretary to send written replies latest by 8
th August,2007  to the queries of the members on 
which the information was not readily available with them, as well as  to the Supplementary 
List of Points handed over to them.   
 
  The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
  
 The Committee then adjourned.  
 

 56
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON TUESDAY, 14 AUGUST  2007 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1600 hours in Committee Room 
“E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
5. Smt. Sushila Kerketta, 
6. Shri Virendra Kumar, 
7. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
8. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
9.       Shri Gandhi Azad 
10.       Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.  Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
3. Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
4. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 57
 
 
2.  XX    XX    XX 
 
 
   
3. The Committee then considered the Draft Twenty-Second Report on “The 
Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Bill, 2007.”  The Committee after deliberations on the 
recommendations contained in the Draft Report at length adopted the same with the 
following modification:- 
 
      Page no. 8, Para no. 1.14, line no.10-insert “not more than” before  “three years.”  
 
4. The Committee then authorised the Chai rman to finalise the above Report and 
present the same to the Parliament on their behalf. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.       
     
 
 
 