 
  10 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2005-06) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
 
 
The Labour Laws (Exemption fro m Furni shing Returns and Maintaining 
Registers by certain Esta blishments) Amendment and Miscellaneous Provision s 
Bill, 2005. 
 
 
 
 
        TENTH REPORT 
 
 
      
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 December 2005/Agrahayana 1927 (Saka) 

 
 10 
 TENTH REPORT 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2005-06) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT  
 
 
 
 
The Labour Laws (Exemption fro m Furni shing Returns and Maintaining 
Registers by certain Esta blishments) Amendment and Miscellaneous Provision s 
Bill, 2005. 
 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 20 December 2005 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  20 December 2005 
 
 
 
  
      
  
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 December 2005/Agrahayana  1927 (Saka) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
           P A G E   
          
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii)  
      
 
 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE         ……………………    1 
 
 
ANNEXURE – I The Labour Laws (Exemption from furnishing Returns 
 and Maintaining Registers by Certain Establishment). 
   Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2005. 
     
 
ANNEXURE - II Minutes of the  sittings of the Standing Committee on Labour  
 held  on  5 & 18 October, 28 November 2005 and 15 December 2005  
 
 
APPENDIX  List of Organisations which have furnished their comments/ 
suggestions on the provisions of the Bill.  
 

COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
      (2005-2006) 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Munawwar Hassan Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa   
7. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot   
8. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar    
10. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi   
12. Shri Ananta Nayak   
13. Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal)  
14. Shri Lal Mani Prasad   
15. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
16. Shri Mohan Rawale  
17. Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat   
18. Shri Chandra Pratap Singh   
19. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
20. Shri Parasnath Yadav   
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA  
  22. Shri Gandhi Azad 
  23. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
  24. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
  25. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
  26. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
  27. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  28. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
29. Shri Dilip Ray 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
  SECRETARIAT 
        
 1.    Shri John Joseph  -           Secretary 
2.    Shri N.K. Sapra   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.S. Misra   - Deputy Secretary  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
5.    Shri S.K.Saxena  - Assistant Director  
 
      (iii)

 
  
              REPORT 
 
 
I, the  Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour   having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the report on their behalf present this Tenth Report on the Labour Laws 
(Exemption from Furnishing Returns and Maintaining Registers by certain Establishments) 
Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2005  of the Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 22 August 2005 and was referred to the 
Committee on 30 August  2005 by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E(b) of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  for examination and report within three months 
from the date of reference i.e. 30 August 2005.  The Bill seeks to amend the Labour Laws (Exemption 
from Furnishing Returns and Maintaining Registers by Certain Establishments) Act, 1988 and certain 
other labour laws.      
 
3. The Committee at their sitting held on 5 October  2005   took evidence of the representatives  
of the Ministry of Labour and Employment on the provisions of the Bill.  
 
4.      The Committee at their sitting held on 18 October 2005, decided to invite  
comments/suggestions on the provisions of the Bill from the Employees and Employers Groups.  As 
the extant Bill needs thorough and threadbare co nsideration taking into account all shades of 
opinion, the Committee, therefore, decided to seek extension of time up to 30 January 2005 for 
finalisation of their report.
 Hon’ble Speaker granted an ex tension of time upto 30 January 
2006 for finalizing the report. 
 
5. In response to the request, some of the Central Trade Unions viz., AITUC, CITU, HMS, 
INTUC, BMS and All India Central Council of Trade Unions – Employees Group  and 
Confederation of Indian Industry,  ASSOCHAM, Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry and All India Organisation of Employers  - Employers Group   furnished their 
comments/suggestions on the clauses of the Bill.   The Committee considered these 
comments/suggestions at their sitting held on 28 November 2005.  
 
6. In their  comments/suggestions, the  Central Trade Unions have stated that they were not 
in favour of the Bill, as the proposed am endments would pave the way for further 
exploitation of workers.  They  were, therefore, unable to comprehend how the Government 
had proceeded to frame and introduce the Bill without holding consultations with them in this 
respect.  Although the Employers Group had appreciated the initiatives taken by the 
Government,  they had also shown their reservations on some of the clauses of the Bill.  
 
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Central Trade Unions/Employers Group 
for placing before them their comments/suggestions on the clauses of the Bill. 
 
     - 1 -  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-2- 
 
8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks  to the officers of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment for placing before them detailed written notes on the subject and for furnishing the 
desired information  in connection with the examination of the Bill. 
 
9. The  Report was considered and adopted by  the Committee at their sitting held on 15 
December 2005. 
 
10. The observations of the Committee with rega rd to the proposed amendments in the Labour 
Laws (Exemption from Furnishing Returns and Main taining Registers by Certain Establishments) 
Act, 1988  are detailed in the succeeding paragraph. 
 
11. The Committee express their dismay that  the Government have not shown any 
seriousness before bringing the Labour Laws (Exemption from Furnishing Returns and 
Maintaining Registers by Certain Estab lishments) Amendment and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Bill, 2005 in the Parliament as they have neither consulted the Employees 
Group nor the Employers Group.   The Committ ee are of the view that the laws should 
be made simple in order to be more effective so that the interests of the workers are 
protected but the proposed amendments in the instant Bill seem overwhelmingly in 
favour of employers.  The Committee note that not only the Central Trade Unions but 
the Employers Group have also shown their res ervations on some of the clauses of the 
Bill. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Bill should be returned to the 
Government with the request to hold disc ussions with the Employees and Employers 
Groups before reaching any consensus on reforming labour laws.  
         Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy 
N E W  D E L H I ;        C hairman, 
           16 December 2005                         Standing Committee on Labour  
           25 Agrahayana 1927 (Saka) 
 

 
ANNEXURE - I
As Introduced in The Rajya Sabha 
 on 22nd August, 2005. 
Bill No. LXXXV of 2005 
 THE LABOUR LAWS (EXEMPTION FROM 
FURNISHING RETU RNS AN D M AINTAINING 
REGISTERS BY CERTAIN EST ABL ISIIMENTS) 
AMENDMENT AND MISCELLANE OUS 
PROVISIONS BILL, 2005 
A
BILL
 to nmend the Lnbou r Lnws (Excmption from Furnishing 
 Retums Ilnd Mnilltninillg Regislers by cerlnill 
Esinblishlllellts) Act, 1988 nlld cerlnill olher Inbollr Imps. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of 
the Republic of India as follows: 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short ti tle and
commencement1. (1) Th is Act may be called the Labour Laws (Ex emption
from Furni shing R eturns an d M aintaining R egisters by  C ertain
Establishments) Amendment and  Miscellan eous Prov isions Act,
2005. 
(2) It sh all co me in to fo rce on  su ch date as th e Cen tral
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
3 

 
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE LABOUR LAWS (EXEMPTION FROM 
FURNISHING RETURNS AND MAINTAINING REGISTERS BY 
CERTAIN ESTABLISHMENTS) ACT, 1988 
2. In the long title to the Labour Laws 51 or 1988. 
(Exemption fro m Fu rnishing Retu rns an d Main taining 
Registers by Certain Establishments) Act, 1988 (hereinafter 
referred to  as th e p rincipal Act), for th e words 
"establishments employing a small number of persons", the 
words "certain establishments" shall be substituted. 
3. After section 1 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely: 
"1A. (1) Th is Act sh all, in th e first i nstance, be 
applicable t o every estab lishment in  wh ich n ot m ore th an 
five h undred persons are e mployed or w ere em ployed on  
any day of the preceding twelve months. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, ex tend t he p rovisions of th is Act, with 
effect from such date as may be specified in the notification, 
to any other establishment in which more than five hundred 
persons are employed, or were employed on any day of the 
preceding twelve months." 
Amendment o r 
long title. 
Insertion or new 
section lA. 
Application. 
Amendment o r 
section 2. 4. In section 2 of the principal Act, 
 (I) in clause (c), for the words "Second Schedule", 
the words "Third Schedule" shall be substituted; 
(ii) after clau se (c), th e following claus es shall be
inserted, namely: 
'(ea) "inspector" m eans a n inspector appointed 
by t he ap propriate G overnment un der t he rel evant
provisions of the Scheduled Act; 
(eb) "other estab lishment" means an establi shment
in which not less th an twenty persons are e mployed or
were em ployed o n a ny day  of t he preceding t welve
months; 
4

5  
(iii) in clause (e), the words "not less than ten and" shalI
be omitted; 
 ( iv)clause (f) shalI be omitted. 
5. For section 4 of the principal Act, th e following sections
shalI be substituted, namely: 
"4. (I)  Notwithstandinf, an ythmg co ntallled i n a
Scheduled Ac t, on a nd f rom t he' co mnwncement of thp
Labour La ws (Exem ption from Furni shing R eturns a nd
Maintaining Reg isters b y Certain  Estab lishments)
Amendment and MisceIlaneous Provisions Act, 2005, it shalI
not be neces sary f or an  em ployer i n relation t o a ny sm alI
establishment or other estab lishment to  which  a Sch eduled
Act applies to furnish the returns or to maintain the registers 
required to be furnished or main tained under that Scheduled
Act: 
Substitution 
Of new section
for section 4 
t.Exemption from 
furnishing returns or 
maintaining of 
ers 
ws 
returns and regist
required under 
certain labour la
Old i It ta i 11 i n g 
n.turn~ and 
r('gi~tl~rs <. 
Provided that such employer 
 (a ) furnishes, in lieu of such returns, an 
annual return in Form I; and 
(b) maintains, in lieu of such registers, 
 (i) a register of persons employed-cum 
employment card in Form II, and 
 (ii) a consolidated muster roll-cum-wage 
 register in Form III, 
at the work spot: 
Provided further that every such employer of 
other establishment shall continue to maintain or issue or both 
maintain and  i ssue such wage slip s, em ployment card s an d
wage-books a nd a ny other record as e numerated in the
Second Sched u Ie. 
(2) T he a nnual retur n i n F orm I an d t he re gisters i n
Forms II and 11 1 and wage sl ips, wage books an d other 
records, as e numerated in the Sec ond Sc hed ule, m ay be
maintained by an employer on a c omputer, computer floppy,
diskette or other electronic media: 
Provided t hat a pri nt out  of s uch ret urns, registers ,
books an d rec ords o r a po rtion t hereof i s m ade available t o 
the inspector on demand. 

 
6
Exemption 
the requirem
of displayin
abstracts of
and rules. 
from 
ents 
g of 
 Acts 
(3) The em ployer or the person responsible to fu rnish
the annual return in Form I or any other return enumerated in
the Second Schedule may furnish it to  the Inspector or any
other authority prescribed under the Scheduled Acts through
electronic m ail if th e In spector or th e au thority h as th e
facility to receive such electronic mail. 
(4) Sav e as provided in  su b-section (1 ), all o ther
provisions of a Sched uled Act, i ncluding, i n pa rticular, t he
inspection of the registers by, and furnishing of their copies
to, th e au thorities under that Act, sh all app ly to  th e returns
and re gisters r equired t o be furnished or maintained un der
this Act as th ey apply to the returns and registers under that
Scheduled Act. 
(5) Where an e mployer in respect of an e stablishment
referred to  in  sub-section (1 ), o r notified un der sub-sectio n
(2), of section  lA, to  whom a Sch eduled Act app lies,
furnishes returns or maintains the registers as provided in the
proviso t o s ub- sect ion ( 1), n othing c ontained i n t hat
Scheduled Act shall render him liable to any penalty for his
failure to furnish any return or to maintain any register under
that Scheduled Act. 
4A. Notwithstanding anything contained in a Sched uled
Act, on and from  the comm encement of the Labour La ws
(Exemption from Fur nishing R eturns and M aintaining
Registers by  C ertain Est ablishments) Am endment and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 2005, it shall not be necessary
for an employer, in relation to an establishment to which the
Scheduled Act applies, to display abstracts of Acts and of the
rules framed thereunder." 
6. In section 6 of the principal Act, in clause (a), 
for th e words "with fin e which m ay ex tend to rup ees fiv e
thousand", th e word s "with  imprisonment wh ich m ay ex tend t o
three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees
or with both" shall be substituted. 
Amendment o f
section 6. 

7  
7. For sections 7  and  8 of t he principal Act, th e fo llowing
sections shall be substituted, namely: 
'7. (1) Th e Cen tral Gov ernment may, if it is o f opinion
that it is ex pedient so  to do, b y notification in  t he Offi cial
Gazette, am end any Sc hedule and th ereupon such Sch edule
shall, subject to the 
 provisions of s ub-section (2), be de emed to  h ave b een am ended
accordingly. 
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House
ot Parliament while It IS m sessIOn for a total period of thirty
days w hich m ay be com prised i n one session or i n t wo or
more successi ve ses sions, a nd i f be fore t he e xpiry of the
session im mediately followi ng the sessi on or the  succe ssive
sessions af oresaid, both Houses a gree in m aking a ny
modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the
notification sh ould no t be m ade, th e notification sh all
thereafter have effect onl y in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the  case may be; so, however, that any stich
modification or an nulment s hall b e with out prejudice to  the
validity of anything previously done under that notification. 
8. The a ppropriate Gove rnment or any  au thority dul y
authorised by t he a ppropriate Go vernment may, by  or der,
exempt an y estab lishment fro m th e requ irement o f
maintenance of any register or records 
or furnishing of any return under this Act if that Government
or the authority authorised by it is satisfied that an alternative
mechanism or m ethod o f m aintenance o f record,
electronically or otherwise exists or any arrangement which is
introduced in an establishment meets the requirements of the
concerned re gister o r record or  f urnishing of  any  return o r
notice to the concerned authorities. 
Substitution o f 
new sections for  
section 7 and 8  
 Power to 
amend the 
Schedules  
Power to  
exempt 
Explmwticm. - Fo r th e pu rposes of t his sectio n,
"appropriate Gov ernment", in  relation t o an  estab lishment. 
under th e contro l of th e Cen tral Gov ernment or a railway
administration or major 

 
8
port or a  m ine o r oil fi eld, means t he C entral Government
and in other cases, the State Government' . 
8. For the First Sched ule and the Second Sched ule to the 
principal Act, th e Sch edules sp ecified in th e Sch edule sh all b e
substituted. 
Substitution o f
new Sche dules
for First 
Schedule and 
Second 
Schedule. 
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENTS TO THE WEEKLY HOLlDA YS ACT, 1942 
Substitution of 
new sections for 
section 9. 
9. For section 9 of the Weekly Holidays Act, 1942, 18 of 1942.
the following sections shall be substituted, namely: 
"9. In the event of any  contravention of the provisions 
of section 3 or of section 4 or of a requirement imposed by a 
notification under subsection (1) of section 5 or of section 6, 
the pr oprietor or  o ther person r esponsible for  th e 
management o f th e estab lishment in  wh ich su ch 
contravention takes place s hall be punis hable with fine 
which m ay ex tend, in  t he case of the  fi rst o ffence, t o te n 
thousand rupees, and, in the case of a second or subsequent 
offence, to twenty-five thousand rupees. 
9A. Whoever obstructs an inspector in the discharge of 
his d uties un der th is Act o r refu ses or wilfu lly n eglects t o 
afford the inspector any reasonable facility for m aking any 
inspection, inqu iry o r inv estigation au thorised b y or un der 
this Act i n relatio n to  an estab lishment to  which, or a 
contractor to whom, th is Act ap plies, sh all, o n co nviction, 
be punishable, 
(n) in th e case o f th e first co nviction with  
imprisonment for a ter m wh ich m ay ex tend to  three  
months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in the case of a ny s econd or s ubsequent 
conviction, wi th i mprisonment for a term  which sh all 
not be less than one month but which may extend to six 
months or with fi ne w hich shall n ot be l ess t han t en 
thousand rupees but which may 
Penalties. 
Obstructions. 

9  
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both: 
Provided that if an y p erson wilfully refu ses to  pro duce
on the demand of an inspector any register or other document
kept in  pursuance of th is Act o r prevents o r atte mpts to
prevent or does any thing which he has re ason to believe is
likely to prevent any person from appearing before or being
examined by a n ins pector act ing i n pursuance of his d uties
under this Act, shall, on conviction, be punishable, 
(a) in th e case of th e first con viction, with
imprisonment which may extend to three months or with
fine which may ext end t o t en t housand r upees, or with
both; and 
(b) in the case of any  seco nd o r su bsequent
conviction, with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be l ess t han o ne m onth but which m av ext end t o si x
months or with fi ne which shall not  be l ess t han t en
thousand r upees but  w hich may ext end t o t wenty-five
thousand rupees, or with both.". 
CHAPTER IV
AMENDMENTS TO TilE MINIMUM  WA GES ACT, 
1948 
 11 of 1948 10. For section 22A of the Minimum Wages Act,
1948, 
the following section shall be substituted, namely: 
"22A. Any employer who co ntravenes a ny pr ovision of
this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder shall, if no
other penalty is pr ovided for such contravention by this Act, 
be punishable 
(a) in th e case of t he first con viction, with
imprisonment for a term wh ich m ay ex tend to  three
months or wi th fi ne w hich may ext end t o t en t housand
rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in the case of any second or subse quent 
conviction, with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less th an on e m onth bu t wh ich m ay e xtend to  six
months or with fine which shall not 
Substitution 
nt.~w section
Section 22A 
General 
provision f.
punishmen 
other "ffen, 

-- -- --~ 
10
be less t han ten thousand rupees but which may extend
to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both: 
Provided that if any person wilfully refuses to produce
on t he dem and of a n i nspector any  re gister o r other
document kep t i n purs uance of t his Act  or pre vents o r
attempts to prevent or does anything which he has reas on to
believe is likely to prevent any person from appearing before 
or being examined by an inspector acting in pursuance of his
duties 
under this Act, shall, on conviction, be punishable, 
(n) in th e case of th e first con viction, with
imprisonment for a ter m wh ich m ay ex tend to  three
months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in th e case of  an y seco nd or  subsequ ent
conviction, with im prisonment fo r a term  which sh all
not be less than one month but which may extend to six
months o r with fi ne wh ich shall no t be l ess th an ten 
thousand ru pees bu t which may ex tend to twen ty-five 
thousand rupees, or with both.". 
CHAPTER V
AMENDMENTS TO THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948 
11. In section 95 of the Factories Act, 1948, for the 63 of 1948. 
words "sh all be pu nishable with im prisonment for a term 
which m ay ext end t o si x m onths or with fine which m ay 
extend to ten thousand rupees or with both", the following 
shall be substituted, namely: 
"shall, on conviction, be punishable 
(n) in th e case of th e first co nviction, with 
imprisonment for a ter m which may extend to three months 
or w ith f ine wh ich m ay ex tend to  ten  thousand  r upees, or  
with both; and 
(b) in the case of any second or subsequent conviction, 
with imprisonment for a term wh ich shall not be less t han 
one month but which may 
Amendment o f 
section 95. 

11  
extend to six months or with fine which shall not be less than
ten tho usand rupees bu t which m ay ex tend to twen ty-five
thousand rupees, or with both.". 
CHAPTER VI
AMENDMENTS  TO THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951 
69 OF 1951  12. In section 33 of the Plantations Labour Act, 
1951, i n s ub-sections (1) a nd ( 2), for th e w ords" s hall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term  which may extend
to three m onths, or with fine which m ay ex tend t o five
hundred ru pees, or wi th both", t he following sh all b e 
substituted, namely: 
"shall, on conviction, be punishable 
(a) in the case of the first conviction, with imprisonment
for a ter m wh ich may ex tend to  th ree m onths or with  fi ne
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or ' with both; and 
(b) in the case o f any second o r subsequent conviction,
with im prisonment for a term  wh ich sh all no t b e less t han
one month but which may extend to six months or with fine
which shall not b e less th an ten thousand rupees but which
may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both.". 
'\Amendment o f 
section 33 
CHAPTER VII
AMENDMENTS TO THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER 
NEWSPAPER EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AND 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1955 
45 d 1955 13. In section 18 of the Working journalists and 
other Newsp aper Em ployees (Co nditions o f Serv ice) an d
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955, 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "shall be punishable 
with fi ne w hich m ay ext end t o t wo hundred r upees", t he
following shall be substituted, namely: 
"shall, on conviction, be punishable 
 (n ) in the case of the first conviction, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
Amendment o f
section 18. 

 
12
three m onths or with fi ne which m ay ex tend t o ten
thousand rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in th e c ase o f an y seco nd or  subsequ ent
conviction, wi th i mprisonment for a term  which sh all
not be less than one month but which may extend to six
months or wit h fi ne which shall no t b e less th an ten 
thousand rupees bu t wh ich may ex tend t o twen ty-five 
thousand rupees, or with both."; 
(ii) sub-section (lA) shall be omitted. 
CHAPTER VIII
AMENDMENTS TO THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961 
14. In section 29 of the Motor Transport 27 of 1961. 
Workers Act, 1961, in sub-section (2), for the words "shall 
be punishable with  im prisonment fo r a term  wh ich may 
extend to  three months, or with fine wh ich may ex tend to  
five hund red ru pees, or  with b oth", th e following sh all be 
substituted, namely: 
"shall, on conviction, be punishable 
(a) in  th e case o f th e first co nviction, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months 
or with fine which m ay ext end t o t en t housand r upees, or 
with both; and 
Amendmentof 
section 29. 
(b) in the case of a ny second or subsequent conviction,
with i mprisonment fo r a term wh ich sh all n ot b e less th an
one month but which may extend to six months or with fine
which shall not be less th an ten thousand rupees but which
may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both.". 
CHAPTER IX
AMENDMENTS TO THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965 
15. In section 28 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 21 of 1965. 
for the words "be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
Amendment o f 
section 28. 
. 

n  
may ext end t o o ne t housand r upees, o r wi th bot h", t he
following shall be substituted, namely: 
"shall, on conviction, be punishable 
(11) in th e case o f th e first co nviction, with
imprisonment for a ter m which may extend to three month<;
or with fine which may ex tend to  ten tho usand rup ees~, or
with both; and 
(/I) in the case of a ny second or subsequent conviction,
with im prisonment for a term  wh ich sh all no t b e less t han
one month but which mav extend to six months or with fine
which shall not b e less th an ten thousand rupees but which
may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both.". 
CHAPTER X
AMENDMENTS TO THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF 
EMPLOYMENT)  ACT, 1966 
12 o f 1906. 16. I n sect ion 32 of t he Beedi an d C igar Workers
Conditions of Em ployment) Act, 1966 (h ereafter i n th is
Chapter referred to as the B eedi and Cigar Workers Act), for
the portion beginning with the words "shalI be punishable with
imprisonment" and ending with the words" or with both", the
folIowing shall be substituted, namely: 
"shall, on conviction, be punishable 
(n) in the case of the first conviction, with imprisonment
for a term  which  m ay ex tend to three m onths or with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both; and 
(/I) m the case of  any second or subsequent conviction,
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one
month but  w hich m ay ext end t o si x m onths or with fine
which sh all not b e less th an ten tho usand ru pees bu t which
may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both". 
17. In section 33 of the Beedi and Cigar Workers Act. 
(n) in su b-section (1), fo r the wo rds "with fin e which
may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees and for a second
or any subsequent offence with 
Amcndml'nt. 
S\.~'lion 12 
Anlendmen 
S('ction 3:\. 

 
14
imprisonment for a ter m wh ich sh all n ot b e less th an on e
month or m ore than six months or with fine which shall not
be less than one hundred rupees or more than five hundred or
with both", the following shall be substituted, namely: 
"shall, on conviction, be punishable 
(a) in the case of the first conviction, with imprisonment
for a term  which  m ay ex tend to three m onths or with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in the case o f any second o r subsequent conviction,
with i mprisonment fo r a t erm whi ch s hall not  be l ess t han
one month but which may extend to six months or with fine
which shall not be l ess than ten thousand rupees but which
may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), 
(i) in clause (a), for the w ords " with fine  which m ay 
extend to tw o hundred and fifty rupees", the following shall
be substituted, namely: 
"shall, on conviction, be punishable  
(a) in th e case o f th e first co nviction, with
imprisonment for a term  wh ich m ay ex tend t o three
months or wi th fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in t he c ase of a ny second or subsequent
conviction, with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be l ess t han o ne m onth but  whi ch m ay ext end t o si x
months or with fi ne which shall not  be l ess t han t en
thousand r upees but  w hich may ext end t o t wenty-five 
thousand rupees, or with both."; 
(ii) in clause (b), for the words "with fine which 
may ex tend to  twen ty rupees", th e fo llowing sh all b e
substituted, namely: 
 "shall, on conviction, be punishable 
(a) in th e case o f th e first co nviction, wit h
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 

15  
three m onths or with fi ne which m ay e xtend to  ten
thousand rupees, or with both; and 
(/I) In  t he case of  an y seco nd or  subsequ ent
conviction, with im prisonment fo r a term  wh ich sh all
not be less than one month but which may extend to six
months or with fi ne which shall not  be l ess t han t en
thousand rupees but  which m ay ext end t o t wenty fi ve
thousand rupees, or with both.". 
CHAPTER XI
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND 
ABOLITION)  ACT, 1970 
37 of )970. 18. In section 22 of the Contract Labour 
(Regulation and Abolition)Act, 1970, in sub-sections (1) and 
(7), for the words "shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both", wherever
they occur, the following shall be substituted, namely: 
"shall on conviction, be punishable 
(a) in the case of the first conviction, with imprisonment
for a t erm whi ch m ay ext end t o t hree m onths or with fi ne
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in the case of any  second or su bsequent conviction,
with i mprisonment fo r a term wh ich sh all n ot b e less th an
one month but which may extend to six months or with fine
which sh all not b e less th an ten th ousand ru pees but wh ich
may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both.". 
Anll'ndm('ntof 
""tion 22. 
CHAPTER XII
AMENDMENTS TO THE SALES PROMOTION EMPOYEES 
(CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976 
)1 of 1976. 1,9. In section 9 of the Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions o f
Service) Act, 1976 (hereafter in this Chapter r eferred to as the S ales
Promotion Employees Act), the words and figure" or section 7" shall
be omitted. 
Amendment 
section 9. 

 
16
Insertion of new 
section 9A. 20. After section 9 of t he Sales Promotion Employees Act,
the following section shall be inserted namely: 
"9A. Whoever obstructs an inspector in the discharge of
his du ties u nder th is Act or refuses or wilfu lly n eglects to
afford th e in spector an y reasonable facility fo r making an y
inspection, inqu iry or inv estigation au thorised by or unde r
this Act in  relatio n to  an estab lishment to  wh ich, or a
contractor to whom, this Act applies, shall, on conviction, be
punishable, 
(n) in th e case of th e first con viction, with
imprisonment for a ter m wh ich m ay ex tend to  three
months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in the case of a ny s econd or s ubsequent
conviction, with im prisonment fo r a term  which sh all
not be less than one month but which may extend to six
months o r with fi ne wh ich shall no t b e l ess th an ten
thousand ru pees bu t which may ex tend to twen ty-five 
thousand rupees, or with both: 
Obstruction. 
Provided that if an y person wilfully refuses to produce
on t he demand of an i nspector any  re gister or other
document kep t i n p ursuance of  t his Act or  p revents or
attempts to prevent or does any thing which he has reason to 
believe is likely to prevent any person from appearing before
or being examined by an inspector acting in pursuance of his
duties 
under this Act shall, on conviction, be punishable, 
(n) in th e case o f t he first co nviction, with 
imprisonment for a term  wh ich m ay ex tend to  three
months or with fine which may extend to ten  thousand
rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in the c ase of any s econd or subsequent 
conviction, wi th i mprisonment for a term  which sh all
not be less than one month but which may extend to six
months or with  fin e wh ich sh all not b e less than ten
thousand rupees bu t wh ich may ex tend to twen ty-five 
thousand rupees, or with both.". 

17  
CHAPTER XIII 
A "IENDME1"TS TO THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976 
25 of 1976. 21. In section 10 of the Equal Remuneration Act, 
1976,  
Anwndrnent (11 
...'(.tlnn In 
(0) in su b-section (1), for  the words " he sh all be
punishable with simple im prisonment for a term which ma y
extend to o ne month or wIth fine  which may e xtend to  te n
thousand r upees or  with both", the following sh all be
substituted, namely: 
"he shall on conviction, be punishable 
(0) in the case of the first conviction, with
imprisonment for a term which ma y e xtend to thre e
months or  with fine  which mav e xtend to  ten tho usand
rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in t he c ase 01  a ny s econd or s ubsequent
conviction, with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less th an one mo nth bu t which ma y extend to si x
months or with fine which shall n ot be l ess than ten
thousand ru pees but which may extend to t wenty-five
thousand rupees, or with both." ; 
(/I) in  su b-section (3 ), for th e wo rds "h e sh all b e
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees", the following shall be substituted, namelv: 
"he shall on conviction, be punishable 
(0) in th e c ase of the firs t convic tion, with
imprisonment for a term  wh ich m ay ex tend to  three 
months or with fine which m ay extend to ten 
thousand rupees, or with both; and 
(/1) i n t he c ase of a ny secon d or s ubsequent
conviction, wi th i mprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than one month but which may extend to 
six months or with fine which shall not be less th an ten
thousand ru pees bu t which may ex tend to twen ty-five 
thousand rupees, or with both.". 

 
18 
CHAPTER XIV
 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN 
(REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) 
 A CT, 1979 
22. In section 24 of the Inter-State Migrant 30 of 1979. 
Workmen (R egulation of E mployment an d C onditions of 
Service) Act, 1979, in sub-sections (1) and (2), for the words 
"shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to  two years, or with fine which may ex tend to  two 
thousand rupees, or wi th bot h, the fol lowing shall be 
substituted, namely: 
"shall, on conviction, be punishable 
(a) in th e case o f th e first co nviction, with 
imprisonment for a term  which  m ay ex tend to  three 
months or wi th fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in t he case of a ny se cond or s ubsequent 
conviction, wi th i mprisonment for a ter m which sh all 
not be less than one month but which may extend to six 
months o r wi th fi ne w hich shall n ot be l ess t han t en 
thousand rupees but  w hich may ext end t o t wenty-five 
thousand rupees, or with both.". 
Amendment o f 
section 24. 
CHAPTER XV
AMENDMENTS TO THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND 
 WELFARE) ACT, 1986 
23. In section 14 of the Dock Workers (Safety, 54 of 1986. Health and 
Welfare) Act, 1986, in sub-section (1), for 
the words" five thousand rupees", the words" twenty 
five thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 
Amendment o f 
section 14. 
CHAPTER XVI
AMENDMENTS TO THE CHILD LABOUR (PROHIBITION AND 
 REGULATION) ACT, 1986 
24. In section 14 of the Child Labour (Prohibition 61 of 1986. 
and Regulation) Act, 1986, in sub-section (3), for the words "shall  
be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to 
one month or with 
Amendment o f 
section 14. 

19  
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both".. 
the following shall be substituted, namely: 
"shall, on conviction, be punishable 
(l7i m th e c ase o f th e first co nviction, wit h
imprisonment for a term  wh ich m ay ex tend to  three
months or wi th fine which mav extend to ten thousand
rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in t he case of any  seco nd o r su bsequent 
conviction, wi th i mprisonme'nt fo r a term wh ich sh all
not be less than one month but which may extend to six
months or wi th fi ne w hich shal l not  be l ess t han t en
thousand rupees hut  which may ext end t o t wenty-five 
thousand rupees, or with both,". 
CHAPTER XVII
AMENDMENTS TO THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION 
WORKERS (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF 
SERVICE) ACI, 1996 
27 of 1996. 25. In section 49 of the Building and Other 
Construction Wo rkers (R egulation of Em ployment and
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996, in sub-sections (1) and (2),
for th e wo rds" sh all b e pun ishable with  imprisonment fo r a
term which may ex tend to three months, or with  fine which
may extend to one t housand rupees, or with both" wherever
they occur, the following shall be substituted, namely: 
"shall, on conviction, be punishable 
(n) in th e case o f th e first co nviction, wit h
imprisonment for a term wh ich m ay ex tend to  three
months o r with fine which mav ext end t o t en t housand
rupees, or with both; and 
(b) in t he case of a ny second or subsequent
conviction, with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be l ess t han o ne m onth but  whi ch m ay ext end t o si x
months or with fi ne which shall not  be l ess t han t en
thousand rupees but  which may ext end t o t wenty-five
thousand rupees, or with both,". 
An'\l'ndnlt>nt ( 
Sl.ytion-t9. 

 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 8] 
 THE FIRST
SCHEDULE 
[See section 2(d)] 
1. The Payment of W ages A ct, 1 936 (4 o f 19 36). 2 . 
The Weekly Holidays Act, 1942 (18 of 1942). 3. The 
Minimum Wages A ct, 19 48 ( 11 o f 1948). 4 . The 
Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948). 
5. The Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951). 
6. The Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees 
 (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 (45 of 1955). 
7. The Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 (27 of 1961). 
8. The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965(21 of 1965). 
9. The Beedi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act, 
1966 (32 of 1966). 
10. The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 (37 of 1970). 
11. The Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976 (11 of
1976). 
12. The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 of 1976). 
 13. The Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment 
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979 (30 of 1979). 
 14. The Dock Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) Act, 1986 (54 of 
1986) 
15. The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 (61 of 1986). 
16. T he B uilding a nd O ther C onstruction Workers (R egulation o f
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 (27 of1996). 
20

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See Section –4 (i) 
 
WAGE SLIPS, WAGE BOOKS AND OTHER RECORDS WHICH MAY BE
MAINTAINED IN COMP UTER FLOP PIES, DISKE TTES OR OTHER
ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
 
'1. \V agc slips prescribed in th e rule s made under sections 1 8 and 30 of the
Minimum \Vages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948). 
2. Slips relating to measurement of the amount of work done piece-rated 
worker required to be issued under the rules made und sections 13 A and 26 
of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936). 
3. Wage Book and Service Certificate as prescribed by the rules ma 
under section 62 of the Building and Other Construction Work (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 (27 of 1936). 
4. Record of Eye Examination, Humidity Registers, Register of  
Workers employed for work on or near machinery in motion, Regis1 containing
details of Examination of Hoists and Lifts, Register 
Pressure Plant / Pressure Vessel Register of Examination of G Holders, Health
Register, Register of Accidents and Dangerous Occurrence and other records to
be maintained under the Factory Rules made under sections 12, 13, 21, 26, 28,
29, 31, 34, 35, 38, 41, 85, ~ 88A and 89 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948). 
5. Return to be su bmitted by the Contractor to the Licensing Officer and 
register of contractors to be maintained by  the Principal Employ er 
pursuance of the rules made under section 35 of t he Contract Labou r 
(Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 (37 of 1970). 
6. Registers prescribed by the rules made in pursuance of clause (4) 
section 2, sections 15, 17 and 18 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 1965). 
7. Monthly return by an employer to the competent authority specifying the
quantity of t obacco release d by t he Ce ntral Excise Department and th e
number of beedi and cigar or both manufactured I him and the register of
work for the wetting or cutting of beedi or tobacco l eaves by employees
outside the industrial premises prescribed by t] rules made under section 44
of the Beedi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act, 1 966 (32
of 1966). 
8. Register of periodical test and examination and certificates thereof
be maintained under Regulations 41, 47, 49 and 51 of the Dock Workers (Safety,
Health an d Welfare) R egulations, 1990 m ade u nder sec tion 2 1 o f t he Doc k
Workers (Safety, Heal th and Welfare) Act, 1986 (54 of 1986). 
21 

 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (c)] 
FORM I [See section 4(1)] 
 AN NUAL RETURN 
 (To be furnished to the Inspector or the authority specified for this 
purpose under the respective Scheduled Act before the 31st January of the 
following year) 
 (ending 31st December 
1. Name of the establishment, its postal address, telephone 
 number, FAX number, e-mail address and location 
2. Name and postal address of the employer 
3. Name and address of principal employer, if the employer is a 
 cont ractor 
 4. Name of the Manager responsible for supervision and control 
 (i) Name of business, industry, trade or occupation carried on 
 by the employer 
 (ii) Date of commencement of the business, industry, trade or 
 occu pation 
5. Employer's number under Employees State Insurance/ 
 Employees Provident Fund/Welfare Fund/PAN No., if any_ 
6. Maximum number of workers employed on any day during the 
 year to which this return relates to: 
High Skilled Skilled Semi-skilled Un-skilled Category 
Male 
Female 
Children (those 
who have not 
completed 18 
years of age) 
Total 
22

23  
7. Average number of workers employed during the year. 8. Total 
number of mandays worked during the year. 
9. Number of workers during the year 
(a) Retrenched 
(b) Resigned (c) 
Terminated 
10. Retrenchment compensation and terminal benefits paid 
 (provide information completely in respect of each worker) _ 
11. Mandays lost during the year on account of 
(a) Strike 
(b) Lockout 
(c) Fatal accidents 
 (d ) Non-fatal accidents 
12. Reasons for strike or lockout 
13. Total wages paid (wages and overtime to be shown separately) 
14. Tot al am ount o f de ductions from wages made: 15.
Number of accidents during the year: 
Reported to 
Employees' 
State 
Insurance 
Corporation 
Reported to Inspector of 
Factories/Dock Safety 
Reported to Workmen's Othe 
Compensation 
Commissioner 
Fatal Non-
fatal 
16. Compensation paid under the Workmen's Compensation AI 1923 (8 of
1923) during the year_ ___ 
(i) Fatal accidents 
(ii) Non-fatal accidents 
17. Bonus* 
(a) Number of employees eligible for bonus: 

 
24 
(b) Percentage of bonus declared and number of employees who 
were paid bonus: 
(c) Amount payable as bonus: 
(d) Total amount of bonus actually paid and date of payment: 
Signature of the Manager/Employer 
 with full name in capital letters 
Place: 
Date: 
ANNEXURE TO FORM 1*
Number of 
mandays 
worked 
Nature of 
work 
Maximum Number of 
number of days worked 
 workers 
employed by each contractor 
Period of 
contract 
From to 
Name and 
address of 
the 
Contractor 
6543 2 1 
*Delete, if not applicable. 

FORM II [See 
section 4(1)] 
 REG/S1ER OF PE RSONS EJ \II'LOYEO-CUJ\I-EMPLOYJ\IENT
CARD 
 
Name of the establishment, address, telephone number, FAX. 
number and e-mail address __ ____
. .
Location of work __ 
Name and address of Principal Employer if the employer is a Contractor----------
1. Name of workman/ employee 2. 
Father's/Husband's name 3. Address 
(i) Present 
(ii) Permanent 
4. Name and address of the nominee/next-of-kin 
5. Designation/Category _ ____ 
6. Date of Birth/ Age 
7. Educational qualifications 
8. Date of entry 
9. Worker's ID No./ESI/EPF/L.W.F. No. 
10. If the employed person is below 14 years, whether a certificate of 
age is maintained 
1]. Sex: Male or Female 
12. Nationality 
13. Date of termination of employment with reason 
14. Signatures/ thumb impression of worker/employee 
15. Signature of the employer / Authorised officer with designation 
I
Signature of the Contract 
 au thorised representative 
of the Principal Employer:
25

 
FORM III 
[See proviso section 4 (1)] 
MUSTER ROLL-CUM-WAGE REGISTER
Name of the Establishment and address 
Location of work 
Name and address of Employer ______________________________ 
Serial Name of the Designation/ Attendance  Leave due Leave availed Wage rate/  Other allow- 
number worker (lD No. category / (Dates of the (Earned leave (Specify) payor piece  ances, e.g. 
 if any/ and nature of month 1.2,..  and other  rate/wages (a) Dearness 
 father's work to 31)  kinds of  per unit  Allowance 
 husband's performed   admissible   (b) House Rent 
 name    leave)    Allowance 
        (d Night 
         Allowances 
        (d) Displacement 
         Allowance 
        (e) Outward 
         Journey 
         Allowance 
        (a)  
        (b)  
        (d  
        (d)  
        (e)  
 10 11 12  13 14 15  16 
Overtime Amount of Amount of Total/ gross  Dp.ductions Net amount Signature/  Remarks 
worked overtime advance and earnings  e.g. payable receipt of   
number of wages purpose of  (a) Provident (\ 2 13) wages!   
hours in the advance   Fund  allowances   
month    (b) Advance  for column   
    (d Employees'  number 14   
     State     
     Insurance     
    (d) Other     
     amount     
   
 
    (d      
    (d)      
    
    
Certificate by the Pr incipal E mployer T his is to
certify that the contractor shown in this register. 
(a)   
(b)     has paid wages to workmen employed by him as 
if the employer is a contractor. 
Signature of Prin cipal Em ployer/ Aut horised 
Representative of Principal Employer 
26 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
Parliament enact ed f rom t ime t o t ime a num ber of l abour l aws for 
regulating emp loyment an d co nditions o f service of wo rkers. Whenever a n ew 
law was e nacted,  i t pres cribed cer tain r egisters to be m aintained b y the e mployers. 
Simultaneously, the laws also prescribed for furnishing of returns of various details by the 
employers to  th e. concerned en forcing authorities. Over  the  years, th e num ber of s uch 
registers to be maintained and the returns to be furnished by the employers under different 
labour laws has increased cons iderably.  The   (Labour La ws (E xemption fr om 
Furnishing Retu rns and  Maintain ing Reg isters b y certain  establishments)  Act, 
1988 was e nacted t o p rovide. f or t he (exemption o f e mployers i n r elation t o 
establishments em ploying a sm all  num ber of pe rsons f rom furni shing ret urns 
and maintaining registers under certain labour laws. Small establishments were 
exempted from furnishing returns a nd maintaining registers under certain enact 
ments mentioned in th e first Schedule to the Act an d instead they were required 
to furn ish ret urns an d m aintain reg isters in  th e fo rms set o ut in  th e Second 
Schedule to the Act. However, over the, years there have been persistent demand 
from various quarters II simplify the forms of various returns to be furnished and 
registers t o b , m aintained by t he em ployers under different l abour l aws. T he 
Second N ational C ommission o n Labour has al so recommended f or 
simplification of th e forms o f return s a nd r egisters and ex tending th en to all  
establishments irrespective of the number of employees Accordingly, in line with 
the recommendations of the Second National Commission on Labour and to meet 
the demand from various quarters the Central Government constituted a Working 
Group to study and suggest the simplification of the forms and registers. 
2. After considering the recommendations of the Working Group, i has been 
decided to amend the Act, inter-alia, to provide for the. following:  
(1) to simplify c1l1d rationalise the forms and registers specified ( in the 
Second Schedule to Act; 
(2) to extend the applicability of the Act to estab lishments in which not
more than 500 persons are employed or were employed on any day of the
preceding t welve m onths an d al so t o em power t he C entral Go vernment t o 
extend th e applicab ility o f the Act to establish ments e mploying m ore t han
500 persons by notification in the Official Gazette; 
27 

 
28 
(3) to design c omputer-based forms and  m ake pr ovisions f or
transmitting the returns electronically; 
(4) to amend the First Sch edule to the Act (which specifies nine
enactments) including the rein seven more enactments so that the em ployers
covered under all those sixteen enactments need to furnish or maintain only
the common forms of returns or registers specified in the proposed Second
and T hird Sch edules t o t he Act i nstead o f un der t he i ndividual Sc heduled
Acts; 
(5) to prescribe penalties on a uniform basis for obstructions and 
non-maintenance of  rec ords and re gisters t hrough am endments in all the  
sixteen enactments listed in the First Sch edule to the Act ex cept in case o f
the Paym ent o f Wages Act , 193 6 as a sep arate am ending leg islation in
respect of the same is being considered by Parliament. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. The notes on clauses 
explain the various provisions contained in the Bill. 
K. CHANDRASEKHARA RAG
NEW DELHI; 
The 1st AU8ust, 2005. 

 
Notes on  clauses 
Clause 1. - This clau se provides for the short title an d commencement of
the pr oposed legislation. I n orde r t o ena ble t he C entral Gove rnment t o t ake
necessary steps for a dministrative preparedness, sub-clause (2) seeks to empower 
the Cen tral Go vernment to  appoint, by notificatio n in  the Official Gazette, th e 
date of commencement of the Bill, when enacted. 
Clause 2. - The long title of the Labour La ws (Exemption from Furnishing
Returns and Maintaining Reg isters by certain Establishments) Act, 19 88 clearly
indicates t he fact of e xemption of em ployers i n rel ation o f est ablishments
employing a small num ber of persons from furni shing r eturns a nd m aintaining
registers und er certain labou r laws. It  is p roposed to am plify th e scop e of
applicability of th e Act to establishments employing not more than five hundred 
persons. It is also proposed to empower the Central Government to alter the said
upper limit. It is accordi ngly, proposed  t o am end the long title of the  Act vi de 
clause 2 of the Bill. 
Clause 3. - Sub-clause (1) of this clause seeks to insert a new section I A in
the Act providing for the application of the Act. Subsection (1) of the proposed 
new sect ion I A provides t hat t he p rovisions of t he Act would be  ap plicable t o
establishments, whi ch a re e mploying or e mployed not  m ore t han fi ve hu ndred
persons on any day of the preceding twelve months from the reckoning date. Sub-
clause (2) seeks to empower the Central Government to extend the provisions of
the Act. by notification in the Official Gazette, to establishments employing more 
than five hundred workers on any day of the preceding twelve months from the
reckoning date. 
Clause 4. - This clause inter alia seeks to define the expressions "inspector" 
and" other establishment". It is proposed to clarify that the word "inspector" used 
in the Act sh all refer to  the inspector appointed by the appropriate Government
under the relevant provisions of the 
concerned Scheduled Act. This definition is on the lines of the provisions of other
labour laws. 
Clause 5. - This clau se seeks to substitute section 4 of the Act relatin g to
exemption from returns a nd registers required under certai n labour laws and also
to insert a n ew section 4A in  the Act relating to exemption from the requirement
of displaying of abstracts of Acts and rules at work premises. 
29

 
30 
As per sub-section (1) of the proposed new Section 4, the employer of small
and other establishments to which the Act applies is required to furnish, instead of
furnishing returns under the Scheduled Acts, annual return in Form-I appended to 
the Th ird Sched ule t o t he Act. Sim ilarly th ey are required  t o m aintain on ly a
register of persons employed-cumemployment card in Form-II and a consolidated 
muster roll-cum-wage register in Fo rm-III appended to t he Third Sc hedule to the
Act in stead of v arious registers to  b e main tained und er th e Sch eduled Acts.
However, the em ployers of ot her establishments, i.e. establishments em ploying 
not less than twenty persons are required to continue to maintain wage books and
issue wage sl ips a nd em ployment cards  a nd ot her rec ords e numerated i n t he
Second Schedule. Th is will si mplify th e procedure and redu ce th e number o f
registers which the employers are required to maintain. 
As per s ub-section ( 2) o f t he pr oposed new sect ion 4, t he em ployers can
maintain annual returns in Form-I and the registers in Forms-II and III and wage 
slips, wage books and other records in computers, computer floppies, diskette or 
other electronic media. However, the employer shall be required to give print outs
to the inspector on demand. 
Sub-section (3) of the proposed new section 4 seeks t o apply the procedure
laid down under the relevant Scheduled Act in the case of furnishing of returns 
and maintaining of registers under the Act. 
Sub-section (5) of t he proposed new section 4 see ks to provide and clarify
that the employer who furnishes the returns and maintains the registers under the
Act shall not be punished for non-furnishing of such returns and non-maintenance 
of such registers under the Scheduled Acts. 
The pr oposed n ew sectio n 4 A seek s t o exem pt the e mployers o f
establishments t o whi ch t he Scheduled Act s appl y, f rom displaying abs tracts o f
Acts and rules framed under those Acts. 
Clause 6. - Th is clau se seek s to  am end sectio n 6 of the Act relatin g t o
penalty. It  i s obs erved t hat t he pe nalty pr ovided i n t he Act i s not  st ringent o r
adequate en ough for dete rrent effect. It is, there fore, proposed to enhance the
penalty for fi rst conv iction fro m" fiv e thousand rupe es", as  at present, t o
"imprisonment, which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees or with both". 
Clause 7. - This clau se seeks to substitute sections 7 and 8 of th e Act. The 
proposed new section 7 empowers the Central Government to 

 
11
.amend, th e notification i n the Offici al Gazette any Schedule t o t he Act.
However, every notification issued under this section is required to be laid before
each House of Parliament. 
The proposed new section 8 empowers the appropriate Government or a ny
authority dul y aut horised b y such Government t o ex empt. by  or der, an y
establishment from the requirement of maintenance of any register or record if it
is satisfied  that su itable altern ative arrang ement h as been  in troduced. Th e
Explanation to th is clause clarifies that "appropriate Government", in relation to
an est ablishment un der t he cont rol of t he C entral Go vernment or a rai lway
administration or m ajor port or m ine or oi l field means the Central Government
and in other cases, the State Government. 
CIause' 8. - Th is clause seeks to rev ise the ex isting two Sch edules of the
Labour Laws (Exemption from Furnishing Returns and Maintaining Registers by
certain Establishments) Act, 1988 in the following manner: 
(i) The First Schedule contains the names of the sixteen Scheduled Acts 
as against nine enactments as at present. The enactments now proposed to be
added to the First Sch edule are(i) th e Motor Transport Workers Act, 1 961, 
(ii) th e Paym ent of Bonu s Act, 1965, (iii) th e Beed i and  Cig .ar Workers
(Conditions of Em ployment) Act. 1 966, (i7 » th e In ter-State Mig rant 
Workmen (R egulation of E mployment an d C onditions of Service) A ct.
1979, (v) the Dock Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) Act, 1986, (vi) the 
Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, IIJ86 and (vii) the Building 
and Other C onstruction Wo rkers (Regulation of  Em ployment and
Conditions of Service) Act. 1996. 
(ii) Th e Secon d Schedule co ntains th e details o f those ad ditional
records, which will be maintained by the emplovers of other establishments,
in d ifferent circu mstances, in ad dition to  t hose prescribed u nder th e Th ird
Schedule. 
(iii) At present, the forms are now ap pended to the Second Schedule to
the Act. It is proposed to revise the Forms and put them under the proposed
Third Schedule. 
CIauses 9 to 24. - O ne of t he recommendations o f t he Seco nd Nat ional
Commission on Labour has been that the penalties prescribed under the different
Labour laws should be enhanced to make them at par with those presc ribed in the
Labour Laws (Ex emption from Fu rnishing Returns and Maintaining Registers b y 
certain Establishments) Act, 

 
32 
1988. R ecently, t he Department R elated Parliamentary St anding C ommittee on
Labour and Welfare, wh ile examining the Payment of Wages (Amendment) Bill,
2002, also observed that the penalties and fines should be made more stringent in
order to have a deterrent effect on t hose who violate the laws. It is, accordingly,
proposed that the penalties for obstructions and non- maintenance of the records
may be prescribed on a un iform basis in all the Scheduled Acts so  that penalties
for non-maintenance of records are uniform in the Labour Laws (Exemption from
Furnishing Retu rns and  Mai ntaining Reg isters b y certai n Estab lishments) Act,
1988 as well as in  th e Sch eduled Acts. In case of a sec ond or any s ubsequent
conviction, penalty at a higher rate is proposed to be prescribed so that there is no
apathy on t he part  of t he e mployer t o m aintain re gisters o r furnish returns as
required by the law. 
It i s pr oposed t hat t he pe nalty for a sec ond o r any  s ubsequent co nviction
shall be imprisonment for a term, which shall not be less than one month, and may
extend to six months or fine which shall not be l ess than ten thousand rupees but
which may ex tend to  twen ty-five thou sand rupees, or with  bo th. It is, th erefore,
proposed to lay down a u niform scale of penal ty by amending all the Scheduled
Acts, ex cept th e Paym ent of Wages Act, 19 36 i n respect o f which separate
legislation has been considered. Accordingly 
 (i ) clause 9 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 9 relating to 
penalties of the Weekly Holidays Act, 1942; 
(ii) clause 10 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 22A relating to 
general provisions for punishment of other offences of the Minimum Wages 
Act, 1948; 
 (iii ) clause 11 of the Bill seeks to amend section 95 relating to 
penalty for obstructing inspector of the Factories Act, 1948; 
 (iv ) clause 12 of the Bill seeks to amend section 33 relating to 
obstruction of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951; 
(v) clause 13 of the Bill seeks to amend section 18 relating to penalty of 
the Working Jo urnalists an d Oth er Newspaper Em ployees (Con ditions o f 
Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955; 
 (vi ) clause 14 of the Bill seeks to amend section 29 relating to 
obstructions of the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961; 
 (vii ) clause 15 of the Bill seeks to amend section 28 relating to 
penalty of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965; 

 
33
(viii) clauses 16 a nd 1 7 of the Bill seek to am end sections 32
relating to penalty for obstructing inspector and 33 relating to general 
penalty fo r o ffence, res pectively, of t he B eedi and Cigar Workers 
(Condition of Employment) Act, ]966; 
(ix) clause]8 seeks to amend section 22 relating to obstructions of the
Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970; 
(x) clause 19 of the Bill seeks to amend section 9 relating to penalty of 
the Sales Prom otion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976 and 
clause 20 thereof seeks to insert a new section 9A relating to obstructions; 
 (xi ) clause 21 seeks to amend section) 0 relating to penalties of 
the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976; 
(xii) clause 22 seeks to amend section 24 relating to obstructions of the 
Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996; 
(xiii) clause 23 of the Bill seeks to amend section 14 relating to 
penalties of the Dock Workers (Safety. Health and Welfare) Act, ]986; 
(xiv) clause 24  of th e Bill  seek s to  amen d section  14  relatin g t o
penalties of the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, ] 986; and 
(X11) clause 25 of the Bill seeks to amend section 49 relating to penalty
for o bstructions o f t he B uilding an d Other C onstruction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996. 

 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill, inter alia, seeks to substitute section 7  of the Labour
Laws (Exemption from Fur nishing R eturns a nd M aintaining o f R egisters b y
certain Estab lishments) Act, 19 88 relating to  power of Central Gov ernment t o 
amend t he Sc hedules. S ub-section ( 1) of t he p roposed new sect ion 7 seeks t o
empower th e Central Gov ernment to  am end, by no tification in th e Official
Gazette, any Schedule to the Act. Sub-section (2) of the said section requires that 
every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be required to be laid before
each House of Parliament. 
2. The aforesaid matter relates to procedure of an administrative detail and it
is not practicable to provide for it in  the Bill itself. Th e delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
34 

 
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROI\I THE LABOUR LAWS (EXEMPTION FROM 
FURNISHING RETURNS AND MAINTAINING REGISTERS BY 
CERTAIN ESTABLISINENTS) ACT, 1988 (51 OF 1988) 
* * ** *
An Act  t o provide for t he exem ption of em ployers i n
relation t o est ablishments employing a sm all num ber o f pers ons
from furnis hing retu rns an d m aintaining reg isters und er certain
labour laws. 
** ** * 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, Drfinition!-t. 
** ** * 
(c) "Form" means a Form specifie d in the Sec ond
Schedule; 
* *** * 
(I') "sm all est ablishment" means an  estab lishment in
which not less than ten and not more than nineteen persons
are employed or were employed on any day of the preceding 
twelve months; 
(j) "very s mall establishm ent" m eans an es tablishment
in which not more than nine persons are employed or were
employed on any day of the preceding twelve months. 
*** * * 
4. (1) On  and from the commencement of this Act, it shall
not be necessary for an e mployer in relation to any sm all
establishment or very small establishment to wh ich a Sch eduled
Act ap plies to fu rnish th e retu rns o r to  maintain th e reg isters
required to be furnished or maintained under that Scheduled Act: 
Exemption tronl 
returns ilnd 
Tf'gisters 
required under n-
rtain labour lil\\'~. 
Provided that such employer 
 (a ) furnishes, in lieu of such returns, a Core 
Returns in Form A; 
35

 
36 
(b) maintains, in lieu of such registers, 
 (i) registers in Form B, Form C and Form D, in 
the case of small establishments; and 
(ii) register in Form  E, in the case of ve ry s mall
establishments: 
Provided further that every such employer shall continue to 
(a) issue wage slips in the Form prescribed in the 
Minimum W ages (C entral) Rules, 1 950 made un der 
sections 18 and 30 of the Minimum 
Wages Act, 1948 and slips relating to 11 of 1948. 
measurement of the am ount of work done by piece-
rated workers required to be issued under the Payment 
of Wages (M ines) R ules, 1956 m ade u nder sect ions 
13A and 26 of the Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936; and 4 of 
1936. 
(b) file returns relating to accidents under sections 88 and 
88A of the Factories Act, 1948 
and sections 32A and 32B of the Plantations 63 of 1948. 
Labour Act, 1951. 69 of 
1951. (2) Save as provided in sub-section (1), all other provisions
of a Scheduled Act, including in particular, the inspection of th e
registers by, and furnishing of their copies to, the authorities under
that Act, sh all ap ply to  th e re turns a nd re gisters re quired t o be
furnished or maintained under this Act as they apply to the returns
and registers under that Scheduled Act. 
(3) Where an employer in relation to a small estab lishment
or very sm all estab lishment to  wh ich a Sch eduled Act ap plies,
furnishes returns or m aintains th e registers as pro vided in  th e
proviso to  sub-sectio n-(1), no thing con tained in  th at Sch eduled
Act shall render him liable to any penalty for his failure to furnish
any return or to maintain any register under that Scheduled Act. 
  

37  
to co mply with  th e on 
conviction, be 6. Any  employer w ho fails
provisions of this Act shall, punishable 
(0) in th e case o f t he first co nviction, with fi ne which
may extend to rupees five thousand; and 
** * * *
7. The Central Government may, if it is o f opinion that it is
expedient so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, am end 
any Form and thereupon such Form shall, subject to the provisions
of sub-section (2), be deemed to have been amended accordingly. 
Power to 
amend form 
(2) Any notification issued under sub-section (I) shall be laid
before each House of Parliament, if it is sitting as s oon as may be
after th e issu e o f th e notification, and  if i t is n ot sitting; with in
seven days of Parliament to the notification by a resolution moved
within a period of fifteen days beginning with the day on which the
notification is so  laid  b efore th e Hou sf' o f th e People, an d i f
Parliament makes a ny m odification i n t he notification or di rects
that the notifi cation should cease to have effect, the not ification
shall thereafter have effect only in  such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be, but without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done thereunder. 
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, th e Central Government may, b y o rder, not inco nsistent
with the provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Power!o 
difficulties.
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of
a period of two ~'ears from the date on which this Act receives the
assent of the President. 

 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 2(d)] 
(1) The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of1936). (2) 
The Weekly Holidays Act, 1942 (18 of 1942). (3) The 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948(11 of 1948). 
(4) The Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948). 
(5) The Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951). 
(6) The Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees 
(Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 (45 of 1955). 
 (7) The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 (37 
of 1970) 
 (8) The Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 
1976 (11 of 1976). 
 (9) The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 of 1976). 
38 

 
SECOND SO IEDULE
[See section 2(c) 
FORM A 
[See Section 4 (1) proviso (a)]   
CORE RETURNS 
RETURN FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31 DECEMBER 
(Tobe fumished on  orbefore tfhe 15th  February of the succeeding year by small 
establishments and very small establishments 
1. (a ) Nam e and postal ad dress of t he est ablishment. (b)  
Name and residential address of the employer. 
(c) Name and residential address of the Manager or person 
responsible for supervision and control of the establishment. 
 (d) Name of the principal employer 111 the case at a contractor’s 
esta bl ishment. (e) Date and postal address of the establishment 
NATUR OF OPERATION/INDUSTRY/WORK CARRIED ON  
 
 2. (a) Number of days worked during the year. 
(b) Number of mandays worked during the year. 
(c) Daily hours of work. 
(d) Day of weekly holiday. 
3. (a) Average number of persons employed during the year. (i) Males. 
(ii) Females. 
(iii) Adolescents (those who have completed 14 years 
have not completed 18 years of age). 
 (iv) Children(those who have not completed 14 years of a~ 
(b) Maximum number of workers employed on, any day during year. 
(c) N umber o f wo rkers discharged, di smissed, ret renched o r w hose
services were terminated during the year. 
39 

 
40 
4. Rates of wages-categorywise. 
 (1) Males (2) Females (3) Adolescents (4) Children 
 5. Gross Wages paid: 
 (a) in cash. 
 (b) in kind. 
6. Deductions: 
(a) Fines. 
(b) Deductions for damage or loss. (c) 
Other deductions. 
 7. Number of workers who were granted leave with wages during 
the year. 
 8. Nature of Welfare amenities provided: Statutory (specify the 
Statute). 
9. Does the establishment carry out any hazardous process or dangerous 
operation coming within the meaning of the Factories Act, 1948. If so, give 
particulars. 
 10. Number of Accidents: 
(a) Fatal. 
(b) Non-fatal. 
11. Nature of safety measures provided as required under the 
Factories Act, 1948. 
Signature of the employer with full name in: capitals. 
Date. ... .. ..... ... .. 
Place ................... 

 
FORM B 
ISee section 4(1) proviso (b)(i) 
REGISTER OF WAGES REQUIRED TO BE: MAIN'IAINED BY SMALL ESTABLISHMENTS 
(To be maintained within seven days of the expiry of the wage period) 
'~s oi emplove'r ___ __ . 
Name of E'stablishment
Address (Local) 
Name and addnNature' of work.
Wag!' period __
lolal 
da\'s 
num 
her of 
unib. 
~nHk. 
,,1 
Bask \'\'agl' DeMStatu. 
.'ktual nl''';" 
tory .\  
11o\\' , 
~1ini .111((' 
ilium 
r~t(' 
OWf 
tlmt' 
Wilgc:) earned 
("erma nen t) 
father's 
or hus-
band's 
namf' 
S<>Tldl Ndme of the S<>x Oesig. 
Num- empIN'e(' nation 
h('f 
CI.1ssification 
\.dwthl'f pNmtt-
Il('nt/tt>mporary I 
ca~uJI/parl-tlm(' or 
",nr other 
Bonu" Malt'f- Cra- ."lIr 
<IT nll\ tUlh' otlwr 
1'.\ bt.'II(" <illo\\
"- 
grJII/(/ ht.. ,1I1Ct
' 
1 I 12 1:1 I ~ I 3I (}
\\'agt's 
t'drtH.'t
1 Total Advanu's 
amount 
Ot'durtions 
Fines 
due to 
damage 
or loss 
h~ nt'g 
it'ft or 
defaull 
Emplo. 
n'rs 
contn-
~ution 
Provident Fund Sign". SIy,na R(,lllarb
tUft' 01 :!Irt' pI  
thumb Im_pl't_  
ImpH's- tOI  
sinn (It \\ dh  
l'l1\pIO\'- d.lh'  
\'i'(' "Ith   
daft>   
26 17 2B 
Employees'Sldk 
 In surance 
Other loldl 
deduc. deduc. 
tions lions 
indICa 
ting the natur(' 
\:el 
dtn(lunt 
pa\'dhlt
> 
Emplo. 
YN'<; 
contri-
hution 
Emplo-
yers' 
contn. 
bution 
Emp. 
lon'es 
fontn-
bution 
J 6 17 18 19 20 2 ) 22 2~ 25
Notes: 1. In case of deduction of  any advance take'n by an em ployee, the' emplover shall
also indicate therein the nu mber of instalments paid/ total instalnwnts b y which advance' 
is to be' paid such as "5/20, 6/20", etc. The purpose of advance shall also be mentioned in
th., Remarks column. 
2. In ca se of im position of fi nes or d eduction f or damage o r lo ss, t he s pecific , Kt or om ission ac t o r
omission wh ich th e p enalty h as b een im posed has  to  l1l ' i ndicated in the Remark s colu mn. A
ceertificate' shall also be rec orded in the said column to the e ffect that an opportunity to show ca use'
was give'n to the employee concerned befon' imposition of fine' or deduction. 
Signature of the em plover with full name' in capitals. 
DatE'H' .................
Place..... ..................... 
41 

 
FORM C 
[See section 4(1) proviso (b)(i)] 
MU.STER ROLL TO BE MAINTAINED BY SMALL ESTABLISHMENTS 
Name of establishment Name and address of employer 
Nature of workAddress (Local) 
(Permanent)   Wage period    
Serial Name of the Date of Permanent Age or date Fath..r's or For thl' period Total
Number employ<-'" employment address of birth husband's ending.......... aU..n-
     name Number of units dance
      of work done  
      during.........  
 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
Compensatory rest 
Signature of Remarks Ins 
pector \V i th 
 datt) 
Total production in 
case of piecerated 
workers2 
Tot"lovertime 
worked' Given during the
wage p(}riod 
Brought forward from 
previous wagt.' 
period 
11 9 10 12 13 14
Notes : 1. In the case of daily-rated workers, the extent of overtime done on each occasion
has to be ref lected against each conc erned date, such as "P/l" meaning "Present with one
hour's overtime," "P/I-2" meaning "Present with one and a half ho ur's overtime", and s o
on. 
2. The number of units of work done by a pi ece-rated worker has to be noted for each day in 
the Register. In case of em ployment of an y child/adolescent, the e mployer shall indicate
the hours worked each day with intervals of rest. 
3. The compensatory rest availed by the worker has to be marked in the Register 
 in red ink as 'CR'. 
4. Column 7 to be filled up on each working day and the remaining columns to be 
 completed within seven days of the expiry of the wage period. 
Signature of the employer with full name in capitals. 
Date................................. 
Place................................. 
42 

 
FORM (D) 
[See section 4(1) proviso (11) (i) I 
~'1():\n IIY REGI<';TFR 5110\\ I'\iG \-VII.fARE Ar-If'\!ITIES TO IH. M AI.'\,TAI:\ ED BY S~IALI 
ESI'\RLlSI-Ir-1F~TS 
For th,' nH,"th of.......AddrC'ss of the establishm,'nt: 
Local/I'prmanent 
Name an d .1 ddrl'ss of t he
emploY"'n.. nnn.n'nnn.  
1>1>"lhn
~. tH1/1
\'umhlOI ,., 
.,"li,tI 1"',1\,\' 
,,,,.,,h.d b\ 
Ih.. l'mpll'\'t'1' 
\\t'I.''''I) 
d,t\' \IJ 
fl,..t
O.1h."' III twh,t"" hlf 
h'...lIv.11:-. 01 
..imilM (\th,",
S.-n,d 
\;uml'"'r 
Vthll1ltml 01 .10Ilu.11 
 I .. wl \\"jlh \\.'~l'''' 
  
\\'h ... 'III\'1 Schl'ttt,I,,',f 
 C .y...k / .......Iwdull.d 
I ril'tt, f i.tndll.IPPI'J, 111.un 
tlth.." p.lrtl\"UI.lrl,lh'glln 
It.....t I h-inkmg First.ud
f\"llnm ""'.1h'I'  
HI 11 12 
\\'I1\"II1\"1 \Vl'Ilan' Am...nitil ............. provided hlr Sign,atun'lIt 
tht..'l'mp!t'\-l'r 
orlll........ 'gl.ut 
RI'IH.1:1...," th__' 
InSpl'dlltg ()tli"'1 
"'.gll<.lll1n.'01 
III"'Pl'lh11' with 
1:.lh' 
I"15 I~
Notl' . 1'" bl' compll't,'d within Sl'ven days of the expiry of e,Kh c.,l,'ndar month. 
Signature of the I'mplover with full naml' in capitals. 
Date......... ............
Place..... ................
43 

 
FORM E 
[See section 4(1) proviso (b)(ii)] 
 MONTHLY REGISTER OF MUSTER ROLL-CUM-WAGESjREQUIRED TO BE 
MAINTAINED BY VERY SMALL ESTABLISHMENTS 
Year .................................................... 
Month ........................................................or 
wage period 
(Where different) ............................. 
Name o f e stablishment .............. ............. Nam e o f 
employee .............. ..................... Nat ure of w ork 
......................................... W age period 
.............................................. 
Father's nam e ..... ..................................... Rate of 
wages ............... ........................... Dat e o f
employment .............................. 
Dah' Hours of work Intervallor 
 Rest and 
Mea
Hours 
worke<
i with 
the 
emp-
loyer 
From To 
Overtime Casual 
or sick. 
Hours Wages ness 
worked earned leave 
 ava iled 
 dur ing 
 t he month/ 
 wag e period
 Privile ge Leave Signature Remarks
 oft he of the 
leave leave BalaIlCl' employer employer 
due availed 
l From To 
6 7 8 12 13 144 10 1193 
Remuneration Due   Deductio
ns    Net Date of Signature Signature
         amount payment or thumb ofInspec-
Basic 
Overtime Other Total Fines 
and Other Advance paid if, anv ci  impres- tor with
salar)'  allowance
s,  deductions deduc-    payment  sion of the 
remarks, 
or  ifan)'  on 
aC\'(}unt tions Dale Amount Total   employe
e if any,
wage    of damage        and 
    or loss by        dale 
    neglect or         
    default         
15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
Note: Columns 1 to 12 to be filled up on each working day and the remaining columns 
 to be completed within seven days of the expiry of the wage period. 
Signature of the employer with full name in capitals. 
Oal................................... 
Place................................. 
44

 
E\TRACTS I'RO\11HF \ VEEKI Y HOLlDAYS ACT, 1942 
(1801'1942) 
*** * * 
9. In the event of any contravention of the provisions I"-"all"". 
of sect ion 3, o f sect ion 4, of a  re quirement im posed by 
notification under sub-section (1) of section 5, of section 6, or of 
the rules made u nder cl ause (C) of su b-section 2 of sect ion 10, 
the proprietor or other person responsible for the management of 
the estab lishment in wh ich su ch con travention tak es place sh all 
be punishable with fine which may extend, in the case of the first 
offence, t o t wenty-five rupees, and, in the case of a second 
offence or subsequent offence, to two hundred and fifty rupees. 
* * *
.
* * 
EXTRACT FR01\1 TIlE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948 (11 OF 
1948) 
** ** * 
22A. Any employer who contravenes any provision of this
Act or of a ny rul e o r o rder made t hereunder s hall, i f n o ot her
penalty i s pr ovided f or su ch co ntravention by t his Act, be
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
(General 
provision for 
punishment of 
()ther offences 
* * * * *
  -- --"---   
 EXTRACT FROM THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948  
  (63 OF 1948)   
* * * * *
Penalty for 
obstructin
g 
Inspector 
95. Whoever wilfully obstructs an I nspector in the exercise
of a ny po wer con ferred o n h im by  or un der t his Act , o r fails t o
produce on demand by  an  Ins pector an y regi sters o r ot her
documents in his custody kept in pursuance of t his Act or of a ny
rules m ade thereunder or c onceals or prevents a ny worker in a
factory from appeari ng before , or being examined by, an
Inspector, sh all b e p unishable "with  im prisonment fo r a ter m
which 
45 

 
46 
may ext end t o si x months o r wi th fi ne which m ay ext end t en
thousand rupees or with both. 
*** ** 
EXTRACT FROM THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951 (69 OF 
1951) 
** ** * 
CHAPTER VII 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
Obstruction. 33. ( 1) Whoever o bstructs an  inspector in t he disc harge of
his duties under this Act or refuses or wilfully neglects to afford
the in spector any reason able facility fo r making an y insp ection,
examination or inquiry authorised by or under this Act in relation 
to any  pl antation, s hall be punishable wi th i mprisonment fo r a
term which may ex tend to three months, or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
(2) Wh oever wilfully  refuses to p roduce o n the demand o f
an inspector any register or other document kept in pursuance of
this Act, or prevent or attempts to prevent or does anything which
he has reason to  believ e is lik ely to  prev ent an y person fro m
appearing before or bei ng examined by  an i nspector a cting i n
pursuance of hi s dut ies u nder this Act, shall be pu nishable with 
imprisonment fo r a t erm wh ich may ext end t o t hree m onths, o r
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
* * * * *
EXTRACT FROM THE W ORKING J OURNALISTS AND OTHE R
NEWSPAPER EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AND 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1955 
(45 OF 1955) 
* * * * *
18. (1) If any employer contravenes any of the provisions of
this Act or any rule or order made 
Penalty. 

 
47
thereunder, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
two hundred rupees. 
(1A) Whoever, having been convicted of any offence under
this Act, is ag ain co nvicted of an y offen ce inv olving th e
contravention of the same provision, shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
** * * *
.
EXTRACT FROI\I THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS Ac r, 1961 (27 OF 1961) 
* * ** *
CHAPTER VIII
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURf 
*** * (Jbstrudion....
29. (1) * 
(2) Whoever wilfuHy refuses to produce on the demand of 
any inspector any register or other document kept in pursuance of
this Act, or prevent or attempts to prevent or does anything which
he has reason t o bel ieve i s l ikely t o prevent  a ny pers on from
appearing bef ore o r being examined by an ins pector a cting in 
pursuance of  his du ties under th is Act, shall b e pun ishable with
imprisonment for a  t erm wh ich m ay ext end t o t hree m onths, or
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
** * * * 
Extract from the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 
OF 1965) 
* * * * * 
Pendltv
28. If any person 
 (n ) Contravenes any of the provisions of this Act 
or any rule made thereunder; 
or 

 
48 
(b) to whom a direction is given or a requisition is made
under th is Act fails to  co mply with  t he d irection or
requisition, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term whi ch m ay ext end t o s ix m onths, or with fi ne w hich
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
**** * 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BEEDI AND CiGAR WORKERS 
(CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT) ACT, 1966 
 (32 OF 1966) 
**** * 
32. Whoever obstructs the Chief Inspector or an Inspector in
the exercise of any powers conferred on him by or under this Act,
or fai ls to p roduce o n de mand by  the C hief Ins pector o r an
Inspector a ny register o r other document k ept i n hi s cu stody i n
pursuance of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, or conceals
or prevents any employee in an industrial premises from appearing
before or being exam ined by the Chief Inspector or a n Inspector
shall b e pun ishable with imp risonment for a term  wh ich m ay
extend t o t hree months, o r with fi ne w hich m ay ext end t o five
hundred rupees, or with both. 
33. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, any
person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of any
rule made thereunder, or fails to pay wages or compensations in 
accordance with any order of the appellate authority passed under
clause (b) of subsection (2) of section 31, shall, be punishable, for
the first offen ce, with fi ne which may extend to two  hundred and
fifty ru pees and f or a seco nd or any  s ubsequent of fence wi th 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one month or
more than six months or with fine which shall not be less than one
hundred rupees or more than five hundred or with both. 
(2) (a) Any employer who fails to reinstate any employee in 
accordance with the order of the appellate authority pass ed under
clause (b) of sub-section (2) o f se ction 3 1, s hall be punishable
with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees. 
Penalty for 
obstructing 
Inspector. 
GCI1l,,,,1 p enalty 
for offence, 

 
49
(h) Any employer, who, after having been convicted under
clause (n), continues, after tl1(' date of such conviction. to fail to
reinstate an employee' in accordance with the order mentioned in
that clause, shall be punishable, for each day of such default, with 
fine which may extend to twenty rupees. 
.... .. .. ..
EXTRACT FROM THE CONTRACT LABOUR 
(REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970 
(37 OF 1970) 
 .. .. .. .. .. 
CHAPTER VI
PENAlTIES AND PROCFDLJRE 
22. (1) Whoever obstructs an inspector in the discharge of his  
discharge of hi s duties un der this Act  or ref uses or wi lfully 
neglects to afford the inspector any reasonable facility for making 
any in spection, ex amination, in quiry or inv estigation au thorised 
by or under this Act in relation to an establishment to which, or a 
contractor t o whom, th is Act ap plies, sh all b e p unishable with  
imprisonment for a term wh ich may ex tend to  th ree months, or 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
(2) Whoever wilfully refuses to produce on the demand of 
an inspector any register or other document kept in pursuance of 
this Act o r prevents or attem pts to p revent o r does any th ing 
which he has reason t o believe i s l ikely t o prevent any  per son 
from appearing before or being examined by an inspect or acting 
in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term wh ich may ex tend to  th ree months, or 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
.. .. .. .. .. 

 
50 
EXTRACT FROM THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS 
OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976 (11 OF 1976) 
**** * 
9. If any employer contravenes the provisions of section 4 or 
section 5 or section 7 or any rules made under this Act, he shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
Penalty. 
**** * 
EXTRACT FROM THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976 (25 OF 
1976) 
**** * 
 10 . (1) If after the commencement of this Act, any 
employer, being required by or under the Act, so to do 
 (a ) omits or fails to maintain any register or other 
 document in relation to workers employed by him, or 
 (b ) omits or fails to produce any register, 
 muster-roll or other document relating to the 
 employment of workers, or 
(c) omits or refuses to give any evidence or prevents his 
agent, serv ant, or  an y other person in ch arge of  t he 
establishment, or any worker, from giving evidence, or 
(d) omits-or refuses to give any information, 
he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to on e month or w ith fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees or with both. 
Penalties. 
**** * 
(3) If any person being required so to do, omits or refuses to 
produce to an Inspector any register or other document or to give
any in formation, he sh all b e punishable with  fine which m ay
extend to five hundred rupees. 
**** . * 

 
51
EXTRACT FROM THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN 
(REGULATIONS OF EMPLOYJ\IENT AND CONDITION Of SI'RVICE) 
ACT, 1979 (30 OF 1979) 
* * * * *
24. (1) \-Yhoever obstructs an inspector or a person  
appointed under sub-section (3) of section 20 (hereinafter referred 
to as t he authorised person) in the discharge of his duties under 
this Act or refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the inspector or 
authorised person an y reaso nable facility fo r m aking an y 
inspection, examination, inquiry or investigation authorised by or 
under th is Act in  relatio n t o an  estab lishment to  wh ich, or a  
contractor t o whom, th is Act ap plies, sh all b e p unishable with  
imprisonment for a term  which may extend to two years, or with 
fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) Whoever wilfully refuses to produce on the demand of 
any inspector or authorised person any register or other document 
kept in pursuance of this Act or prevents or attempts to prevent or 
does anything which he has r eason to believe is likely to prevent 
any person from appeari ng be fore or being e xamined by  a ny 
inspector or a uthorised person act ing i n p ursuance o f his d uties 
under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a t erm 
which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to 
two thousand rupees, or with both 
* * **.. 
EXTRACT FROM  THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND 
WELFARE) ACT, 1986 (54 OF 1986) 
* ** * * 
Penalties.14. (1) Whoever, 
(n) wilfully o bstructs an  Insp ector in  ex ercise o f an y
power conferred by or under this Act or fails to produce on
demand by an Inspector any register or other documents kept
in pu rsuance of t he re gulations or ot herwise i n con nection
with any 

 
52 
dock work or conceals or prevents or attempts to prevent any
person f rom appea ring before, or being e xamined by , an
Inspector; or 
(b) unless duly authorised or i n case of necessity,
removes any  fencing, ga ngway, gea r, l adder, l ife-saving 
means or appliance, light, mark, stage or other thing required
to be provided by, or under, the regulations; or 
(c) having i n case o f necessity rem oved a ny suc h
fencing, ga ngway, gea r, l adder, l ife-saving m eans o r 
appliance, light, mark, stage or other thing, omits to restore it
at the end of the period for which its removal was necessary,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with the fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees, or with both. 
* * * * *
EXTRACT FROM THE CHILD LABOUR (PROHIBITION AND 
REGULATION) ACT, 1986 
 (61 OF 1986) 
* * * * *
PART IV 
MISCELLANEOUS
14. (1) * 
(3) Whoever 
(a) fails to give notice as required by section 9; or 
 (b ) fails to maintain a register as required by 
section 11 or makes any false entry in any such register; or 
**** Penalties. 
(c) fails to  d isplay a no tice c ontaining an abstract of
section 3 and this section as required by section 12; or 
(d) fails to  co mply with  or con travenes an y o ther
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, 

 
53
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend
to one m onth or wi th fi ne which m ay ext end t o t en t housand
rupees or with both. 
.. .. .. ....
..
EXTRACT FROM THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION 
WORKERS (REGULATION OF EMLOYMENT AND CONDITION OF 
SERVICE I: BUILUI:'-i(. ANO OTHER CO:\'STRLCnON \,yORKERS 
(REGUI.ATlO!\: or EMPLOYMENT AND CONOIIit 1N ()F SERVin) 
ACT, 1996 
 ( 27 m 1996) 
.. ...... .. 
49. (1) Whoever obstructs an Inspector in the disc harge of
his dutIes under this Act or refuses or wilfully neglects to afford
the In spector any reason able facility fo r mak ing an y in spection,
examination, inquiry or investigation authorised by or under this
Act in relation  t o an  establish ment sh all b e pun ishable with
imprisonment fo r a t erm wh ich m ay ext end t o t hree m onths, o r
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) Whoever wilfully refuses to produce on the demand of
an Inspector any register or other document kept in pursuance of
this Act or prevl>nts or att empts to  preven t or does an ything
which he has reason t o believe is lik ely to  prevent an y p erson
from appearing before, or being examined by, an Inspector acting
in pursuance of his duties under this Act shall be punishable with
imprisonment fo r a t erm wh ich m ay ext end t o t hree m onths, o r
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
Pt~l1~llt \' 101 
obstrLh:til)lb. 
.. .. .... .. 

-3- 
                                                                                                                            
                                   ANNEXURE-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2005-2006) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 5 OCTOBER  2005. 
 
The Committee met from 1100 to 1430 hours in  Room No. `139’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
6. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
7. Shri Virendra Kumar    
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
9. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
10. Shri Mohan Rawale  
11. Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat   
12. Shri Chandra Pratap Singh 
13. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
             
RAJYA SABHA  
 
14. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
15. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
16. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.    Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
 3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena              -           Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-4- 
 
    I.  REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MI NISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT  
 
  
Sl.No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri K.M. Sahni   Secretary (L&E) 
2. Shri J.P. Singh Additional Secretary (L&E) 
3. Dr. H.N. Gupta Labour &  Employment Adviser 
4. Smt. Rama Murali Financial Adviser (L&E) 
5. Shri K. Chandramouli Joint Secretary  
6. Shri J.P. Pati Joint Secretary 
7. Shri Manohar Lal Joint Secretary (DGLW) 
8. Shri K.K. Mittal Joint Secretary (DGE&T) 
9. Shri Uday Kumar Verma Director (V.V. Giri NLI) 
10. Shri S.K.Mukhopadhyay Chief Labour Commissioner 
(Central) 
11. Dr. Ashok Sahu Economic Adviser 
12. Dr. Harcharan Singh Director 
   
 
 
II REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE 
 
1. Shri S.R. Dhaleta  Joint Secretary & Legislative 
Counsel  
2. Shri R. Sreenivas Additional Legislative Counsel 
  
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members and officials of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment and the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) to the sitting 
of the Committee.  He apprised them about “The   Labour Laws (Exemption for Furnishing Returns 
and Maintaining Registers by Certain Establishm ents) Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions 
Bill, 2005” which was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 22 August 2005 and was referred to the 
Committee by Hon’ble Speaker for examination and re port within three months from the date of 
reference, i.e. 30 Augus t 2005 in terms of Rule 331 E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha.     
  
3. Labour Secretary, while explaini ng the salient features of th e proposed amendments in the 
Bill, inter-alia informed the Committee as under:-  
  
 (1) The Act would be applicable to establishments employing upto 500  
workers from the present level of 19; 
 
 
 
 
 

-5- 
 
(2) The Central Government would be empowere d to extend applicability of the Act, if 
need arises, to establishments empl oying more than 500 workers by way of 
notification; 
 
(3) All establishments are required to mainta in only two registers (register of persons 
employed-cum-employment card and consolid ated muster role-cum-wage register) 
and furnish one annual return. 
 
(4) Registers/records could be maintained  in computers, floppy, diskette or other 
electronic media and return submitted through E-mail. 
 
(5) Employers would be exempted from displaying abstracts of the Acts and rules framed 
under the Scheduled Acts. 
 
(6) To increase the penalty in a uniform manner in all the Scheduled Acts (except the 
Payment of Wages  Act, 1936). 
 
[The Committee  adjourned for Tea-Break at 1210 hrs. and reassembled at 1225 hrs.] 
  
4. Thereafter,  Labour Secretary  briefed on the subject “Making Labour Markets Flexible”.  He 
informed the Committee that the main focus is on job creation.  He also suggested the amendments 
in the Contract Labour (Regulat ion and Abolition) Act, 1970 and in  the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947.   
 
5. Members were, however, of the view  that nothing could be suggested suo-motu on the 
proposed Labour Reforms in the country unless the same is referred to by  Hon’ble Speaker, Lok 
Sabha to them for examination and report.  
 
   (  The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
  A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
 
6. Hon’ble Chairman then apprised the Member s about the postponement of proposed tour of 
the Standing Committee to Kolkata, Chennai and Hyderabad which was scheduled to  commence on 
17  October 2005.  
 
7. The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet  again on 18 October 2005 to have general 
discussion on the provisions of  the Labour Laws (Exemption from Furnishing Returns and 
Maintaining Registers by Certain Establishments ) Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 
2005. Members were also informed that they might send their suggestions/ame ndments, if any, on 
the proposed Bill by 14 October 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-6- 
 
 
8. The Committee then adjourned to meet agai n at 1100 hrs. on Thursd ay  6 October 2005 to 
have a briefing by the representati ves of the Ministry of Textiles  on “The Central Silk Board 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005. 
     ------- 
 

-7- 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2005-2006) HELD ON TUESDAY, 18 OCTOBER 2005. 
 
The Committee met from 1100 to 1400 hours in Committee Room  `B’, Parliament House 
Annexe,  New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
6. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
7. Shri Virendra Kumar    
8. Shri Ananta Nayak 
9. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
10. Shri Chandra Pratap Singh 
11. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
             
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
13. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
14. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.    Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
 3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena              -           Assistant Director 
        
 
 

 
-8- 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed  the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
and apprised them that (i) “The  Labour Laws (Exemption for Furn ishing Returns and Maintaining 
Registers by Certain Establishments) Amendment a nd Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2005” and (ii) 
“The Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005” have been referred to the Standing Committee on 
Labour by Hon’ble Speaker for examination and report within three months from the date of 
reference i.e. 30 August and 12 September 2005 respec tively of rule 331E of the Rule of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
     
3. The Committee then took up “The Labour Laws (E xemption for Furnishing Returns and Maintaining 
Registers by Certain Establishments) Amendment an d Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2005” for discussion.  
While discussing on the clauses of the Bill, Members were of the view that the comments/suggestions of the 
Employers’ and Employees’ Groups might be invited be fore taking any final decision, as the Bill, if passed 
would have a lasting effect on the welfare of the labo urers.  The Committee, therefore, unanimously decided 
to make a request to Hon’ble Speaker  to extend the time granted for finalisation of the report on the Bill for a 
further period of two months.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up the Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005 for discussion. 
The discussion over the proposed amendment Bill mainly cen tered around the protection to farmers, technical 
training and subsidized financial assistance to small and marginal farmers engaged in sericulture, nature and 
composition of the Silkworm Seed Committee and provision of grainages by the States for use of small and 
marginal farmers. 
 
  The Committee were of the opinion that the repor t would be finalised on “The Central Silk Board 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005” after hearing the views of the farmers, reelers and weavers during the ensuing visit 
of the Committee to Bangalore and Hyderabad.  
 
5. A reference was also made regarding the visit of the Swedish Parliamentary Delegation to India to 
meet the Hon’ble Chairman and Members of the Standi ng Committee to exchange their views on the issue of 
(i) Employment and Labour reforms in India in the context of globalisation and (ii) Unemployment and job 
losses due to BPO activities.  The Co mmittee expressed their view that since they would be meeting on 
Monday, 31 October 2005 to discuss future programme  of the Committee, the request of the Swedish 
Parliamentary Delegation be acceded to meet them at 1130 hrs. on 31 October 2005. 
 
   The Committee then adjourned. 

-9- 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2005-2006) HELD ON MONDAY, 28 NOVEMBER 2005. 
 
The Committee met from 1500 to 1600 hours in Committee Room  `D’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Munawwar Hassan Chaudhary 
6. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
9. Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat 
10. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
             
RAJYA SABHA  
 
11. Shri Gandhi Azad 
12. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
11. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.    Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
 3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena              -  Assistant Director 
 

-10- 
  
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed  the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
and apprised them that (i) “The  Labour Laws (Exemption for Furn ishing Returns and Maintaining 
Registers by Certain Establishments) Amendment a nd Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2005” and (ii) 
“The Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005” had been referred to the Standing Committee on 
Labour by Hon’ble Speaker for examination and report within three months from the date of 
reference i.e. 30 August and 12 September 2005 re spectively under rule 331E of the Rule of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. First of all, the Committee took up “The La bour Laws (Exemption for Furnishing Returns 
and Maintaining Registers by Certain Establishm ents) Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions 
Bill, 2005” and were informed that H.S. had been  kind enough to grant extension of time up to 30 
January 2006 to invite comment s/suggestions from the Employers and Employees Groups on the 
provisions of the Bill as the extant Bill needs thorough and threadbare consideration taking into 
account all shades of opinion. 
     
4. The Committee  were also informed that out of 26 organisations, which were  asked to furnish their 
comments/suggestions on the provisions of the Bill, onl y 10 organisations had res ponded to this effect i.e. 
AITUC, CITU, HMS (combined), INTUC and BMS  - Employees Group and Confederation of Indian 
Industry and ASSOCHAM – Employers Group. Other three organizations ha d sought extension of time for 
furnishing their comments/suggestions on the Bill and they had been asked to send the same by 1 st December 
2005. 
 
5. Hon’ble Chairman also apprised  the Committee that  the Central Tr ade Unions are not in favour of 
the Bill and they are of the view that the proposed am endments would pave way for further exploitation of 
workers.  They are, therefore, unable to comprehe nd how the Government have proceeded to frame and 
introduce the Bill without holding consultations with th em in this respect.  They have requested the 
Committee to send back the proposed Bill to the Gove rnment directing them to hold discussion with the 
Central Trade Unions and make efforts first to decide the direction and then reach a consensus on reforming 
labour laws.  Although the Employers Group have appreciat ed the initiatives taken by the Government,  they 
have shown their reservations on some of the clauses of the Bill.  
  
6. The Committee, therefore, unanimously decided to  send back the Bill to the Government with the 
request to hold discussion with the Central Trade Unions and other stakeholders on the provisions of the Bill 
before bringing the same to the Parliament.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-11- 
 
 
7. The Committee then took up the Central Silk Bo ard (Amendment) Bill, 2005.  Hon’ble Chairman 
informed the Committee that they held informal discussion with the farmers, reelers, weavers and Central Silk 
Board during their recent study tour to Bangalore and Pochampalli in Andhra Pradesh. Seed farmers have 
opposed this Bill. They were of the view that this Bill is detrimental to the interests of the farmers and were of 
the opinion that the Karnataka Seed Act is quite in orde r.  Response of the State Government of Karnataka  
also seems to be negative to the proposed amendment.  It was informed during tour that the Bill had been 
circulated to the State Governments and their responses were awaited.  In this regard the Committee decided 
that they might have further discussion with the representatives of the Ministry of Textiles and the Central 
Silk Board after they receive res ponses from the State Governments.  As such, the Committee decided to 
request the Hon’ble Speaker to grant extension fo r a period of 3 months upto 12 march 2006 for the 
presentation of the Report on the Bill to both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
8. The Committee also decided to hold their next sitting on 5 December 2005 to consider and 
adopt draft Reports of the Committee on Action Ta ken by the Government on their Fifth and Sixth 
Reports on Demands for Grants, 2005-06 relating to the Ministry of Labour and Employment and 
the Ministry of Textiles respectively.   
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 

-12- 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING CO MMITTEE ON LABOUR 
HELD ON 15 DECEMBER 2005. 
 
 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to  1600hrs. in Committee Room `D’ 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Joachim Baxla        
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
5. Shri Virendra Kumar 
6. Shri Lal Mani Prasad    
13. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
14. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
             
RAJYA SABHA  
 
15. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
10. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
  1.    Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
  3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena              -  Assistant Director 
        
 
 

-13- 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about the two Draft Reports on “Development Schemes for Handloom Sector” 
and “The Labour Laws (Exemption from  Furnishing Return s and Maintaining 
Registers by Certain Establishments) Amen dment and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 
2005.”  
 
  3. XX  XX   XX   XX 
 
4. The Committee then considered the draft Tenth Report on “The Labour Laws 
(Exemption from Furnishing Returns a nd Maintaining Registers by Certain 
Establishments) Amendment and Miscellane ous Provisions Bill, 2005.”  and adopted 
the same without any amendments. 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports and present 
the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
  
6.  XX  XX   XX   XX  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

-14- 
                                                                                          APPENDIX 
 
 
LIST OF ORGANISATIONS WH ICH HAVE FURNISHED THEIR 
COMMENTS/SUGGESTIONS ON THE PROVISIONS OF THE BILL.  
 
 
EMPLOYEES GROUP 
 
1. United Trade Union Congress, Kolkata 
2. All India Central Council of Trade Unions 
3. Centre of Indian Trade Unions 
4. Hind Mazdoor Sabha 
5. Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh 
6. Indian National Trade Union Congress 
 
 
EMPLOYERS GROUP 
 
 
7. Confederation of Indian Industry 
8. ASSOCHAM 
9. Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
10. Council of Indian Employers 
11.       All India Organisation of Employers 