      
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Fortieth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on the 
`Problems being faced by workers due to sickness of HMT units’] 
 
 
 THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2010/ Sravana, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
13 

THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Fortieth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on the 
`Problems being faced by workers due to sickness of HMT units] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20th August, 2010  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20th August, 2010  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
August, 2010/Sravana, 1932 (Saka) 
  


CONTENTS 
       
       
   PAGE(S)   
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government‘s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
  
   replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require 
reiteration…………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature    ……………………………………………… 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report  
  (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-10) 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL-CHAIRMAN 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Shri  M. Anandan 
3. Shri  P. Balram  
4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq   
5. Shri  Sudarshan Bhagat 
6. Shri  Hassan Khan 
7. Shri  Kaushalendra Kumar 
8. Shri P. Lingam 
9. Shri  Hari Manjhi 
10. Shri  P.R. Natarajan 
11. Smt. Mausam Noor 
12. Shri  S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri  Ramkishun 
14. Shri  Mahendra Kumar Roy 
15. Shri  Chandu Lal Sahu 
16. Shri  Murari Lal Singh 
***17. Shri Raj Babbar 
*****18. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar    
******19. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
*******20. Dr. P. L. Punia 
21. Vacant 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
23. Shri  Rudra Narayan Pany 
**24. Shri  Pyarelal Khandelwal 
25. Shri  Rajaram 
26. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 27. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 *28. Shri  Mohammad Adeeb 
****29. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal   
******30. Vacant  
        31. Vacant 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*    Changed the nomination from Committee on Labour to Committee on  
      Commerce w.e.f. 17th September, 2009. 
**    Expired on 6th October, 2009. 
***    Nominated w.e.f. 3rd December, 2009. 
 ****    Nominated w.e.f 31st December, 2009. 
 *****   Nominated w.ef 11th January, 2010. 
 ******  Nominated w.ef 26th February, 2010. 
 ******* Nominated w.e.f. 4th August, 2010. 
  
  

 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri B.S. Dahiya    - Director  
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
 4.    Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Thirteenth Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Fortieth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
on `Problems being faced by workers due to sickness of HMT 
units’.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at 
their sitting held on 22.07.2010. 
2. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report of the Committee 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
3. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed 
in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                     HEMANAND BISWAL 
21 July, 2010                                          CHAIRMAN, 
29 Asadha, 1932 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
     
  
 
 

CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Labour deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Fortieth Report (14 th 
Lok Sabha) on `Problems being faced by workers due to sickness of 
HMT Units‘ relating to the Ministry of L abour and Employment which 
was presented to Lok Sabha, and laid in Rajya Sabha, on 25.02.2009.  
The Report contained seven recommendations/observations. 
 
2. The Fortieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 25.02.2009.  The Ministry of Labour and Employment 
were required to furnish the action taken replies by 24.05.2009 i.e. 
within 3 months of presentation of the Report.  The Ministry were also 
issued due reminders in this regard but of no avail.  The Ministry did 
not even observe basic courtesy to seek extension of time for 
furnishing the action taken replies  as per the well -established 
parliamentary practice.  Miffed with such blithe unconcern on the 
part of the Ministry, the Committee were compelled to direct the 
Ministry at t heir sitting held on 01.07.2010  to furnish the requisite 
replies within 10 days . The Ministry finally furnished their replies 

indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that 
Report on 12.07.2010.   
While deprecating such a perfunctory attitude of the 
Ministry, the Committee expect that hereinafter the Ministry will 
take parliamentary work seriously and also with utmost 
seriousness and furnish reasons as to why the basic courtesy of 
seeking extension of time was dispensed with.   
3. The action taken replies of the Government in respect of all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 
12.07.2010.  These have been categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government —Rec. Sl.Nos. 2, 6 and 7 (Para Nos. 37, 
41 and 42).  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‘s reply – NIL 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the  
Committee and which require reiteration—NIL. 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which replies of 
the Government are interim in nature -Rec.Sl.Nos.1,3,4 and 
5. (Para Nos. 36, 38, 39 and 40) 

 
  
4. The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect of 
recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action taken 
notes in respect of recommendations contained in Chapter -V for 
which only interim replies have been given by the Government 
may be furnished to them a t the earliest and in any case no t 
later than three months of the presentation of this Report.   
 
5.      The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations which merit 
comments in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Problems of workers in HMT Units 
 
 (Rec. Sl. No.1, Para 36) 
6. The Committee noted that HMT was set up in 1953 for 
manufacture of machine tools in collaboration with a Swiss company 
named OERLIKON.  As of now, the company has subsidiaries of 
machine tools, watches, bearings, HMT International and Praga Tools 
under the ambit of holding company, HMT Limited.  At present the 
company has 8873 permanent employees and 1700 contract workers 
in its different units.  The Committee f ound that the company was 

plagued with various problems ranging from inharmonious industrial 
relations to lower wages and inhospitable working conditions which 
are having direct bearing on the workforce of the company.  Thi s has 
significantly eroded not only the confidence of the workforce but their 
numerical strength also.  The inept handling on the part of the 
Government and management of the company has done irreparable 
damage to the interest of the workers and to the fut ure of the 
company as well. Lack of foresight in the implementation of VRS 
resulted in sustainable depletion of staff strength leading to non -
availability of even bare minimum staff to manage the affairs of the 
company.  Needless to say, the VRS of such a magnitude drained the 
much-needed finance which could otherwise have been made use of 
in a more meaningful way for the sustenance and growth of the 
company.  Ironically, those who opted for VRS are at an advantageous 
position as they are being paid 150% of  their remuneration whereas 
those who are working are not getting the revised wages.  Even the 
arrears arising out of 1992 wage revision have not been paid to the 
workers who are working in different units of the company. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly  recommended that issues regarding 
problems of workers be immediately addressed with specific attention 
to revision of wages, payment of arrears following wage revision of 
1992 and suitable career avenues be charted out for the workers of 
HMT. 
 
7. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry has stated:- 
 ‗Management has been advised to take appropriate 
measures to create confidence among the workforce by 
addressing their problems.  Apart from giving budgetary 
support and other finan cial help to the companies, 
Government has been giving revival packages to make the 
companies viable.  But implementation of such packages is 
the prime responsibility of the management of the 

company.  From time to time, performance of the 
companies is rev iewed by the Government. The companies 
are asked to take corrective measures in cases where there 
is slack in performance. The policy for giving VRS is 
decided by the company with the approval of its Board and 
in conformity with the Department of Public En terprises 
guidelines.  
 
As regards revision of pay and wages, it may be stated 
that all the HMT Group of companies except HMT 
International Limited have been incurring losses over the 
years. These companies are not in a position to generate 
required resources to meet the addition al expenditure on 
account of such pay/wage revision through improved 
performance in terms of productivity and profitability as 
required under the guidelines of Department of Public 
Enterprises. HMT Machine Tools Ltd. was given a revival 
package of Rs.880.8 0 crore in February 2007 but the 
company could not turn around towards the path of profit 
making. However, the proposal for implementation of 1997 
pay revision have been envisaged in revival plans of HMT 
Limited and HMT Watches Limited which are under 
consideration of the Government. For HMT Bearings 
Limited the proposal for implementation of 1997 pay 
revision has been included in the Draft Rehabilitation 
Scheme. As regards HMT International Limited, a proposal 
for implementation of 1997 pay revision is und er 
consideration.  
 
As regards payment of arrears of 1992 pay revision, it 
may be stated that although the pay revision of 1992 was 
implemented, the company could not make payment of 
arrears due to financial constraints. The issue was raised 

before the Court of Law also and as per orders of the court, 
the company has been making payment of Rs. 50 lakh per 
month to the employees in the order of seniority based on 
their date of separation. However, provision for making 
payment of arrears on account of 1992 pa y revision has 
been factored into the revival plan of HMT Ltd which is 
under consideration of the Government at present. 
  As regards charting out suitable career avenues for 
the workers of HMT Limited, the company has taken up 
activities pertaining to tra ining/re-training/multi-skilling 
of its employees with a view to increasing their engagement 
levels as an essential ingredient for successful 
achievement of targets set under the revival plans. 
Further, the approved revival plans also include formation 
of JV in order to further the business prospects of the 
company and also to improve the career of the employees‘. 
 
8. The Committee had recommended that issues regarding 
problems of workers be immediately addressed with specific 
attention to revision of wages, payment of arrears following wage 
revision of 1992 and suitable career avenues be charted out for 
the workers of HMT.  The Committee note that these companies 
are not in a position to generate required resources to meet 
additional expenditure on account of pay/wage revision and 
arrears.  The Committee hope that the rehabilitation 
scheme/revival plans under consideration would be approved 

without further delay so as to facilitate payment of arrears to the 
employees at the earliest. 
 
B. Harmonious Industrial Relations 
 
(Rec. Sl. No.2, Para 37) 
 
9. The Committee noted that the industrial atmosphere in the units 
of HMT was far from being congenial  as no d iscussion on industrial 
relations or review of industrial relation machinery in HMT 
organisation took place at the Board Meetings or at Ministerial level 
meetings during the last three years .  The Committee were even 
informed that most of the IR issues were sorted out at the unit level  
and remaining is sues were ultimately solved at the subsidiary 
company‘s level.  The Committee observed that perhaps this was a 
unique case wherein no issues regarding industrial relations ha d 
been discussed during the last three years.  The Committee were 
informed that i naccessibility of the top management and consequent  
lack of interaction between the management and workers ‘ 
representatives were the primary reasons for many avoidable and 
small problems of the workers. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommended that, despite demarcated and distinct responsibilities 
assigned to management and workers, it was incumbent upon both 
the sides, with a far greater responsibility on the management, to 
preserve and promote harmonious industrial relations in the larger 
interest of the workers, management, company and the nation a s a 
whole.  The Committee hoped  all ou t efforts would be made by the 
Government in right earnest to achieve the objectives. 
  

 
 
 
10. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry has stated:- 
 
 ‗The Committee‘s observation in this aspect is noted. 
Continuous efforts will be made to maintain harmonious 
industrial relations.  The Management has already 
informed the Committee that Industrial Relation issues 
have been resolved at the appropriate level. However, the 
Committee‘s views are kept in mind and suitable measures 
will be taken in resolving all genuine Industrial Relation 
issues in future, involving both Management/Government. 
The creation and maintenance of cordial industrial 
relations is a joint effort and responsibility. Howeve r, the 
management is advised to adhere to the Committee‘s views 
and work on them.‘ 
 
 
11. The Committee in their Report had recommended that, 
despite demarcated and distinct responsibilities assigned to the 
management and workers, it is incumbent upon both the sides, 
with a far greater responsibility on the management, to preserve 
and promote harmonious industrial relations in the larger 
interest of the workers, management, company and the nation as 

a who le.  The Committee  reiterate that the management must 
maintain cordial relation s with the workers  and ensure frequent 
interactions between them and the representatives of workers 
and also with the top management as is being done by the 
maharatna public sector companies leading to higher production 
and harmonious industrial relations. 

C. Low morale of existing depleted staff and the need for 
corrective measures 
(Rec. Sl. No.3, Para 38) 
 
12. The Committee observe d that the morale of the workers of the 
HMT organization was at its lowest ebb due to pending of wage 
revision since January 1997.  The Committee, however, noted that 
though various proposals of wage revision had been submitted to the 
Government for consideration  but d istressingly, the issue could not 
be resolved due to non-fulfillment of Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE) guidelines and other reasons varying from units to unit of HMT 
organization.  The Committee found that c onsequently not only the 
workers but the Executives too are not getting the wages due to them.  
The Committee, strongly recom mended that an urgent, effective and 
time bound action plan be drawn for implementation so that not only 
the morale of the staff was resorted but the functional and financi al 
viability of all the units was guaranteed through such measures.  
 
13. In the action taken reply furnished to  the Committee, the 
Ministry has stated:- 
 `The revival plans already approved/under 
consideration/proposed for the HMT Group of companies 
includes effective and time bound action plan for 
implementation. It is expected that with the 
approval/implementation of the revival plans the functional and 
financial viability of the Units will improve and consequently the 
morale of the employees would also improve‘. 
  

14. The Committee in their recommendation had desired that 
an urgent, effective and time bound action plan be drawn for 
implementation so that not only the morale of the staff was 
improved but also the functional and financial viability of all the 
units was guaranteed through such measures.   The Committee 
earnestly hope that the revival plans already approved/under 
consideration/proposed for the HMT Group of Companies , as 
stated by the Ministry , would be implemented expeditiously and 
sincerely. 
 
D. Reasons for sickness 
 
(Rec. Sl. No.4, Para 39) 
15. The Committee noted that due to lack of foresightedness and 
unimaginative handling of the domestic and international market , 
HMT continuously kept yielding its ground to their competitors in the 
private sector.  The Committee were informed that with the advent of 
liberalization in 1990, HMT units faced a lot of problems in marketing 
of products, excess manpower, etc.  liberalization, opening of global 
boundaries and import of second hand machinery were the other 
contributory factors, statedly, for the prese nt status of HMT units.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend ed that in order to make the 
company viable, it would be essential to integrate the various units of  
the organization with the other establishments of the Government of 
India like BHEL, HAL, NTPC, Railways, IAF, etc. wherein the technical 

requirements of these establishments were first invariably met by the 
products o f HMT paving the way for strengthening HMT as an 
organization and also ensuring supply of high quality implements to 
the various wings of the Government of India.  
 
 
16. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry has stated:- 
 
 `The proposals from the company seeking assistance from 
Department of Heavy Industry for promotion/generation of 
business are actively supported by Department of Heavy 
Industry. Such proposals have been taken up with 
respective authorities in the Central Go vernment as also 
with the Public Sector Enterprises under Department of 
Heavy Industry. For example to promote the products of 
HMT Bearings Limited, Department of Heavy Industry has 
also taken up the matter with Ministry of Defence, Ministry 
of Railways an d also Department of Supply. For the 
products of HMT Watches Limited, Department of Heavy 
Industry has taken up the matter with Department of Posts 
for institutional purchase for Commonwealth Games, 2010 
and also Ministry of Railways. Apart from this, a pr oposal 
for merger of HMT Machine Tools Limited with M/s Heavy 
Engineering Corporation, Ranchi is being explored. For 
increasing the business potential of HMT International 
Limited, Department of Heavy Industry has also taken up 
the matter with Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited‘. 
  
 

17. The Committee in their Report had recommended that in 
order to make the company viable, it would be essential to 
integrate the various units of  the organization with the other 
establishments of the Government of India like BH EL, HAL, 
NTPC, Railways, IAF, etc. wherein the technical requirements of 
these establishments are first invariably met by the products o f 
HMT paving the way for strengthening HMT as an organization 
and also ensuring supply of high quality implements to the  
various wings of the Government of India.   The Committee note 
that various proposals are underway for promotion/generation of 
business of HMT Group of Companies.  The Committee urge the 
Government to expedite the implementation of the se proposals 
and keep them posted as and when any tangible progress is made 
in this regard. 
 
 
 
  
 
 

E. Need for revival 
(Rec. Sl. No.5, Para 40) 
 
18. The Committee noted that the company prepared a plan during 
1998 which tried to address the issue of deterioration of the HMT 
group of companies through organization restructuring, manpower 
streamlining, ensuring financial health of the company etc.  Th ough 
the Government approved and implemented the plan in August  2000, 
yet it did not help improve the finances of the company as factors like 
lack of working capital, unaddressed liabilities , non-fructification of  
efforts for sale of NPAs, sale of stake to joint venture partner,  inability 
to diversif y the products, technology up gradation and plant 
modernization and above all,  resources crunch remained as nagging 
as before.  More so, the disinvestments process of HMT Machine Tools 
Limited, HMT watches, HMT Chinar and HMT bearings during 2002 -
03 could also not be completed due to non receipt of necessary 
permission from the concerned quarter of the Government.   
 
 The Committee found that all these reasons led to heavy losses 
and necessitated revival plans for the company and its subsidiaries.  
Even the restructuring package of the Government was not found 
comprehensive by the Committee .  The Committee observed that no 
contingencies like loan from banks, raising of internal resources, sale 
of surplus assets, etc. should be the part of revival scheme  as these 
are the negative appendices and smack will power o n the part of the 
Government to move seriously in the direction of revival.  The 
Committee were of the considered view that the revival plan should be 
comprehensive for all the units of HMT and should inter-alia consist 
of working capital for each unit wherever necessary, retrospective 
wage revision of employees, payment of arrears, liquidation of 
liabilities, transparent methodology for infusion of fresh and skilled 

talent into the organization, a clear and well defined marketing 
strategy and firm tie up with other Government departments.  The 
Committee found that revival plans were not time bound and their 
implementation procrastinate d indefinitely. The Committee fel t that 
lacing the proposal of revival of HMT wi th impractical conditions for 
releasing a few hundred crores, particularly when the organization 
had paid handsome dividend to the nation continuously for five 
decades, amount ed to self -defeat leaving the workers to their fate.   
The committee, strongly rec ommended that a wholesome revival 
package for all the units of HMT be released immediately for being 
executed in a time bound manner so that not only the interest of the 
workers was well taken care of but the glory of the HMT organization 
was reinstated. 
 
19. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry has stated:-  
 `The Committee critically examined the revival plan  during 
1998 for restructuring, manpower streamlining, ensuring 
financial health of the Company etc. and suggested var ious 
methodologies while implementing the Restructuring/ 
Revival Plan of the Company as a whole.  Restructuring 
/revival plan are sanctioned to the loss making companies 
in consultation with BRPSE and other concerned 
Government authorities. 
 
 At present, the revival plans in respect of HMT Limited 
and HMT Watches Limited are under active consideration 
of the Government. In respect of HMT Bearings Limited, 
which stands referred to BIFR, a Draft Rehabilitation 
Scheme is also under consideration of the Governm ent. A 
revival package has already been sanctioned for HMT 
Machine Tools Limited in February 2007. In respect of HMT 

Chinar Watches Limited the proposal for handing over the 
Unit to the Government of Jammu & Kashmir is also under 
active consideration. It is expected that with the approval of 
revival plans/rehabilitation scheme HMT Group of 
companies would be able to turnaround and become 
financially viable‘. 
 
20. The Committee had recommended that a wholesome revival 
package for all the units of HMT be released immediately for 
being executed in a time bound manner so that not only the 
interest of the workers was well taken care of but the glory of the 
HMT organization was reinstated.  The Committee note from the 
reply of the Government that a revival package has already been 
sanctioned for HMT Machine Tools Limited in February, 2007.  
The Committee urge the Government to make concerted efforts 
for the actual impleme ntation of the said plan and apprise the 
Committee on the progress made in this regard. 
 The Committee also expect that immediate decision be 
taken on the revival plans of HMT Limited and HMT watches 
Limited and the Committee be informed of the same.  The 
Committee desire that revival package for each unit be prepared 

and released expeditiously and no  unit be closed down without 
proper rehabilitation of the workers. 
 
F. Other issues of importance 
(Rec. Sl. No.6, Para 41) 
 
21. The Committee, further recommend ed that in addition to the 
above recommendations, the following steps may also be taken 
urgently for fulfilling the aspirations of the workers and the health of 
the organization.  
 
(i) Merging of HMT Machine Tools unit with BHEL/ Defence 
organizations.   
(ii) Retaining age of superannuation as 60 years.  
(iii) Merger of 50% DA in the basic pay on par with other PSUs. 
(iv) Implementation of HRA applicable for ―A‖ class cities by lifting or 
extending the   ceiling. 
(v) Strengthen the tractor project at Hyderaba d to meet the heavy 
demand of South India. 
(vi) Waiver of training period for junior employees, who worked for few 
years earlier and underwent training. 
(vii) Enhancement of conveyance allowance on par with PS cadre 
employees. 
(viii)   Revision of pension scheme. 

(ix) Transfer of Ex -LMH employees back to Hyderabad who are 
working in various locations to HMT. 
 
22. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry has stated:-  
 
 `(i) A proposal for merging HMT Machine Tools Ltd. with 
M/s Heavy Engineering Corporation, Ranchi is currently 
being explored and a Task Force has been constituted in 
the Department of Heavy Industry for this purpose. 
(ii) As HMT Group of companies baring HMT 
International Limited have been incurring losses for the  
last many years, the superannuation age has been reduced 
to 58 years as per the policy decision taken by the 
Department of Heavy Industry in conformity with could be 
considered only after these companies start generating 
profits. the DPE guidelines in res pect of all loss making 
companies.  The revision of superannuation back to 60 
years 
 
(iii) As HMT Group of companies except HMT (I) Limited 
have been incurring losses, the pay scales of 1997 and any 
further pay scales could not be implemented.  However, 
provisions for implementation of 1997 pay scale are being 
considered in the revival plan proposals of individual 
companies.  As per DPE guidelines, the merger of 50% D.A. 
with basic pay is possible in the companies which have 
already implemented the pay revision of 1997. 
(iv) This has already been implemented. 

(v) The company at its Board level would consider the 
issue for taking an appropriate decision as part of its 
marketing strategy.   The company also plans to 
manufacture some exclusive tractor models at the tractor 
unit at Hyderabad. This would cater to the requirement of 
the coastal areas. Further, proposal is also there to develop 
infrastructure for manufacture of gensets. The plant at 
Hyderabad would accordingly be strengthened to take up 
the above activities. 
(vi) This has been noted by the company for examining it 
further in accordance with the policy of the company. 
(vii) This is to be considered only during wage revision. 
(viii) This is to be considered only during wage revision. 
(ix) The LMH employees are placed/transferred to various 
Units spread over in the country due to closure of the Unit 
keeping their livelihood in view.  However, considering the 
health/critical domestic grounds, few of them have been 
transferred.  The transfers are considered  only against the 
need and requirement of the Units located at Hyderabad.‘ 
 
   
23. The Committee note that a proposal for merging HMT 
Machine Tools Limited with M/s Heavy Engineering Corporation, 
Ranchi is being explored and that a taskforce has been 
constituted for this purpose.  The Committee desire to know the 
timeframe given to the taskforce to complete the evaluation 
process and finalise the recommendations on the merger.   The 

Committee hope that once the revival plan is finalized, DA 
merger and other wage related issues would be accordingly 
addressed.   

CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Harmonious Industrial Relations 
 
(Rec. Sl. No.2, Para 37) 
 
The Committee note that the industrial atmosphere in the units 
of HMT is far from being congenial.  The harmonious relationship 
between the management and workers is the touchstone for 
purposeful working and peaceful existence of any industrial units. In 
reply to a question  whether any discussions on industrial relations 
took place at the Board Meetings or at Ministerial Meetings during the 
last three years, the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises conceded that no such discussions took place in any of 
the mee tings.  Regarding review of industrial relations machinery 
HMT organization during the last three years, it has been evasively 
stated that consequent to formation of subsidiary companies, the IR 
machinery got reviewed and reorganized in the company.  On be ing 
asked the reasons for not discussing the issues at board meeting, it 
has been replied that most of the IR issues are sorted out at the unit 
level.  The left over issues are ultimately solved at the subsidiary 
company‘s level.  The Committee feel that p erhaps this is a unique 
case wherein no issues regarding industrial relations have been 
discussed during the last three years.  The committee were apprised 
by the representatives of the various trade unions about the 
prevailing industrial atmosphere in the  HMT organization.  
Inaccessibility of the top management and consequent lack of 
interaction between the management and workers representatives 

were cited as the primary reasons for many avoidable and small 
problems of the workers.  Undoubtedly, such a str ained relationship 
between the management and workers is bound to impair invariably 
the efficiency and smooth functioning of any organization more so of 
one which is sick and struggling for its survival.  Obviously, the 
responsibility for creating cordial climate of working relations in any 
industrial unit lies more on the management than on the workers.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that, despite 
demarcated and distinct responsibilities assigned to management and 
workers, it is incumbent up on both the sides, with a far greater 
responsibility on the management, to preserve and promote 
harmonious industrial relations in the larger interest of the workers, 
management, company and the nation as a whole.  The Committee 
hopes all ou t efforts would  be made by the Government in right 
earnest t achieve the objective. 
 
 In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry have stated:- 
 
‗The Committee‘s observation in this aspect is noted. 
Continuous efforts will be made to maintain har monious 
industrial relations.  The Management has already 
informed the Committee that Industrial Relation issues 
have been resolved at the appropriate level. However, the 
Committee‘s views are kept in mind and suitable measures 
will be taken in resolving a ll genuine Industrial Relation 
issues in future, involving both Management/Government. 
The creation and maintenance of cordial industrial 
relations is a joint effort and responsibility. However, the 
management is advised to adhere to the Committee‘s views 
and work on them.‘ 
 

Other issues of importance 
(Rec. Sl. No.6, Para 41) 
 
 The Committee, further recommend that in addition to the above 
recommendations, the following steps may also be taken urgently for 
fulfilling the aspirations of the workers and the h ealth of the 
organization.  
 
(i). Merging of HMT Machine Tools unit with BHEL/ Defence 
organizations.   
(ii). Retaining age of superannuation as 60 years.  
(iii). Merger of 50% DA in the basic pay on par with other PSUs. 
(iv)   Implementation of HRA applicable for ―A‖ class cities by lifting or 
extending the   ceiling. 
(v). Strengthen the tractor project at Hyderabad to meet the heavy 
demand of South India. 
(vi). Waiver of training period for junior employees, who worked for 
few years earlier and underwent training. 
(vii). Enhancement of conveyance allowance on par with PS cadre 
employees. 
(viii).   Revision of pension scheme. 
(ix). Transfer of Ex -LMH employees back to Hyderabad who are 
working in various locations to HMT. 
 
 In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry have stated:-  

 
 `(i) A proposal for merging HMT Machine Tools Ltd. with 
M/s Heavy Engineering Corporation, Ranchi is currently 
being explored and a Task Force has been constituted in 
the Department of Heavy Industry for this purpose. 
(ii) As HMT Group of companies ba rring HMT 
International Limited have been incurring losses for the 
last many years, the superannuation age has been reduced 
to 58 years as per the policy decision taken by the 
Department of Heavy Industr y in conformity with the DPE 
guidelines in respect of all loss making companies could be 
considered only after these companies start generating 
profits.  The revision of superannuation back to 60 years 
 
(iii) As HMT Group of companies except HMT (I) Limite d 
have been incurring losses, the pay scales of 1997 and any 
further pay scales could not be implemented.  However, 
provisions for implementation of 1997 pay scale are being 
considered in the revival plan proposals of individual 
companies.  As per DPE guidelines, the merger of 50% D.A. 
with basic pay is possible in the companies which have 
already implemented the pay revision of 1997. 
(iv) This has already been implemented. 
(v) The company at its Board level would consider the 
issue for taking an appropriat e decision as part of its 
marketing strategy.   The company also plans to 
manufacture some exclusive tractor models at the tractor 
unit at Hyderabad. This would cater to the requirement of 
the coastal areas. Further, proposal is also there to develop 
infrastructure for manufacture of gensets. The plant at 
Hyderabad would accordingly be strengthened to take up 
the above activities. 

(vi) This has been noted by the company for examining it 
further in accordance with the policy of the company. 
(vii) This is to be considered only during wage revision. 
(viii) This is to be considered only during wage revision. 
(ix) The LMH employees are placed/transferred to various 
Units spread over in the country due to closure of the Unit 
keeping their livelihood in view.  However, considering the 
health/critical domestic gr ounds, few of them have been 
transferred.  The transfers are considered only against the 
need and requirement of the Units located at Hyderabad.‘ 
 
 
Labour problems in various establishments of Government of 
India. 
(Rec. Sl. No.7, Para 42) 
 
 The Committee observed that of late, most of the establishments 
(PSUs) of the Government of India are facing various kinds of 
problems relating to the workforce. Outsourcing of jobs, engagement 
of contract labour, drastic downsizing of staff, violation of social 
security statutes etc.  have become rampant.  Units of Defence, 
Telecommunications, Railways, Heavy Industries, Road Transport and 
Highways, Coal & Steel, etc. with whom the Committee have had 
interaction during various study tours undertaken by the  Committee, 
have been found lagging in fulfillment of their statutory obligations 
towards the workforce. The Committee feel that the Ministry of Labour 
and employment should play a strong proactive role in identification 
and rectification of the problems o f workforce in Government Sector.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry of 

Labour and Employment should devise a strategy wherein all the 
PSUs of the Government of India are brought within the labour 
scanner of the Ministry so tha t the problems of workers are identified 
before hand and necessary corrective measures applied in right 
earnest and direction. 
 
 In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry have stated:-  
`Ministry of Labour & Employment and organi zation of 
CLC(C) has been playing a pivotal role in the enforcement 
of applicable labour laws in industries where Central 
Government is the Appropriate Government.  The Ministry 
has in its fold a very well designed and proactive dispute 
resolving machinery backed by competent officers to handle 
such specialized jobs.  Besides, the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment has also chalked out awareness programme of 
industrial workers on labour laws and other welfare 
measures on a continued basis wherein workers have been 
educated about the impact of liberalization, privatization 
and globalization and statutory laws.  It has also focused 
attention on changing the mindset of the employers 
towards a more humane relationship with the workforce 
and ensuring compliance to t he various labour laws 
thereby safeguarding the interests of the workers. Such 
compliance to statutory provisions will promote healthy 
industrial relations combined with a proactive conciliation 
machinery to intervene in a timely and effective manner 
whenever the situation so warrants. Such a strategy will 
ensure that the labour problems of the workforce of PSUs 
are duly addressed‘. 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDTIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
            NIL 
  

 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
      NIL 

  
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Problems of workers in HMT Units 
 
 (Rec. Sl. No.1, Para 36) 
 The Committee noted that HMT was set up in 1953 for 
manufacture of machine tools in collaboration with a Swiss company 
named CERLIKON. Over the y ears the company diversified its 
products into various kinds of machine tools, watches, printing 
machinery, presses, tractors, bearings and food processing 
machinery.  As of now, the company has subsidiaries of machine 
tools, watches, bearings, HMT Interna tional and Praga Tools under 
the ambit of holding company, HMT Limited.  At present the company 
has 8873 permanent employees and 1700 contract workers in its 
different units.  The Committee find that the company is plagued with 
various problems which are h aving direct bearing on the workforce of 
the company.  They vary from inharmonious industrial relations to 
lower wages and inhospitable working conditions.  This has 
significantly eroded not only the confidence of the workforce but their 
numerical strength  also.  The inept handling on the part of the 
Government and management of the company has done irreparable 
damage to the interest of the workers and to the future of the 
company as well. Lack of foresight in the implementation of VRS 
resulted in sustainab le depletion of staff strength leading to non -
availability of even bare minimum staff to manage the affairs of the 

company.  Needless to say, the VRS of such a magnitude drained the 
much-needed finance which could otherwise have been made use of 
in a more meaningful way for the sustenance and growth of the 
company.  Ironically, those who opted for VRS are at an advantageous 
position as they are being paid 150% of their remuneration whereas 
those who are working are not getting the revised wages.  Even the 
arrears arising out of 1992 wage revision have not been paid to the 
workers who are working in different units of the company. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that issues regarding 
problems of workers be immediately addressed with specific atte ntion 
to revision of wages, payment of arrears following wage revision of 
1992 and suitable career avenues be charted out for the workers of 
HMT. 
 
 In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry have stated:- 
 ‗Management has been advised to take appropriate 
measures to create confidence among the work force by 
addressing their problems.  Apart from giving budgetary 
support and other financial help to the companies, 
Government has been giving revival packages to  make the 
companies viable.  But implementation of such packages is 
the prime responsibility of the management of the 
company.  From time to time, performance of the 
companies is reviewed by the Government. The companies 
are asked to take corrective measur es in cases where there 
is slack in performance. The policy for giving VRS is 
decided by the company with the approval of its Board and 
in conformity with the Department of Public Enterprises 
guidelines.  
 

  As regards revision of pay and wages, it may be stated 
that all the HMT Group of companies except HMT 
International Limited have been incurring losses over the 
years. These companies are not in a position to generate 
required resources to meet the additional expenditure on 
account of such pay/wage revis ion through improved 
performance in terms of productivity and profitability as 
required under the guidelines of Department of Public 
Enterprises. HMT Machine Tools Ltd. was given a revival 
package of Rs.880.80 crore in February 2007 but the 
company could n ot turn around towards the path of profit 
making. However, the proposal for implementation of 1997 
pay revision ha s been envisaged in revival plans of HMT 
Limited and HMT Watches Limited which are under 
consideration of the Government. For HMT Bearings 
Limited the proposal for implementation of 1997 pay 
revision has been included in the Draft Rehabilitation 
Scheme. As regards HMT International Limited, a proposal 
for implementation of 1997 pay revision is under 
consideration.  
 
As regards payment of arrears  of 1992 pay revision, it 
may be stated that although the pay revision of 1992 was 
implemented, the company could not make payment of 
arrears due to financial constraints. The issue was raised 
before the Court of Law also and as per orders of the court, 
the company has been making payment of Rs. 50 lakh per 
month to the employees in the order of seniority based on 
their date of separation. However, provision for making 
payment of arrears on account of 1992 pay revision has 
been factored into the revival pla n of HMT Ltd which is 
under consideration of the Government at present. 

  As regards charting out suitable career avenues for 
the workers of HMT Limited, the company has taken up 
activities pertaining to training/re -training/multi-skilling 
of its employees with a view to increasing their engagement 
levels as an essential ingredient for successful 
achievement of targets set under the revival plans. 
Further, the approved revival plans also include formation 
of JV in order to further the business prospects of the 
company and also to improve the career of the employees‘. 
 
Low morale of existing depleted staff and need for corrective 
measures 
(Rec. Sl. No.3, Para 38) 
 
 The Committee observe that the morale of the workers of the 
HMT organization is at its lowest e bb.  The major contributory factor 
in this regard is the issue of pending wage revision since January 
1997. With low wages and uncertain future of the company, workers 
are de -motivated as they are more preoccupied with the economic 
costs and social status vis-à-vis their peers in the society.  Educated 
and skilled workers with appropriate age profile desert the 
organization the moment they find greener pastures elsewhere.  It is 
only the employees of higher age group who are forced to continue 
with their jo bs with no or little option left.  Such circumstances in 
their entirety take a heavy toll on the spirit and working capacity of 
the worker ultimately affecting the utilization of productive capacity 
and overall efficiency of the organization. Asked about t he reasons for 
non-revision of wages, the Ministry replied that the issue of wage 
revision is pending since 1.1.1997 but further informed that various 
proposals have been submitted to the Government for consideration.  
Distressingly, till date, the issue h as not been resolved due to non -

fulfilment of Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) guidelines and 
other reasons varying from units to unit of HMT organization.  
Consequently not only the workers but the executives are also not 
getting the wages that are due to them.  To arrest further 
deterioration, emergent steps are the need of the hour to bail out the 
workable units of HMT. Moreover, there is no reason as to why the 
viable and profit making unit of the organization is not being given 
proper attention.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
an urgent, effective and time bound action plan be drawn up for 
implementation so that not only the morale of the staff is resorted but 
the functional and financial viability of all the units is guaranteed  
through such measures.  
 
 In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry have stated:- 
`The revival plans already approved/under 
consideration/proposed for the HMT Group of companies 
includes effective and time bound action plan for 
implementation. It is expected that with the 
approval/implementation of the revival plans the functional 
and financial viability of the Units will improve and 
consequently the morale of the employees would also 
improve‘. 
 
  

Reasons for sickness 
 
(Rec. Sl. No.4, Para 39) 
 The Committee noted that HMT was established in 1953 with a 
view to meet our  machine tool requirements and to manufacture and 
supply high precision automatic and hand wound mechanical 
watches to domestic and international markets. For five  decades, 
HMT had achieved its objectives and was the market leader for a long 
time earning the title of ‗Jewel in the Crown‘ and remained a brand in 
the country for long.  HMT also contributed significantly to national 
exchequer with its profits and made forays in diverse fields of 
production/ manufacturing. The Company also served in other 
critical and strategic areas like defence, Railways, Aero Space, 
Nuclear Science, Automobile and General Engineering Industries.  
Even today, the organization has the c apability to serve the nation in 
specialized fields particularly in the areas of space and atomic energy.  
However, due to lack of foresightedness and unimaginative handling 
of the situation, HMT continuously kept yielding its ground to their 
competitors in the private sector.  On being asked about the reasons 
for present state of affairs of the organization, the Government replied 
that with the setting in of liberalization in 1990, HMT units faced a lot 
of problems in marketing of products, excess manpower , etc.  
liberalization, opening of global boundaries and import of second 
hand machinery are the other contributory factors, statedly, for the 
present status of HMT units.  Lack of orders and non -adherence to 
time schedule coupled with inability of the com pany to acclimatize 
itself quickly in accordance with the new economic environment led to 
the decline in the fortunes of the company.  Besides, vertically 
integrated and widespread manufacturing plants and assembly 
ancillaries have also contributed signifi cantly to the current position 
of the organization.  Other factors like increase in social overhead, 
costs,  high interest have also added considerably to the erosion of the 

company‘s worth.  In view of the stiff competition from the market in 
the backdrop  of liberalization and open economy, the company 
became unviable following its products becoming uncompetitive and 
non-remunerative.  In this state of affairs, it became increasingly 
difficult to attract fresh talents to infuse competitiveness, quality 
production and aggressive market strategy in a significant manner.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that in order to make 
the company viable, it would be essential to integrate the various 
units of  the organization with the other establishments of the 
Government of India like BHEL, HAL, NTPC, Railways, IAF, etc. 
wherein the technical requirements of these establishments are first 
invariably met by the products or HMT paving the way for 
strengthening HMT as an organization and also ensuring supply  of 
high quality implements to the various wings of the Government of 
India.  
 
 In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry have stated:- 
 
`The proposals from the company seeking assistance from 
Department of Heavy Industry for promotion/generation of 
business are actively supported by Department of Heavy 
Industry. Such proposals have been taken up with 
respective authorities in the Central G overnment as also 
with the Public Sector Enterprises under Department of 
Heavy Industry. For example to promote the products of 
HMT Bearings Limited, Department of Heavy Industry has 
also taken up the matter with Ministry of Defence, Ministry 
of Railways a nd also Department of Supply. For the 
products of HMT Watches Limited, Department of Heavy 
Industry has taken up the matter with Department of Posts 
for institutional purchase for Commonwealth Games, 2010 
and also Ministry of Railways. Apart from this, a p roposal 

for merger of HMT Machine Tools Limited with M/s Heavy 
Engineering Corporation, Ranchi is being explored. For 
increasing the business potential of HMT International 
Limited, Department of Heavy Industry has also taken up 
the matter with Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited‘. 
 
Need for revival 
(Rec. Sl. No.5, Para 40) 
 
 The Committee noted that the HMT used to be the ‗jewel of the 
nation‘ and it performed so well for about five decades as per its 
brand image.  However, deterioration set in due to several  reasons 
which is recorded elsewhere in this report.  The diversified activities of 
the organization touch upon the significant sphere of our industry 
including Railways, Defence, Space, and other strategic areas.  
Prudence, therefore, demands that Governm ent take essential and 
urgent steps for effecting a successful turnaround in the fortunes of 
all the units of HMT. The company prepared a plan during 1998 
which tried to address the issues through organization restructuring, 
manpower streamlining, ensuring financial health of the company etc.  
The Government of India approved and implemented the plan in 
August 2000. The Committee are inclined to infer that this plan was a 
skewed one as it could not help in improving the finances of the 
company.  Constraints  like lack of working capital, unaddressed 
liabilities to the extent of Rs.374 crores, non -fructification of  efforts 
for sale of NPAs, sale of stake to joint venture partner,  inability to 
address issues relating to product  development, diversification, 
technology upgradation and plant moder nization, resources crunch 
remained as nagging as before.  The disinvestments process initiated 
in respect of HMT Machine Tools Limited, HMT watches, HMT Chinar 
and HMT bearings during 2002 -03 could not be completed as  

requisite go ahead was not received from the concerned quarter of the 
Government.   
 
 The above reasons led to heavy losses and necessitated revival 
plans for the company and its subsidiaries.  A restructuring package 
is currently under consideration of t he Government.  The Committee 
finds that even this plan is not comprehensive being laden with 
piecemeal approach.  Instead of addressing the problems of HMT as 
an organization, a unit -wise revival plan will only delay the 
achievement of desired target.  In ter segregation of the various units 
of HMT for the purpose of revival will adversely impact the welfare of 
workers and sustenance of the company as a whole.  Even the revival 
package cannot be contingent and will have to be encumbrance free.  
No contingencies like loan from banks, raising of internal resources, 
sale of surplus assets, etc.  should be the part of revival scheme.  
These are the negative appendices and smack lack of will power on 
the part of the Government to move seriously in the direction o f 
revival.  In the considered view of the Committee, the plan should be 
comprehensive for all the units of HMT and should inter-alia consist 
of working capital for each unit wherever necessary, retrospective 
wage revision of employees, payment of arrears, liquidation of 
liabilities, transparent methodology for infusion of fresh and skilled 
talent into the organization, a clear and well defined marketing 
strategy and firm tie up with other Government departments.  The 
Committee are pained to note that revival plans are not time bound in 
nature and their implementation procrastinate indefinitely making 
revival plan a mockery.HMT bearings is a glaring instance of this kind 
of exercise wherein the company was referred to BIFR again due to 
the long time taken in the completion of various stages of activities 
regarding its revival. The Government is also not taking the revival 
plan in the proper perspective.  Till the revival plan is formulated and 
approved by the Government, the support in terms of wages and 
statutory dues provided for every quarter.  Money is provided to those 
PSUs which have already undertaken the revival plans are supposed 

to stand on their own and have their internal generation of resources 
to support their activities.  Consequently, the reviva l plan is not 
wholesome and one or the other aspects in the entire process goes out 
of tune crippling the revival plan altogether.  Of late, the Government 
is infusing hundreds of thousands of crores in uncertain and grey 
areas in the name of reviving econ omy.  The Committee feel that 
lacing the proposal of revival of HMT with impractical conditions for 
releasing a few hundred crores, particularly when the organization 
has paid handsome dividend to the nation continuously for five 
decades, amounts to self-defeat and leaving the workers in the lurch.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend  that a wholesome 
revival package for all the units of HMT be released immediately for 
being executed in a time bound manner so that not only the interest 
of the worke rs are well taken care of but the glory of the HMT 
organization is reinstated and it again becomes a pioneer in its 
activities. 
 
 In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry have stated:-  
`The Committee critically examined the rev ival plan 
prepared during 1998 for restructuring, manpower 
streamlining, ensuring financial health of the Company etc. 
and suggested various methodologies while implementing 
the Restructuring/ Revival Plan of the Company as a 
whole.  Restructuring /revival  plan are sanctioned to the 
loss making companies in consultation with BRPSE and 
other concerned Government authorities. 
 
 At present, the revival plans in respect of HMT Limited 
and HMT Watches Limited are under active consideration 
of the Government. In respect of HMT Bearings Limited, 
which stands referred to BIFR, a Draft Rehabilitation 

Scheme is also under consideration of the Government. A 
revival package has already been sanctioned for HMT 
Machine Tools Limited in February 2007. In respect of HMT 
Chinar Watches Limited the proposal for handing over the 
Unit to the Government of Jammu & Kashmir is also under 
active consideration. It is expected that with the approval of 
revival plans/rehabilitation scheme HMT Group of 
companies would be able to turnaro und and become 
financially viable‘. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;     (HEMANAND BISWAL) 
21 July, 2010                                           CHAIRMAN, 
29 Asadha, 1932 (Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR. 
     
 
 