42 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
      MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 ‘THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY 
NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES) AMENDMENT BILL, 
2013’ 
 
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
    
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
February,  2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
 


 
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
  
‘THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY 
NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES) AMENDMENT BILL, 
2013’ 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  7th February, 2014 
Presented to Rajya Sabha on  7th February, 2014 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February,  2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka) 


CONTENTS 
       
                   PAGE(s)  
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv)  
REPORT        (v) 
Chapter-I  Introductory 
 Chapter-II Clause by Clause Analysis of the  Bill 
 
 Chapter III Observation & Recommendation 
  
APPENDICES 
 
  I. ‘The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory    
  Notification of Vacancies) Amendment Bill, 2013’.   
 
 (II) Minutes of the sittings of the Committee.    
 
  
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2013-14) 
 SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN - CHAIRMAN 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Ashok Argal  
3.  Shri Ismail Hussain  
4.  Dr. Manda Jagannath  
5.  Dr. Virendra Kumar  
6.  Shri Nara Hari Mahato  
7.  Shri Hari Manjhi  
8.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel  
9.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy  
10.  Smt. J. Shantha  
11.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh [Lalan]  
12.  Shri Ratan Singh  
13.  Shri Dinu Solanki  
14.  Shri Makansingh Solanki  
15.  Shri K. Sugumar  
16.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai  
17.  Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware  
18.  Shri Om Prakash Yadav  
*19.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
20.  Vacant  
21.  Vacant  
            Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Smt. T. Ratna Bai  
23.  Shri D. Bandyopadhyay  
24.  Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot  
25.  Shri P. Kannan  
26.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan  
27.  Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati  
28.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
29.  Shri Rajaram  
30.  Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
31.  Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh  
*Nom   *  Nominated w.e.f 17th December, 2013 
 
 
 
 

 
 
                     SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy - Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Forty-Second Report on  ‘The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification 
of Vacancies) Amendment Bill, 2013’ of  the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment.   
 
2. ‘The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) 
Amendment Bill, 2013’ as introduced in Rajya Sabha on 22 nd April, 2013 was 
referred to the Committee by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in consultation wi th the 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha for examination and report.    
 
3. In the process of examination of the Bill, the Committee invited the 
representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment on 7 th October, 
2013 and 11th December, 2013 to hear their views. The Committee also sought 
written information on various aspects of the Bill from the Ministry.   
 
4. The Standing Committee on Labour at their sitting held on 19 th 
December, 2013 considered and adopted the draft report and authorized the 
Chairman to final ise the same and present it to the Hon’ble 
Speaker/Parliament.  
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for tendering evidence before the 
Committee and furnishing written inputs/suggestions on the amending Bill. 
 
6. For facilitation of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of 
the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                                     DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
  December, 2013                                                              CHAIRMAN,  
 Agrahayana ,1935 (Saka)       STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
 
 

7 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Introductory 
 
 
 The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 
1959 was enacted on the recommendations of the Training and Employment 
Services Organisation Committee set up by the Government of India in 1952 to 
provide for compulsory notification of vacancies to the Employment Exchanges 
and for rendering returns, both  employment and occupational, relating to 
employment situation by the employers. 
   
1.2. The enforcement of the provisions of the EE(CNV)Act, 1959 is the 
responsibility of the respective State Governments in respect of the 
establishments located in their r espective administrative  jurisdiction and the 
State Director/Commissioner of Employment is the prescribed authority for 
implementing the provisions of the Act.   
 
1.3 In sixties to eighties, the main focus of the Employment Exchanges   was   
on   registration   and      placement    as   majority of the employment was in 
Public Sector. Since nineties and after liberalization, the trend has changed.  
Moreover, with the emergence of various recruitment bodies such as Staff 
Selection Commission, State Service  Selection Boards, Railway   Recruitment   
Boards, Subordinate Service Selection Boards, the role of Employment 
Exchanges in direct placement started declining and shifted towards vocational 
guidance and career counseling.   
 
1.4 Occupational Structure of Indian Economy, number of  contract workers,   
use of capital intensive instead of labour intensive techniques, advancement 
and use of technology in many  establishments, outsourcing, etc, have reduced 
the number of regular workers in such establishments a nd affected the 
coverage of the EE(CNV) Act, 1959 .  
 
1.5 The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 
1959 has been brought to bring the said Act in tune with the present day 
scenario. The proposed amendments were discussed in various meetings of 
Working Group on National Employment Service which broadly endorsed all 
these amendments.  
 
1.6 The salient features of the Bill are as follows— 
 
 (a) changing the short title of the Employment Exchanges 
 (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 as “the 
 Employment Guidance and Promotion Centres (Compulsory  Notification 

8 
 
 of Vacancies) Act, 1959” and accordingly to amend  the long title of 
 the Act; 
 
 (b) substituting the words ‘‘Employment Exchanges’’ with the words 
 ‘Employment Guidance and Promotion Centres’’, throughout the said 
 Act, to give the emphasis on the guidance  and counselling aspect 
 rather than mere registration for jobs; 
 
 (c) the amendment of clause (g) of section 2 relating to the  definition of 
 “establishment in private sector” by substituting the words “ten or  more” 
 for the words “twenty -five or more” to collect employment information 
 from establishments employing ten or more persons; 
 
 (d) the insertion of a new clause ( ga) in section 2 to define the 
 expression “plantation” so as to bring the vacancies in the  plantation 
 sector within the purview of the Act and to apply the  provisions  of the 
 Act to t he plantations owned and managed by an individual on 
 voluntary basis; 
 
 (e) the amendment of sub-section (1) of section 3 in order to  notify 
 vacancies relating to unskilled office work and also vacancies relating 
 to plantation sector along with employm ent as agriculture or farm 
 machinery operatives; 
 
 (f) providing exemption from the application of the Act to the  vacancies of 
 staff of the State Legislature at par with the staff of Parliament; 
  
 (g) the omission of the provision relating to vacancies  in an 
 employment, which carries a remuneration of less than sixty rupees in a 
 month, as there is hardly any post, which carries that  remuneration; 
 
 (h) providing for an obligation on the employer to furnish the  information 
 relating to the selection against the vacancies notified under the Act; 
 
 (i) the insertion of a new section 5A, to provide for furnishing of 
 returns by establishments employing ten or more but less  than 
 twenty-five persons to work for remuneration and in case of any failure 
 to furnish the returns, to provide the punishment after consecutive 
 two defaults with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and 
 for every subsequent default with fine which may extend to five 
 thousand rupees for each such default; 
 
 (j) the substitution of section 7 so as to ensure better coverage  and 
 proper implementation of the said Act by making penalty provisions 
 more stringent including an additional provision of imprisonment  and 
 raising the amount of fine for the first offence which may extend to  five 
 thousand rupees, for any second offence with fine which may extend 

9 
 
 to ten thousand rupees and for any subsequent offence with fine which 
 may  extend to ten thousand rupees, or with simple imprisonment 
 which may extend to one month, or with both; 
 
 (k) the insertion of new sections 7A and 7B to provide penalties for  non-
 rendition of returns by establishments employing ten or more but less 
 than twenty-five persons and  to bring the public and  private limited 
 companies offering employ ment opportunities under the purview of the 
 Act and to make liable  any officer or other person working in such 
 companies for committing offence for non-compliance of the  provisions 
 of the said Act. 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
 
 CLAUSE BY CLAUSE ANALYSIS OF `THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES 
(COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES) AMENDMENT BILL, 2013 
 
 
 Amendment of the Act. 
 
 
2.1 This Act may be called the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory 
Notification of Vacancies) Amendment Act, 2013.  It shall come into force on 
such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint. 
 
 
2.2 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the proposed amendments in 
the Bill stated as follows:- 
 
 “It is proposed to rename the “Employment Exchanges” as “Employment 
 Guidance and Promotion Centres”. The guidance and counseling 
 activities are also being handled by Employment Exchanges in addition 
 to a mere employment placement agency.” 
  
 
 Amendment of Long title of the Act. 
 
 
2.3 In the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) 
Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the 
words "employment exchanges", the words "employment guidance and 
promotion centres" shall be substituted. 
 
2.4 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “An Act to provide for the compulsory notification of vacancies to 
 Employment Guidance and Promotion Centres. Wherever employment 
 exchange is appearing in the Act, it will be substituted by Employment 
 Guidance and Promotion Centre.”      
  
 
 

11 
 
2.5 When Ministry were asked about the change in nomenclature and no 
consequent provision in the Bill for discharging of the new rate, the Ministry 
replied that: 
 
 “The Employment Exchanges are already rendering advice and 
 counselling to the jobseekers on career, training and employment 
 opportunities. On the basis of various inputs received from stakeholders 
 and valuable suggestions of the Members of the Standing Committee, the 
 Ministry is proposing to remodel the National Employment Service as a 
 National Career Service (NCS) and improve the delivery of employment 
 services. The range of services is also proposed to be widened to cover 
 apprenticeships, part time job, and information about various skill 
 development courses etc so that more and more people access these 
 services and that too from various delivery points over and above the 
 Employment Exchanges. The Committee may therefore,  like to guide 
 whether we may call this Act as “National Career Service Act”. 
 
 Amendment in definitions. 
 
2.6 In the principal Act, in Section 2  
 
  '(b) "employee" means any person who is employed or engaged on 
 contract basis, continuously for a period not less than two hundred 
 and forty days, in an establishment to do any work for remuneration; 
 
2.7 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “It has been observed that many tim es employers are hiring manpower 
 on contract basis for a particular activity. Presently, these persons are 
 not covered under the Act. As the number of such persons is on rise, it is 
 proposed to include them to get a realistic picture. The revised provis ion 
 is suggested as follows: ‘employee’ means any person who is employed or 
 engaged on contract  for the whole year (240 days or more) in an 
 establishment to do any work for remuneration.” 
  
 
2.8 In the principal Act, in section 2,— 
 
 (c) "employer" means any person who, employs, or, enters into contract 
 with, one or more other persons to do any work in an establishment for 
 remuneration, continuously for a period not less than two hundred and 
 forty days, and includes any person entrust ed with the supervision and 
 control of employees in such establishment;” 
 
 

12 
 
2.9 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
  
 “The employer sometimes enters into contract with one or more persons 
 for performing a part of the functions of the establishment.  The 
 definition of employer, therefore, needs a little modification and has been 
 proposed as ‘employer’ means any person who either employs or enters 
 into contract for the whole year (240 days  or more) with one   or   more   
 other persons to do any work in   an establishment   for remuneration 
 and includes any person entrusted with the supervision and control of 
 employees in such establishment.” 
 
 
2.10 In the principal Act, in section 2,— 
 
  (d) "employment guidance and promotion centre" means any office or 
 place established and maintained by the appropriate Government for the 
 collection and furnishing of information, either by the keeping of 
 registers or through electronic medium or otherwise, relating to— 
 
  (i) persons who seek to engage employees; 
  (ii) persons who seek employment; 
  (iii) vacancies to which persons seeking employment may be 
  appointed; and 
  (iv) persons who seek vocational guidance and career counselling 
  or guidance to start self-employment;’; 
 
2.11 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “Employment Guidance and Promotion Centre” means any office or  
 place established and maintained by the appropriate Government for the 
 collection  and  furnishing of  information either by  keeping  of  registers 
 or through electronic medium or otherwise, relating to--- 
  (i) persons who seek to engage employees, 
  (ii)  persons who seek employment,   
  (iii) vacancies to which persons seeking employment, may be  
  appointed; and 
  (iv)  persons who seek vocational guidance and career counseling 
  or guidance to start self-employment.” 
 
 

13 
 
2.12 In the Principal Act (B) in clause (g), for the words "twenty -five or more", 
the words "ten or more" shall be substituted; 
 
2.13 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 ““establishment in private sector” means an establishment which is not 
 an establishment in public sector and where ordinarily ten or more 
 persons are employed to work for remuneration.”  
           To increase the scope and coverage of the Act and make data 
 collected under Employment Market Information programme more 
 meaningful it is proposed to bring establishments in private sector 
 employing 10-24 workers within the scope of the Act.” 
 2.14 When the Ministry were asked to comment on t he suggestion that 
provisions of the Bill apparently aim at reaching the large numb er of 
establishments for enhancing database. There is view that census/surveys can 
be better carried out by dedicated organisations and the employment 
exchanges should concentrate on providing information about employment 
opportunities to the largest numbe r of people and information about 
unemployed youth to the prospective employers, the .Ministry replied that: 
 
 “This is an extremely good suggestion and focus would be kept on 
 providing employment and other career related services leaving the work 
 of information collection/survey to other specialised agencies.” 
 
2.15 (C) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 '(ga) "plantation" means preparation of any land for planting of 
 commercial crops of perennial nature cultivated extensively in 
 tropical and sub-tropical situations on a large scale by uniform system of 
 cultivation under central management owned and managed by a 
 company formed and registered under the  Companies Act, 1956,  but 
 does not include the plantation owned and managed by an  individual;’; 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
2.16 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
         
 “The following definition of plantation will be included.  
           “preparation of any land for planting of commercial crops of  
 perennial nature cultivated extensively in tropical and sub tropical 
 situations on a large scale by uniform system of cultivation under central 
 management owned and managed by a company, does  not include the 
 plantation owned and managed by an individual.  
         The importance of plantation sector in the Indian economy as well 
 as the considerable employment in the industry compels for inclusion of 
 the plantation sector in the Act.” 
 
2.17 In the Principal Act, in Section-2 - (D) clause (i) shall be omitted. 
 
2.18 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
  “It is now proposed to cover vacancies to do unskilled office work within 
 the purview of the Act as the number of vacancies notified to the 
 employment exchanges presently does not reflect the exact employment 
 opportunities occurred.” 
  
 
 Applicability of Act in case of certain vacancies 
 
2.19 In the principal Act, in section 3,— 
 
 (a) in sub-section (1),— 
 
 (i) in clause (a), after the words "other than", the words "employment in 
 plantation or" shall be inserted; 
 
2.20 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
      “ It is proposed to cover vacancies in plantation owned and managed by 
 a company within the purview of the Act by adding the words 
 “employment in plantation and” after the words “other than” in clause 
 (a), of  Sub- Section (1) of Section 3  as a sizeable Section of the work 
 force in the  organised sector is engaged in Plantation Sector 

15 
 
 
  
 (ii) clause (d) shall be omitted; 
 
 
2.21 In the principal Act, in section 3  (iii) in clause ( e), after the word 
"Parliament", the words "or a  State Legislature" shall be inserted; 
 
 
2.22 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “It is proposed to bring the staff of Parliament and State Legislature at 
 par, by inserting the words “or any State Legislature” after the word 
 “Parliament” in clause (e) of Sub -Section (1) of Section (3)  which means 
 that the  vacancies of staff of Parliament as well as State Legislatures will 
 be excluded from the purview of the Act.” 
 
2.22 When Ministry were asked about large numbers of private placement 
agencies involved in providing domestic workers and why not the employment 
exchanges involve themselves in this area as this will help in curbing 
exploitation of poor people, the Ministry stated that: 
 
 
 “As per section 3(1)(b) of the Act, this Act shall not apply in relation to 
 vacancies “in any  employment in domestic service”.   
 
  However, regulation of Private Placement Agencies is a matter of 
 concern which requi res wider debate and discussion, especially, with 
 reference to the role of the State Government. If Employment 
 Exchanges were to enter the arena of providing placement  to domestic 
 workers, it would imply that households would need to notify their 
 vacancy  requirements with the Employment Exchange which may not 
 be practical to implement or enforce, given the existing 
 infrastructure available with the Employment Exchanges.” 
 
 
2.23 In the Principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (b) shall be omitted. 
 
2.24 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “In the present day wage structure, there is hardly any  post which 
 carries a remuneration of less than rupees sixty per month and 
 therefore, this Section has become obsol ete.   It is proposed to omit this 
 clause as it has become redundant.” 
  

16 
 
 
2.25 On being asked about the suggestion that to increase the effectiveness of 
the Act the provisions may be made mandatory for certain categories of the 
employees, for e.g., class IV employees or information about openings offering 
more than the prescribed salary may not be routed through employment 
exchanges, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
 “It is not possible to make it mandatory that recruitment be made only 
 from the list sent by Employment Exchange for any category of 
 employees. Supreme Court orders dated 22.08.1996 in the case of Excise 
 Superintendent vs KBN Bisweshwar Rao & Ors (CA No. A7646 -11724 of 
 1996) in this regard is attached at Annexure. Also, for high salary jobs,  
 there is no restriction to recruit people from the open market. The 
 proposal to do away with notification of vacancies will go against the 
 spirit of the Act especially, since the Ministry is moving to launch 
 National Career Service (NCS) and planning to attract jobseekers from all 
 categories. As stated earlier, the range of employment related services is 
 also proposed to be widened under the National Career Service (NCS) to 
 cover apprenticeships, part time job, and information about various skill 
 development courses etc.  so that more and more people access these 
 services and that too from various delivery points over and above the 
 Employment Exchanges.” 
 
 
 
 Notification of Vacancies by certain establishments 
 
 
2.26  In the principal Act, in section 4, in sub-section (2),— 
 
 (i) after the words "every establishment in private sector", the words 
 "employing twenty-five or more persons" shall be inserted; 
 
 (ii) after the words "category of establishments in private sector",  the 
 words "employing twenty-five or more persons" shall be inserted. 
 
2.27 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
   “In the light of insertion of new section 5A, consequential amendments 
 in section 4 of the Principal Act relating to “private establishment 
 ordinarily employing twenty -five or more persons to work for 
 remuneration”.  
 
 
 
 

17 
 
 Intimation of the result of selection/Furnishing of information 
 
2.28 In the principal Act, in section 5, after sub-section (3), the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 "(4) The employer shall furnish the information relating to the result 
 of selection against the vacancies notified under section 4 to the 
 employment guidance and promotion centre within thirty  days from 
 the date of selection in such form as may be prescribed.". 
 
2.29 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “Provision is being added as 5(4) in the Act. 
 
       It has been experienced that most of the employers do not  
 intimate the Employment Exchange about the results of selections made 
 by them against submissions made by the Employment Exchanges from 
 time to time against notified vacancies despite repeated follow up by the 
 exchange and hence the Section 5(4) is to be added.  The live register 
 gets inflated on this account. 
 
  “The employer shall intimate the result of selection to the 
 Employment Guidance and Promotion Centre against the vacancies 
 notified within thirty days from the date of selection in the format as may 
 be prescribed”. 
 
 
2.30 In the principal Act, after section 5, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
 
 "5A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the appropri ate 
 Government may, by notification in the Official  Gazette, having regard 
 to the requirement of collection of  statistics relating to employment 
 status, require that from such date as may be specified in the 
 notification, the employer in every establ ishment in private sector 
 employing less than twenty -five persons or every establishment 
 pertaining to any  class or category of establishments in private sector 
 employing  less than twenty-five persons shall furnish such information 
 or  return as may be prescribed in relation to vacancies that have 
 occurred or are about to occur in that establishment to such employment 
 guidance and promotion centre as may be  prescribed,  and the employer 
 shall thereupon comply with such requisition.". 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
2.31 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “Provision is being added as now the establishments employing 10 -24 
 persons in private sector are required to furnish employment and 
 occupational returns under the Act.   
   
  Experience shows that most of these establishments do not furnish 
 the returns for one reason or another.  This distorts the employment 
 statistical information collected under EMI Programme.  In order to get 
 the employment statistics from these establish ments it is proposed to 
 add a new section 5A as follows: 
 
  “Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the appropriate 
 Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, having regard to 
 the requirement for collection of statistics relating to employment status, 
 require that from such date as may be specified in the notification, the 
 employer in every establishment in private sector ordinarily employing 
 ten or more but less than twenty -five persons to work for remuneration 
 or every establishment pertaining to any class or category of 
 establishments in private sector ordinarily employing ten or more but 
 less than twenty -five persons to work for remuneration shall furnish 
 such information or return as may be prescribed in relation to vacancies 
 that have occurred or are about to occur in that establishment to such 
 employment guidance and promotion centre as may be prescribed, and 
 the employer shall thereupon comply with such requisition.”. 
 
2.32 When the Ministry were asked why  no time limit has been prescribed for 
intimation of vacancies by the establishments, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
 “As such, occurrence of a vacancy and the decision to fill it up by an 
 establishment are two different issues. Many a time, there could be a 
 conscious decision of the management not to fill the vacancy on its 
 occurrence and it would not be feasible to  specify a time limit on the  
 management for filling up the same.” 
 
 
 Amendment to Section 6  
 
 
2.33 In the principal Act, in section 6,— 
 
 (i) for the words and figure "any employer required to furnish any 
 information or returns under section 5", the words, figures and letter 
 "any employer required to notify vacancies to employment guidance 
 and promotion centres under section 4 or furnish any  information or 
 return under section 5 or section 5A" shall be substituted; 

19 
 
 
 (ii) for the words "under that section", the words, figures and  letter 
 "under section 5 or section 5A" shall be substituted. 
 
 
2.34 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “It is proposed that Section 6 of the Act may also be made applicable for 
 purposes of Section 4, by substituting in Section 6, for the words and 
 figure “any employer required to furnish any information or returns 
 under Section 5” the following words and figures:- 
  “any employer required to notify vacancies to Employment 
 Guidance and Promotion Centres under Section 4 or furnish any 
 information or returns under Section 5 or Section 5A”. 
 
  This will ensure better implementation of the Act and have a 
 realistic picture about the vacancies occurred.” 
 
 Enhancement in Penalities 
 
2.35 In the principal Act, for section 7, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
 "7. (1) If any employer fails to notify to the employment guidance  and 
 promotion centre prescribed for the purpose any vacancy in  accordance 
 with sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 4, he shall be 
 punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to five 
 thousand rupees and for every second offence with fine which may 
 extend to ten thousand rupees and for every subsequent o ffence with 
 fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with simple 
 imprisonment which may extend to one 
 month, or with both. 
 
 
 (2) If any person,— 
 
  (a) required to furnish any information or return under   
  section 5,— 
  
  (i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or    
  returns; or 
  (ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or   
  returns which he knows to be false; or 
 
  (b) impedes the right of access to any relevant record or   
  document or the right of entry conferred by section 6; or 

20 
 
 
 
  (c) refuses to answer, or gives a false answer to any    
  question asked under section 6, necessary for obtaining   
  any information required under section 5 or section 5A, 
 
he shall be punishable for the fir st offence with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees and for every second offence with fine which may extend to 
ten thousand rupees and for every subsequent offence with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with simple imprisonment which may extend 
to one month, or with both.". 
 
 
2.36 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “To ensure better coverage and proper implementation of the said Act, it 
 is proposed to enhance the penalties in respect of all establishments 
 except those in private sector employing 10-24 workers.  
       The penalties for first offence with regard to notification of 
 vacancies as well as submission of returns, uniformly upt o Rs.5000/ -; 
 for the second offence upto Rs.10,000/ -; and for any subsequent offence 
 the penalty may include a fine upto Rs. 10,000/ - and/or simple 
 imprisonment upto one month, except in respect of returns filed by 
 establishments employing 10-24 workers.  In such cases, warning will be 
 given for the first offence; explanation called if it is repeated; and a fine of 
 Rs. 5000/ - imposed for each subsequent offence.  Accordingly, the 
 existing Sections 7(1) and 7(2) in the Act may be amended as under: 
  
 (a)   in clause (1) of Section 7,  for the words “he shall be punishable  for 
 the first offence with fine  which may extend to five hundred rupees and 
 for every subsequent offence with fine which may extend to one thousand 
 rupees”,  the words “he shall be punishable for the first offence with fine 
 which may extend upto Rs.5000/ -; for the second offence upto Rs. 
 10,000/-; and for any subsequent offence the penalty may include a fine 
 be upto Rs. 10,000/ - and/or simple imprisonment upto one month, 
 except in respect of returns filed by establishments employing 10 -24 
 workers.  In such cases, warning will be given for the first offence; 
 explanation called if it is repeated; and a fine of Rs. 5000/ - imposed for 
 each subsequent offence” shall be substituted; 
 (b) in clause (2) of Section 7, in sub -clause (b), for the words “he shall be 
 punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to two 
 hundred and fifty rupees and for every subsequent offence with fine 
 which may extend to five hundred rup ees”, the words “he shall be 
 punishable for the first offence with fine which may extended upto 
 Rs.5000/-; for the second offence upto Rs. 10,000/ -; and for any 
 subsequent offence the penalty may include a fine be upto Rs. 10,000/ - 

21 
 
 and/or simple imprisonment upto one month, except in respect of 
 returns filed by establishments employing 10-24 workers.  In such cases, 
 warning will be given for the first offence; explanation called if it is 
 repeated; and a fine of Rs. 5000/ - imposed for each subsequent offence” 
 shall be substituted.” 
  
2.37 In the principal Act, after section 7, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
 
 ‘7A. If any employer of an establishment in private sector  referred to 
 in section 5A,— 
 
 (a) required to furnish any information or return under that  section,— 
 
  (i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or return;   
  or 
  (ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or   
  return which he knows to be false; or 
 
 (b) impedes the right of access to any relevant record or document  or the 
 right of entry conferred by section 6, 
 
he shall be punishable after consecutive two defaults with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees and for every subsequent default with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees for each such default. 
 
2.38 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “It is proposed to include a penalty clause  for establishments employing 
 10-24 workers in the private sector by including a separate section 7A as 
 follows: 
 (a) required to furnish any information or return –  
   (i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or returns, or 
  (ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return  
  which he knows to be false, or 
  (iii) refuses to answer, or gives a false answer to any question  
  necessary for obtaining any information required to be furnished  
  under section 5; or 
 
 (b) impedes the right of access to relevant records or documents or the 
 right of entry conferred by section 6, he shall be punishable after 
 consecutive two defaults with fine which may extend to five thousand 
 rupees and for every subsequent default with  fine which may extend to 
 five thousand rupees for each such default.”. 
  
 

22 
 
2.39 In the principal Act, 
 
  7B. ( 1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
 company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, 
 was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the 
 conduct of the business of the company, as well  as the company shall be 
 deemed to be guilty of having  committed the offence and shall be liable 
 to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
 
  Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall 
 render any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the 
 offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
 exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where  any 
 offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
 proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
 connivance of, or is attributable to, a ny neglect on the part of any 
 director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
 director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
 be guilty of having committed such offence and shall be liable to be 
 proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
 
  (a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a firm   
  or other association of individuals; and 
  (b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the   
  firm.’. 
 
2.40 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “It is proposed to include imprisonment as a penalty provision for 
 violating the provisions of the Act. Thus, it becomes necessary to 
 prescribe the person responsible f or violating the provisions of the Act in 
 the case of companies. It is, therefore, proposed to incorporate a new 
 clause in the Act in Section 7 as 7(B) as under: 
  
  “7(B).(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
 company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in 
 charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
 business of the company  as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
 guilty of the offence and shall be liable  to be proceeded against and 
 punished accordingly: 
        Provided that nothing contained in this Sub -Section shall render 
 any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence 

23 
 
 was committed without his knowledge or that he had exerci sed all due 
 diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub -Section (1), where any 
 offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved 
 that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, 
 or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, 
 secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, 
 secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and 
 shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
      
 Explanation – For the purposes of this Section – 
 
 (a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other 
 association of individuals; and  “director”, in relation to affirm, means  a 
 partner in the firm.” 
 
 
 Amendment of Section 10 
 
 
2.41 In the principal Act, in section 10, in sub -section (2), after clause (b), the 
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 ‘‘(ba) the form in which the information relating to result of  selection 
 may be furnished by the employer under sub-section  (4) of section 5; 
 
 (bb) the information or return in relation to vacancies that have 
 occurred or are about to occur in the establishment in private sector 
 and the employment guidance and pro motion centre to which such 
 information or return shall be furnished under section 5A;’’. 
 
 
2.42 The Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment stated during 
evidence held on 11th December, 2013: 
 
 “I have already said that employment exchanges should be dynamic.  
 They are disjoined from current requirement.  I had said in my opening 
 remarks that out of four crore persons only four lakhs are being placed.  
 Therefore, the process needs to be fundam entally changed and that is 
 the job which are doing.  I had also said in the beginning that we are 
 making an e-governance model.  Why should everyone come to office.  He 
 has to go to an office to register.” 
 
 

24 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
3.1 The Committee note that the Ministry proposes to 
substitute Section 2(b) by a new definition of employee. The 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that as the 
number of persons engaged on contract basis is on rise, it is 
proposed to widen the def inition of employees to cover all 
those persons who are employed or engaged on contract basis, 
continuously for a period not less than 240 days. The 
Committee are concerned about the situation where the 
employers give a break after less than 240 days and r e-employ 
on contract basis or where project wise employment is offered 
by the employers which may or may not last for 240 days. The 
Committee are of the opinion that the definition needs to be 
inclusive to cover all such scenarios where employers look for 
new ways to solicit employees. 
 
  

25 
 
3.2 The Committee note that the Ministry propose to 
substitute the nomenclature of Employment Exchanges with 
Employment Guidance and Promotion Centres by amending 
Section2 (d). The Committee note that to give emphasis to t he 
guidance and counseling aspect rather than mere registration 
of jobs, substituting the words   ‘Employment Exchanges’ with 
the words ‘Employment Guidance and Promotion Centres’ has 
been proposed. The Committee find that no provision has been 
made for th e role of Employment Exchanges as ‘Guidance and 
Promotion centres’ pursuant to the proposed change. When the 
Ministry was asked about the non -provision, the Ministry 
replied they propose to remodel the National Employment 
Service as National Career Service  and to widen the range of 
employment services. The Committee note from the reply of 
the Ministry that the Ministry now propose to call the Act the 
‘National Career Service Act’. The Committee are of the 
opinion that improving the services and widening the  coverage 
of the Act would be in the interest of the large employment 
seeking population of the country. The Committee recommend 
that the Ministry while changing the nomenclature of the Act 

26 
 
bring consequent changes in the Act for the benefit of 
maximum number of jobseekers and prospective employers. 
 
3.3 The Committee note that the Ministry propose to amend 
Section 2(g) containing the definition of ‘establishment’ by 
covering all the establishments, which are not in public sector, 
having 10 or more employee s. The Committee note that to 
increase the scope and coverage of the Act and make data 
collected under Employment Market Information Programme 
more meaningful it has been proposed to bring establishments 
in private sector employing 10 -24 workers within the  scope of 
the Act. The Committee are of the view that such provisions 
apparently aim at reaching large number of establishments for 
enhancing database. The Committee are of the opinion that 
census/ surveys can be better carried out by dedicated 
organizations and the employment exchanges should 
concentrate on providing information about employment 
opportunities to the largest number of people and information 
about unemployed youth to the prospective employers. 
  

27 
 
 
3.4 The Committee n ote that as per Section 3( 1)(b), the Act 
does not apply in relation to any vacancies in any employment 
in domestic services. The Committee are concerned to note 
that the rise of private placement agencies involved in 
providing domestic workers has led to exploitation of poor 
people at the hands of the agencies, the middlemen and the 
employers. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry 
that if employment exchanges were to enter the arena, the 
households would have to notify their vacancies which may not 
be practical. The Committee are of the opinion that there is no 
need for the households to notify their vacancies beforehand. 
The domestic workers seeking work can register with the 
exchange and the households can go to the exchanges when the 
demand arises. The Committee are of the view that to curb the 
exploitation of the poor workers, the revamped Employment 
Exchanges, once they are set up, may involve themselves in 
this field. 

28 
 
3.5 The Committee observe that private placement agencies 
catering to the recruitment needs of the private sector have 
mushroomed in the recent past. The Committee note that 
guidelines on regulation of private placement agencies have 
been issued and it is left to the state governments to frame 
regulations to monitor the working of private placement 
agencies. The Committee are of the view that these placement 
agencies mislead the unemployed youth, collect money from 
them and often vanish. The Committee recommend that the 
provisions for regulating such agencies may also be made in the 
amended Act.  
 
3.6 The Committee note that the sub section 3(2)(b) 
exempting the vacancies carrying monthly remuneration of 
less than rupees sixty per month is proposed to be omitted. 
The Committee while agreeing to the proposal are of the view 
that the high-end vacancies may be exempted from the purview 
of the Act. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of 
the Ministry that the proposal to do away with notification of 
vacancies will go against the spirit of the Act. The Committee 

29 
 
are of the view that high -end jobs are filled by selection from 
short listed experienced candidates and making it mandatory 
to notify their vacancy in the employment exchange would 
serve no purpose and also this would mean that people who are 
already working will have to register with employmen t 
exchanges. The Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry 
should focus on providing employment opportunities to the 
unemployed/ first time job seekers. 
3.7 The Committee find that there are various shortcomings 
in the Amendment Bill. The Bill seeks to change the name of 
the Employment Exchanges as Employment Guidance and 
Promotion Centres but no provision has been made in the Bill 
for effective discharge of t he new role of the exchanges. The 
Bill provides for amending the definition of employee and 
employer but has fallen short of an inclusive definition to cover 
future developments. The Bill defines employment guidance 
and promotion centre as any office or pl ace established and 
maintained for collection and furnishing of information relating 
to employees, employers, vacancies and persons who seek 
vocational guidance and career counseling. It is apparent from 

30 
 
the definition that the exchanges are only establish ed for 
collection and furnishing of information and no value addition 
is proposed to be done through them. Further, in this era of 
computerization and connectivity the exchanges cannot be 
said to be limited to an office or place where information is 
collected, maintained and furnished. The Bill seeks to cover 
plantation owned and managed by a company formed and 
registered under the Companies Act, 1956 under the Act but 
has left ‘contract farming’ out of purview where companies 
enter into agreement with the cultivators for production and 
supply of agricultural products. The Bill provides for imposing 
an obligation on the employer to furnish information relating 
to the selection against the vacancies notified under the Act 
but no provision has been made for in timation of a vacancy at 
the same time as it is advertised in other media to give equal 
opportunity to those registered with the employment 
exchanges. The Bill seeks to cover establishments employing 
10-24 workers only to enhance database thereby losing it s 
focus i.e. providing information about job opportunities to the 
unemployed youth. 

31 
 
3.8 The Committee also note that only four lakh candidates 
per year are placed through 956 Employment Exchanges out of 
four crore people who are registered with them. The Committee 
observe that the Employment Exchanges have lost their 
significance due to changing trends for e.g. rise in number of 
contract workers, use of capital intensive techniques, 
technological developments, outsourcing and emergence of 
recruitment boards have led to reduced coverage under the Act. 
The Committee are of the opinion that the Employment 
Exchanges should be completely revamped to provide one-stop 
placement solutions to the unemployed. Employment 
exchanges should aim to match the requirements o f the 
employers with the skill sets of the employees and for 
matching them, they should strive to provide short term 
courses, vocational guidance, training and career counseling by 
qualified career counselors to the registered candidates. The 
Committee are also of the opinion that the Act should aim at 
making the establishments in both private and public sector 
transparent in their recruitment policies by displaying the 
status of vacant posts as and when they arise and those opened 

32 
 
for filling on the web po rtal. But, the present Amendment Bill 
fails to offer anything in this direction. The Committee are 
disappointed to find that the Ministry has taken 50 years to 
bring an Amendment Bill that too haphazardly and half 
heartedly. The Committee agree with the su bmission of the 
Secretary that the Employment Exchanges need to be dynamic 
and the whole process needs to be re -engineered in line with 
the under consideration e -governance project. The Committee 
are of the opinion that since the Ministry is still working on 
the improving the delivery of employment services, it may 
review the proposed amendments in light of those 
improvements and bring fresh proposal for the benefit of large 
number of jobseekers in the country. The Committee 
recommend that the Bill should b e returned to the Ministry 
with a request to bring a comprehensive Amendment Bill so 
that the Employment Exchanges are able to fulfill their role in 
the present times. 
 
New Delhi;                       DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
  December, 2013                                                       CHAIRMAN,  
 Agrahayana ,1935 (Saka)       STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

33 
 
AS INSTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
Bill No. XXVII of 2013 
 
 
THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION 
OF VACANCIES) AMENDMENT BILL, 2013 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
further to amend the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory 
Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employment Exchanges 
(Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Amendment Act, 2013. 
 
Short title  and commencement. 
 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
2. In the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of 
Vacancies) Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in 
the long title, for the words "employment  exchanges", the words 
"employment guidance and promotion centres" shall be substituted. 
 
31 of 1959. Amendment of long title. 
 
3. In the principal Act, in section 1, in sub-section (1), for the words 
"Employment Exchanges", the words "Employment Guidance and 
Promotion Centres" shall be substituted. 
 
Amendment of section 1. 
 
4. Throughout the princ ipal Act, unless otherwise expressly 
provided, for the words  "employment exchange" and "employment 

34 
 
exchanges" wherever they occur, the words  "employment guidance 
and promotion centre" and "employment guidance and promotion  
centres" shall respectively be su bstituted and such other 
consequential amendments as the  rules of grammar may require 
shall also be made. 
 
 
Substitution of references of certain expressions by certain other 
expressions. 
 
5. In the principal Act, in section 2,— 
 
 (A) for clauses (b), (c) and (d), the following clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
 '(b) "employee" means any person who is employed or engaged 
on contract basis, continuously for a period not less than two 
hundred and forty  days, in an establishment to do any work for 
remuneration; 
 
 (c) "employer" means any person who, employs, or, enters into 
contract with, one or more other persons to do any work in an 
establishment for remuneration, continuously for a period not less 
than two hundred and forty  days, and includes any perso n 
entrusted with the supervision and control of  employees in such 
establishment; 
 
 (d) "employment guidance and promotion centre" means any 
office or  place established and maintained by the appropriate 
Government for the collection  and furnishing of inform ation, either 
by the keeping of registers or through  electronic medium or 
otherwise, relating to— 
 
 (i) persons who seek to engage employees; 
 (ii) persons who seek employment; 
 (iii) vacancies to which persons seeking employment may be 
 appointed; and 
 (iv) persons who seek vocational guidance and career 
 counseling or guidance to start self-employment;’; 
 

35 
 
 (B) in clause (g), for the words "twenty-five or more", the words 
"ten or more" shall be substituted; 
 
 (C) after clause (g), the following clause sh all be inserted, 
namely:— 
 
 '(ga) "plantation" means preparation of any land for planting of 
 commercial crops of perennial nature cultivated extensively in 
 tropical and sub -tropical situations on a large scale by 
 uniform system of cultivation under cent ral management 
 owned and managed by a company formed and registered 
 under the  Companies Act, 1956, but does not include the 
 plantation owned and managed by an individual;’; 
 
 (D) clause (i) shall be omitted. 
 
Amendment of section 2. 
 
6. In the principal Act, in section 3,— 
 
(a) in sub-section (1),— 
 
 (i) in clause (a), after the words "other than", the words 
 "employment in plantation or" shall be inserted; 
 (ii) clause (d) shall be omitted; 
 (iii) in clause ( e), after the word "Parliament", the words "or a 
 State Legislature" shall be inserted; 
 
(b) in sub-section (2), clause (b) shall be omitted. 
 
Amendment of section 3. 
 
7. In the principal Act, in section 4, in sub-section (2),— 
 
 (i) after the words "every establishment in private sector", the 
 words "employing  twenty-five or more persons" shall be 
 inserted; 
 

36 
 
 (ii) after the words "category of establishments in private 
 sector", the words  "employing twenty -five or more persons" 
 shall be inserted. 
 
Amendment of section 4. 
 
8. In the principal Act, in section 5, after sub -section ( 3), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 "(4) The employer shall furnish the information relating to the 
 result of selection against the vacancies notified under section 
 4 to the employment guidance and  promotion centre within 
 thirty days from the date of selection in such form as may 
 be prescribed.". 
 
Amendment of section 5. 
 
9. In the principal Act, after section 5, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
 
 "5A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the 
 appropriate Government  may, by notification in the Official 
 Gazette, having regard to the requirement of collection  of 
 statistics relating to employment status, require that from 
 such date as may be specified in the notification, the employer 
 in  every establishment in private sector employing less than 
 twenty-five persons or every establishment pertaining to any  
 class or category of establishments in private sector employing 
 less than twenty -five persons shall furnish such information 
 or  return as may be prescribed in relation to  vacancies that 
 have occurred or are about to occur in that  establishment 
 to such employment guidance and promotion centre as may 
 be  prescribed, and the employer  shall thereupon comply 
 with such requisition.". 
 
 
Insertion of new section 5A. Obligation of certain establishments 
In private sector to furnish returns. 
 
 

37 
 
 
10. In the principal Act, in section 6,— 
 
 (i) for the words and figure "any employer required to furnish 
 any  information or  returns under section 5", the words, 
 figures and  letter "any employer required to  notify 
 vacancies to employment  guidance and promotion centres 
 under section 4 or furnish any  information or return under 
 section 5 or section 5A" shall be  substituted; 
 
 (ii) for the words "under that section", the words, figures and 
 letter "under section 5 or section 5A" shall be substituted. 
 
Amendment of section 6. 
 
11. In the principal Act, for section 7, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
 "7. ( 1) If any employer fails to notify to the employment 
 guidance  and promotion  centre prescribed for the purpose 
 any vacancy in  accordance with sub-section (1) or sub-section 
 (2) of section 4, he shall be punishable for the first offence with 
 fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and for every 
 second offence  with fine which may  extend to ten thousand 
 rupees and for every subsequ ent offence with fine which may  
 extend to ten thousand  rupees, or with simple 
 imprisonment which may extend to one 
 month, or with both. 
 
 
 (2) If any person,— 
 
  (a) required to furnish any information or return under  
  section 5,— 
  
  (i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or  
  returns; or 
  (ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or 
  returns which he knows to be false; or 
 

38 
 
  (b) impedes the right of access to any relevant record or  
  document or the right of entry conferred by section 6; or 
 
 
  (c) refuses to answer, or gives a false answer to any   
  question asked under section 6, necessary for obtaining  
  any information required under section 5 or section 5A, 
 
he shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may 
extend to five thousand  rupees and for every second offence with 
fine which may extend to ten thousand  rupees and for every 
subsequent offence with fine which may extend to ten thousand  
rupees, or with simple imprisonment which may extend to  one 
month, or with both.". 
 
Substitution of section 7. Penalties. 
 
 
12. In the principal Act, after section 7, the following sections shall 
be inserted, namely:— 
 
 ‘7A. If any employer of an establishment in private sector 
 referred to in section 5A,— 
 
 (a) required to furnish any information or return under that 
 section,— 
 
  (i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or  
  return; or 
  (ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or 
  return which he knows to be false; or 
 
 (b) impedes the right of access to any relevant record or 
 document or the right of entry conferred by section 6, 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
he shall be punishable after consecutive two defaults with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees and for every subsequent 
default with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for each 
such default. 
 
 
Insertion of new sections 7A and 7B. Penalty for contravention of 
section 5A. 
 
 7B. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed 
 by a  company, every person who, at the time the offence was 
 committed, was in charge of, and was  responsible to, the 
 company for the conduct of the business of the company, as 
 well  as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of having 
 committed the offence and shal l be  liable to be proceeded 
 against and punished accordingly: 
 
  Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall 
 render any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves 
 that the offence was committed without his  knowledge or that 
 he  had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission 
 of  such offence. 
 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), 
 where  any offence under this Act has been committed by a 
 company  and it is proved that the offence has  been 
 committed with the  consent or connivance of, or is 
 attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, 
 manager, secretary or other officer of the  company, such  
 director, manager, secretary or other officer shall  also be 
 deemed to be guilty of having committed such offence  and 
 shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished  
 accordingly. 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
 
  (a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a  
  firm  or other association of individuals; and 
  (b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
  firm.’. 

40 
 
Offences by companies 
 
13. In the principal Act, in section 10, in sub -section (2), after 
clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 ‘‘(ba) the form in which the information relating to result of 
 selection may be furnished by the employer under sub -section 
 (4) of section 5; 
 
 (bb) the information or return in relation to vacancies that 
 have occurred or are  about to occur in the establishm ent in 
 private sector and the employment guidance  and promotion 
 centre to  which such information or return shall be furnished 
 under section 5A;’’. 
 
 
Amendment of section 10. 
  

41 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
 The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of 
Vacancies) Act, 1959 was  enacted on the recommendations of the 
Training and Employment Services Organisation  Committee set up 
by the Government of India in 1952 to provide for compulsory 
notification of vacancies to the Employment Exchanges  and for 
rendering returns, both employment and  occupational, relating to 
employment situation by the employers. 
 
 
2. Over the years, based on experience gained and difficulties 
encountered in the  implementation of the said Act, a number of 
suggestions wer e received from various  State Governments and 
Union territory Administrations for amendment of the said Act. The  
proposed amendments were discussed in various meetings of the 
Working Group on National Employment Service. The said Working 
Group broadly endorsed the amendments. In addition,  the Act was 
enacted more than five decades back and with the passage of time, 
some of its  provisions have become redundant or obsolete which 
need omission. In order to bring the  said Act in tune with the 
present day requir ement, certain amendments to the Act are also 
felt necessary. 
 
3. In view of the above, the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory 
Notification of Vacancies) Amendment Bill, 2013, inter alia, provides 
for— 
 (a) changing the short title of the Employment Exchange s 
 (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 as “the 
 Employment Guidance and Promotion  Centres (Compulsory 
 Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959” and accordingly to amend 
 the long title of the Act; 
 
 (b) substituting the words ‘‘Employment Exchang es’’ with the 
 words ‘‘Employment  Guidance and Promotion Centres’’, 
 throughout the said Act, to give the emphasis on  the guidance 
 and counselling aspect rather than mere registration for jobs; 
 
  

42 
 
 
 (c) the amendment of clause ( g) of section 2 relating to the 
 definition of “establishment in private sector” by substituting 
 the  words “ten or more” for the words “twenty-five or more” to 
 collect employment information from establishments  
 employing ten or more persons; 
 
 (d) the insertion of a new clause ( ga) in section 2 to define the 
 expression “plantation” so as to bring the vacancies in the 
 plantation sector within the purview of  the Act and to apply 
 the  provisions of the Act to the plantations owned and 
 managed by  an individual on voluntary basis; 
 
 (e) the amendment of sub -section (1) of section 3 in order to 
 notify vacancies  relating to unskilled office work and also 
 vacancies relating to plantation sector along  with employment 
 as  agriculture or farm machinery operatives; 
 
 (f) providing exemption from the application of the Act to the 
 vacancies of staff of the State Legislature at par with the staff 
 of  Parliament; 
  
 (g) the omission of the provision relating to vacancies in an 
 employment, which carries a r emuneration of less than sixty 
 rupees in a month, as there is hardly any post,  which carries 
 that remuneration; 
 
 (h) providing for an obligation on the employer to furnish the 
 information relating  to the selection against the vacancies 
 notified under the Act; 
 
 (i) the insertion of a new section 5A, to provide for furnishing 
 of  returns by  establishments employing ten or more but 
 less than  twenty-five persons to work for remuneration and in 
 case of any  failure to furnish the returns, to provide the 
 punishment after  consecutive two defaults with fine which 
 may extend to five  thousand rupees and  for every 
 subsequent default with fine  which may extend to five 
 thousand rupees for each such default; 
 

43 
 
  
 
 
  
 (j) the substitution of section 7 so as to ensure better coverage 
 and proper implementation of the said Act by making penalty 
 provisions more stringent including  an additional provision of 
 imprisonment and raising the amount of fine for the first  
 offence  which may extend to five thousand rupees, for any 
 second  offence with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
 rupees and  for any subsequent offence with fine  which 
 may extend to ten  thousand rupees, or with simple 
 imprisonment which may  extend to one month, or with both; 
 
 (k) the insertion of new sections 7A and 7B to provide 
 penalties  for non -rendition of returns by establishments 
 employing ten or  more but less than twenty -five persons  
 and to bring the public  and private limited companies 
 offering employment  opportunities under the purview of the 
 Act and to make liable  any officer or other  person working 
 in such companies for  committing offence for non -
 compliance of the provisions of the  said Act. 
 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
The 18th January, 2013. 
  

44 
 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
 
 Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to amend section 10 of the 
Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 
1959, relating to the power to make rules, by  inserting clauses (ba) 
and ( bb) in sub -section ( 2) of section 10. Clause ( ba) proposed to 
beinserted empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
providing the form in which the  information relating to result of 
selection may be furnished by the employer under sub-section (4) of 
section 5. Clause (bb) proposed to be inserted empowers the Central 
Government to make rules for furnishing the information or return 
in relation to vacancies that have occurred or are about to occur in 
the establishment in private sector and the  employment guidance 
and promotion centre to which such information or return shall be  
furnished under section 5A. 
 
 
2. The rules made by the Central Government are required to be 
laid before Parliament.  The matters in respect of which rules may 
be made by the Central Government are matters of  procedure and 
administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in 
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative po wer is, therefore, of a 
normal character. 
  

45 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES 
(COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES) ACT, 1959 
 
(31 OF 1959) 
 
An Act to provide for the compulsory notification of vacancies to 
employment exchanges. 
 
 *    *    *    *   
 * 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employment Exchanges 
(Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959. 
 
 
 *    *    *   *   
 * 
 
 
Short title, extent and commencement. 
   
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 
 
 *    *    *    *   
 * 
 
 
 (b) ‘‘employee’’ means any person who is employed in an 
 establishment to do any work for remuneration; 
 
 (c) ‘‘employer’’ means any person who employs one or more 
other  persons to do  any work in an establishment for 
remuneration  and includes any person entrusted with  the 
supervision and  control of employees in such establishment; 

46 
 
 
 (d) ‘‘employment exchange’’ means any office or place 
established  and maintained  by the Government for the 
collection and  furnishing of information, eit her by the  keeping of 
registers or   otherwise, respecting— 
 
  (i) persons who seek to engage employees, 
  (ii) persons who seek employment, and 
  (iii) vacancies to which persons seeking employment may  
  be appointed; 
 
 
  *   *    *    *   
 * 
 
 (g) ‘‘establishment in private sector’’ means an establishment 
 which is not an  establishment in public sector and where 
 ordinarily twenty -five or more persons are  employed to work 
 for  remuneration; 
  *   *    *   *  
 * 
 
 
 (i) ‘‘unskilled office work” mea ns work done in an 
establishment  by any of the  following categories of employees, 
namely:— 
 
  (1) daftri; 
  (2) jamadar, orderly and peon; 
  (3) dusting man or farash; 
  (4) bundle or record lifter; 
  (5) process server; 
  (6) watchman; 
  (7) sweeper; 
  (8) any other employee doing any routine or unskilled  
  work which the Central Government may, by    
  notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be   
  unskilled office work. 
 
 

47 
 
3. (1) This Act shall not apply in relation to vacancies,— 
 
 (a) in any employment in agriculture (including horticulture) in 
 any establishment in private sector other than employment as 
 agricultural or farm machinery operatives; 
 
  *   *   *   *    * 
Act not to apply in relation to certain vacancies. 
 
 
 
 (d) in any employment to do unskilled office work; 
 (e) in any employment connected with the staff of Parliament. 
 
(2) Unless the Central Government otherwise directs by notification 
in the Official Gazette in this behalf, this Act shall not also apply in 
relation to— 
*      *    *    *     * 
(b) vacancies in an employment which carries a remuneration of 
less than sixty rupees in a month. 
 
4. (1)    *  *   *   * 
    
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, require that from such date as may be specified in the 
notification, the employer in every establishment in private sector or 
every establishment pertaining to any class or  category of 
establishments in private sector shall, before filling up any vacancy 
in any  employment in tha t establishment, notify that vacancy to 
such employment exchanges  as may be prescribed, and the 
employer shall thereupon comply with such requisition. 
 
 *  *   *    *    * 
 
6. Such officer of Government as may be prescribed in this behalf, 
or any person  authorised by him in writing, shall have access to 
any relevant record or document in the  possession of any employer 
required to furnish any information or returns under section 5  and 
may enter at any reasonable time any premises where he believes 
such recor d or document  to be and inspect or take copies of 

48 
 
relevant records or documents or ask any question  necessary for 
obtaining any information required under that section. 
 
7. (1) If any employer fails to notify to the employment exchanges 
prescribed for the  purpose any vacancy in contravention of sub -
section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 4, he shall be punishable for 
the first offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees 
and for every subsequent offence with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees. 
 
 
(2) If any person— 
 
(a) required to furnish any information or return— 
 
(i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or return, or 
 
(ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return 
which he knows to be false, or 
(iii) refuses to answer, or gives a false answer to, any question 
necessary for obtaining any information required to be furnished 
under section 5; or 
(b) impedes the right of access to relevant records or documents or 
the right of entry conferred by section 6, he shall be punishable for 
the first offence with fine which may extend to two hundred and  
fifty rupees and for every subsequent offence with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees. 
 
 
 *   *   *    *    * 
 
10. (1) *   *   *    *    * 
 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power,  such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:— 
 
 *   *   *    *    * 

49 
 
     RAJYA SABHA 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
BILL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further to amend the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory 
Notification of Vacancies) 
Act, 1959. 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Mallikarjun Kharge, Minister of Labour and Employment) 
GMGIPMRND—120RS(S3)—12-04-2013. 
  

50 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 7 October, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 
hrs. in Room No.53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri Ashok Argal 
3.      Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4.      Shri Narahari Mahato 
5.      Shri Hari Manjhi 
6.      Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
7.      Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
8.      Smt. J. Shantha 
9.      Shri Ratan Singh 
10. Shri K. Sugumar 
11. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
12. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
13. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
   Rajya Sabha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
14. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
15. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
17. Shri P. Kannan 
18. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
19. Shri Rajaram 
20. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 

51 
 
 
           SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri A.K Singh   - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri. P.V.L.N Murthy  - Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND 
EMPLOYMENT AND DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF 
EMPLOYMENT & TRAINING 
Sl No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Arun Kumar Sinha Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Shikhar Agarwal Director General (DGE&T) 
3. Shri Pravin Srivastava Deputy Director General 
(DGE&T) 
 
2.     XX    XX    XX 
3.  XX    XX    XX 
4.  XX    XX    XX 
[At about 1515 hrs the representatives of the Ministries were called 
in] 
5. The Chairman  then welcomed the Additional Secretary and 
other officials of the Ministry of Labour &  Employment and invited 
their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 (1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker.  

52 
 
6. A power point presentation was made by the representatives of 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment and briefed the Committee on 
the amendments proposed in ‘ The Employment Exchanges 
(Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Amendment Bill, 2013. 
7. The Members, thereafter, raised several issues and also sought 
clarifications on the following:- 
 
  (i). Need for a comprehensive review of the Bill covering all 
registered establishments irrespective of the number of 
employees. 
(ii). Effective and stringent penalty for violation of the provision 
of the Act. 
(iii). Clear definition of the employer and the employee. 
(iv). Making provisions of the Act mandatory. 
 (v). Use of information technology for a more effective and 
efficient implementation of the Act. 
(vi). Coverage of commercial agriculture and establishment 
engaged in producing Bio products under the Act. 
(vii).  Proposal for amendment in the wake of the Supreme Court 
ruling in 1996 regarding notification of vacancies. 
(viii). No provision for guidance and promotional role of the 
employment exchanges. 
(ix). Exchanges should be one stop solution for available 
courses, vacancies, training and self employment 
opportunities. 

53 
 
8. The Chairman then directed the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment to send   written replies to the 
unanswered queries of the Members to the Secretariat within a week. 
9. The Chairman thanked the Additi onal Secretary and other 
officials of Ministry of Labour & Employment for giving valuable 
information to the Committee and responding to the queries of the 
Members. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________
XX  Matter do not pertain to this report.  

54 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 11th December, 2013 from 1 500 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in Committee Room `C’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
   Shri Dara Singh Chauhan - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Ashok Argal 
 3. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
 4. Shri Hari Manjhi 
 5. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
 6. Smt. J. Shantha 
 7. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
 
i. Rajya Sabha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
 8. Shri D. Bandoyapadhyay 
 9. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
 10. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 11. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri A.K Singh   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

55 
 
2.    XX    XX    XX 
3. XX    XX    XX  
4. XX    XX    XX 
 [At about 1515 hrs the representatives of the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment were called in] 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
SL. 
NO. 
NAME OF THE OFFICER ORGANISATION 
 
1. Smt. Gauri Kumar Secretary 
 
2. 
 
Shri Shikhar Agarwal Director General 
3. 
 
Shri Pravin Srivastava Deputy Director General 
2. Shri Rajeeva Sadanandan  Joint Secretary/DGLW 
 
3. Shri B.K. Sanwariya CLC (C) 
 
4. Shri A.K. Jena Dy. Director General 
 
5. Shri D.P. Singh RLC (Hq.) 
 
6. Shri R.S. Dangi Deputy Director 
 
5. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretar y of Ministry 
of Labour and Employment and other officials of the concerned 
Ministry to the sitting to hear their views on ` The Building and Other 
Construction Workers Related Laws (Amendment) Bil l, 2013'  & ‘The 
Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) 
Amendment Bill, 2013’.  The Chairman also invited their attention to the 
provisions contained in Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker.  
 

56 
 
6. XX    XX   XX  
7. The Members, thereafter, raised several issues and also sought 
clarifications on the ‘The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory 
Notification of Vacancies) Amendment Bill, 2013’:- 
  
   (i)  Role of Employment Exchanges in the proposed Bill. 
 (ii) Qualification of career counselors. 
 (iii) Proposed change in the nomenclature of the Act. 
 (iv) Failure of the employment exchanges in the country 
  to provide employment opportunities. 
 (v) Mandatory recruitment through employment   
  exchanges. 
 (vi) Need to revamp the employment exchanges,   
  enhance the scope of services rendered through  
  them and  reviewing the amendments proposed in  
  line with the present requirements. 
8. The Chairman then thanked the Secretary and other officials 
of Ministry of Labour & Employment for giving valuable information 
to the Committee and responding to the queries of the Members. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

57 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 19 th December, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 
1700 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
   Shri Dara Singh Chauhan - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Dr. Manda Jagannath 
3.    Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
4.      Shri Ratan Singh 
5.    Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
6.    Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
   Rajya Sabha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
7. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
8. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
9. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
10. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
11. Shri Rajaram 
12. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri A.K Singh    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

58 
 
  
2.     XX    XX   XX 
3.  XX    XX   XX 
4.  XX    XX   XX 
5.  XX    XX   XX 
6.  XX    XX   XX 
7.   XX    XX   XX 
8.  XX    XX   XX 
9.  XX    XX   XX 
 
10. The Chairman then apprised the Members about the Draft 
Reports to be considered and adopted on Action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
the Thirty -Fifth  Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on 
the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
for the year 2013 -14’ and `The Employment Exchanges 
(Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Amendment Bill, 2013’ .  
11. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Reports 
without any modification. 
12. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
Reports after factual verification from the concerned Ministry and 
present the Reports first to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha and 
thereafter to the Houses. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  