33 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-Eighth  Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for the year 2012-13] 
 
THIRTY- THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 August,  2012/Bhadrapada,  1934 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
 
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
  
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-Eighth  Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for the year 2012-13] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.8.2012     
Laid in Rajya Sabha  on  30.8.2012 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


3 
 
August,  2012/Bhadrapada,  1934 (Saka) 
 
  
CONTENTS 
                            PAGE(s) 
      
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
      
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  

4 
 
  Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth   
  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
   
   
   
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
 
2. Shri Raj Babbar 
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
        **5. Shri Pakauri Lal 
6. Shri Narahari Mahato 
         7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Smt. Mausam Noor 
10. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
14. Ms. J. Shantha 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
*16. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
   ****17. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
     21. Vacant 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 

5 
 
24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
25. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
***26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        28. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
        29. Shri Rajaram 
     ***30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri G. N. Ratanpuri 
   ***** 32.    Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
*   Nominated w.e.f 25th November, 2011. 
**  Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon 
his nomination to Standing Committee on Coal & Steel 
w.e.f. 3rd January, 2012. 
***   Retired w.e.f. 02.04.2012 and 03.04.2012 respectively. 
****  Nominated w.e.f. 12th April, 2012. 
*****Nominated w.e.f. 4th May, 2012. 
 
  
 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director  
 4.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Executive Officer 
 
 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Thirty -third Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in th e Twenty-
Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment for the year 2012-13. 
 
2. The Twenty -Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and 
also laid in Rajya Sabha on 3. 5.2012.  The Ministry of Labour and 
Employment furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 6.8.2012.  The 
Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Labour at their sitting held on  23.8.2012.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -Eighth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed 
in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                  (HEMANAND BISWAL) 
23  August,  2012                                       CHAIRMAN, 
 1 Bhadrapada , 1934 (Saka)       STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
     
  
 

7 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty -Eighth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment for the year 2012-13. 
 
2. The Twenty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and 
also laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.05.2012. It contained 26 
recommendations/ observations. Replies of Government in respect 
of all the recommendations have been received and categorized as 
under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government –  
Rec. Para Nos. 3.15, 3.16, 3.17, 3.18, 
3.19, 3.20, 3.21, 3.28, 3.29, 3.45, 3.46, 
3.47, 3.48, 3.49, 3.58,  3.60, 3.62, 3.63, 
3.69, 3.70, 3.71, 3.72 
  
 
 
 
Total - 22 
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply  
– NIL -    
 
 
Total - 0 
Chapter-III 
 
   

8 
 
 
(iii) 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration – 
 Rec.  Para No. 3.22, 3.44 & 3.59 
 
 
 
Total-3 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim 
in nature -   
Rec. Para No. 3.61 
 
 
Total-1 
Chapter-V 
 
    
3. The Committee desire that action taken replies in respect 
of recommendations/observations contained in Chapter I and 
final action taken replies in respect of the recommendation 
contained in Chapter V for which interim reply has been given 
by the Government may be furnished to them at the earliest.  
 
  

9 
 
Collection of Cess under the Welfare Funds 
(Recommendation para No. 3.22) 
 
4. The Committee were informed that a Working Group was 
constituted to ascertain and sort out the discrepancies in the 
figures of Welfare Commissioner Offices and Pay & Accounts Office 
regarding collection of Cess.  The Committee desired to be apprised 
of the  nature of discrepancies and the explanations for the 
discrepancies alongwith the findings of the Working Group.  
 
5. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 
 
Discrepancies were due to miscalculations in accounting of 
 cess which have been sorted out by Working Group through 
 reconciliation of figures booked in the accounts of Pay & 
 Accounts Offices with those booked by the Offices of Welfare 
 Commissioners. The Working Group also found  that Cess 
 collected during 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 has also not been 
 transferred to the concerned Welfare Funds. After 
 reconciliation,  as per the provisions made in the B.E. for inter 
 Accounts  transfer of funds  for the two years  April, 2009 to 
 April, 2012  in respect of the relevant  Labour Welfare Funds, 
 the  sanctions  have already been issued  and balance 

10 
 
 amount would be credited  either  to increase  provision at 
 R.E. stage in current financial year or in the next  financial 
 year.  
Year-wise d etails of cess collected in relevant Welfare 
 Funds from 2009-10 to 2012-13 is given below: - 
 
Details of Cess Collection in various Welfare Funds   
 
 
 
Year Total amount Amount 
already 
transferred 
 
Amount 
Outstanding 
Lime Stone and Dolomite Mines Welfare Fund 
2009-10 23.48 6.19 17.29 
2010-11 25.54 Nil 25.54 
2011-12 29.58 5.17 24.41 
2012-13 0.39 13.05 -12.66 
Total 78.99 24.41 54.58 
Iron Manganese Chrome Ore Labour Welfare Fund  
2009-10 27.85 10.78 17.09 
2010-11 26.32 13.29 13.03 
2011-12 23.92 12.00 11.92 
2012-13 Nil 13.56 -13.56 
Total 78.09 49.63 28.46 
Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund 
2009-10 3.50 3.50 Nil 
2010-11 4.32 1.95 2.37 
2011-12 6.60 2.00 4.60 
2012-13 9.44 2.15 7.29 
Total 23.86 9.60 14.26 

11 
 
Cine Welfare Fund 
2009-10 4.84 1.29 3.55 
2010-11 Nil Nil Nil 
2011-12 2.30 1.50 0.80 
2012-13 2.23 1.63 0.60 
Total 9.37 4.42 4.95 
 
6. The Committee find the reply of the Government 
vague and incomplete as the reasons for non-transfer of 
Cess to the concerned Heads have not been furnished 
as desired by the Committee.  Moreover, due to non -
transfer of the Cess collected to the concerned Fu nds, 
the requisite activities under various welfare funds 
could not be undertaken. Surprisingly, the figures of 
Cess collection do not indicate whether the figures are 
in lacs or crores etc.  The Committee deplore the 
casual attitude of the Government in f urnishing replies 
to them, inspite of the fact that Ministry was cautioned 
on previous occasions to be more careful in this regard.      
 

12 
 
Evaluation of Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojna 
(Recommendation para No. 3.29) 
 
7.   The Committee found that only the upbeat suggestions of the 
findings of the evaluation studies conducted by the Ministry and 
some of the State Governments were taken up and there was no 
mention of lacunae/ shortcoming/ deficiency/ weakness etc.  The 
Committee while showing their un -happiness, desired that the 
shortcomings pointed out in these evaluation reports might be 
taken up seriously and course corrections made and the Committee 
apprised. 
8. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the  
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 
  The finding of the Evaluation Reports, whether positives or 
 negatives, are considered appropriately for further 
 improvement in the Scheme. In this regard recent findings of 
 the Gujarat evaluation stu dy, which are critical of the scheme 
 are as under:- 
 Many reputed hospitals in 10 districts are not empanelled. 
 More dissemination of information is needed regarding 
benefits of Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana, claims 
processing procedures. 
 More awareness is needed to ensure higher utilization levels. 

13 
 
 More hospitals are needed in tribal areas like Kutuch and 
Dahod. 
 Only 55% of respondents were aware of the transportation 
allowance. 
 
On the basis of these findings, State Nodal Agency (SNA), 
 Gujarat has taken  up steps to promote IEC activities for 
 Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana to generate awareness about 
 the Scheme. SNA has also taken steps to engage an 
 independent agency to assist SNA in proper implementation of 
 the Scheme in the State." 
 
9. The Committe e find that the Ministry have 
conducted evaluation study in the State of Gujarat.    
The Committee feel that since the Scheme is being 
implemented on all India basis, the Studies should also 
be conducted at National level especially keeping in 
view the reported abuse of the Scheme in the States of 
Chhattisgarh and Bihar.  The Committee desire that 
the Government to take preventive steps and evolve 

14 
 
strong monitoring mechanism for such a vital Scheme 
intended to cover the workers belonging to the lowest 
rung of the society. 
  
Vacancies in Directorate General Factory Advice Service & 
Labour Institutes (DGFASLI) 
(Recommendation para No. 3.44) 
10. The Committee noted that there were overall 112 vacancies at 
various levels in the DGFASLI and Inspectorates of Dock Safety.  
The Ministry conceded that the existing strength, being far from 
adequate, was adversely affecting the smooth functioning of 
DGFASLI.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that :- 
(i) The existing vacancies be filled up without further 
delay beside s placing a fresh proposal for conducting 
work study by SIU before the Ministry of Finance clearly 
drawing attention towards the existing workload of 
DGFASLI; and 
(ii) All the sanctioned posts of RLI be filled up urgently 
for its smooth functioning and also a review study be 
undertaken for future activities planned vis -à-vis the 
manpower required. 

15 
 
11. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 
 
There are overall 111 vacancies at various levels in the 
 DGFASLI, Mumbai and Inspectorate of Dock Safety (IDS).  The 
 abolition of 115 posts as recommended by SIU in its reports 
 was contested by DGFASLI and Ministry of Labour & 
 Employment took up the is sue with the Department of 
 Expenditure, Ministry of Finance to undertake the work 
 measurement study of DGFASLI organization afresh. However, 
 the Department of Expenditure insisted on the implementation 
 of the SIU report and suggested that the review st udy will be 
 conducted by SIU   after the report is implemented and the 
 work stabilized in the new set up. 
(i)  The Ministry has taken up to fill up the existing vacancies in 
DGFASLI on priority and  several proposals  for filling up of 
vacancies are at advance stage of recruitment  in UPSC.  The 
Ministry has also taken up with Department of Expenditure 
to conduct a review study of DGFASLI Organization at the 
earliest. Department of Expenditure has included it in their 
programme of studies subject to availability of manpower. 
  
(ii) In view of the need of manpower for the newly established 
Regional Labour Institute at Faridabad, for its smooth 
functioning,   action has been initiated by Ministry to fill up 

16 
 
all the sanctioned posts on urgent basis. Review study of 
Regional Labour Institute (RLI), Faridabad would be part of 
the review SIU study for DGASLI."  
 
 
12. The Committee outright reject the view of the 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance with 
regard to abolition of posts of DGFASLI.  The 
Committee are of the considered view that DGFASLI is 
suffering from acute staff crunch which has an adverse 
bearing on its work mandate. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance be again approached alongwith the 
case study and  the recommendation of the Committee 
in the matter and with the request that they may 
review their stand. 
 
 
 

17 
 
Finalisation of Recruitment Rules in Directorate General of 
Employment & Training (DGE&T) 
(Recommendation para No. 3.48) 
13. The Committee found that the Recruitment Rules (RRs) were 
pending finalization for a long time and reminders were issued to 
the concerned department only after the matter was taken up by 
the Committee.  While deploring the delay in finalization of the RRs, 
the Committee recommended that the matter be pursued vigorously 
with the DOPT/PMO and the Committee apprised within three 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
20. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 
 
DGE&T is in the process of amendment of Recruitment Rules 
 of Women Training Cadre and Employment Directorate. 
 
1. The Recruitment Rule of Training Directorate has been notified 
 on 06.07.2011 
 
2.  The Recruitment Rules of Women Training Cadre: - Due to 
 implementation of 6th Pay Commission, UPSC had requested to 
 obtain approval of DOPT again. Accordingly, the file had been 
 sent to DOPT to get their approval for amendment of 
 Recruitment Rules of Women Training cadre. However, the file 
 had been returned with some query regarding educational 

18 
 
 qualification, etc. Since the posts are of technical nature the 
 views have been sought from Women Training Cadre and is 
 under finalization.  
 
3. The Recruitment Rules of Employment Directorate: - The  file 
 had been sent to DOPT who raised some queries. To reply 
 those queries the file was referred to Employment Directorate. 
 As some cadres of Employment Directorate are being merged, 
 therefore, it is taking some time in consultation with DOPT and 
 UPSC.  However, it is being vigorously pursued.  
 
Status of the Recruitment Rules for Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ of various 
 posts in Technical Administration is at Annexure.  
14. The Committee find that the finalization of RRs is 
still pending with the various Departments and in two 
cases the RRs are under preparation.  The Committee 
desire that efforts for expeditious finalization of RRs 
are urgently required to be taken with the Departments 
for expeditious action.  They, further, desire that the 
matter be vigorously pursued with the concerned 

19 
 
Departments and the Committee be apprised of the 
same. 
Shortfall in plan expenditure  
(Recommendation para No. 3.58) 
15.  The Committee noted that there was considerable shortfall in 
plan expenditure on schemes of Mine Accident Analysis and 
Modernisation of Information Database (MAMID) and these schemes 
were continuing from the 10 th Plan after merger with other 
schemes.   While expressing thei r apprehension, the Committee 
recommended that concerted efforts be made by the DGMS to 
spend the grant so as to achieve the objectives of both the schemes 
and the Committee apprised.   
16.  In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 
 
Details of the fund allocation and expenditure upto 
 31.03.2012 of plan scheme SOCFOD & MAMID are given 
 below: 
(Rupees in lakhs) 
Name of 
scheme 
Budget Estimates 2011-12 Final 
Estimates 
2011-12 
Actual 
Expd. upto 
19.3.2012 
Actual 
Expd. upto 
31.3.2012 General NE SCSP TSP Total 
SOCFOD  116.00 170.00 275.00 139.00 700.00 491.54 384.00 440.29 

20 
 
MAMID  328.00 50.00 81.00 41.00 500.00 333.60 182.48 267.84 
Total  444.00 220.00 356.00 180.00 1200.00 825.14 566.48 708.13 
  
 The percentage of expenditure at the end of March, 2012 
 increased from a level of 68.65% on 19.3.2012 to 85.82% on 
 31.03.2012 of Final Estimate (F.E.). 
 
Primary reasons for shortfall in expenditure were due to: 
 
1. Allocation of funds especially under salary sub -head in SCSP 
& TSP heads was to the tune of Rs.2.55 crore i.e. 21.25% of 
total allocation. DGMS being a law enforcement ag ency does 
not have any welfare schemes for SC & ST as a result of which 
Rs.2.55 crore had to be surrendered. 
 
2. An amount of Rs.2.20 crore i.e. 18.33% of the total allocation, 
was provided under North East Region. DGMS is having only 
one regional office at Guwahati in North East, out of the total 
29 Regional Offices, where the scope of expenditure is very 
limited. 
 
3. Systematic planning and monitoring is being done from the 
beginning to ensure proper utilization of funds during the 
financial year 2012-13." 
 

21 
 
 
17. The Committee find that there was  considerable 
shortfall in expenditure in both the Schemes of 
Strengthening of Core functions of DGMS (SOCFOD) 
and  Mine Accident Analysis and Modernisation of 
Information Database (MAMID) upto 19.03.2012.  Now 
as per the final estimate, the expenditure jumped  from 
68.65% to 85.82% that too within a span of merely 12 
days.  The Committee are unable to comprehend as to 
how the DGMS could spend 18% of the allocated funds 
within 12 days while they were unable to spend the  
allocated funds during the whole of the financial year.  
The Committee desire a detailed explanation in the 
matter. 
 
 
 

22 
 
Vacancy position in Directorate General of Mines Safety 
(DGMS) 
(Recommendation para No. 3.59) 
18. The Committee were anguished to find recurrent discrepancies 
in the statistics submitted to them.    The Committee also found 
that a work study Committee was constituted in the year 2007 of 
SIU which had recommended for abolition of 115 posts belonging to 
group C once the persons occupying the se posts superannuate.  At 
the same time the work study Committee had also recommended 
for creation of 196 new posts.  The Committee while finding it quite 
perplexing, desired to know the details of the categories in which 
those posts had been created and the reasons for abolition of 115 
posts.  The Committee also desired that the vacancies be filled up 
without any further delay and the measures initiated in this behalf 
placed before them. 
 
19. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 
There were 642 persons against a total of 732 posts of Group 
 A, B & C as on 22.03.2012.  
          
 
 

23 
 
 The Number of posts created after SIU studies are as follows:- 
 
 Post created  
  
  
 
 
The abolition of posts were based on the sample studies 
 conducted by Staff Inspection Unit of the Department of 
 Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. This report was accepted by 
 the Work Study Committee constituted to assess the strength 
 of DGMS to implement the mandate given to it under the 
 Mines Act, 1952.  
 
  The actions are being taken to fill up the vacant posts 
 expeditiously. It further submitted that the recommendation in 
 respect of 45 posts of Deputy Director (Mining), (Electric al),        
 (Mechanical) and OH discipline were received from UPSC. Out 
 of this requisite pre -appointment formalities have been 
 completed in respect of 26 candidates to whom offer have been 
 issued. Out of them, 13 have already joined. The formalities i n 
 respect of remaining candidates are under way.  
 
 
Group A Group B Group C 
112 55 196 

24 
 
20. The Committee find the reply of the Government 
far from satisfactory.  The Committee had sought 
reasons for abolition of 115 posts as suggested by SIU 
and accepted by the Work Study Committee and the  
rationale for creation of 196 posts in Group 'C'.  
Moreover, there were discrepancies in the figures 
provided for sanctioned and actuals.  The Committee 
also find that the recruitment process has been 
initiated in respect of only one category of post and 
there is no mention of the remaining categories.  The 
Committee therefore, desire that a clear position of all 
the vacancies alongwith the reasons thereof be 
furnished to the Committee within one month from the 
presentation of this Report.  
  

25 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.15)      
     The Committee note that there are vacancies of Presiding 
Officers in Central Government Industrial Tribunals -cum-Labour 
Courts. As per the sub mission of the Ministry these Presiding 
Officers are generally appointed for a period of 3 years and the 
process of appointment is initiated eight months in advance from 
the date the Presiding Officer is to vacate the office. The Committee 
find the period of eight months too less to complete the lengthy 
process of formalities for preparation of panel. The Committee also 
cannot ignore the fact that it is not explicit that a candidate so 
selected would join the post.  In such a situation, it is imperative 
that a reserve panel should also be prepared so that in the 
eventuality of a selected person not joining, the Ministry at least 
have the second option. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
The process of appointment of Presiding Officers in the Central 
Government Indust rial Tribunal -cum-Labour Courts is initiated 
eight months in advance of the date of arising of a vacancy. As per 
guidelines of the Appointments Committee of the cabinet (ACC), 
Department of Personnel and Training, the Ministry sends the panel 
of short list ed candidates for approval of ACC at least two months 
in advance to the date of arising of a vacancy of Presiding Officer 
after completing all formalities. However, to avoid delay in the 
completion of the process due to administrative exigencies, the 
period of eight months is proposed to be enhanced to ten months as 
recommended by the Committee.  
 

26 
 
In so far as preparation of panel is concerned, it is submitted 
that the Search & Selection Committee Chaired by Secretary (L&E) 
recommends a panel of three candidates for appointment of 
Presiding Officer in respect of one vacant post.  Thereafter the panel 
as recommended by the Committee is approved  by Hon’ble Minister 
for Labour & Employment  and  Department of Personnel and 
Training is requested to seek th e approval of ACC for the whole 
panel so that if one candidate fails to join, the offer of appointment 
can be issued to the next incumbent. It is only after exhausting the 
panel that the whole process is started afresh. 
(Recommendation para No. 3.16)      
 
 The Committee note that from 2009 onwards the Skill 
Development Initiative Scheme received overwhelming response and 
its achievements were creditable. However, the Scheme experienced 
a set- back as due to paucity of funds the operation of the scheme 
was held up for about seven months.  The Committee note that the 
Ministry grudgingly admitted that the implementation of the 
scheme suffered for want of funds.  The Committee, therefore, 
impress upon the Ministry to conduct assessment study so that the 
necessary corrective measures could be taken up before hand for 
effective implementation of such a vital Scheme which is otherwise 
doing well. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  
  Corrective measures have already been taken and the scheme 
was re -started from November, 2 010.  Assigned target has been 
achieved. Evaluation of the scheme has already been assigned to 
National productivity Council, New Delhi. 
 
 

27 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.17)      
 
      The Committee note that the Hon'ble Prime Minister had 
announced for setting up of 1500 more ITIs and 5000 Skill 
Development Centres under the Public Private Partnership (PPP) in 
the 11 th Plan with a view to creating a world -class skilled labour 
force.  The Committee also note that the PPP architecture has not 
been finalize d though the matter has been discussed with the 
Planning Commission. The Committee recommends that the matter 
be vigorously pursued with the Planning Commission for its early 
finalization so that it could yield some tangible results at least 
during the 12th Plan which has already started. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  
The matter is being vigorously pursued with the Planning 
Commission. After multiple rounds of discussion, a PPP architecture 
has been agreed upon. Detailed Project Report (DPR) and EFC note 
are being revised accordingly. As soon as it is finalized, process of 
holding EFC and CCEA meetings would take place. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.18)      
 
      The Committee find that some blocks in most of the States have 
been selected by their Panchayati Raj Departments, for development 
of ITI Centres for which buildings and other infrastructure, 
including machinery, have been completed but these are yet to 
start.  The Committee also find that the Ministry are facing crunch 
of funds for development of infrastructure for these ITI Centres. 
They also find that there is no synergy between the Union Ministry 
of Labour & Employment and the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and 
between Union Ministry of Labour and Employment and the 

28 
 
Panchayati Raj Departments of State Governments.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry may consider 
utilizing the existing infrastructure already developed by the State 
Governments after having detailed deliberations with the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj and the State Governments.  The Committee should 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard in due course. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
       The matter has been taken up by DGE&T with Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj. Possibilities are being explored to set up Skill 
Development Centres (SDCs) to impart training accordingly in skills 
required locally and cater to the needs of an agglomeration of 10–12 
villages. Locally available inf rastructure such as Panchayat 
building, etc. would be utilized for the purpose. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.19)      
 
 The Committee note that there was nil expenditure on training 
of 8000 youth from J&K and setting up of new ITIs in North Eastern 
States i n the year 2011 -12.  The Ministry informed that due to 
disturbances during Amarnath Yatra, the Skill Development 
Scheme was started late in J&K.  However, the youth went out to 
different parts of the country and received about Rs.15,000/ - per 
month after three to four months of training.  The Committee desire 
that the matter regarding   utilization of funds meant for training of 
8000 youth of J&K may be taken up with the State Government at 
the earliest so that the targets under the scheme are achieved 
during the current financial year.  The Committee also desire that a 
sound monitoring mechanism be evolved to get the feedback from 
the trainees and at the same time it should also be ensured that the 
trainees from J&K and the North East are extended every 
conceivable assistance and cooperation. 

29 
 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
Out of the target, 75% were to be trained by various 
Vocational Training Providers (VTPs) registered under SDI Scheme 
throughout the country and 25% within the State by registered 
VTPs. 9,500 persons (4000 inside in J&K & 5500 outside the State) 
have already been trained so far. Rs.10.20 crore were released by 
Government of India out of which          Rs.606.76 lakh have been 
utilized so far. And over Rs.6.11 crore are required to train 
remaining 6500 persons by 31.03.2013. It has been informed by the 
Director of Technical Education, Government of Jammu & Kashmir 
that they will develop a suitable mechanism to get the feedback 
from the trainees. The extension of the Scheme upto 31.03.2013 
has already been approved. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.20)      
  The Committee find that the Ministry are formulating a new 
scheme for setting up a large number of ITIs including hostels for 
trainees.  The Committee appreciates the proposal for providing 
hostel facilities to the trainees who have otherwise have to travel 
long distances for enrolment in these ITIs and desire that the 
Scheme be expedited so that it could start in the current financial 
year itself. 
Reply of  the Government 
          There is a provi sion for establishing ITIs with hostel facilities 
under the Scheme “Kaushal Vikas Yojana (KVY)”. The status of the 
scheme has been explained at Para Number 3.17. 
 
          Further, under the scheme on “Skill Development for        34 
Districts affected by  LWE” there is a provision for establishment of 

30 
 
ITIs with hostels. First installment of funds has been released to the 
States for establishment of such ITIs with hostel facilities.  
 
          Under Enhancement of Skill Development Infrastructure for 
North East Region, hostel facilities are being provided, wherever 
required. 
 
          In addition, State Governments have also been requested to 
provide hostel facilities in existing ITIs including those for women as 
per need. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.21)      
 
     The Committee are unable to reconcile the figures provided 
to them on two occasions in respect of 'Rehabilitation of Bonded 
Labour Scheme'.  The Committee were informed that  the BE for the 
year 2011 -12 were Rs.100.00 lakh while RE were Rs.600.00 lakh 
and the actual expenditure upto 15.03.2012 was Rs.385.30 lakh.  
The figures provided subsequently reveal that Rs.590.00 lakh was 
spent upto 15.03.2012 on the Scheme. The Committe e in their 
earlier Reports had cautioned the Government to be careful and 
diligent enough while furnishing information to Parliament but 
deplorably, serious discrepancies continue to recur. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the figures of actual expend iture on the 
Scheme be provided to them and suitable but stringent supervising 
mechanism put in place so that correct information and statistics 
are submitted to Parliament.  The internal audit also needs to be 
revamped so that such discrepancies do not recur. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
 
  Under the Centrally Sponsored Plan Scheme for Rehabilitation 
of Bonded Labour, rehabilitation assistance of Rs.20,000/ - per 
freed bonded labour is provided, which is shared by the Central and 
State Governments on 50:50 ba sis.  In the case of the North 

31 
 
Eastern States, 100% central assistance is provided if they express 
their inability to provide their share. 
   
Apart from this, Rs.2.00 lakh per sensitive district can be 
provided to concerned State Government to conduct surv ey for 
identification  of bonded labour once in three years, Rs.10.00 lakh 
can be sanctioned to every State Government to undertake 
awareness  generation  activities and Rs.5.00 lakh per year to study 
impact  of existing  land debt  related issues  affecti ng bonded 
labour and the impact of poverty alleviation programmes and 
financial assistance provided by various Government sources. 
 
It is submitted that BE for the year 2011 -12 was Rs.100 lakh 
(including Rs.10 lakh provision of North -Eastern Region)      w hich 
was subsequently enhanced to Rs.600 lakh by  re -appropriation.  
Rs.590 lakh was spent upto 31.03.2012 which was inadvertently 
shown to have been spent upto 15.03.2012. The error is regretted. 
The observations of the Committee have been noted for futur e 
compliance.   
(Recommendation para No. 3.28)      
 
    The Committee note that as per the survey of the Planning 
Commission 2002, there were more than five crore estimated 
number of BPL families.  The Committee also note that the present 
figures are based on the survey conducted during the year 2002 
(i.e. 10 y ears back) and the BPL parameters are under revision/ 
consideration.  The Committee are unable to accept the sector -wise 
figures of workers furnished by the Ministry (Table 5 refers) as 
apparently under estimated and moreover the source of the 
statistics has not been indicated.  Since, RSBY has been extended 
to five more categories of workers in un -organized sector, obviously 
there would be considerable increase in the number of eligible 
workers once all the 35 States/UTs are covered.  Taking note of the 
tardy process of issuance of smart cards, the Committee 

32 
 
recommend that the process be accelerated for providing full 
coverage to each worker in the listed categories. 
       The Committee were informed that for getting the smart card, 
the workers are required to furnish proof of residence.  The 
Committee note that since most of the workers under these 
categories are migrant workers, who either reside in make -shift 
tents, Government shelters or on side -walks, they are unable to get 
the smart card.  Since the Government are keen to provide health 
insurance to the workers in un -organised sector, the Committee 
recommend that some alternative be explored so that these large 
sections of workers could also get smart cards. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
The consolidated views of the Committee have been noted.  
The Ministry is making strenuous efforts to cover all eligible  
families under the approved categories of Rashtriya Swasthya Bima 
Yojana. However, the registration of the workers has to be done by 
the concerned State Nodal Agencies as decided by the State 
Governments. 
The enrolment under Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana is done 
as per the data provided by the State Government in t he prescribed 
RSBY template.  Field Key Officer (FKO) who is an official of the 
State Government remains present at the enrolment station to 
identify the person whose name is there in the data.  There is no 
requirement of proof of residence for enrollment under Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojana. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.29)      
      The Committee are informed that periodical evaluation of RSBY 
has been done by independent agencies. The Ministry of Labour & 
Employment had conducted evaluation study in Guja rat and 
Haryana through independent agencies. Similarly, the State 
Governments of Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana have also 

33 
 
conducted studies through independent agencies. The Committee 
find that only the upbeat suggestions of the findings were taken up 
and there is no mention of lacunae / shortcoming / deficiency / 
weakness etc. The Committee are however, dismayed that the 
Government's reply is studiously silent about the action taken to 
address or remedy the lacunae/ shortcoming/ deficiency/weakness 
pointed out by the evaluation reports. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the shortcomings pointed out in these evaluation reports 
may be taken up seriously and course corrections made and the 
Committee apprised. 
Reply of  the Government 
  The finding of t he Evaluation Reports, whether positives or 
negatives, are considered appropriately for further improvement in 
the Scheme. In this regard recent findings of the Gujarat evaluation 
study, which are critical of the scheme are as under:- 
 Many reputed hospitals in 10 districts are not empanelled. 
 More dissemination of information is needed regarding 
benefits of Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana, claims 
processing procedures. 
 More awareness is needed to ensure higher utilization levels. 
 More hospitals are needed in  tribal areas like Kutuch and 
Dahod. 
 Only 55% of respondents were aware of the transportation 
allowance. 
 
On the basis of these findings, State Nodal Agency (SNA), 
Gujarat has taken up steps to promote IEC activities for Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojana to g enerate awareness about the Scheme. 
SNA has also taken steps to engage an independent agency to assist 
SNA in proper implementation of the Scheme in the State. 
  
 
 

34 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.45)      
 
 The Committee find that the work measurement study 
conducted by the SIU is primarily based on the conventional 
records and semi-structured interviews with the officers and staff of 
the organization so inspected. The Committee apprehends that the 
methodology adopted by SIU perhaps overlooks the practical 
difficulties faced by the present incumbents with the increased 
work-load and work -force.  SIU is dependent on the past records 
which contain lesser work -load, lesser responsibilities and less 
workforce.  The Committee opines that there is a need for re-visiting 
the methodology of SIU so that realistic study could be made based 
on prevailing requirement to handle the additional burden.  They, 
therefore, desire that before the start of the study by SIU, the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment need to document an d 
highlight their requirement for additional work -force for effective 
implementation of labour laws. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
  The work measurement study conducted by   the SIU was 
primarily based on the conventional records and semi -structured 
interviews with the officers and staff of DGFASLI. DGFASLI would 
make all efforts to highlight their requirements for additional work -
force for effective implementation of Labour Laws at the time of SIU 
study. The Ministry has also felt that the methodology which h ad 
been adopted by the SIU was not appropriate to address the 
requirement of an organization like DGFASLI.  Hence Ministry has 
all along been emphasizing that whilst assessing the strength of the 
DGFASLI an institutional development approach with futuristi c 
perspective needs to be taken rather than adopting a traditional 
approach of a work study for normal office organization. 
 
 
 

35 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.46)      
 The Committee note that there are around 30 posts lying 
vacant in DGE&T way back from the ye ar 1990 in various 
categories of Group B&C and the responsibility for filling up of 
these vacancies lies with the DGE&T itself.  The Committee in their 
previous reports had advised the Ministry to fill up these posts at 
the earliest possible as various off ices to whom these posts belong 
to were suffering due to staff crunch.  The Committee deprecate 
that instead of taking concrete steps for filling up of these 
vacancies, the Government have merely shifted the responsibility 
either on SSC/ UPSC and DOPT.  Th e Committee also find that 
filling up of promotional posts, holding of DPC etc. has also not 
been done for 2 -3 years. The Committee wish to remind the 
Ministry that not holding of DPC when the posts are lying vacant, 
amounts to denial of legitimate rights of the employees as 
pronounced in various judgments of higher Courts.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the vacancies of Direct 
Recruitment (DR) quota be filled up through Employment 
Exchanges as a stop -gap arrangement till the UPSC forwards the 
panel for regular appointment. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
   Presently, there is no vacancy which is lying vacant for long.  
As per Recruitment Rules: - 
(a)   the post of Training Officers is required to be filled 50%  by 
direct recruitment,  
(b)   50% by pr omotion failing which by deputation failing both by 
direct recruitment.  
The vacant posts  of Training Officers  have been filled as and 
when  posts are fallen vacant  by holding DPCs  from time to time 
and eligible / available officials in feeder cadre we re promoted  
against the  vacant posts.  The requisition of Direct Recruitment 
posts (50%) are sent to UPSC as well, to take further action to fill 
up the said vacancies. 

36 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.47)      
     The Committee are amazed to note the mutually contradictory 
statements of the Ministry that (i) the UPSC takes minimum two 
years to forward names as the recruitment process is lengthy and 
takes considerable time and (ii) that the vacancies not filled in a 
year are  deemed to be abolished afte r one year.  In the given 
scenario all the vacancies would have been abolished by now. 
Mindful of the significant role and functions of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment and also having regard to the fact that the 
staff crunch will not only affect the working but also hamper the 
smooth implementation of the schemes specially formulated for 
upliftment and welfare of the labour class, the Committee 
recommend that immediate and essential steps be taken up to fill 
up all the vacancies without further delay. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
 It is a fact that the direct recruitment process takes time due 
to advertisements of vacancies, written test, interviews, medical 
examination, verification of character and antecedents, delay in 
relieving by previous employer, revival of posts, etc. The vacancy not 
filled within one year goes under economy ban being the temporary 
nature of post. When the panel is received, the post is revived with 
the consultation of Ministry of Finance through Internal Finance 
Division and the same is filled up. It is stated that concrete efforts 
are being made to fill up all the vacant posts. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.48)      
 
      The Committee find that the Recruitment Rules (RRs) were 
pending finalization for a long time and reminders we re issued to 
the concerned department only after the matter was taken up by 
the Committee.  While deploring the delay in finalization of the RRs, 
the Committee recommends that the matter be pursued vigorously 

37 
 
with the DOPT/PMO and the Committee apprised wi thin three 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
Reply of  the Government 
  
DGE&T is in the process of amendment of Recruitment Rules 
of Women Training Cadre and Employment Directorate. 
 
 The Recruitment Rule of Training Directorate has been notified 
on 06.07.2011 
 
  The Recruitment Rules of Women Training Cadre: - Due to 
implementation of 6 th Pay Commission, UPSC had requested to 
obtain approval of DOPT again. Accordingly, the file had been sent 
to DOPT to get their approval for amendment of Recruitment Rules 
of Women Training cadre. However, the file had been returned with 
some query regarding educational qualification, etc. Since the posts 
are of technical nature the views have been sought from Women 
Training Cadre and is under finalization.  
 
 The Recruitment Rules of Employment Directorate: - The  file 
had been sent to DOPT who raised some q ueries. To reply those 
queries the file was referred to Employment Directorate. As some 
cadres of Employment Directorate are being merged, therefore, it is 
taking some time in consultation with DOPT and UPSC.  However, it 
is being vigorously pursued.  
 
Status of the Recruitment Rules for Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ of various 
posts in Technical Administration is as under:-  
Information regarding Recruitment Rules (RRs) of various posts. 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Subject Status 
1. Revision of RR for 
Group ‘C’ Technical 
Post. 
Published in Gazette 
notification. 
 
2. Revision of RR for Published in Gazette 

38 
 
Group ‘C’ Non -
Technical Post. 
notification. 
 
3. Amendment / 
Revision of RR for the 
post of Maintenance 
Electrician / V.I / 
JTA / Store Keeper/ 
Maintenance 
Electronics  
 
Proposal is pending with UPSC  
for their approval on 
16.07.2012. 
4. Amendment/Revision 
of RR for the post of  
Training Officer 
 
Proposal is  re -submitted to 
UPSC for their approval on 
23.05.2012 
5. Amendment / 
Revision of RR for the 
post of Multi Tasking 
Staff (erstwhile 
Group ‘D’ Posts.) 
 
Proposal is pending with  
Department of Official Language. 
6. Amendment of RR to 
the post of Junior  
Hindi Translator  
Proposal is pending with DOPT 
RR (division) for their approval. 
 
7. Amendment of RR to 
the post of Senior  
Hindi Translator  
Proposal is pending with DOPT 
RR (division) for their approval. 
 
  

39 
 
8. Amendment of RR to 
the post of Driver.  
Proposal  is pending with 
Ministry of Law  & Justice for 
their approval.  
 
9. Framing/Amendment 
of RR to the post of 
Office 
Superintendent/ 
Hostel Warden/ 
Assistant of Group ‘B’ 
Non-Gazetted.  
 
Under preparation. 
 
10. Framing/Amendment 
of RR to the post of 
Stenographer Gr.-II 
 
Proposal is pending with 
Ministry of Law & Justice for 
their approval. 
 
11. Framing/Amendment 
of RR to the post of 
Stenographer Gr.-I  
 
Proposal online submitted to 
DOPT for their approval. 
 
12. Framing/Amendment 
of RR to the post of 
Draughtsman.  
 
Under preparation. 
 
13. Framing/Amendment 
of RR to the post of 
Departmental 
Canteens.  
 
File is pending with re-submitted 
to Department of Official 
Language. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.49)      
     The Committee note that an evaluation study of the work 
implemented by DGFASLI was conducted by IIT Roorkee during 
2008.  As per their recommendation DGFASLI was to be bifurcated 
into two wings, namely, Administration and Academic & Research.  
However, the  decision is still pending with the Ministry. The 
Committee opines that for smooth functioning of the organization it 

40 
 
is imperative to have two separate wings of DGFASLI.  The 
Committee also feel that if the bifurcation is done before the review 
study of the organization by SIU, it would help justify their demand 
for additional staff.  Hence, the Committee desire that the decision 
of bifurcation be taken up without further delay. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  
The technical manpower of the DGFASLI organization carries 
out the research, training and consultancy work pertaining to 
Factories Act (1948), Dock Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) 
Act, 1986.   
In order to enhance the effectiveness of the organization the 
process of combining the various technical divisions manned by 
engineers and non -engineers has been taken up.  Accordingly, the 
process of amending the Recruitment Rules is underway which 
would enhance the efficiency of the organization through improve d 
manpower situation. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.58)      
     The Committee note that the expenditure on the plan scheme of 
Mine Accident Analysis and Modernisation of Information Database 
(MAMID) upto 19.3.2012 was Rs.182.48 lakh against the budget 
estimate of Rs.500 lakh.  Similarly, the actual expenditure on the 
plan scheme of SOCFOD was Rs.384 lakh against the budget 
allocation of Rs.700 lakh.  The Committee find that these schemes 
are continuing from the 10 th Plan after merger with other schemes.  
The reasons for not spending the funds allocated to DGMS for both 
the schemes need to be explained to the satisfaction of the 
Committee. The Committee are quite apprehensive about the 
fruition of these schemes seeing the pace of expenditure on these 
schemes. They, therefore, recommend that concerted efforts be 

41 
 
made by the DGMS to spend the grant so as to achieve the 
objectives of both the schemes and the Committee apprised. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  
Details of the fund allocation and expenditure upto 
31.03.2012 of plan scheme SOCFOD & MAMID are given below: 
(Rupees in lakhs) 
Name of 
scheme 
Budget Estimates 2011-12 Final 
Estimates 
2011-12 
Actual 
Expd. upto 
19.3.2012 
Actual 
Expd. upto 
31.3.2012 General NE SCSP TSP Total 
SOCFOD  116.00 170.00 275.00 139.00 700.00 491.54 384.00 440.29 
MAMID  328.00 50.00 81.00 41.00 500.00 333.60 182.48 267.84 
Total  444.00 220.00 356.00 180.00 1200.00 825.14 566.48 708.13 
  
The percentage of expenditure at the end of March, 2012 
increased from a level of 68.65% on 19.3.2012 to 85.82% on 
31.03.2012 of Final Estimate (F.E.). 
Primary reasons for shortfall in expenditure were due to: 
 
Allocation of funds  especially under salary sub -head in SCSP & 
TSP heads was to the tune of Rs.2.55 crore i.e. 21.25% of total 
allocation. DGMS being a law enforcement agency does not have 
any welfare schemes for SC & ST as a result of which Rs.2.55 
crore had to be surrendered. 
 
 
 
An amount of Rs.2.20 crore i.e. 18.33% of the total allocation, 
was provided under North East Region. DGMS is having only one 
regional office at Guwahati in North East, out of the total 29 
Regional Offices, where the scope of expenditure is very limited. 

42 
 
 
Systematic planning and monitoring is being done from the 
beginning to ensure proper utilization of funds during the 
financial year 2012-13. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.60)      
    As per the existing Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, 
the mine workers are out of the purview of the ESI Act. The 
Committee are of the view that the mining activities are mostly in 
the tribal dominated and inaccessible parts of the country, 
particularly in Odisha and the basic medical facilities do not reach 
them.  To  avail such facilities, either they have to travel over long 
distances and arduous terrains or they avoid going that far. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that a feasibility study of opening of 
ESI Hospital/ dispensary in the mine workers concentrated area s 
be carried out and if need be necessary amendments made in the 
ESI Act. 
Reply of  the Government 
  
 As per the provision of Section -2(12) of the Employees' State 
Insurance Act, 1948, Mines subject to the operation of the Mines 
Act, 1952 are not covered u nder the Act. At present, there is no 
proposal under consideration to extend coverage under the 
Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 to Mine Workers. 
 
 
ESIC  is being asked to explore the feasibility of making 
necessary amendments in the Employees' State I nsurance Act, 
1948 to extend the benefits available under the Act to the Mine 
Workers and submit a Report to the Ministry. 
 

43 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.62)      
 
    The Committee feel that administration of ESIC run hospitals 
needs further improvement specially departments relating to 
medical equipments and medical stores. The Committee desire that 
inspections at regular intervals should be conducted at these 
hospitals to ensure that all life saving machines and equipments 
are well maintained and the ne cessary medicines are supplied to 
the patients and that prescribed procedure is strictly followed for 
segregation and disposal of medicines which have outlived their 
prescribed shelf-life. 
Reply of  the Government 
  
To ensure proper maintenance of life sav ing machines and 
equipments and supply of necessary medicines to patient including 
monitoring of expiry of drugs following actions have been taken: - 
1. The equipment maintenance policy has been prepared and 
circulated to all ESIC hospitals. 
2. Comprehensive Mai ntenance Contract (CMC) is a part of 
purchase of new equipments. 
3. To ensure regular supply of medicines to patients ESIC is 
forming rate contract for Allopathic and Ayurvedic drugs and the 
same is circulated to all ESI institutions for procurement of 
drugs.  For monitoring expiry of drugs, detailed guidelines have 
been issued by ESIC. Further instructions have been issued to 
all State Directors/ Medical Superintendent ESI/ESIC hospitals 
for following the procedure for segregation and disposal of 
expired drugs. 
 
 
4. All Senior Medical Commissioners / State Medical   
Commissioners have been asked to visit and do inspection of 
medical stores in dispensaries and hospitals on regular basis 
with special emphasis on monitoring of expiry of drugs. 
 

44 
 
5. Nodal Officer a ppointed by Ministry of Labour & Employment 
have been visiting the ESIC Hospitals regularly to see and report 
any shortcoming found there. 
 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.63)      
      The Committee note that despite the assurance given by the ESIC 
regarding furnishing of a feasibility report for opening an ESIC Hospital 
in Firozabad, Uttar Pradesh, neither any feasibility report nor any 
concrete action has been taken by the ESIC for opening of an ESI 
Hospital there.  The Committee feels that keeping in view a large number 
of bangle and glass industry workers there, who have no access to any 
proper medical facilities, there is an urgent demand for opening of an 
ESI Hospital there.  The Committee, therefore, desire that immediate 
steps be taken for fresh IP map ping that too in a time bound manner 
and feasibility report submitted to the Committee within two months.  
While conducting such an IP mapping it must be ensured that there is 
no underreporting regarding the work -force employed by any 
establishment. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  
An intensive survey was undertaken during 01.05.2012 to 18.05.2012 to 
cover uncovered, coverable employees in Firozabad area.  The Survey team 
detected total 3873 employees who were coverable, but not covered in 181 
units.    However, by adding above additional covered employees, total strength 
of Insured Persons at Firozabad comes to 19493.  As per policy of the ESIC in 
order to open separate ESI Hospital for an area, minimum 25000 numbers of 
Insured Persons is necessary.   As soon as the total number of Insured Persons 
reaches beyond 25000, necessary action will be initiated to set up an ESI 
Hospital.  However, in order to improve ESI medical facilities in the area, 
following actions have been taken:- 
 
1. Existing ESI dispensary has been shifted to a new building. 
 

45 
 
2. Proposal for Model Dispensary & Diagnostic Centre has been submitted 
to the State Government to issue No Objection Certificate (N.O.C.) and same 
will be established on receipt of N.O.C. from the State Government.  
 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.69)      
 
    The Committee find that there are a number of posts of Dy. 
CLCs, RLCs and LEOs lying vacant besides the vacancies at 
Headquarter in Group B and C posts.  The Committee fully 
endorses the view that after amendment to the Industrial Disputes 
Act, the work of CIRM has increased manifold.  During their study 
visits to various places across the country to oversee the 
implementation of various Labour Laws by the Public Sector 
Undertakings in relation to the Contract and Casual Workers 
employed by the Contractors, the Committee found that due to 
acute shortage of staff, the Regional Labour Commissioners are 
badly hamstrung to carry out regular inspections of various 
establishments under them. The Committee are of the considered 
view that for smooth functioning of the CIRM and effective 
implementation of the 44 Acts intended for welfare of labour, 
availability of adequate human resource at the disposal of RLC is a 
sine qua non .  Though the SIU have conducted studies of different 
offices / organizations throughout the country, but in the absence 
of any recruitment, such studies become in fructuous.  The 
Committee, therefore, desires that the UPSC/SSC be requested to 
expedite the matter and forward the panels urgently.  The 
Committee also suggests that necessary relaxation may be sought 
from the competent authorities, if so warranted, to fill up the 
vacancies through Employment Exchanges as a stop -gap 
arrangement until the regular appointments are made. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
  Action for filling up of the posts of Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioners (Central), Regional Labour Commissioners (Central) 

46 
 
by way of Promotion and Direct recruitment has already been taken 
up. The requisition for filling up of 28 posts of Labour Enforcement 
Officers (Central) has been sent to UPSC on 26.04.2012 and matter 
is being pursued with the UPSC to fill up the vacancies.    
 
 In respect of Group B and C posts the posts are to be filled by 
DOP&T and requisition has already been sent to them. The matter 
is being pursued at Secretary (L&E)’s level.  
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.70)      
 
     The Committee is perturbed that there is no set procedure for 
keeping the data of the number of establishments covered vis -à-vis 
the work-force.  It is all the more disconcerting that the data was 
called from the respective RLCs on being asked by the Committee. 
The Committee hardly wishes to emphasize the significance of 
collection and compilation of such vital statistics by the office of 
CLC notwithstanding the short age of staff at the level of LEOs and 
ALCs which need to be made good expeditiously. They, therefore, 
desire that collection/ processing of the data about the covered 
establishments vis-à-vis the work-force be maintained at the CLC(C) 
Office with a cut off  date of calendar year so that the interests and 
welfare of workers is not allowed to suffer for want of desired 
inspections. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
 The data about the covered establishments vis-à-vis the work-
force is being maintained at the CLC(C) Office.  The same is 
available upto December, 2011. 
  

47 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.71)      
   The Committee is dismayed to note that the Government does not 
have the data  on unemployment. Further, no empirical study has 
been conducted as yet about the impact of economic growth on 
expansion of employment opportunity.  They, therefore, recommend 
that figures of Sectoral unemployment as on 31.12.2011 be 
furnished to them as a lso the findings of the study of economic 
growth and its impact on employment opportunities. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  
As per quinquennial labour force survey conducted during 
2009-10 by National Sample Survey Office, unemployed persons of 
all ages based on usual status basis was estimated at 9.50 million, 
of which 2.82 million were females. Report on Employment and 
Unemployment Survey (2011 -12) released by Labour Bureau, 
Ministry of Labour and Employment, revealed that unemployment 
rate among persons of 15 years and above was estimated to be 3.3 
per cent during 2010 -11, resulting into around 15 million as 
against around 9 million during 2009 -10 as per 66 th round of 
survey conducted by National Sample Survey Office. Fourteen 
quarterly surveys in quick succ ession on the effect of global 
economic meltdown on employment in India have been conducted 
by Labour Bureau attached to the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment. The survey covered selected sectors of the economy 
such as textiles including apparels, leather,  metals, automobiles, 
gems and jewellery, transport, IT / BPO and Handloom / 
Powerloom. According to these surveys, overall employment has 
shown an increase of over 26.65 lakh during the period October, 
2008 to March, 2012. These surveys cover only selected sectors and 
therefore, actual employment in different sectors of economy will be 
much more.    
(Recommendation para No. 3.72)      
 

48 
 
       Taking note of the assurance of the representatives of the 
Ministry that they would never be complacent and continu e to 
protect the interests of the labour force and create conducive work 
environment for them, the Committee would like detailed 
governmental review on the working of the 44 Labour Acts and the 
concrete corrective measures taken to protect the interests of  the 
labour in the light of discrepancies and shortcomings detected. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
   
Review and updation of labour laws is a continuous process 
and amendments are made in labour laws from time to time in 
order to, inter -alia, promote employmen t generation, welfare of 
labour force, etc.  Recent amendments carried out include those 
under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, the   Payment   of   Bonus  
Act, 1965,  the Apprentices Act, 1961, the Payment of Gratuity Act, 
1972, the Employees’ State Insura nce Act, 1948, the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947, the Plantation Labour Act, 1951 the Maternity 
Benefit Act, 1961  and the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923.  
 
The Government had introduced the Labour Laws (Exemption 
from Furnishing Returns and Maintaining of Registers by Certain 
Establishments) Amendment Bill, 2011, the Mines (Amendment) 
Bill, 2011 and the Inter -State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of 
Employment an d Conditions of Service) Bill, 2011 in the Rajya 
Sabha which were referred to Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Labour for examination. The observations / recommendations of 
the Committee as contained in the report are under examination.  
 
 

49 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

50 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.22)      
 
       The Committee note that there was less collection of cess under 
the Welfare Funds meant for (i) Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund; 
(ii) Iron, Manganese Chrome Ore Fund; (iii) Limestone and  Dolomite 
Mines Fund and (iv) Cine Workers Welfare Fund, due to 
discrepancies in the figures of Welfare Commissioner Offices and 
Pay & Accounts Office.  The Committee were further informed that a 
Working Group was constituted to ascertain and sort out the 
discrepancies.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
nature of discrepancies and the explanations for the discrepancies 
alongwith the findings of the Working Group. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  
Discrepancies were due to miscalculations in accounting of 
cess which have been sorted out by Working Group through 
reconciliation of figures booked in the accounts of Pay & Accounts 
Offices with those booked by the Offices of Welfare Commissioners. 
The Working Group also found that Cess collected during 2009 -10 
and 2010-11 has also not been transferred to the concern Welfare 
Funds. After reconciliation, as per the provisions made in the B.E. 
for inter Accounts transfer of funds  for the two years  April, 2 009 
to April, 2012  in respect of the relevant  Labour Welfare Funds, the 
sanctions  have already been issued  and balance amount would be 
credited  either  to increase  provision at R.E. stage in current 
financial year or in the next  financial year. Year -wise details      of 

51 
 
cess collected in relevant Welfare Funds from 2009-10 to 2012-13 is 
given below: - 
 
Details of Cess Collection in various Welfare Funds   
 
 
Year Total amount Amount 
already 
transferred 
 
Amount 
Outstanding 
Lime Stone and Dolomite Mines Welfare Fund 
2009-10 23.48 6.19 17.29 
2010-11 25.54 Nil 25.54 
2011-12 29.58 5.17 24.41 
2012-13 0.39 13.05 -12.66 
Total 78.99 24.41 54.58 
Iron Manganese Chrome Ore Labour Welfare Fund  
2009-10 27.85 10.78 17.09 
2010-11 26.32 13.29 13.03 
2011-12 23.92 12.00 11.92 
2012-13 Nil 13.56 -13.56 
Total 78.09 49.63 28.46 
Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund 
2009-10 3.50 3.50 Nil 
2010-11 4.32 1.95 2.37 
2011-12 6.60 2.00 4.60 
2012-13 9.44 2.15 7.29 
Total 23.86 9.60 14.26 
Cine Welfare Fund 
2009-10 4.84 1.29 3.55 
2010-11 Nil Nil Nil 
2011-12 2.30 1.50 0.80 
2012-13 2.23 1.63 0.60 
Total 9.37 4.42 4.95 
  

52 
 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.44)      
     The Committee note that there are overall 112 vacancies at 
various levels in the DGFASLI and Inspectorates of Dock Safety.  
More so, notably, after the work study undertaken by the Staff 
Inspection Unit (SIU), many posts of the organization were 
abolished.  The Ministry conceded that the existing strength, being 
far from adequate, is adversely affecting the smooth functioning of 
DGFASLI. The Committee are unable to comprehend as to why the 
recommendations of SIU for abolishing the posts were not contested 
keeping in view the increased workload.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that:- 
(i) The existing vacancies be filled up without further delay 
besides placing a fresh proposal for conducting work study by SIU 
before the Ministry of Finance clearly drawing attention towards the 
existing workload of DGFASLI; and 
(ii)  All the sanctioned posts of RLI be filled up urgently for its 
smooth functioning and also a review study be undertaken for 
future activities planned vis-à-vis the manpower required. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
There are overall 111 vacancies at various levels in the 
DGFASLI, Mumbai and Inspectorate of Dock Safety (IDS).  The 
abolition of 115 posts as recommended by SIU in its reports was 
contested by DGFASLI and Ministry of Labour & Emp loyment took 
up the issue with the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance to undertake the work measurement study of DGFASLI 
organization afresh. However, the Department of Expenditure 
insisted on the implementation of the SIU report and suggested that 
the review study will be conducted by SIU   after the report is 
implemented and the work stabilized in the new set up. 
 

53 
 
 
 The Ministry has taken up to fill up the existing vacancies in 
DGFASLI on priority and  several proposals  for filling up of 
vacancies are at advance stage of recruitment  in UPSC.  The 
Ministry has also taken up with Department of Expenditure to 
conduct a review study of DGFASLI Organization at the earliest. 
Department of Expenditure has included it in their programme of 
studies subject to availability of manpower. 
  
In view of the need of manpower for the newly established Regional 
Labour Institute at Faridabad, for its smooth functioning,   action 
has been initiated by Ministry to fill up all the sanctioned posts on 
urgent basis. Review study of Regional Labour Institute (RLI), 
Faridabad would be part of the review SIU study for DGASLI.  
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.59)      
 
    The Committee are anguished to find recurrent 
discrepancies in the statistics submitted to them.  On the  one hand 
there are 116 vacant posts dating back to the year 2004, in Group 
A, B and C while on the other, there are 642 persons against the 
total of 732.  The Committee also find that a work study Committee 
was constituted in the year 2007 of SIU which ha d recommended 
for abolition of 115 posts belonging to group C once the persons 
occupying these posts superannuate.  At the same time the work 
study Committee had also recommended for creation of 196 new 
posts.  The Committee find it quite perplexing.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire to know the details of the categories in which these 
posts have been created and the reasons for abolition of 115 posts.  
The Committee also desire that the vacancies be filled up without 
any further delay and the measures init iated in this behalf placed 
before them. 
 
 

54 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  
There were 642 persons against a total of 732 posts of Group 
A, B & C as on 22.03.2012.  
         The Number of posts created after SIU studies are as follows:- 
Post created  
  
  
 
 
The abolition of posts were based on the sample studies 
conducted by Staff Inspection Unit of the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. This report was accepted by the 
Work Study Committee constituted to assess the strength of DGMS 
to implement the mandate given to it under the Mines Act, 1952.  
 
  The actions are being taken to fill up the vacant posts 
expeditiously. It further submitted that the recommendation in 
respect of 45 posts of Deputy Director (Mining), (Electrical),        
(Mechanical) and OH discipline were received from UPSC. Out of 
this requisite pre -appointment formalities have been completed in 
respect of 26 candidates to whom offer have been issued. Out of 
them, 13 have already joined. The formalities in respect of 
remaining candidates are under way.  
 
 
  
Group A Group B Group C 
112 55 196 

55 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Recommendation para No. 3.61)      
      The Committee find that the ESIC is in the process of setting up 
ESI Medical College  & hospital in Bhubaneshwar.  The Committee 
are of the view that Bhubaneshwar, being the State Capital, already 
has so many hospitals including AIIMS and Railway Hospital 
besides two ESI hospitals.  The Committee also note that there is an 
urgent and popul ar demand for setting up of a medical college in 
Rourkela by the ESIC.  The present ESIC dispensary is woefully 
inadequate to provide medical facilities to large number of workers 
working in various small and medium industries there. The 
Committee, therefo re, recommends that a ESI Medical College & 
Hospital be opened in Rourkela while in Bhubaneswar opening of a 
Nursing College and paramedical college/pharmaceutical may be 
considered. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
  A Sub -Committee under the Chairmanship of Add itional 
Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment was constituted for 
taking a decision on location for setting up of Medical College and 
Hospital in Odisha. After visiting Odisha and meeting with the State 
Government officials and peoples’ representatives at Bhubaneshwar 
and Rourkela, the Sub -Committee has submitted its Report. The 
Report of the Sub-Committee is under consideration. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                  (HEMANAND BISWAL) 
 August,  2012                                       CHAIRMAN, 
 Bhadrapada , 1934 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
    

56 
 
  
Annexure 
Information regarding Recruitment Rules (RRs) of various posts. 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Subject Status 
1. Revision of RR for 
Group ‘C’ Technical 
Post. 
Published in Gazette 
notification. 
 
2. Revision of RR for 
Group ‘C’ Non -
Technical Post. 
Published in Gazette 
notification. 
 
3. Amendment / 
Revision of RR for the 
post of Maintenance 
Electrician / V.I / 
JTA / Store Keeper/ 
Maintenance 
Electronics  
 
Proposal is pending with UPSC  
for their appro val on 
16.07.2012. 
4. Amendment/Revision 
of RR for the post of  
Training Officer 
 
Proposal is  re -submitted to 
UPSC for their approval on 
23.05.2012 
5. Amendment / 
Revision of RR for the 
post of Multi Tasking 
Staff (erstwhile 
Group ‘D’ Posts.) 
 
Proposal is pending with  
Department of Official Language. 
6. Amendment of RR to 
the post of Junior  
Hindi Translator  
Proposal is pending with DOPT 
RR (division) for their approval. 
 
7. Amendment of RR to 
the post of Senior  
Hindi Translator  
Proposal is pending  with DOPT 
RR (division) for their approval. 
 
8. Amendment of RR to Proposal  is pending with 

57 
 
the post of Driver.  Ministry of Law  & Justice for 
their approval.  
 
9. Framing/Amendment 
of RR to the post of 
Office 
Superintendent/ 
Hostel Warden/ 
Assistant of Group ‘B’ 
Non-Gazetted.  
 
Under preparation. 
 
10. Framing/Amendment 
of RR to the post of 
Stenographer Gr.-II 
 
Proposal is pending with 
Ministry of Law & Justice for 
their approval. 
 
11. Framing/Amendment 
of RR to the post of 
Stenographer Gr.-I  
 
Proposal online submitted to 
DOPT for their approval. 
 
12. Framing/Amendment 
of RR to the post of 
Draughtsman.  
 
Under preparation. 
 
13. Framing/Amendment 
of RR to the post of 
Departmental 
Canteens.  
 
File is pending with re-submitted 
to Department of Official 
Language. 
 
  

58 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
 
The Committee sat on 23 August, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in the  Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   2. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
   3. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
   4. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
   5. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure   
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
   6.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
   7.  Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
   8.  Dr. E.M.Sudarsana Natchiappan 
   9.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
   10.Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
   
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 

59 
 
 2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
2. XX     XX    XX 
3. XX     XX    XX 
4. XX     XX    XX  
5. XX     XX    XX 
6. XX     XX    XX 
 
7. Thereafter, the Hon'ble Chairman apprised the Members about 
the following  draft Reports to be considered for adoption:   
 (i) XX    XX     XX 
    (ii)    Action taken by the Government  on the     
  recommendations/ observations contained in the 28th  
  Report of the Committee on 'Demands for Grants' of the  
  Ministry of Labour & Employment for the year 2012-13, 
     (iii)  XX    XX     XX 
 
8. The Committee took up the draft Reports one by one for 
consideration. After some discussions, the Committee  adopted all 
draft Reports without any modification.   

60 
 
 
 
9. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
above draft reports i n the light of factual verification from the 
concerned Ministry and present the Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament. 
      
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 XX Do not pertain to this report. 
 
 
  

61 
 
 
  APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations       26   
II. Recommendations/Observations which have  22       84.6%   
 been accepted by Government 
 
 (Rec. Para. Nos.3.15, 3.16, 3.17,3.18,3.19,3.20,  
 3.21, 3.28, 3.29, 3.45,3.46,3.47,3.48,3.49,3.58,3.60,  
 3.62, 3.63,3.69,3.70,3.71 and 3.72  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s replies-  
         NIL    0  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
 which Government’s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration –           03   11.02 % 
  
 (Rec.  Para. Nos. 3.22,3.44 and 3.59) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which     
 final replies of Government are of interim in  nature       
         01   4.02% 
 (Rec. Para No. 3.61)  
                                    ----------- 
            100%  
                                                ------------ 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 