 
7  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Labour on `General conditions of weavers in the country – A case 
study of Sircilla concentration zone of weavers’] 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2009/   Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
   


SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Labour on `General conditions of weavers in the country – A case 
study of Sircilla concentration zone of weavers’] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2009 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2009 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2009/   Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
   


  
CONTENTS 
 
       
     PAGE(S) 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
CHAPTER I  Report…………………………………………………    
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………... 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
   replies of Government have not been accepted by  
   the Committee and which require reiteration………. 
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature    ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.  
    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report 
   (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 

  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been 
authorised  by the Committee  to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Seventh Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty -Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on  `General conditions of weavers 
in the country – A case study of Sircilla concentration zone of weavers’. 
 
2. The Thirty -Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and  also laid in  
Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2008.  The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 
31.3.2009.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee 
on Labour at their sitting held on 11.11.2009. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty -Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For the facility of refe rence and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed in thick 
type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;               HEMANAND BISWAL 
11th Novemeber, 2009                                       CHAIRMAN, 
20 Kartika, 1931 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.   
   

 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty -Fifth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on `General condition s of weavers in the country – A 
case study of Sircilla concentration zone of weavers‟ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Textiles. 
 
2. The Thirty -Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha, and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha, on 12.12.2008.  It contained 15 recommendati ons.  Replies of 
Government in respect of all the recommendations have been received and have 
been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply  -   NIL. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration--Paragraph Sl. Nos.  8 and 9. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 2 and 5.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

3. The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect of 
recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action taken notes in 
respect of recommendations contained in Chapter -V for which only interim 
replies have been given by the Government may be furn ished to them at the 
earliest and in any case not later than 3 months of the presentation of the 
Report.   
 
4.      The Committee will now deal with the action taken replies of the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 

Recommendation( Sl. No.2, Para 29) 
 
Conducting of Census 
 
5. The Committee in their Thirty -Fifth Report on `General conditions of 
weavers in the country – A case study of Sircilla concentration zone of weavers‟ 
found that there were no authentic figures with regard to th e number of 
weavers and allied workers engaged in handloom and powerloom sectors and 
the policies of the Government are formulated on the assumptions based on the 
estimated data.  Resultantly, not only the policy and programme formulations 
become unrealist ic, the Government is not in a position to exactly assess the 
impact of implementation of these policies and programmes on the weavers, 
not to say of the benefits whether these weavers have actually got or not.  The 
Committee recommended that urgent steps should be taken, in a time bound 
manner, to conduct a survey of weavers and other workers engaged in the 
handloom and powerloom sector in the country not only to ascertain their 
figures but also to identify the real problem plaguing the weavers‟ community.  
 
6. In their action taken reply regarding handloom sector,  the Ministry stated 
as follows: 
„The work of conducting the third “national census of handlooms and 
issue of Photo Identity Cards (PIC) to all the eligible weavers and 
workers” has been entruste d to the National Council of Applied 
Economic Research (NCAER), New Delhi on 19.3.08 and it is scheduled to 

be completed by September 2009.  It is felt that the census, on completion, 
will help and assist the Government of India in modifying and revising 
the schemes and programmes to suit the present day requirements of the 
handloom sector and the weavers engaged in it. „ 
 
As regards powerlooms sector, the Ministry stated as follows: 
„Necessary initiative has already been taken to conduct a baseline survey 
of the powerloom units covering unit‟s name, type of machinery, no. of 
workers employed category -wise such as SC 
/ST/OBC/Minority/Women alongwith their salary/wages, working 
hours, utility, problems faced by units, sale of finished product, purchase 
of raw  material, import and export components etc.   The additional 
aspects as suggested now by the Committee (Economic status, dependant 
family members,  self dwelling space, education to children etc which 
could form the basis of formulating plans/schemes for d evelopment of 
the weavers) would be added for coverage during the survey. As per the 
agreement, the agency   identified for conducting the survey (M/s. 
Technopac Advisors Pvt. Ltd.)  would complete the survey within 6 
months from the date of release of 20%  amount of the total charges of 
Rs.3.281 crore.  The Ministry has also agreed in principle for release of the 
fund required for this purpose.‟ 

  
7. The Committee note that,  pursuant to their recommendation, the  work 
of conducting census for handloom wea vers has been assigned to the 
National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) which as 
scheduled, would complete it by  September, 2009.    The Ministry have, 
however,  not clarified about the inclusion of issues like gender proportion, 
production ca pacity, economic status, education to children, dependent 
family members, self dwelling space etc. in the ongoing census operations.  
The Committee are of the view that a mere head counting would not address 
the problems of weavers.  The Committee, therefo re, emphasize that the 
accurate data covering all these aspects needs to be gathered as it will play a 
very pivotal role in formulation of integrated schemes for the welfare of 
weavers and development of textile sector as a whole.    
 
 As regards  the powerloom sector, the Committee note that the work of 
conducting   survey has been given to M/s Technopac Advisors Pvt. Ltd. and  
the agency would complete the survey within six months from the date of 
release of 20% amount of the total cha rges of Rs.3.281 crore estimated for the 
purpose.  However, the time of release of the 20% funds by the Ministry and 
subsequently the date of commencement of survey by the agency has not 
been mentioned.   The Committee,   believing that the selection of th is 
particular agency  would have been done after following the prescribed 
procedure and considering its infrastructural position, experience and 
expertise in the particular field, urge upon the Ministry that the work of 
survey should start at the earliest and completed within the stipulated time - 
frame.   The Committee also expect that the entire survey should be 

completed within the current financial year i.e. 2009-10 so that the intended 
benefits of all the schemes may reach to all the weavers engaged in 
powerloom sector from the beginning of next financial year.  

 Recommendation( Sl. No.5, Para 32) 
 
Loan to weavers 
 
8. In order to protect the poor weavers from the clutches of micro finance 
units/individual money lenders and to end their exploitation, the Committee in 
their Thirty - Fifth Report recommended that it will be most appropriate if 
formation of Handloom Bank on the pattern of NABARD and SIDBI is given 
thought of.  To start with,  specialized branches could be set -up in the highly 
concentrated zon e of weavers from amongst nationalized/cooperative banks.  
Loan to weavers from these banks should be made available on soft terms.  
Some mechanism should also be devised to waive the existing loan of the 
weavers who are heavily indebted and are not in a p osition to repay the loan to 
the local money lenders.   
 
9. In their action taken reply regarding handloom sector,  the Ministry stated 
as follows: 
„A High Level Committee headed by MD, NABARD was formed by this 
Ministry to look into the problems of debt a nd high cost of working 
capital in the Handloom Sector. The Committee submitted the financial 
package to this Ministry which has been sent to Ministry of Finance for 
consideration.   The Committee recommended one time waiver of 
overdue loans and extending the credit at concessional rates of 7% per 
annum to the weavers.  The size of the financial package is Rs. 2600 crores.   
Response of Ministry of Finance is awaited.  Any further action in the 

matter will be taken once the decision is taken by the Ministry  of Finance. 
It is felt that this package will help in opening up the credit lines and flow 
of working capital in the handloom sector, which in turn will help revival 
of production cycle and sustenance of handloom weavers in the sector.‟ 
  
10. The Committee are happy to note that in order to provide one time 
waiver of overdue loans and thereafter to extend the credit at 
concessional rates of 7% per annum to the handloom weavers, the 
Ministry  have sent a proposal of financial package of Rs.2600 crore to 
the Ministry of Finance for their consideration and  approval.  This 
indeed is a commendable step taken by the Ministry for the welfare of 
handloom weavers and will definitely help the poor weavers to emerge 
out of the grip of indebtness and poverty.    Considering the importance 
of the matter, the Committee reiterate that the Ministry of Textiles 
should  pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance conculsively 
with the same unremitting zeal which inspired the formulation of the 
financial package. 
 
 The Com mittee further desire that the Ministry should 
meanwhile, prepare the data of handloom weavers who are in debt and 
are eligible to receive the benefits of the aforesaid package so that after 
the approval of Ministry of Finance, the assistance could be exte nded to 
them expeditiously.  

Recommendation( Sl. No. 8, Para 35) 
 
Working/living condition of weavers 
 
11. Considering the dismal working condition of weavers in their Thirty-Fifth 
Report, the Committee urged the Ministry to increase budget allocation under 
the workshed scheme so that proper changes may be brought in the working 
condition of the weavers and the y are provided with basic minimum 
requirements of working/living. Cluster development programme should 
necessarily include creation and maintenance of houses and basic amenities like 
provision of drinking water, toilets, bathrooms, proper ventilation in th e 
working space, etc. This will also help in improving the productivity and 
competitiveness of the sector.  
 
12. In their action taken reply regarding handloom sector,  the Ministry stated 
as follows: 
 
„Under the Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme (IHDS), financial 
assistance for construction of workshed has been enhanced to Rs. 25,000/- 
per weaver for BPL while for non -BPL, the assistance is Rs. 18,750/ - per 
weaver. The assistance towards construct ion of houses may be availed by 
the weavers under Indira Awas Yojana of the Ministry of Rural 
Development. Provision of basic amenities is the subject matter of the 

State Govt., therefore, the State Govts. have been requested to take steps 
in this regard.‟ 
    
  As regards powerlooms sector, the Ministry stated as follows: 
 
„The Ministry of Textile has taken up a proposal to set up 6 Mega Clusters 
including 2 Powerloom Mega Cluster at Bhiwandi and Erode as per 
budget speech (2008 – 09) of the Finance Minist er.  The EFC on Mega 
Cluster has already been considered by the Expenditure Finance 
Committee.  However, the Detailed Project Report (DPR) would be 
prepared after necessary Cabinet approval.  While preparing the DPR, the 
requirement of weavers like housing , drinking water, toilet, bathroom, 
proper ventilations in working space etc would be taken care of.‟ 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
13. The Committee find that the Ministry are providing financial 
assistance of Rs.25,000 per weaver for BPL and Rs.18,750 per weaver for 
non BPL category for construction of worksheds under Integrated 
Handlooms Development Scheme (IHDS).   The Committee are of  the 
opinion that     this amount is on the lower side as it is virtually not 
possible to construct a workshed unit with such a meagre amount  due 
to steep rise in the prices of construction material.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge that this amount under Integrated Handloom 
Development Scheme be appropriately hiked.   
 
  As regards the powerloom sector, the Committee note that two 
powerloom clusters  would be set up by the Ministry at Bhiwandi and 
Erode to provide workplace to powerloom weavers.   Consider ing the 
enormity of the workplace problems of powerloom weavers of the 
entire country, the setting up of two mega clusters would be far from 
adequate.  The Committee desire that similar clusters should also be set 
up in all the concentrated areas of powerl oom weavers throughout the 
country with adequate facilities in a time bound manner.  

Recommendation( Sl. No. 9, Para 36) 
Wage revision of weavers 
 
 14. In the light of the fact that the wages of weavers have not been revised for 
the last many years, the Committee in their Thirty -Fifth Report recommended 
that minimum wages to weavers across the country be ensured and it should be 
revised from time to time taking into consideration the price index and other 
related factors. 
 
15. In their action taken reply regarding handloom sector,  the Ministry stated 
that `Implementation of Minimum Wages Act is the responsibility of the 
concerned State Government.  This has been brought to the notice of the State 
Governments.‟ 
 
As regards powerlooms sector, the Ministry s tated that `Implementation 
of Minimum Wages Act is the responsibility of the concerned State 
Government.‟ 
  
  

 
 
16. The Committee are unhappy that their earlier recommendation for 
payment of minimum wages to weavers across the country has met the 
stock  reply of the Ministry that the implementation of minimum wages 
Act is the responsibility of the concerned State Govern ment and that 
the matter has been brought to their notice.  Such a reply only reveals 
the languid approach of the Ministry towards the welfare of weavers 
who are the backbone of entire textile industry and without whose 
contribution the all round developme nt of the textile sector would 
remain a distant dream.  The Committee are unanimously in this 
considered view that by merely bringing the matter to the notice of the 
State Governments will not address the long prevailing problem of 
weavers without the effect intervention of the Union Government.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
strongly urge the Ministry to play the role of a catalyst by taking proper 
initiatives in ensuring payment of minimum wages, wherever 
applicable, to the weavers by State Governments.   The Ministry may 
also interact with the weavers and ascertain the position of their wages 
while monitoring the central schemes throughout the country, if need 
be. 

CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation( Sl. No.1, Para 28) 
 
Suicide by Weavers  
 
The Committee note that there are 2,50,805  handlooms and 45,064 
powerlooms in the State of Andhra Pradesh. Sircilla is predominantly a 
powerloom center as there are 22,168 powerlooms whereas the number of 
handloom units there is only 220.    13,500 weavers are working as powerloom 
weavers in Sirci lla and there is no figure of handloom weavers. During their 
visit to Sircilla, the Committee were informed that over a period of time 
handloom units have been converted to powerloom units and consequently the 
weavers have shifted to powerloom units. There have been greater and unusual 
incidents of suicides by the powerloom weavers in Sircilla and the reasons 
attributed for these suicides are (i)  lack of regular jobs, (ii) inadequate wages, 
(iii) indebtedness and resultant harassment by the micro-finance companies, (iv) 
closure of powerloom units on account of piling of unlifted stock, (v) ill health 
and other domestic reasons (vi) prolonged addiction to alcohol. Out of the 
reported 314 cases of suicides, 161 cases of assistance have been rejected and 8 

cases are pending decision. Reasons for rejection of cases have been stated to be 
(i) natural death, (ii) accidental death, (iii) suicides due to family disputes etc. 
etc. However, an amount of Rs. 25,000/ - has been released to 122 cases from 
CM Relief Fund a s a special case. Other benefits sanctioned to suicides families 
are 70 widow pensions, 54 houses, 47 upgradation of powerlooms, 122 AAY 
Cards, 18 old aged pensions, 49 sewing machines and 25 IAY houses. As far as 
the assistance to powerloom weavers is concerned, Group Insurance Scheme for 
powerloom workers appear to be the only scheme which is directly related to 
them. No other meaningful scheme exists which can provide succor to 
powerloom weavers at the time of their need. The Central Government 
provided fund of about Rs. 52 crores to the State Government of Andhra 
Pradesh during last three years for running various plan and non -plan schemes 
for the weavers. The State Government also inter-alia initiated the various 
measures viz. (i) 50% power tariff concession, (ii) upgradation of powerloom 
with grant of Rs. 30,000/- for 2 powerlooms, (iii) sanction of 2 Textile Parks, (iv) 
sanction of Rs. 21,00,000/- to an NGO, NETHA Cheyutha Trust, (v) covera ge of 
5,954 powerloom workers under Health Insurance Scheme, (vi) sanction of ex -
gratia of Rs. 1.5 lakh to each one of the suicide case fulfilling the norms etc. etc. 
Besides the Government propose to conduct awareness programme for the 
benefit of textile industry around Sircilla to make  weavers aware about the 
various subsidy schemes implemented by the Government. They are 
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS), 20% Margin Money Subsidy 
Scheme for powerlooms, 15% Margin Money Scheme for SSI units, Modif ied 
Group Workshed Scheme, Scheme for Integrated Textile Park (SITP) and 
Integrated Textile Cluster Development Programme etc.  The Committee, 
however, feel that these schemes are in vogue in one form or the other for last 

many years. However, the primary and direct beneficiary of most of these 
schemes have been mainly the owners of the powerlooms and textile industry 
rather than the poor weavers/workers. Delay in implementation, improper 
implementation, lack of monitoring, procedural wrangles etc. have deprived the 
weavers from the intended benefits of all these schemes. Had the intended 
benefits actually reached them, the conditions of weavers in Sircilla might not 
have been what it is today. The suicide cases are the result of severe distress 
wherein weavers are left with no hope but to resort to such an extreme step. The 
conditions of weavers, whether in powerloom or in handloom more or less, 
remains shaky and lacking very essential minimum requirements of life, 
threatening the very survival of the commun ity. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the incidents of suicides by weavers should be an eye-
opener to the Government to become pro-active in protecting the interests of the 
weavers both from handloom and powerloom sector. Instead of distri buting ex-
gratia after the suicides and salvaging actions, it will be in the fitness of things if 
suo-motto initiatives are taken in right earnest to promote weavers‟ welfare 
while formulating policies and schemes for the textile sector as a whole.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPLY  
 
HANDLOOMS: 
 
 At the outset, it may be mentioned that various welfare and 
developmental measures, to be implemented during the XI Plan, by the 
Government of India have been recast and modified keeping in view the felt 
needs of the handloom sector as  well as of the weavers in the country. These 
schemes are implemented through the concerned State Governments especially 
in view of the fact that the Government of India does not have the wherewithal 
to implement them directly and also in view of the fact that the State 
Governments have their field offices at the regional and district levels, which is 
abreast with the problems confronting the handloom sector and the weavers 
engaged in the sector. Proposals for grant of assistance under various schemes 
of the Government of India are therefore,  formulated by the Field Officers of 
the State Government in accordance with the requirements of the weavers in 
their region/district. Central assistance is in turn extended on the basis of 
viable proposals received, duly recommended, from the State Governments.   
 
 It is pertinent to mention here that the schemes and programmes 
implemented by the Government of India have resulted in an increase in the 
production in the handloom sector and sustenance of employment of 
handloom weavers. The declining trend in the production figure had not only 
been arrested but also improved in that the production figures of 5493 million 

sq. meters in the year 2003-04 went up to 6536 million sq. meters in the 2006-07.  
In the year 2007 -08, the handloom cloth production registered a figure of 6947 
million sq. meters, which is 6.29% over the figure of 2006-07.  
 
 In order to make the weavers aware of the benefits emanating out of the 
welfare and developmental schemes implemented by the Government of India, 
extensive publicity is carried out from time to time.  
 
 The Office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms is also 
implementing Handlooms Weavers Comprehensive Welfare Scheme for 
covering health and life risk of the weavers.  The health risk of the weaver is 
covered under the Health Insurance Scheme, implemented by ICICI Lombard.   
 
 In the last three years, 98.92 lakh weavers have benefited under the 
scheme.   Moreover, this scheme provides unique health benefits of cashless 
OPD and IPD facilities in as many as 2261 empanelled hospitals and 751 OPD 
clinics.  This benefit is available not only to the weavers but to his wife and two 
children as well as ancillary handloom workers.  The scheme covers all pre 
existing diseases and has a substantial provision of Rs.7,500/- out of the annual 
limit of Rs.15,000/ - per family. Claims worth Rs.   121.04 crore have been 
settled in these three years.  Therefore, the benefits of this scheme are 
percolating down to the weavers. 
 

 Similarly, the benefit of life risk is covered under Mahatma Gandhi 
Bunkar Bima Yojana , imple mented by LIC of India.  Under this scheme, as 
many as 5.99 lakh (both new and renewal) weavers have been enrolled since 
October, 2005 to March, 2007.  During the 11 th Plan w.e.f. 2007 -08, 9.54 lakh 
weavers (including renewals) have been covered upto Dec, 2008.  Under this 
scheme, natural/ accidental death claims worth Rs.22.67 cr. have been settled 
in 2008-09 (upto Dec, 2008).  In addition to this, scholarships worth Rs.6.1 crore 
have been given @ Rs.300/ - per quarter per child to students studying in 
standard IX to XII for a maximum period of four years to two children of the 
enrolled weavers.   
 
 Therefore, the initiatives taken w.r.t. the welfare of handloom weavers are 
truly reaching the family of the weavers. 
 
 However, the observations and suggestions made by the Committee have 
been noted and the State Governments have also been directed to initiate 
immediate steps in their States to make aware the benefits accruing out of the 
schemes implemented by the Government of India.   
 
 
 
 

 
POWERLOOMS 
 
 As one of the steps to promote the weavers welfare, the Group Insurance 
Scheme already under implementation for the powerloom sector since July 2003 
was further modified to provide added benefits from 1 st January 2008 onwards.  
According to the modified Scheme, t he benefits to the powerloom weavers are 
as under:- 
  
Natural death         –       Rs.  60,000/- 
 Accidental death    –      Rs.1,50,000/- 
 Permanent disability  – Rs.1,50,000/- 
 Partial disability         – Rs.   75,000/- 
 
 In addition to the above, a worker under the Scheme will also be entitled 
to the Scholarship of Rs.600/ - per child / per half year for two children 
studying in Std IX to XII for a maximum period of 4 years under Shiksha 
Sahayog Yojana (SSY). 
 

 In addition to the Group Insurance Scheme, Health Insurance Scheme is 
also available for the handloom weavers.  However, the Health Insurance 
Scheme is not available for the powerloom weavers so far.   
 
A new scheme namely “Powerloom Weavers Distress Relief Fund Schem e” 
including assistance for setting up a telephone helpline for powerloom weavers, 
ex-gratia grant to the family of powerloom weavers who committed suicide due 
to economic distress, provision for revolving fund for powerloom weavers in 
distress, publicity and training to dependant of distressed powerloom weavers 
has been proposed and sent to the Planning Commission for their in -principle 
approval. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated  31 /3/2009) 
 

Recommendation( Sl. No.3, Para 30) 
 
Organising Weavers 
 
The Committee find that handloom sector is a highly decentralized and 
dispersed sector. Handloom weavers can be found all over the country and 
majority of them are operating as household units. However, their large 
concentrations are located in about 200 clusters in the country. Against the total 
estimated 34, 87,146 units, only 1,98,590 units are working as commercial units. 
This shows that handloom weaving is still not a commercial activity and is 
practiced more as a vocation lacking entrep reneurship and profit motive. Only 
about 17% of their total population is stated to be within the cooperative fold as 
of now. Moreover, many of the cooperatives are defunct due to one reason or 
the other. As assistance under central schemes is routed through cooperatives, it 
is anybody‟s guess whether such assistance really reach the intended class of 
people. The cooperative structures need a revisit so as to make it weaver 
friendly. Besides, the weavers should also be encouraged to act more as a self 
help group and the Government assuming the role of a catalyst in such an 
endeavour. The objective behind such a move should be to unite the weavers 
for availing the benefits of the various schemes of the Government. The 
Committee would also like to underline th at the welfare schemes of the 
Government aimed at weavers should not be regimented as the conditions of 
the weavers working in handloom or in powerloom are equally miserable, as 
many places handloom units are being converted to powerloom units and 

workers/weavers remain the same. Moreover, developmental schemes for 
powerloom sector are meant for upgradation of the powerlooms thereby 
benefiting the powerloom owners. There is no denying the fact that weavers 
working there hardly get even the prescribed minimu m wages. With the 
existing schemes of the Government for powerloom sector, the sector as such 
may grow but the conditions of weaver/worker working there may not 
improve. Hence, regimentation of schemes between handloom weavers and 
powerloom weaver/worker w ill deprive one segment of weavers/workers for 
the benefits which they strongly deserve. Therefore, the weaver community 
should be identified as one irrespective of the sector they are working in. 
Accordingly, the Committee strongly  recommend that efforts should be made 
to form cooperatives, Associations and Self Help Groups of the weavers with a 
view to covering the maximum number of weavers so that the benefits of 
various welfare schemes are ensured to them and there should be no 
classification of weavers (between handloom or powerloom) as far as the 
benefits of the Government schemes to the individual weavers are concerned.  
REPLY  
 
HANDLOOMS 
 
 It is stated that under the Integrated Handloom Cluster Development 
Scheme (IHCDS) introduced in 2005 -06, 20 clusters have been taken up in 12 
States.  Each cluster is being developed at an upper cost of Rs. 2.00 crores in a 

time frame of four years.  The development of these clusters is still in progress. 
Under this Scheme, 1236 Self Help Groups have been formed so far.  
  
 It is clarified that as per the last census i.e. 1995 -96, the number of 
commercial looms in household and non-household units are 14,59,822.  
 
 “Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme (IHDS)”, introduced during the 
XI Plan as a centrally sponsored plan scheme, lays emphasis on formation of weavers 
group as a visible entity, develop the Handlooms Weavers Groups to become self -
sustainable, an inclusive approach to cover weavers both within and outside the 
Cooperative fold etc. Under this scheme, clusters covering 300 – 500 looms under 
each are being taken up.  So far 382 clusters have already been taken up for 
development  at an upper cost of Rs.60.00 lakh per cluster.  
 Till the X Plan, the implementation of the Schemes was mainly through the 
State Govt. for Handloom Co -operatives and Handloom Corporations. While in the 
XI Plan, Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme (IHDS) has been intro duced. 
Under the scheme, handloom weavers, who are not covered by clusters, are benefited 
by a “Group Approach”. Each Group will have preferably 10 weavers or more, which 
can be in the form of Self Help Group/Primary Weavers Cooperative Society/other 
independent/ individual weavers.  462 Group approach projects have been 
sanctioned so far throughout the country.  
 The clusters developed under this scheme will facilitate the handloom 
weavers located in and outside the clusters not only to become a cohesive a nd 
self managing socio economic unit but will also  help them to avail the benefits 

of the various developmental and welfare schemes of  the Government of India 
in a coordinated and concerted manner.   
 
POWERLOOMS 
 
 Since the distribution of work relating to handloom and powerloom is 
already in force [DC(Handloom) dealing with handloom sector and Textile 
Commissioner with the Powerloom Sector], the same may be continued. Efforts 
are being made to homogenize the welfare schemes presently implemented 
separately for the weavers of handloom and powerloom sector. As far as 
powerloom sector is concerned, at present, there is only one welfare scheme 
being implemented through this office i.e. Group Insurance Scheme for 
powerloom workers, which is similar to the Maha tma Gandhi Bunker Bima 
Yojana Scheme (MGBBY) for the Handloom weavers.  The handloom weavers 
also have the Health Insurance Scheme, which is not available to the 
powerloom weavers as of now. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated    31/3/2009) 
 

Recommendation( Sl. No.4, Para 31) 
 
Formulation of welfare schemes 
 
The Committee take note of the fact that there are multiple schemes aimed 
at improving the conditions of weavers. They vary from training projects to 
workshed-cum-housing, cluster developments, weavers comprehensive welfare 
inclusive of health insurance, mill gate price sch eme, marketing and export 
promotion, strengthening of weavers service centre, etc. etc. The primary 
objective of all these schemes is to improve the condition of weavers. With the 
sizeable presence of Government machinery throughout the country and 
handsome expenditure of public money on this Governmental set -up as well as 
on the schemes framed in this regard, the condition of common weavers in the 
country has remained desperate and distraught. Schemes are introduced 
without proper spade work and thereafter  withdrawal, modifications and 
merger of schemes with other schemes keep going on and every time some or 
the other excuse is put forward for such display of incompetence and un -
imagination. The worst sufferer for this kind of goof-up is the poor weaver who 
is not even aware as to what is being done by the Government for weavers in 
the country. Moreover, because of the procedural difficulties most of the 
weavers remain outside the reach of the system. The Government should 
appoint a high level Committee to e valuate the performance of the existing 
welfare schemes for the workers. Based on findings by such Committee 
necessary follow-up action should be taken by the Government. The thrust of 

such schemes should be on the problem of weavers relating to minimum wages, 
sickness, maternity, housing, education of children, employment injury, 
unemployment, subsistence allowance when owners are not giving work on 
account of temporary closure of units, invalidity, old age and death.  
REPLY  
HANDLOOMS: 
 
 It may be stated that the schemes being implemented during the XI Plan 
have been formulated after assessment of the impact of the developmental and 
welfare schemes implemented during the X Plan through an Independent 
Agency and also in consultation with various State Governments.   
  
 As per the evaluation of the Health Insurance Scheme conducted by 
National Institute of Small Industry Extension Training (NISIET) , the 
performance of this scheme during the X Plan was found to be highly 
satisfactory.  Therefore, it was recommended to be continued in XI Plan also. 
Thereafter, the Handloom Weavers Comprehensive Welfare Scheme was 
introduced with the two components of Health Insurance Scheme and Mahatma 
Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana ( MGBBY) for Life Insurance.  These welfare 
measures have proved as highly successful as the number of beneficiaries has 
multiplied in last three years and 98.92 lakh weavers have benefited under  the 
Health Insurance Scheme.  This scheme has various unique components such as 
OPD cover of Rs.7,500/ - (which is available in 751 clinics all over the country); 
maternity benefits per child worth Rs.2,500/ - with a baby coverage of Rs.500/ -; 

dental treatm ent (Rs.250/ -); eye treatment (Rs.75/ -);  spectacles (Rs.250/ -).  
Moreover, Ayurvedic/ Unani, Homeopathic, Siddha treatment worth Rs.4000/- 
can also be availed under this scheme by the beneficiary. Pre and post 
hospitalization treatment worth Rs.15,000/ - are available on cashless basis in 
2261 empanelled hospitals; whereas the beneficiaries can get the treatment in 
any other hospital on a reimbursement basis.   
 
 Similarly, in the life insurance cover given under MGBBY scheme, the 
benefits of the schemes have been enhanced w.e.f. 1.10.2007 as follows:- 
 
Benefits during 10th Plan w.e.f.1.10.07 
Natural death Rs.50,000 Rs.60,000 
Accidental death Rs.80,000 Rs.1.50 lakh 
Total disability Rs.50,000 Rs.1.50 lakh 
Partial disability Rs.25,000 Rs.75,000 
  
 In addition to above, scholarship of Rs.300/ - per quarter per child is 
available to students studying in standard IX to XII for a maximum period of 2 
years to two children of the enrolled weavers. 
  

 Various other Ministries are also implementing schemes for the benefit of 
weaker sections of the society, including handloom weavers also.  These 
schemes redress various problems. However, in view of the observations made 
by the Committee, a letter has been addressed to the State Governments 
requesting them to initiate necessary steps to ensure welfare of the weavers. 
POWERLOOMS 
 It is to inform that Office of the Textile Commissioner had assigned The 
Synthetic & Art Silk Mills Research Association (SASMIRA), Mumbai to carry 
out a detailed study for evaluation of the various Powerloom sector schemes 
including Group Insurance Scheme.    
 
 Accordingly, SASMIRA had evaluated the scheme and recommended 
continuation of  the scheme with certain modifications.  The Group Insurance 
Scheme has now been modified. As regards coverage of welfare schemes for 
education of children, employment injury, invalidity and death suggested by 
the Committee, the Group Insurance Scheme incl udes these components in 
varying degree.  With regard to minimum wages, housing, education of 
children, unemployment, subsistence allowance when work not given due to 
temporary closure, old age etc. the subject matter comes under the concerned 
State Governments. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated    31/3/2009) 
 

Recommendation( Sl. No.6, Para 33) 
 
Raw material to weavers 
 
Another area where the Committee would like to pin -point is inadequate 
access to raw material in handloom sector. Hank yarn availability has been the 
principal problem since decades. To overcome the problem, it will be 
appropriate to encourage development and grounding of decentralized 
spinning technology which would enable the production of hank yarn at places 
where cotton is produced. This will also establish direct linkage between cotton 
farmers and handloom weavers enabling availability of hank yarn at 
competitive rates. As the Mill Gate Price Scheme has failed to meet the objective 
of supplying yarn either through  its depot or through mobile vans, it will be 
purposeful to develop a network of yarn depots which can ensure the supply of 
yarn to Handloom clusters. National Handloom Development Corporation 
(NHDC) has grossly and squarely failed in meeting the demands o f hank yarn 
for the handloom sector. There is an urgent need for revamping the work of 
NHDC making it more efficient in supply of yarn to weavers and also making it 
accountable for any lapse in this regard. The Committee strongly recommend 
that to ensure t he availability of raw material to clusters and to individual 
weavers, raw material depots should be opened on the lines of shops of public 
distribution system so  that individual weavers may also avail the facility of 
getting yarn at reasonable prices from  these shops. This will also end of the 

reported unholy nexus among the officials of NHDC, master weavers and other 
unscrupulous persons to manipulate the supply of raw material to weavers.  
REPLY  
HANDLOOMS: 
 
 National Handloom Development Corporation Ltd ., Lucknow has been 
set up to ensure adequate availability of the hank yarn, dyes and chemicals at 
reasonable prices to the handloom weavers.  Under the Mill Gate Price Scheme 
of this Office implemented by NHDC Ltd., there is a provision inter -alia to set 
up yarn depots in the cluster or otherwise.  The details of the yarn supplied and 
yarn depots set up are as follows :  
 
Year Quantity 
(lakh kg.) of 
yarn supplied 
Value (Rs. in crores) 
of yarn supplied 
Number of 
depots 
2005-06 226.37 235.63 110 
2006-07 452.61 398.34 383 
2007-08 682.13 567.48 622 
2008-09 (as on 
20.01.2009) 
647.99 611.18 639 
 

 
 
POWERLOOMS 
 
 Ministry of Textiles has constituted Hank Yarn Price Monitoring 
Committee under the Chairmanship of the Textile Commissioner. The 
Committee is meeting once in 3 months and monitoring the price 
fluctuation/increase of hank yarn, availability of hank yarn an d taking 
corrective/remedial measures as deemed fit.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated    31/3/2009) 
 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation( Sl. No. 7, Para 34) 
 
Institutional structure 
 
The Committee note that the Government have introduced many schemes 
and established institutions like Weavers Service Center (WSC), Indian Institute 
of Handloom Technology (IIHT), National Handloom Developmental 
Corporation (NHDC) and National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT) etc. 
to provide base support for the g rowth of handloom sector in the country. 
Despite such a wide -ranging infrastructure there is no improvement as far as 
growth of handloom sector is concerned. Besides, the conditions of weavers 
have become more miserable from every yardstick. The institutio nal structure 
established for promotion of handloom sector has squarely failed in responding 
to the needs of the sector in general and weavers in particular. NHDC and NIFT 
have been unable to inspire the sector. It will, perhaps, not be out of place to 
mention that NIFT has become the spring board for self promotion and self 
aggrandizement despite the fact that the growth of NIFT has been enabled by 
the Government in the name of handloom promotion and development. 
Similarly, NHDC has not been able to respon d to the expectations of the 
weavers in supplying yarn to them on time. There is a strong need of a 
thorough review of these institutions with the objective to re -dedicate their 
efforts for promotion of the sector and make them effective in promoting 
handloom sector by addressing the sector‟s problems. Local, traditional and 
indigenous designs need to be promoted through training programmes, 

exposure visits, scholarships and other incentives. The Committee therefore, 
strongly recommend that the performance of WSC, IIHT, NIFT and NHDC 
needs a thorough reappraisal so as to make them accountable as far as the 
performance of their responsibility towards weaver and handloom sector is 
concerned. A comprehensive, sensitive and result oriented institutional network 
be set up with a view to improving working/living conditions of weavers.  
REPLY  
 
HANDLOOMS: 
 
 These institutions have been set up to cater to the different requirements 
of the handloom sector.  Presently, there are 25 Weavers Service Centres 
(WSCs), generally 1 or 2 WSCs in the main States. WSCs are the technical wing 
of the Office of the DC Handlooms and provide technical inputs like designs, 
weaving technique, dyeing methods, skill up -gradations etc. to the handloom 
weavers, exporters, designers etc.  In dian Institute of Handloom Technology 
provides technically qualified man power by awarding three years diploma in 
Handloom Technology.  NHDC caters to the raw materials i.e. yarn, dyes & 
chemicals etc. requirements of the handloom sector.  The progress of these 
Institutions is reviewed from time to time by the authority concerned so as to 
ensure effective functioning.   
 
 

National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT) :  
 
 The Textile Design  Department  at NIFT is first and foremost academic 
institution for  human resource development in the area of Textile Design for 
Fashion and Apparel Industries , Textile Clusters, Home Fashion Industries and 
Handloom Sectors.  The Textile Design students from NIFT generally contribute 
design intervention for fabric  development through cluster research projects as 
a part of course curriculum.  NIFT alumni work as freelance designer or 
designer for various organizations as well as through DC(Handlooms) work as 
a designer for handloom cluster. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated    31/3/2009) 

Recommendation( Sl. No. 10,  Para 37) 
 
Market development and handloom promotion 
 
The Committee note  that despite the fact that a number of events 
organized under marketing and export promotion scheme, the conditions of 
handloom sector is not improving. National Handloom Expos, Special 
Handloom Expos, District level events, Craft Mela etc. have not yield ed the 
desired results. The allocations for organizing these events in Andhra Pradesh 
during the last three years is to the tune of Rs.120.17 lakh in the year 2006 -07, 
Rs.95.78 lakhs in the year 2007 -08 and Rs.111.85 lakhs in the year 2008 -09. The 
Committee are not convinced that incurring an expenditure of about Rs. 1 crore 
annually for such events in a major handloom cluster State like Andhra 
Pradesh, has really helped the handloom sector in any manner not to speak of 
the weavers. Innovations is left to b e much desired in the marketing of 
handloom products. NHDC and other concerned wings of the Government 
should devise more innovative schemes for promotion of the handloom sector. 
The proposed activities should inter-alia include catchy advertisements, new 
designs, developing trend images to promote handloom in the country and 
abroad. Such steps will retain the existing consumer base. The cost  of 
production of handloom cloth is more than the cost of production in 
powerloom and hence the concept of 20% rebate  on sale of production of 
weavers cooperatives, individual weavers be continued with.  
 

REPLY  
HANDLOOMS 
  
In order to augment marketing of handloom products particularly in the 
wake of stiff competition with textile products of powerloom and mill sectors,  
the Government of India had re -introduced 10% rebate Scheme for a period of 
three years i.e. w.e.f. 1.4.2006 to 31.3.2009.  The scheme is entirely funded by the 
Central Government with a total budgetary provision of Rs. 100 crore. The 
Scheme has been able  to market handloom products worth over Rs.1000 crore 
so far. In view of the pivotal role played by the scheme in marketing of 
handloom products, a proposal has already been initiated for continuation of 
the scheme for a period of another 3 years to be co -terminus with the XI Plan 
period. 
 
 The National Centre for Textile Design (NCTD) under the office of 
Development Commissioner (Handlooms) is also providing innovative, ethnic 
and contemporary designs to the textile sector through its website 
www.designdiary.nic.in . Both domestic and international trends and color 
forecasts are collated and provided on the website for the benefit of the whole 
textile sector so that they can respond in a timely fashion to the market 
requirements. 
 
 To promote the innovative schemes of Handloom Sector, catchy ads have 
been given in national and regional newspapers and magazines in English, 

Hindi and regional languages vide a comprehensive media plan devised for this 
purpose.  The Handloom Mark is being promoted through TV commercials and 
radio spots on major TV and Radio Channels at prime time. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated    31/3/2009) 

Recommendation( Sl. No. 11, Para 38) 
 
The Committee understand that Kerala Government at the behest of 
Handloom Cooperative has advised the schools in the State to ask the students 
and teachers to wear handloom dress at least once a week. The Committee 
desire that Central Government may send similar advisory requests to all the 
States/UTs. This will go a long way in inculcating the use of handloom clothes 
in the Country.  
 
REPLY  
 
HANDLOOMS 
 
 The observation of the Committee is acknowledged.  A letter has 
accordingly been addressed to all the State Governments requesting them to 
initiate similar steps in their States too. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated    31/3/2009) 

Recommendation( Sl. No. 12, Para 39) 
 
Formulation of proper economic policies of the Government for handloom 
sector 
 
  The Committee find that handloom sector is not getting the due atten tion 
of the Government. Despite its contribution, handloom sector is not 
acknowledged in various reports related to GDP, Exports, Development and 
Economic Policies as a distinct sector. Moreover, due to the duality of 
administration, overlapping responsibi lities between the Union and State 
Governments even the existing schemes and policies do not deliver the desired 
results. Recognizing its potential in employment generation and contribution to 
Gross Domestic Product, handloom sector has to be recognized ap propriately 
and this recognition should help in formulation of appropriate policy responses. 
Being environmental friendly products, Government should consider providing 
subsidy and incentives to handloom sector on the lines it is provided to 
powerloom in t he form of 20% margin money subsidy scheme and also under 
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme available to textile sector. This will help 
not only in the development of handloom but also enable it to compete 
successfully with powerloom sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
handloom sector should get the attention of the Government it merits so that it 
is provided with the thrust it requires for its development by making provisions 
for appropriate incentives and subsidies whenever necessary.  
 

REPLY  
HANDLOOMS: 
 
 The observations made by the Committee have been noted. However, it 
may be stated that the schemes and programmes for the handloom sector for 
the XI Plan has been modified and revised   on the basis of feed back received 
from the field and after deliberations with the State Governments.  These 
schemes are in the midway of its implementation.  Impact of these schemes 
would be assessed in the coming year.    Enumeration of handloom weavers 
would also be completed through the handloom censu s. Schemes and 
programmes for the handloom sector would be revised and modified further in 
keeping with the findings of the   outcome of the assessment of the impact of 
the scheme in the field and the handloom census report. 
 
POWERLOOMS 
 
 Under the TUF Scheme there is a provision to provide 25% capital subsidy 
on purchase of new machinery and equipments for the pre -loom and post-loom 
operations, handlooms / upgradation of handlooms and testing and quality 
control equipments for handloom production units, as  against 20% subsidy for 
the powerloom units in the SSI sector. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated   31 /3/2009) 

 
Recommendation( Sl. No. 13, Para 40) 
 
Protection to handloom markets 
 
The Committee note that handloom markets are under threat from 
unscrupulous business practices. Reportedly powerloom products are being 
extensively sold as handloom products. This is impinging not only the 
consumer confidence but also preventing the genuin e handloom products in 
entering the market. To obviate this, there should be strict implementation of 
the Handloom (Reservation of Articles for Production) Act, 1985 and proper 
machinery should be set up for its enforcement. There should also be proper 
labeling of the handloom products and powerloom products so that these have 
distinct identities.  
 
To sustain the market and to give a fillip, if necessary, some buy back 
arrangements by the Government should also be made for the products of 
handloom. This will help in reducing the monopoly of a few to manipulate and 
influence the handloom market according to their whims and fancies. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that appropriate and necessary steps should 
be taken to protect the handloom market from the  invasion of other non -
handloom products. Besides, more and more articles should be reserved for 

production in handloom  sector along with the institutional buy back 
arrangements by the Government.  
 
REPLY 
 
HANDLOOMS: 
 
 The Government of India promulgated the Handlooms (Reservation of Articles 
for Production) Act, 1985 dated 29.3.1985 with a view to protect ing the interests of 
the handloom weavers in the country from the encroachment of the Powerloom and 
Mill sector on their livelihood.  Under the Act, protection to the handloom sector was 
extended by way of reserving certain textile articles for exclusive production by 
handlooms. Initially 22 textiles articles were reserved for exclusive production by 
handlooms Subsequently based on the recommendation of the Advisory Committee, 
these 22 articles were reduced to 11 vide Reservation Order Notification No. S.O. 
557(E) dated 26.7.96 which further amended vide notification No. S.O. 2160(E) dated 
3.9.2008.  
 The 11 reserved textile under the Handloom Reservation Order are (1) Saree, (2) 
Dhoti, (3) Towel, Gamcha and Angawastaram, (4) Lungi, (5) Khes, Bedsheet, 
Bedcover, Counterpane, Furnishing (including tapestry, upholstery), (6) Jamakkalam 
Durry or Durret, (7) Dress Material, ( 8) Barrack Blankets, Kambal or Kamblies, (9) 
Shawl, Loi, Muffler, Pankhi etc., (10) Woollen Tweed, (11) Chaddar, 
Mekhala/Phanek. 

 The Reservation of any articles or class of articles is considered by the Advisory 
Committee constituted under Section 4 of th e Act for the purpose of examining the 
need of such reservation based on the demand of reservation from textiles industry.  
 To protect the handloom market from the invasion of non -handloom products, 
widespread inspections of powerlooms are done through th e Enforcement Wing; 
their Regional Offices; Weavers‟ Service Centres and the Enforcement Machinery of 
the State Governments set up for this purpose.  As a consequence of these inspections, 
37 FIRs were lodged in 2006 -07 which resulted in 9 convictions; 12 FIRs in 2007 -08 
which resulted in 11 convictions and in 2008 -09 (upto Dec‟08) one FIR has been 
lodged.  
 Further, Handloom Mark has been introduced which distinguishes a handloom 
product from the powerloom/mill made products.  The Handloom Mark is being 
used for brand building of handloom products in India and will also be used for 
abroad.  So far, 109.83 lakhs labels have been sold and 689 retail outlets are selling 
Handloom Mark label products.    
 The Handloom Mark logo has been registered as a Certifica tion Trade Mark 
under the Trade Marks Act, 1999, meaning thereby that its use is strictly restricted to 
the Licensed users.  Random verification of Handloom Mark label products is carried 
out at retail outlets. Wherever non handloom -products are found to b e sold as 
handloom product, it shall attract penal action including imprisonment for a term not 
less than six months and extendable for three years and with a fine of not less than 
Rs.50,000 but which may extend to Rs.2.00 lakh and be enhanced on second an d 
consequent conviction. Serious action is taken wherever any doubt on the 
authenticity of handloom products is raised. 
 Besides, the Government in order to protect the traditional handloom items 
provides financial assistance for registration of such items  under the Geographical 

Indication Act.  For this purpose, financial assistance of Rs. 1.50 lakhs is provided per 
item.  So far, financial assistance has been released for registration of 20 handloom 
items.   
POWERLOOMS 
 
 The monitoring and implementation of the Handloom (Reservation of 
Articles for Production) Act 1985 is the responsibility of the DC(Handlooms). 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated   31 /3/2009) 
 

Recommendation( Sl. No. 14, Para 41) 
 
Campaign for social awareness among  weavers 
 
The Committee during their recent visit to Sircilla noticed that entire 
weaving community is under heavy debt and is being exploited by local money 
lenders. The Committee are of the view that besides the ongoing pr oblems like 
lack of continuous work for weavers, non -lifting of finished products, non -
receipt of minimum wages etc., their exploitation by money lenders followed by 
social humiliation coupled with lack of medical facilities have compounded the 
problems gr avely. To save the poor and hapless weavers from this self 
destructive vicious circle of poverty, it is essential that proper social awareness 
campaign at appropriate level be launched forthwith. This should be 
introduced in all concentration zones of weav ers. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that simultaneously with other policies and programmes for 
weavers, social awareness campaign about the ill effects of the liquor be 
initiated. The cooperation of local administrative set up should be enlisted to 
dismantle such network which is detrimental to the weavers and which is 
exploiting the weavers/workers for their own end.  
 
 
 
 

 
REPLY  
 
HANDLOOMS 
 
 The office of the Development Commissioner has written to the State 
Govts.. 
 
POWERLOOMS 
 
 The Ministry would write to all the State Governments to dismantle such 
network, which is detrimental and exploiting the weavers/workers for their 
own end. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated   31 /3/2009) 

Recommendation ( Sl. No. 15, para 42) 
 
  In the foregoing paragraphs, the Committee, have recommended various 
measures for welfare and uplift of the weavers.  The Committee also 
recommend that following steps are essential for the overall improvement in 
the conditions of weavers throughout the country : 
 
(i) Issue of identity cards to all the eligible weavers.  
 
(ii) Scholarship to school going children from class I onwards as against 
class IX as of now.  
 
(iii) Bridge school for school drop outs.  
 
(iv) Anthodaya ration cards for households with adequate ration.  
 
(v) Health care centers in major handloom clusters.  
 
(vi) Housing sites/Houses.  
 

(vii) Review of insurance schemes with a view to have minimum ensured 
amount of Rs. One lakh for health insurance and life insurance, 
respectively, to increase age of weavers for eligibility upto 72 years and 
adequate enhancement in,  widow pension and old age pension.  
 
(viii) Encourage genuine NGOs to work in weavers clusters.  
 
(ix) Regular mechanism to review/monitor the schemes for taking 
corrective / remedial measures.  
 
(x) Presence of ESI/EPFO in handloom/powerloom clusters.  
REPLY  
HANDLOOMS : 
 (i)  The work of conducting the “Third National Census of Handlooms 
and issue of Photo Identity Cards (PIC) to all the eligible weavers” has been 
entrusted to the National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER), 
New Delhi on 19.3.08 and it is scheduled to be completed by end of this year. 
 
(ii) Normally the State Governments provide free education to children from 
class 1 to class VIII.  Further, besides insurance coverage, the additional benefits 
of scholarship under the Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana are available to 
the children of the member of the MGBBY from Class IX to XII for two children. 

 
(iii) & (iv) This is a State subject. Letters have, however, been addressed to all the 
State Governments for initiating necessary remedial steps.    
 
(v)  The Government of India has already given directions to the ICICI 
Lombard to ensure that under the Health Insurance Scheme, the weavers have 
an access to empanelled hospitals and OPD centres   in or near vicinity of the 
handloom clusters. 
 
(vi) For cons truction of the houses, the assistance will be availed by the 
weavers under the Indira Awas Yojana, Ministry of Rural Development. While 
assistance towards construction of the workshed is provided under Integrated 
Handlooms Development Scheme of this office. 
 
(vii)  A review of Health Insurance scheme was done by NISIET, Hyderabad in 
2005.  The scheme was found to be a boon to the weavers at large and was 
therefore, recommended to be continued in the 11th Plan and beyond.   
  
 A proposal to cover seven crit ical illnesses under the Health Insurance 
Scheme, in addition to the existing benefits, is under active consideration. 
 
 

 
 The Health Insurance component of the Handloom Weavers 
Comprehensive Welfare Scheme for the XI Plan has been approved by the 
Cabinet Committee with the benefits of Rs.15,000/ - per annum per family.  The 
benefits under Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana have been substantially 
enhanced during the XI Plan as under:- 
Sl.No.  Earlier Benefits Benefits from 
1.10.2007 
(i) Natural death Rs.50,000/- Rs.60,000/- 
(ii) Accidental death Rs.80,000/- Rs.1,50,000/- 
(iii) Total Disability Rs.50,000/- Rs.1,50,000/- 
(iv) Partial disability Rs.25,000/- Rs.75,000/- 
 
 As regards increase in the age limit under the MGBBY, the Government of 
India is already considering the proposal to increase the age limit upto 70 years. 
 The Government of India does not have any scheme for widow pension or 
old age pension. 
(viii)  Under the Integrated Handloom Development Scheme, various agencies 
have been authorised to become an implementing agency. One of the eligible 
implementing agencies for Cluster Development Programme is the NGO, which 
should fulfil the norms for its eligibility as per the guidelines of the Scheme.   
 

(ix) & (x) Recommendations made by the Committee have been intimated to the 
State Governments with a request to initiate necessary action as the subject 
matter comes under their purview. 
 
POWERLOOMS 
 
 The Ministry of Textiles would refer these recommendations at Point (i), 
(ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (viii), (ix), (x) to various State Governments for initiating 
necessary decisions in the matter as the subject matter comes under their 
purview.   
 
 The Group Insurance Scheme for Powerloom worker is already being 
implemented with an added benefit w.e.f. 1.1.08. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated   31 /3/2009) 

CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDTIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL

CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation( Sl. No. 8, Para 35) 
 
Proper working/living condition 
 
In most of the handloom clusters, handloom weavers, workers are 
working in dismal conditions and are living in extreme inhospitable conditions. 
Many families with more than two couples have been staying in one room for 
years. Workshed -cum-housing scheme has not been able to address the 
problem of weavers in this regard. It is high time that Government should 
increase allocation under the scheme so that proper changes may be brought in 
the dwelling pattern of the weavers and they are provided with basic minimum 
requirements of living. Unlike, in any other housing schemes, weavers tend to 
hold on to their houses given by the Government and as such it is only one time 
affair to settle the weavers as far as their housing is conce rned. Cluster 
development programme should necessarily include creation and maintenance 
of houses and basic amenities like provision of drinking water, toilets, 
bathrooms, proper ventilation in the working space, etc. This will also help in 
improving the productivity and competitiveness of the sector.  
 

REPLY  
 
HANDLOOMS 
 
  The Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme implemented during the X Plan was 
evaluated through an Independent Agency. On the basis of its 
recommendations, the quantum of central assistance for the workshed 
component has been enhanced during the XI Plan. Under the Integrated 
Handlooms Development Scheme (IHDS), financial assistance for construction 
of workshed has been enhanced to Rs. 25,000/ - per weaver for BPL while for 
non-BPL, the assistance is R s. 18,750/ - per weaver. The assistance towards 
construction of houses may be availed by the weavers under Indira Awas 
Yojana of the Ministry of Rural Development.  
  
Provision of basic amenities is the subject matter of the State Govt., therefore, 
the State Govts. have been requested to take steps in this regard. 
 
POWERLOOMS 
 
 The Ministry of Textile has taken up a proposal to set up 6 Mega Clusters 
including 2 Powerloom Mega Cluster at Bhiwandi and Erode as per budget 
speech (2008 – 09) of the Finance Mini ster.  The EFC on Mega Cluster has 

already been considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee.  However, the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) would be prepared after necessary Cabinet 
approval.  While preparing the DPR, the requirement of weavers like housi ng, 
drinking water, toilet, bathroom, proper ventilations in working space etc 
would be taken care of. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.13 in Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated    31/3/2009) 
 
Recommendation( Sl. No. 9, Para 36) 
Wage Revision 
 
  The Committee find  that weavers are one of the most exploited segment 
of workers in the country. Lack of proper working conditions, non -payment of 
minimum wages wherever applicable, non-regulation of working hours etc. are 
the most rampant form of exploitation they are subj ected to. Reportedly, debt 
related wage bondage is also most prevalent form of exploitation in the sector. 
Stipulated minimum wages are not being paid to weavers. Their indebtedness 
is so baneful that it does not allow them to come out of the vicious circl e of 
poverty. Their wages have not been revised for the last many years. 

Implementation of Minimum Wages Act is a statutory requirement and these 
should be revised periodically taking into account various factors relating to 
price index. As women constitut e a major workforce in the handloom and 
powerloom sector, and at times they are discriminated in term of wage payment 
it becomes more essential that minimum wages to them are also  ensured. 
Similarly, their need revolve around access to proper health care, education, 
housing, food and work security. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that minimum wages to weavers across the country be ensured and 
it should be revised from time to time taking into consideration the price index 
and other related factors.  
 
REPLY  
 
HANDLOOMS 
 
 Implementation of Minimum Wages Act is the responsibility of the 
concerned State Government.  This has been brought to the notice of the State 
Govts. 
 
 
 
 

 
POWERLOOMS 
 
 Implementation of Minimum Wages Act is the responsibility of the 
concerned State Government. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated    31/3/2009) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.16 in Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation( Sl. No.2, Para 29) 
 
Conducting of Census 
 
 
Handloom sector is one of the largest employer in the country. However, 
there are no authentic figures with regard to the number of weavers and allied 
workers eng aged in this sector. Like all informal sectors in the country, 
especially the rural non -formal sector, information about the statistical base on 
handloom sector is based more on estimates or assumptions, which could be 
incorrect. However, the policies of t he Government are formulated on the 
assumptions based on this data. Resultantly, not only the policy and 
programme formulations become unrealistic, the Government is not in a 
position to exactly assess the impact of implementation of these policies and 
programmes on the weavers, not to say of the benefits whether these weavers 
have actually got or not. As per the census conducted in 1995 -96, about 65 lakh 
persons are engaged in weaving and associated activities in the Handloom 

sector. The Working Group of T extile Industry for X Plan indicated 120 lakh 
persons engaged in handloom weaving and allied activities. Considering 100% 
difference between the two estimates by the Government, immediate action is 
required to determine the number of persons directly or in directly involved 
with this sector. This exercise should not be restricted to counting of heads only 
but other issues like gender proportion, their economic status, dependent 
family members, self dwelling space, education to children and all related 
issues which could form basis of formulating plans/schemes for development 
of the  weavers, be taken into account. This will also help in preparing a data 
base about the weavers and other persons engaged in this sector so as to enable 
the Government to frame new schemes, recast existing schemes and 
synchronising them with the need of the weavers. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that with an identified objective, urgent steps should be 
taken to conduct a survey of weavers and other workers engaged in t he 
handloom and powerloom sector in the country not only to ascertain their 
figures but also to identify the real problem plaguing the weavers‟ community. 
Needless to emphasise this exercise should be done in a time bound manner 
under intimation to the Committee. 
 
REPLY  
 
 
 
 

 
HANDLOOMS: 
 
 The work of conducting the “Third National Census of Handlooms and 
issue of Photo identity cards (PIC) to all the eligible weavers and workers” has 
been entrusted to the National Council of Applied Economic Research 
(NCAER), New Delhi on 19.3.08 and it is scheduled to be completed by 
September 2009.  It is felt that the census, on completion, will help and assist the 
Government of India in modifying and revising the schemes and programmes 
to suit the present day requirements of the handloom sector and the w eavers 
engaged in it.  
 
POWERLOOMS 
 
 Necessary initiative has already been taken to conduct a baseline survey 
of the powerloom units covering unit‟s name, type of machinery, no. of workers 
employed category -wise such as SC /ST/OBC/Minority/Women  alongwith 
their salary / wages, working hours, utility, problems faced by units, sale of 
finished product, purchase of raw material, import and export components etc.           
          
 The additional aspects as suggested now by the Committee (Economic 
status, dep endant family members,  self dwelling space, education to children 
etc which could form the basis of formulating plans/schemes for development 
of the weavers) would be added for coverage during the survey.  

          
 As per the agreement, the agency   identified for conducting the survey 
(M/s. Technopac Advisors Pvt. Ltd.)  would complete the survey within 6 
months from the date of release of 20% amount of the total charges of Rs.3.281 
Crore.  The Ministry has also agreed in principle for release of the fund required 
for this purpose. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated    31/3/2009) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.7 in Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation( Sl. No.5, Para 32) 
 
Loan to weavers 
 
The Committee note  that self investment or private investment in the 
handloom sector has been the mainstay for production of handloom. As most of 
the weavers belong to very poor section of the society, they manage finances 
from the private parties/credit companies at great cost in terms of the interest. 
Because banks do not finance them or provide loans without counter 

guarantees or due to weak repaying capacity of weavers, they do not have any 
option but to take money from private finance companies for raising their 
working capital or to run their household. Private micro finance units exploit 
poor weavers to the hilt and sometimes they even work under wage bondage to 
these private companies. Cooperative system has also failed miserably in terms 
of arranging finances to the individual weavers. Even informal system of 
marketing did not help in attracting public investment into the sector due to its 
inherent shortcomings like risk of defaults and reneging of promises, etc. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that with a  view to overcoming 
the problem, it will be most appropriate if formation of handloom bank on the 
pattern of NABARD and SIDBI is given thought of. To start with specialized 
branches could be set -up in the highly concentrated zone of weavers from 
amongst na tionalized/cooperative banks. Loan to weavers from these banks 
should be made available on soft terms. Some mechanism be devised to waive 
the existing loan of the weavers who are heavily indebted and are not in a 
position to repay the loan to the local mon ey lenders. This will not only go a 
long way in bringing out the poor weavers from the clutches of micro finance 
units/individuals ending their exploitation, but will also pave the way for the 
healthy growth of textile sector as well as of the weavers in the country.  
 
 
 
 
 

REPLY  
HANDLOOMS: 
 
 A High Level Committee headed by MD, NABARD was formed by this 
Ministry to look into the problems of debt and high cost of working capital in 
the Handloom Sector. The Committee submitted the Financial Package to this 
Ministry which has been sent to Ministry of Finance for consideration.   The 
Committee has recommended one time waiver of overdue loans and extending 
the credit at concessional rates of 7% per annum to the weavers.  The size of the 
financial package is Rs. 2600 crores.  In this regard, response of Ministry of 
Finance is awaited.  Any further action in the matter will be taken once the 
decision is taken by the Ministry of Finance. It is felt that this package will help 
in opening up the credit lines and flow of working capital in the handloom 
sector, which in turn will help revival of production cycle and sustenance of 
handloom weavers in the sector. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated    31/3/2009) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.10 in Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

 
Recommendation( Sl. No. 11, Para 39) 
 
Formulation of proper economic policies of the Government for handloom 
sector 
 
  The Committee find that handloom sector is not getting the due attention 
of the Government. Despite its contribution, handloom sector is not 
acknowledged in various reports related to GDP, exports, development and 
economic policies as a distinct sector. Moreover, due to the  duality of 
administration, overlapping responsibilities between the Union and State 
Governments even the existing schemes and policies do not deliver the desired 
results. Recognizing its potential in employment generation and contribution to 
Gross Domestic Product, handloom sector has to be recognized appropriately 
and this recognition should help in formulation of appropriate policy responses. 
Being environmental friendly products, Government should consider providing 
subsidy and incentives to handloom se ctor on the lines it is provided to 
powerloom in the form of 20% margin money subsidy scheme and also under 
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme available to textile sector. This will help 
not only in the development of handloom but also enable it to compete  
successfully with powerloom sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
handloom sector should get the attention of the Government it merits so that it 
is provided with the thrust it requires for its development by making provisions 
for appropriate incentives and subsidies whenever necessary.  

 
REPLY  
 
HANDLOOMS: 
 
 The observations made by the Committee have been noted.  However, it 
may be stated that the schemes and programmes for the handloom sector for 
the XI Plan has been modified and revised   on  the basis of feed back received 
from the field and after deliberations with the State Governments.  These 
schemes are in the midway of its implementation.  Impact of these schemes 
would be assessed in the coming year.    Enumeration of handloom weavers 
would also be completed through the handloom census. Schemes and 
programmes for the Handloom sector would be revised and modified further in 
keeping with the findings of the   outcome of the assessment of the impact of 
the scheme in the field and the handloom census report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

POWERLOOMS 
 
 Under the TUF Scheme there is a provision to provide 25% capital subsidy 
on purchase of new machinery and equipments for the pre -loom and post-loom 
operations, handlooms / upgradation of handlooms and testing and quality  
control equipments for handloom production units, as against 20% subsidy for 
the powerloom units in the SSI sector. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/28/2008-Parl., dated   31 /3/2009) 
 
 
 
New Delhi;               HEMANAND BISWAL 
11th Novemeber, 2009                                       CHAIRMAN, 
20 Kartika, 1931 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.   
   
  

 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR HELD ON 11 TH 
NOVEMBER, 2009.  
 
 
The Committee met from 1400 hrs. to 1545 hrs in Co mmittee Room No. `139’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi to have oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment on 
`The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009’  and `The Employees’ State Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 
2009’ and to consider and adopt draft Action Taken Reports. 
 
xx   xx   xx 
xx   xx   xx 
8. The Chairman then informed the Members regarding consideration and 
adoption of following draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirtieth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on the `Functioning of the 
Employees‟ Provident Fund Organisation‟. 
 
(ii) Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the  Thirty-Third 
Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on the `Development 
Schemes for Handicrafts Sector‟. 
 
(iii) Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty -Fifth 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Stand ing Committee on 
Labour on `General conditions of weavers in the country – A case 
study of Sircilla concentration zone of weavers‟. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
9.  The Committee, then, took up the draft Reports for consideration.  The 
Committee adopted the draft Reports without any amendments/modifications.   
 
10. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to present the same to the 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
xx Not pertain to this Report.

                 APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY -FIFTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
        Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations       16 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have          
been accepted by Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1,3,4,6,7,10,11,12,13,14 and 15)     11  73.33% 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government‟s  replies      NIL  NIL  
       
       
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which  Government‟s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration-(Sl. Nos. 8 and 9)            2   13.33% 
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which     
final replies of Government are of interim in  nature      2    13.33% 
(Sl. Nos.2 and 5)                                       ---------- 
              100% 

                              ------------ 
  
 
 
 
  

 CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1. This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty -Third Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on `Development Schemes for Handicrafts Sector‟ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Thirty -Third Report was present ed to Lok Sabha and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 24.10.2008.  It contained 12 recommendations.  Replies of 
Government in respect of all the recommendations have been received and have 
been categorized as under:- 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations which have been  accepted by the 
Government--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10 and 12.  
 
(vi) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply  -  NIL 
 
(vii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration--Paragraph Sl. No.  8. 
 
(viii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 2, 6, 9 and 11.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect of 
recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action taken notes in 

respect of recommendations contained in Chapter -V for which only interim 
replies have been given by the Government may be furn ished to them at the 
earliest and in any case not later than 3 months of the presentation of this 
Report.   
 
4.      The Committee will now deal with the action taken replies of the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 

A. Census of artisans 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2  Para 13) 
5.  The Committee in their original Report observed that the existing process of conducting census 
for handicraft artisans by covering 20% districts every year, was cumbersome and skewed as it would 
not bring out the e xact figures of artisans in the country because by the time census of last phase took 
place, the figure in areas wherein the census was carried out in the first phase might have changed 
drastically.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that it would be i n the fitness of things if a one 
time survey was carried out to cover the entire strength of artisans all over the country and the current 
process of covering 20% of the districts every year should be continued thereafter to keep the data 
updated.   
 
6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry stated that : 
`The recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee to have 
one time survey i.e. 100% census conducted, has been referred to the 
competent authority, for approval.  Since the methodology of conducting 
100% census is a shift from the existing policy o f conducting census of 
20% districts every year, the change in policy has to be decided by the 
competent authority and requires subsequent approvals including from 
the Planning Commission.  This process will take more time.  It has, 
therefore, been decided to carry on with the census on the basis of present 
policy covering further 20% districts in the country this year i.e. 2008 -09 
and the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee to 
conduct 100% census, shall be implemented w.e.f. the next fin ancial year 
i.e. 2009-10 after the acceptance and approvals of the competent authority 
as aforesaid.  A proposal in this regard has been submitted to the Internal 
Finance Wing and will be taken up thereafter with the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance etc.‟ 
 
7. The Committee take note of the Ministry’s assurance that the census operations shall be undertaken 
throughout the country in the next financial year i.e. 2009-10, after the subsequent approvals of the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance. The Committee desire that entire census needs to be conducted within the 

current financial year so that realistic targets could be fixed under various developmental and welfare schemes    
well before implementing them in the next financial year i.e. 2010-11. 
 
B. Low coverage under the schemes for Handicrafts Sector 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3  Para 18) 
 
 
8. The Committee in their Report, considering the very low coverage under the developmental and 
welfare schemes of handicrafts sector recommended that all out efforts should be made to cover the 
entire strength of artisans within the current Five Year Plan, p articularly under the welfare schemes.  
For the purpose, the targets under each of the schemes should be revised accordingly and if needed be, 
the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission should be urged to enhance the budgetary 
allocations to meet the increased targets.  
 
9. In their action taken reply, the  Ministry stated that : 
`The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. It will be the 
sincere efforts of the Government to cover large number of handicraft 
artisans through the six plan schemes approved for the 11th Plan. The 
Committee‟s recommendations with specific reference to coverage of 
larger number of artisans under the Welfare Scheme has also been noted.  
In   first 2 years of the plan period, physical coverage under the welfare 
schemes has been achieved more than what had been envisaged in the 
projections under the welfare scheme submitted for approval before the 
beginning of the 11th Plan.  The increased physical coverage had been 
due to the reason that the actual annual premium under  the health 
scheme determined after a competitive bidding process at the beginning 
of the Plan period had come out to be significantly lower than what was 
assumed while making physical and financial projections under scheme 
submitted for approval at the beginning of 11th Plan.‟ 

 
10. The Committee take note of the assurance given by the Ministry to 
cover large number of handicrafts artisans under the developmental and 
welfare schemes during the remaining period of 11 th Five Year Plan.  The 
Committee, while a ppreciating the efforts of the Ministry for achieving the 
physical targets more than the initial projections under Janashree Bima 
Yojana and Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana during the first two 
years of the plan period, urge them  to demonstrate s imilar performance 
under other developmental and welfare schemes also  so that  the needy 
artisans can also receive benefits of these schemes and sustain in the sector 
progressively.  
 
C. Travel assistance to artisans 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6  Para 39) 
 
11. The Committee in their Report further recommended that the limit of 
distance considered for providing travel assistance to the artisans who wished 
to take part in various handicraft exhibitions, should have been reduced from 
existing 500 kms. to at lea st 100 kms so that it did not prove an obstacle for the 
needy artisans to exhibit their skills. Similarly, some arrangements like plying 

special buses should have been  arranged for the artisans residing/working 
within the radius of 100 kms. of the exhibition venue.  
 
12. In their action taken reply, the Ministry  stated that : 
`During the 11 th Five year Plan the facility of payment of TA/DA to 
artisans which earlier was paid to artisans from some identified and 
difficult localities has been extended to all the artisans who come to 
participate in a market related activity from a distance of and more than 
500 kms. from and to their place of residences. The acceptance of the 
recommendation of the  Standing Committee on Labour to relax the rules 
for payment of TA/DA to artisans participating in Market related 
programmes of this office reducing the d istance from approved 500 Kms 
to 100 Kms. requires the approval of the competent authority. A 
proposal in this regard has been submitted to the Planning Commission.‟ 
  
 
13. The Committee note that the Ministry have submitted the proposal to 
reduce the limi t of distance from 500 kms. to 100 kms. for the purpose of 
paying TA/DA to artisans who participate in the marketing events relating to 
handicrafts, to the Planning Commission for  approval. The Committee are of 
the opinion that as it is a welfare measure,  the Ministry should take up the 
matter with the Planning Commission with top priority and expeditious 
approval.  The Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
desire that some local transport arrangements at the time of conducing 

marketing events should also be made for the artisans residing/working 
within the radius of 100 kms. of the exhibition venue as such  step will not 
only encourage the artisans to participate in these exhibitions but  will also 
help spread awareness of handicrafts p roducts/Industry among the common 
masses.  

D. Training and financial assistance to artisans 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8  Para 55) 
14. The Committee in their Report, while noting the lower coverage of 
artisans under training programmes recommended that training of artisans was 
of utmost importance for their sustainable growth and to achieve this, though in 
a phased manner, a proper and well thought out strategy might be devised to 
continue it on a regular basis. The publicity of such programmes be adequately 
given amongst the artisans for achieving maximum coverage and to make them 
aware about the benefits of these trainings. The proposal for soft loan to artisans 
under Design and Technological Upgradation Scheme should have been also 
mooted with the provision  of buy back arrangements of finished products 
against such loan.  
 
15. In their action taken reply, the Ministry   stated that:  
`This is already taken care of, under different components of the existing Human Resource Development Scheme implemented by this office. 
 The range of these trainings provided varies from skill development under the tutelage of Master craftperson and specialized 
institutional trainings.  A wide publicity of all the schemes including that of the HRD Scheme is regularly ensured through press advertisement 
for creating awareness among the stake- holders.  As regards soft loan to artisans under Design & Technology Upgradation Scheme, it is 
submitted that as of now there is no such enabling provision in the existing approved schemes of this office. However, under the Ambedkar 
Hastshilp Vikas Yojana there is a component of Credit Guarantee Scheme through which the Government of India bears the cost of Guarantee 
Fee and Annual Service Charges, which is paid to Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for micro, medium and small enterprises for obtaining 
guarantee cover in respect of the credit sanctioned to the handicraft artisans by different Member Lending Institutes (MLIs) i.e. Banks. This 
arrangement is applicable in respect of credit sanctioned to both artisans and Self Help Groups (SHGs).’ 
 
16. The Committee notice that the Ministry/Office of Development 
Commissioner (Handicrafts) are providing training to artisans under 
different components of `Human Resource Development Scheme’ and  wide 
publicity of all the Schemes is regularly ensured through press advertisement 
for creating awareness among the stakeholders.  However, reply of the 

Ministry is silent regarding fixing periodicity of various training programmes 
being organized by them.  Since the major population of artisans belongs to 
an unorganized sector and are working in individual capacity, they cannot 
afford to go for training unless they get time to plan for the same well in 
advance.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that the artisans can avail 
the benefits of training programmes in a better way and in larger number if 
they are aware of the schedule of such programmes in the very beginning of 
the year.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their  recommendation and 
urge upon the Ministry  to prepare a definite schedule of training 
programmes to be organized under different schemes throughout the year.  
The Committee  further desire that the credit guarantee scheme which is a  
component of Ambedkar Hastshilp Vikas Yojana, and under which lo ans are 
provided to the artisans, should be restructured and the provision of buyback 
arrangements of finished products against loans availed by artisans, should 
also be suitably incorporated into it.  

E. Raising ceiling under Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Yojana 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9  Para 62) 
17. The Committee, keeping in view the ever increasing medical expenses recommended that the ceiling under the Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya 
Yojana should be raised from Rs.15,000 to atleast Rs.1,50,000 per annum per family.  The Committee  also recommended that the critical illnesses like 
cancer, heart problems, brain surgery etc. should also have been  brought within the ambit of the scheme with appropriate financial ceiling. 
  
18.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry stated that: 
`The recommendations concerning raising the ceiling of coverage as well 
as inclusion of critical illness has been examined. It is felt that these 
enhancements in the coverage of benefits may yield in substantial hike in 
the annual premium, which at present is Rs.800/- per annum per artisan. 
Out of this, the general category artisan contributes Rs.150/ - and an 
artisan belonging to NER, SC, ST & BPL categories contributes Rs.75/ -. 
The Government of India contributes the balance annua l premium and 
Service Tax on the total premium. If the sharing of the future premium 
between the artisan and GOI is kept in the existing proportion, there 
would be an apparent hike in the artisan‟s share of the annual premium 
as well, which all artisans may not be able to afford. Therefore, in view of 
the recommendation,  action has been initiated for a new add -on feature 
to be introduced in the scheme for covering 10 critical illnesses viz., 
Cancer, Paralysis, Myocardial Infarction (Heart Attack), Bye pass  
Surgery, Kidney failure, Stroke, Tuberculosis etc., with a financial cap of 
Rs.1.5 lakh per annum per artisan family. Artisan who is willing to pay 
the higher premium could opt for this feature.  A suitable proposal 
in this regard has been submitted to the Planning Commission.‟ 
 
19. The Committee find that in order to cover critical illnesses under Rajiv 
Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Yojana, the Ministry have proposed to introduce a 

new add -on feature with a financial cap of Rs.1.5 lakh per annum per 
artisan/family.  The Ministry have further stated that the artisan who is 
willing to pay the higher premium could opt for this feature.  The Committee 
are astonished to note such business like attitude of the Ministry where the 
poor artisans are being treated as custo mers.  Instead of providing them 
adequate health coverage, which is a part of social security measure, the 
Ministry are, in a way, trying to sell insurance policy to them.  The 
Committee observe that such a cursory approach of the Ministry does not 
reflect the seriousness of  the issue it merits.  The plea of the Ministry that 
enhancing financial ceiling from the existing Rs.15,000/ - to Rs.1,50,000/ - for 
providing general health coverage and covering critical illnesses under the 
scheme, may yield in substant ial hike in the annual premium which all 
artisans may not be able to afford, is not acceptable to the Committee.  At 
present, the premium is being shared by the Government of India and the 
artisan.  Life Insurance Corporation (LIC), through which the scheme is being 
implemented being a public sector company,  should not shirk its social 
responsibility towards the handicrafts artisans who are from the 
disadvantaged strata of society. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their  
recommendation and urge upon the  Ministry to act in a positive manner and 
extend the critical illness  cover to the handicrafts artisans and also enhance 

the financial ceiling to atleast Rs.1,50,000/ -.    With regard to sharing of 
premium, the Committee desire that Government of India and LIC may share 
the hiked premium on the lines of welfare schemes being implemented in 
Handloom Sector.  Such a philanthropic step will not only extend the desired 
insurance coverage to the needy artisans but they will also be spared of the 
extra financial obligations arising due to the extended coverage.    
     

F. Enhancement of age of artisans under Bima Yojana 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11  Para 69) 
 
20. The Committee, in the light of the fact that the artisan of higher age group were also 
contributing to the development of the handicrafts sector and the life expectancy in our country has also 
considerably gone up in their Report, recommended that the age for the purpose of insurance coverage 
under  the Bima Yojana should be enhanced at least upto 70 years.   
  
21. In their action taken reply, the Ministry stated that : 
`Based on the recommendations of the Committee, a proposal was made to LIC of India on 
22.08.2008, requesting consideration of, among others, the following issues: 
- Enhancing the age limit from 60 years to 70 years 
- Increase in Children Education Allowance from Rs.300 per quarter 
per child  to 2 children to Rs.500. 
  
On the issue of increasing the age limit to 70 years, LIC has asked for likely number of 
persons to be covered under the scheme. The same is being furnished to them.’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry have on the 
recommendation of the Committee have submitted a proposal to LIC for the welfare of 
the artisans of higher age group, who were, so far, deprived of  Life Insurance cover 
and similarly, LIC has requested the Ministry to provide likely number of persons to 
be covered under the Scheme.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should provide 
the requisite data to LIC at the earliest so  that, after complet ing other necessary 
procedural formalities, the artisans upto the age of 70 years may also get the benefits 
of the Scheme.  
  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1,   Para 8) 
 The Committee take note of the fact that formulation of various schemes 
in handicraft sector and corresponding budgetary allocations are just not 
adequate to tap full potential of the artisans in the country. Based on the census 
of artisans conducted in t he year 1995 -96, the schemes framed cover only 
miniscule of artisans and the relative allocation under the schemes is also not 
fully utilized. The expenditure under the schemes which cover common 
artisans like Training and Extension, Design and Technology Upgradation, 
Marketing Support and Services and Research and Development has been far 
from satisfactory during the entire Tenth Plan. After noticing the trend of less 
budgetary utilization, a series of measures were stated to be taken by the 
Government including rationalization of planning schemes and introduction of 
11 generic schemes. Despite all these measures, even from the lesser allocation 
of Rs.425 crore for the handicraft sector during the Tenth Plan Period, 
approximately Rs.50 crore could not be sp ent due to lack of proper and 
adequate planning of the schemes. Identical reasons like non - receipt of viable 
proposals from implementing agencies, non settlement of pending utilization 

certificates, non completion of SIDC projects, less demand from implem enting 
agencies etc. have been given for non fulfillment of targets and less utilization 
of budgetary allocations repeatedly.  
The allocation for the 11
th 
Plan period is Rs.1257 crore practically trebling 
it from the one allocated during the Tenth Plan Per iod. As the Government has 
been unable to undertake any census of artisans after the last census done in 
1995-96, schemes for development and welfare of handicraft sector and artisans 
will have to be formulated on the basis of the figures of last census. T aking cue 
from the past experience the Government should ensure that reasons cited for 
non fulfillment of targets resulting in less budgetary utilization are pre -empted 
before the formulation  of schemes for artisans and handicraft sector during the 
current Plan Period.  The Committee also recommend that enhanced targets 
alongwith the matching budgetary allocations  under each of the scheme having 
impact on wider segment of artisans should be fixed. The Committee also 
expect that wide publicity of the schem es would be given among the targeted 
groups and the monitoring of the schemes be done at regular intervals to ensure 
that the targets fixed for the schemes are achieved in a time bound manner and 
funds allocated are gainfully utilized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The targets are fixed on year -to-year basis and are subject to periodical 
review and assessment to determine if any revision is required.  The budgetary 
allocation in the first two years of the 11 th Five Year Plan namely 2007 -08 and 
2009-10 is as per the amounts approved in the SFC/EFC & CCEA note of the 
respective schemes.  
  
 Every scheme has now a component of publicity and separate budget is earmarked for it.  Wide publicity of the schemes amongst the target 
groups through newspaper advertisements at National, Regional and local levels is a regular and continuous feature now.  Publicity of schemes is also 
made through workshops/seminars being organized at local, State and National levels.  The monitoring of the schemes being implemented is regularly 
undertaken through field officers and the officers from the Headquarter Office. These efforts are being initiated to ensure proper implementation of the 
schemes and to strengthen the implementation further. 
 

 As regards full utilization of the allocated outlays, it is submitted that as a result of measures 
taken concerning monitoring and publicity of the schemes, it is hoped that outlays in the handicraft 
sector will be fully utilized under each of the schemes. 
 
  
 
 
 
 With regard to the recommendation regarding coverage of the schemes having impact on wider segment of artisans, it is submitted that 
additional measures like taking up theme based clusters (five theme based craft categories already finalized) and Mega Clusters such as at Moradabad and 
Narsapur would result in delivery of services through these schemes to a significantly larger artisanal base in the entire country. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3  Para 18) 
 
 The Committee no te that there have been numerous schemes for the 
welfare of artisans. Even though the Government has harped on increasing 
budget allocations year after year, the Committee are not satisfied as most of 
these schemes have not been able to come up to the expe ctations of artisans as 
the benefits of these schemes have not reached to the majority of them. The 
Committee are unable to understand the reasons for fixing the targets on lower 
side under the Schemes. During the entire Tenth Five Year Plan, only 1.48 lak h 
artisans under the Ambedkar Hastshilp Vikas Yojana, 1.17 lakh artisans under 
Marketing and Support Promotion Scheme/Export Promotion Scheme, 2.93 
lakh under Bima Yojana, 0.50 lakh under Design Scheme and 1.54 lakh artisans 
under the ID card Scheme could be covered. The reason given by the Ministry 
that the coverage under these schemes is directly proportional to the budgetary 
outlays approved by the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission and 
hence the small percentage of total artisans covered is attributable to the outlays 
approved under these Schemes, contradicts with their version as there have 
been under utilization of funds during each plan year of the last Five Year Plan. 

The Committee are of the strong view that adequate spadework should be done 
ensuring that benefits of the developmental and welfare schemes reach the 
maximum number of beneficiaries. Considering the enhanced allocations 
during  11 th 
 
Plan, the Committee recommend that all out efforts should be 
made to cover the entire strength o f artisans within the current Five Year Plan, 
particularly under the welfare schemes. For the purpose, the targets under each 
of the schemes should be revised accordingly and if need be the Ministry of 
Finance and the Planning Commission should be urged to  enhance the 
budgetary allocations to meet the increased targets.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. It will be the 
sincere efforts of the Government to cover large number of handicraft artisans 
through the six plan schemes approved for the 11th Plan. 
 
 The Committee‟s recommendations with specific reference to coverage of 
larger number of artisans under the Welfare Scheme has also been noted and it 
is submitted that in the first 2 years of the plan period, physical coverage under 
the Welfare Scheme has been achieved more than what had been envisaged in 
the projections under the Welfare Scheme submitted for approval before the 
beginning of the 11th Plan as indicated below: 
Year Physical target projected in 
CCEA Note(lakhs) 
Actual physical target 
prescribed/ achieved 
(lakhs) 

Janashree 
Bima 
Yojana 
(JBY) 
Rajiv Gandhi 
Shilpi Swasthya 
Bima Yojana 
(RGSSBY) 
JBY RGSSBY 
2007- 08 1.00 8.00 0.98 8.82 
2008- 09 1.00 8.00 9.82 10.10 
  The increased physical coverage had been due to the reason that the 
actual annual premium under the Health Scheme determined after a 
competitive bidding process at the beginning of the Plan period had come 
out to be significantly lower than what was assumed while making 
physical and fina ncial projections under scheme submitted for approval at 
the beginning of 11th Plan.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 in Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4  Para 28) 
 The Committee note that the handicraft sector is a highly decentralized and dispersed sector. As per the census conducted in the year 1995-96, 
a total number of 45.83 lakh artisans are working as household units out of the total strength of 47.61 lakh artisans. The strength of artisans in the 
country at present is estimated to be 67 lakh. The Government did not sought a separate data of artisans working by forming Cooperative 
Societies/Clusters in the last census and hence their data is not available. This reflects the non seriousness of the Government regarding organizing 
the handicraft artisans. Although, efforts are being made by the Government to organize the artisans, yet these efforts are limited and half hearted 
considering the total strength of artisans in the country. During the last three years 267 clusters have been formed as a result of Government efforts 
covering only, 1,06,974 artisans which is a small portion of the Government data of 65 lakh artisans in the country. The Committee feel that the 
Government assistance can be better channelised and utilized through Cooperative fold vis-à-vis targeting the individual artisan. For the purpose, 
handicrafts sector needs to be organized by bringing maximum number of artisans under the Cooperative fold. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that a well planned strategy be chalked out to form Cooperative Societies/Clusters all over the country in a time bound manner so as to 
bring the benefits of various welfare schemes to the artisans in a cohesive and assured way. It will be more appropriate if the work on the formation 
of Cooperatives is taken up simultaneously with the census operations by launching proper awareness programmes among the artisans regarding 
benefits of joining the Cooperatives.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 

 This recommendation of the Committee has already been accepted and 
adopted. Accordingly, the enumeration questionnaire has been suitably 
modified whereby data/information on Cooperative Societies and Clusters of 
the artisans shall also be captured. Upon th e census findings becoming 
available, requisite strategies would be formed and implemented in such a 
manner that the recommendations of the Committee concerning formation of 
Cooperative Societies and clusters for the handicraft artisans all over the 
country could be implemented.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5  Para 35) 
 The Committee note that the role of NGOs in the implementation of 
developmental schemes for handicraft sector is very vital. A ccording to the 
Government, their involvement is essential due to the fact that they have their 
presence through out the whole country at the grassroot level and are well 
familiarized about the issues relating to the artisans in the entire country and 
particularly in far flung areas. For implementing the welfare and developmental 
schemes aimed at welfare of artisans, these NGOs are provided financial 
assistance and are required to submit utilization certificates after spending it for 
the purposes  it was re leased to them. The Committee are dismayed to note the 
lack of proper monitoring mechanism on the functioning of these NGOs to 
ensure that the amount released to NGOs is spent purposefully. Besides, 
situation regarding receipt of utilization certificate fr om NGOs is far from 
satisfactory. The NGOs are one of the eligible agencies entrusted with the 
responsibilities of implementing the various Schemes in the handicraft sector. 
Therefore, not only the verification of the amount spent by them is essential but 
the achievement of physical target set out for each of the NGO by the 
Government will ensure their accountability in fulfilling their obligation 
towards handicraft sector. Non submission of utilization certificate by NGOs is 
indicative of the fact that the  fund released to them have either being not 
utilized properly or could have mis -utilised. Despite the pendency of about 835 

utilisation certificates for submission by different NGOs since long time, no 
NGO has been taken to task or blacklisted for its act  of omission. This is a very 
serious lapse on the part of the Government as it involves the public money 
about which no accountability is being ensured. The non -receipt of utilization 
certificates on time restricts the timely release of further funds and h ampers the 
growth of the sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a 
thorough scrutiny of the proposals of NGOs should be done before involving 
them as implementing agencies. Their past performance, infrastructure, 
technical expertise and f inancial position should also be taken into 
consideration before entrusting any offer to them. The Committee further 
recommend that the submission of the utilization certificate alongwith the 
evaluation of the target achieved should be responsibilities of field formations 
of Office of DC (Handicrafts). They should also be held responsible alongwith 
the defaulting NGOs against whom punitive action be initiated including 
blacklisting them.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee contained in this para are being followed in the Office of DC (Handicrafts). To illustrate, it is 
submitted that the proposals of NGO as well as the competence of the NGO are scrutinized and ascertained at the application stage and at the field level 
itself. There is an elaborate grading system through which the capacity and capability of the NGO is ascertained by awarding a score against different 
identified performance parameters. A cut-off grade has also been prescribed to ensure that only capable NGOs are shortlisted as implementing partners for 
different schemes. While assessing their capability, their past performance, infrastructure, technical expertise and financial position are also taken into 
account. 
  
 There are suitable standing instructions to the field formations making them responsible for physical inspection of the activity under 
implementation and to ensure not only proper utilization of the funds released but also for arranging scrutiny of their utilization certificates and other 
related documents. To ensure compliance with the guidelines and standing instructions by the implementing agencies/NGOs, no reimbursement proposal 
is considered unless it is accompanied with field inspection reports by the Assistant Director. Besides, additional checks have also been introduced to 
ensure proper utilization of grants by the NGOs. As an example, each applicant NGO under he Marketing Support Scheme & Design and Technology 
Upgradation Scheme is expected to disclose the list of artisans in advance at the stage initial proposal itself. The presence of the pre-disclosed artisans 
during the implementation stage is physically verified during the field inspection. A minimum presence of 80% pre-disclosed artisans during the 
implementation of the activity has been prescribed to become entitled for reimbursement of balance grants. Reimbursements are made, curtailed or 
recoveries made according to the actual number of artisans who participated in the activity. This arrangement ensures that the NGO really caters to the 
pre-identified artisans who shall receive prescribed benefits under the Schemes. 
  
 The NGOs in whose case the actual presence is 50% or below, are black listed, apart from action for recovery of the first installment released. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 7,  Para 44) 
 The Committee observe that our country produces varieties of handicrafts 
items marked by area specific characteristics. The artisans of different regions 
give special dimensions prominently featuring their local artistic creations in 
the making of different crafts. However, in  the absence of an appropriate 
identification mark it becomes difficult for a buyer to distinguish it from rest of 
the handicrafts made by machines or imported depriving the artisans of the 
rightful and legitimate dues worth their products. The Indian trad itional crafts 
do have the recognition all over the world since long. Our handicraft products 
are being exported to all the major countries in the world. Yet, our share of 
exports of handicrafts in the world‟s is only 1.6% which is very low. 
Considering th e total artisanal population and vast range of products 
manufactured in the country, there is a tremendous scope for increasing our 
handicrafts exports ensuring that the benefits also percolates down to the 
artisans. On one hand, the artisans are unaware a bout the worth of their 
product due to their lack of proper exposure to the markets while on the other 
hand they are being exploited by the agents and middlemen for want of 
identification mark having the price value of the product in it. Even though the 
Government maintains that handicraft represents a very wide range of products 
made out of a diverse range of raw materials and combination thereof and 
employing a  variety of processes, tools and technologies, it has not taken 
initiative to develop a generic trademark for the handicrafts. The quality of the 
raw material of different handicraft items can be quantified, the products can be 
labeled after these meet the laid down criteria for the eligibility of the 
Handicraft mark. The Committee are of the opinion that there is need for proper 
identification of the handicrafts products to give a thrust to the exports and for 
ensuring that the artisans get a good value of their produces. They, therefore, 
strongly recommend that expeditious steps should be taken by t he Government 
to develop a trademark namely `Handicraft Mark‟ for handicraft items and, if 
possible, also displaying its price in it. Such a trademark would definitely 
enable handicraft products to develop a niche with a distinct identity both in 
domestic and international markets.  
 
Reply of the Government 

 Suitable proposals for undertaking the work for developing modalities for 
handicrafts trade mark, in case of feasibility, have been invited from competent 
organizations. The services of NID Ahmedabad have requisitioned to undertake 
the exercise for Handicrafts Mark. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10  Para 63) 
 The Committee observe that under Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima 
Yojana, efforts have been made to enable the artisans community to have access 
to the health care facilities. However, not only the identification of ailments and 
the amount earmarked for their treatment speak volumes about the 
shortsightedness of the Government on such an important issue, but the limit of 
four persons of a family for benefits under the Scheme has raised questions 
about the thinking of the Government in so far as concept of the family in our 
society is concerned. Under the Scheme, four persons of a family co mprising 
self and any other three members of the family from amongst the dependent 
parents, spouse and children are covered. The choice between the parents and 
children, at times may be very difficult to make. The Committee are unable to 
understand the logic behind this concept as it may obliquely alter the edifice of 
the family bondage. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
ceiling of four persons of a family for benefits under the Scheme be done away 
with henceforth. The concept of a famil y should invariably include dependent 
parents and thus taking into account the two children, self and spouse, the 
ceiling should atleast be  extended to six persons for the purpose of insurance 
coverage under the Scheme.  
 
Reply of the Government 

 
 It is submitted that after the first 2 years of implementation of RGSSBY 
with a provision of covering an artisan with 3 family members i.e. total 4, the 
average family size has been reported to be as under:- 
   
   2006-07 -  2.92 members 
  2007-08 –  3.12 members 
 
 Thus, it is evident that even the existing provision of 4 family members 
has not been optimally availed by the beneficiary artisans.  
 
 Therefore, keeping in view the recommendations of the Parliamentary 
Committee, it is proposed to introduce an additi onal add -on feature in the 
existing scheme wherein the family size for the purpose of availing benefits 
under the scheme, in those cases where parents will be included as family 
members, shall be additional to the approved family size of 1+3. That is, if b oth 
the parents are included, then the family size for the beneficiary artisan shall be 
6  (1+5) as has been recommended by the Committee. 
 A suitable proposal in this regard has been submitted to the Planning 
Commission. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12,  Para 70) 
 The Committee observe that Shiksha Sehyog Yojana is one of the 
components of the Bima Yojana for the handicraft artisans. Under the Scheme 
educational assistance in the form of scholarship at the rate of Rs.300/ - per 
quarter per child, for maximum to two children, studying in class 9 th to 11 th 
 
Standard is given to the children of insured artisans. The Committee 

appreciated the objective of the Scheme, but express their apprehens ion 
regarding its practicality. Although it aims at promoting education among the 
children of artisans, yet pegging it for students of class 9 th to 11 th 
 
makes it 
unrealistic and impractical. It is common knowledge that the percentage of 
children of artisa ns reaching upto class 9 th 
 
and beyond is very low and hence 
the purpose of launching schemes largely remain unfulfilled. To make the 
Scheme meaningful with the intent to upgrade the education of artisans 
offsprings, it should be made applicable from the b eginning of the schooling of 
the student i.e. from the Ist standard to the 12 th 
 
standard. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the scholarships should be provided at the initial 
stage of schooling, i.e. from 1 st 
 
Class onwards so that the artisans are motivated 
to start the schooling of their children and are encouraged to continue till their 
wards become conscious enough to pursue their career profession.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Based on the recommendations of the Committee, a proposal was made to LIC of India on 
22.08.2008, requesting consideration of, among others, the following issues: 
 - For enhancing the age limit from 60 years to 70 years 
 - To increase Children Education Allowance from Rs.300 per quarter 
per child  to 2 children to Rs.500. 
 Before the response of LIC of India is described, it is imperative to 
mention here that Janashree Bima Yojana is not a scheme specifically for the 
handicraft artisans. 
 
 On the issue of increasing the age limit to 70 years LIC has asked for likely number of persons to 
be covered under the scheme. The same is being furnished to them. 
 As regards providing scholarships under Shiksha Sahayog Yojana from 
the initial stage of schooling i.e. from Class 1 st onwards as against Class  9th to 
12th as at present, LIC has responded that the change in the classes to which 
scholarship is provided under Shiksha Sahayog Yojana or the quantum of 
scholarship cannot be decided by LIC of India. This is a Central Government 

Scheme managed by LIC a nd any change in the scheme cannot be done in 
isolation to any scheme but would be applicable to all the Janashree Bima 
Yojana scheme. The LIC has further intimated that the JBY scheme would be 
reviewed again in next year and depending upon claim experienc e the benefits 
can be reviewed.  In view of the above response from LIC, it would be the 
endeavor of the Office of DC (Handicrafts) to again pursue with LIC to accept 
the proposals emanating from the recommendations of the Committee, at the 
time of review in the next financial year.   
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 

 CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDTIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8,  Para 55) 
 The Committee observe the emphasis of the Government on the Human 
Resource Development of artisans is extremely lop -sided keeping in view the 
number of artisans in the country vis-à-vis training activities underaken. During 
the year 2005 -06 1,100 participants in 11 events, 300 participants in 3 events in 
the year 2006 -07 and 2 ,460 participants in 18 events in the year 2007 -08 were 
imparted training. Under Special Handicraft Training Project, training imparted 
to artisans declined every succeeding year as 2,660 participants were trained 
during the year 2005 -06, 760 during the ye ar 2006-07 and 600 during the year 
2007-08. But the position under the schemes Training in Innovative Designs and 
Training of artisans/SHG leaders/NGO in capacity building is extremely poor 
as for the years 2005 -06, 2006-07 not a single person was trained under both the 
schemes. Similarly, during the year 2007 -08 not a single person was trained 
under the scheme Training through Guru Shishya Parampara. There has also 
been no fixed periodicity of these trainings as they were stated to be organized 
on a need based manner. In future also, workshops and seminars  are proposed 
to be organized only in such a fashion.  The manner in which need for such 
workshops/seminars is decided and what is the criteria for such a decision has 
not been explained. Training to arti sans is given primarily to upgrade their 
skills and make them aware about the conditions prevailing in the sector and 
how to cope with the fast growing and  ever changing market requirements. 
Hence, an adhoc approach on this important aspect of artisans act ivity will not 
make our artisans competitive and sustainable. Besides, our artisans also face 
resource crunch in carrying out their vocation. Under no scheme of the 
Government financial assistance, subsidy or loan is provided to artisans to 
enhance their p rofessional skills. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that training of artisans is of utmost importance for their 
sustainable growth and to achieve this, though in a phased manner, a proper 
and well thought out strategy be devised to continue it  on a regular basis. The 
publicity of  such programmes be adequately given amongst the artisans for 
achieving maximum coverage and to make them aware about the benefits of 
these trainings. The proposal for soft loan to artisans under Design and 
Technological Upgradation Scheme be also mooted with the provision of buy 
back arrangements of finished products against such loan.  

 
Reply of the Government 
 This is already taken care of, under different components of the existing 
Human Resource Development Scheme implemented by this office.  
 
 The range of these trainings provided varies from skill development 
under the tutelage of Mastercraftperson and speci alized institutional trainings.  
A wide publicity of all the schemes including that of the HRD Scheme is 
regularly ensured through press advertisement for creating awareness among 
the stake- holders.   
 
 As regards soft loan to artisans under Design & Tech nology Upgradation 
Scheme, it is submitted that as of now there is no such enabling provision in the 
existing approved schemes of this office. However, under the Ambedkar 
Hastshilp Vikas Yojana there is a component of Credit Guarantee Scheme 
through which the Government of India bears the cost of Guarantee Fee and 
Annual Service Charges, which is paid to Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for 
micro, medium and small enterprises for obtaining guarantee cover in respect 
of the credit sanctioned to the handicraft art isans by different Member Lending 
Institutes (MLIs) i.e. Banks. This arrangement is applicable in respect of credit 
sanctioned to both artisans and SHGs. 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.16 in Chapter-I of the Report)

CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2,  Para 13) 
 The Committee find that the last census to ascertain actual number of 
handicrafts artisans was conducted in the  year 1995 -96 and thereafter no fresh 
survey  has been carried out even after a gap of more than a decade. Now, in 
the 11 th Plan the Office of t he DC (Handicrafts) has decided to conduct a fresh 
survey in which 20% districts will be covered every year. Based on the outcome 
of the census of 20% districts each year, estimated/projected population of 
artisans will be determined. In this way, it is pr oposed to get the actual data of 
artisans by the end of the Eleventh Five Year Plan. This process of census is 
cumbersome and skewed as it will not bring out the exact figures of artisans in 
the country because by the time census of last phase takes place,  the figure in 
areas wherein the census was carried out in the first phase might have changed 
drastically. The present decision of the Government has perhaps not considered 
the very fact that the number of artisans in the country may not be more than a 
crore and the pockets of their concentration are also easily identifiable. Hence, 
to prolong the census of artisans during the entire 11 th Plan period defies all 
logic. The implementation of  developmental and welfare schemes based on 
assumption of figures of artisans will not be of any consequence as the quantum 
of money and machinery cannot be determined in the absence of correct data 
resulting in non fulfillment of the target fixed under the schemes. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that it will be in the fitness of things if a one 
time survey is carried out to cover the entire strength of artisans all over the 
country and the current process of covering 20% of the districts every year 
should be continued thereafter to keep the data updated. Since the artis ans are 
scattered across the country including in far flung and hilly areas. The existing 
set up in the Ministry of Textiles may not have adequate infrastructure and 
expertise, the services of other specialized agencies, like National Sample 
Survey Organiz ation (NSS) may be requisitioned  for conducting a realistic 

scientific census operations. This will not only help in expediting the work of 
census, but a region wise data base will also be prepared for implementation of 
the schemes effectively in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee to have 
one time survey i.e. 100% census conducted, has been referred to the competent 
authority, for approval.  Since the methodology of conducting 100% census is a 
shift from the existing policy of conducting census of 20% districts every year, 
the change in policy has to be decided by the competent authority and requires 
subsequent approvals including from Planning Commission.  This process will 
take more time.  It has,  therefore, been decided to carry on with the census on 
the basis of present policy covering further 20% districts in the country this year 
i.e. 2008-09 and the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
to conduct 100% census, shall be impleme nted w.e.f. the next financial year i.e. 
2009-10 after the acceptance and approvals of the competent authority as 
aforesaid.   
  
 A proposal in this regard has been submitted to the Internal Finance Wing 
and will be taken up there -after with Planning Commi ssion and Ministry of 
Finance etc. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 

(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6,  Para 39) 
 The Committee observe  that the Government has introduced a new 
provision in the 11 th Plan paving the way for providing travel assistance to the 
artisans who participate in the marketing events organized by the Office of the 
DC (Handicrafts) from time to time and are coming fro m the distance of more 
than 500 kms. Although this is a welcome step as it will encourage the artisans 
of distant areas to take part in the marketing events, yet the proposal is bereft of 
ground realities and will perhaps act as dampener to the local artis ans where 
the Expo is being organized. The distance limit of more than 500 kms is 
impracticable. Keeping in view the poor financial position of the artisans and 
escalating transport expenses due to continuous hike in fuel prices, the distance 
of even 100 k ms. is beyond the reach of artisans to travel at their own cost. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the limit of distance considered for 
providing travel assistance to the artisans should be reduced to at least 100 kms 
so that it does not prove an ob stacle for the needy artisans to exhibit their skills. 
Similarly, some arrangements like plying special buses can be arranged for the 
artisans residing/working within the radius of 100 kms. of exhibition venue. 
These steps will help in maximizing the  participation of artisans benefiting 
them.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 During the 11 th Five year Plan the facility of payment of TA/DA to 
artisans which earlier was paid to artisans from some identified and difficult 
localities has been extended to all the art isans who come to participate in a 
market related activity from a distance of and more than 500 kms. from and to 

their place of residences.    
  
 The acceptance of the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Labour to relax the rules for payment of TA/DA to artisans 
participating in Market related programmes of this office reducing the distance 
from approved 500 Kms to 100 Kms. requires the approval of the competent 
authority. 
 
 A proposal in this regard has been submitted to the Planning Commission. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.13 in Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9,  Para 62) 
 The Committee observe that the Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima 
Yojana was launched by the Government in March, 2007 with the objective to 
financially enable the artisans community to have access to the health care 
facilities at an annual premium of Rs.150 for artisan of the general category and 
Rs.75/- for artisa ns belonging to SC/ST/BPL/NER. The Scheme is being 
implemented through Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC). The annual 
coverage per family is four persons  comprising self and any other three 
members of the family from amongst the dependent parents, s pouse and 
children. The annual coverage per family is Rs.15,000 under the Scheme. The 
Committee are of the opinion that the cap of Rs.15,000 per family under the 
Scheme is, however, too meagre taking in account the present day medical 
expenses. There have been classification of various ailments and the monetary 

ceiling for their treatment. However, the classification of ailment and provision 
of money is far from satisfactory. Provision for Rs.75/ - for eye treatment, 
Rs.250/- for dental treatment and Rs.500/ -for baby coverage are few 
illustrations highlighting the casual approach in deciding these issues. 
Although, the Committee understand the limited scope of maneuverability due 
to financial constraints, yet earmarking of the paltry sum is an exercise in 
futility keeping in view the procedure involved in getting reimbursement and 
the cost of treatment. The Committee feel that the artisans belong to the 
disadvantaged strata of the society and most of them are very poor. Due to their 
improper, unhygienic workin g conditions and poor life style, they are more 
prone to occupational diseases including critical illness not to say of normal 
diseases. The Health Scheme, currently in operation, ignores a very vital aspect 
of the health care as it does not include treatm ent for critical illnesses. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that keeping in view the ever 
increasing medical expenses, the ceiling under the scheme should be raised to 
atleast Rs.1,50,000 per annum per family. The Committee further recommend 
that the critical illnesses like cancer, heart problems, brain surgery etc. should 
also be brought within the ambit of the Scheme with appropriate financial 
ceiling.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The recommendations concerning raising the ceiling of coverage  as well 
as inclusion of critical illness has been examined. It is felt that these 
enhancements in the coverage of benefits may yield in substantial hike in the 
annual premium, which at present is Rs.800/ - per annum per artisan. Out of 
this, the general ca tegory artisan contributes Rs.150/ - and an artisan belonging 
to NER, SC, ST & BPL categories contribute Rs.75/ -. The Government of India 
contributes the balance annual premium and Service Tax on the total premium. 
If the sharing of the future premium betwe en the artisan and GoI is kept in the 
existing proportion, there would be an apparent hike in the artisan‟s share of 

the annual premium as well, which all artisans may not be able to afford. 
 Therefore, in view of recommendation of the Parliamentary  Commi ttee, 
action has been initiated for a new add -on feature to be introduced in the 
scheme for covering 10 critical illnesses such as Cancer, Paralysis, Myocardial 
Infarction (Heart Attack), Bye pass Surgery, Kidney failure, Stroke, Tuberculosis 
etc., with a financial cap of Rs.1.5 lakh per annum per artisan family. Artisan 
who is willing to pay the higher premium could opt for this feature.  
 
 A suitable proposal in this regard has been submitted to the  Planning 
Commission. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.19 in Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para 69) 
 
 The Committee note  that Bima Yojana for Handicraft artisans has been 
launched by the Government to provide Life Insurance protection to handicraft 
artisans in case of natural/accidental death or total/partial disability due to 
accident. This Scheme is being implemented thro ugh Life Insurance 
Corporation (LIC) of India. The artisans between the age group of 18 to 60 years 
are eligible to be covered under the Scheme. The annual premium under the 
Scheme is Rs.200/- of which Rs.40/- is to be contributed by the artisan, Rs.60/ - 
by the Government of India, and Rs.100/ - by LIC. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the handicrafts is an art and even the artisans of higher age groups 

are also practicing their skills and are contributing to the development of the 
sector. More so, they also work as trainers for the young generations using their 
vast experience and traditional skills. Hence, to exclude them from the coverage 
of insurance not only negates their past contribution to the sector but also 
harbours the misplaced presumption th at the artisans beyond the age of 60 are 
incapable of any work. This notion will undermine the efficacy, talent, 
resourcefulness and innovations of the sector because primarily all the activities 
here revolve around the person and his skill. Nonetheless, life expectancy in our 
country has also considerably gone up and hence restricting it to the age of 60 in 
such circumstances will not be beneficial to the artisans. The Committee, 
therefore strongly recommend that the age for insurance coverage under the 
Scheme should be enhanced at least upto 70 years as this will also enable the 
Government to fulfill its socio-economic obligations. The Committee also desire 
to be apprised of the concrete steps taken in this regard at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Based on the recommendations of the Committee, a proposal was made to LIC of India on 
22.08.2008, requesting consideration of, among others, the following issues: 
 - For enhancing the age limit from 60 years to 70 years 
 - To increase Children Education Allowance from Rs.300 per quarter 
per child  to 2 children to Rs.500. 
 
 Before the response of LIC of India is described, it is imperative to 
mention here that Janashree Bima Yojana is not a scheme specifically for the 
handicraft artisans. 
 
 On the issue of increasing the age limit to 70 years LIC has asked for likely number of persons to 
be covered under the scheme. The same is being furnished to them. 
 As regards providing scholarships under Shiksha Sahayog Yojana from 
the initial stage of schooling i.e. from Class 1 st onwards as against Class 9 th to 
12th as at present, LIC has responded that the change in the classes to which 
scholarship is provided under Shiksha Sahayog Yojana or the quantum of 

scholarship cannot be decided by LIC of India. This is a Cen tral Government 
Scheme managed by LIC and any change in the scheme cannot be done in 
isolation to any scheme but would be applicable to all the Janashree Bima 
Yojana scheme. 
 
 The LIC has further intimated that the JBY scheme would be reviewed 
again in nex t year and depending upon claim experience the benefits can be 
reviewed. 
 
  
 
 
 In view of the above response from LIC, it would be the endeavor of the Office of DC 
(Handicrafts) to again pursue with LIC to accept the proposals emanating from the recommendations 
of the Committee, at the time of review in the next financial year.   
           (Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.22 in Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;               HEMANAND BISWAL 
11th Novemeber, 2009                                       CHAIRMAN, 

20 Kartika, 1931 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.      
  

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR HELD ON 11 TH 
NOVEMBER, 2009.  
 
The Committee met from 1400 hrs. to 1545 hrs in Committee Room No. `139‟, Parliament  
House Annexe, New Delhi to have oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment on `The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009‟  and `The Employees‟ State 
Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2009‟ and to consider and adopt draft Action Taken Reports. 
  
PRESENT 
    Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri M. Anandan 
3.      Shri P. Balram 
4.      Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5.      Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6.      Shri Hassan Khan 
7.      Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8.      Shri P. Lingam 
9.      Shri Hari Manjhi 
10.  Shri P.R. Natarajan 
11.  Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
12. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
13. Shri Rajaram 
14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
15. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
   
SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
             2.        Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
  3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
 4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja   - Under Secretary 
    
  
 

 
2.  xx   xx   xx 
3.  xx   xx   xx 
4.  xx   xx   xx 
5.  xx   xx   xx 
6.  xx   xx   xx 
7.  xx   xx   xx 
8. The Chairman then informed th e Members regarding consideration and adoption of 
following draft Action Taken Reports: 
(i) Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirtieth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on the 
`Functioning of the Employees‟ Provident Fund Organisation‟. 
 
(ii) Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty -Third Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on 
the `Development Schemes for Handicrafts Sector‟. 
 
(iii) Action ta ken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty -Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Labour on `General conditions of weavers in the country – A 
case study of Sircilla concentration zone of weavers‟. 
 
9.  The Committee, then, took up the draft Reports for consideration.  The Committee 
adopted the draft Reports without any amendments/modifications.   
 
10. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to present the same to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
xx     Not pertain to this Report.  
  

                 APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY -THIRD REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
        Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations     12 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have       
   
been accepted by Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1,3,4,5,7,10 and 12)          7  58.33% 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government‟s  replies-     NIL  NIL  
    
       
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which  Government‟s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration-(Sl. No. 8)            1   8.33% 
  

V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which     
final replies of Government are of interim in  nature       
        4    33.33% 
(Sl. Nos.2,6,9, and 11)                            ---------- 
              100% 
                              ------------ 
  
 
 