  
37 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2012-13) 
 (FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
 
`WELFARE OF LEGAL HEIRS OF DECEASED 
WORKERS OF ROURKELA STEEL PLANT -A CASE 
STUDY' 
 
         THIRTY- SEVENTH  REPORT 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
           May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
       
 
 


2 
 
THIRTY-SEVENTH   REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2012-13) 
 
(FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
`WELFARE OF LEGAL HEIRS OF DECEASED 
WORKERS OF ROURKELA STEEL PLANT -A CASE 
STUDY' 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on  6th May, 2013    
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 6th May, 2013 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
                   May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 


3 
 
 
 CONTENTS 
PAGE (S) 
    
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
     
INTRODUCTION          (v)   
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
 
REPORT       
 
 
ANNEXURES 
    (i) Annexure-I-A comparative statement of the guidelines/rules  
   dealing with compassionate employment 
  (ii) Annexure-II – A statement containing details of the cases  
   brought before the Committee and the reasons given for  
   denying compassionate employment   
    (iii) Annexure-III-Minutes  of  the sittings  of   the  Committee    
   held  on 30.1.12, 2.5.12, 23.8.2012  and 12.12.12 and  
   3.5.2013 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
2. Shri Raj Babbar 
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
        **5. Shri Pakauri Lal 
6. Shri Narahari Mahato 
         7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Smt. Mausam Noor 
10. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
14. Ms. J. Shantha 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
*16. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
  ****17. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
     21. Vacant 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
25. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
***26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        28. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
        29. Shri Rajaram 
     ***30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri G. N. Ratanpuri 
  ***** 32.    Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
________________________________________________________________ 
*   Nominated w.e.f 25th November, 2011. 
**  Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon  his 
nomination to Standing Committee on Coal & Steel w.e.f. 3rd January, 
2012. 
***   Retired w.e.f. 02.04.2012 and 03.04.2012 respectively. 
****  Nominated w.e.f. 12th April, 2012. 
*****Nominated w.e.f. 4th May, 2012. 
  

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2012-13) 
 SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN - CHAIRMAN 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ismail Hussain 
*3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
5. Shri Nara Hari Mahato 
6. Shri Hari Manjhi 
7. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
8. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
9. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
10. Shri Dinubhai Boghabhai Solanki 
11. Shri Makhan Singh Solanki 
12. Shri K. Sugumar 
13. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
**14. Shri Ashok Argal 
 ***15. Smt. J. Shantha 
  ****16. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
 ****17. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
****18. Shri Ratan Singh 
****19. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
  MEMBERS 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
24. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
25. Shri P. Kannan 
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
27. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
28. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
29. Shri Rajaram 
30. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
31. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 *    Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his  nomination to 
       Standing Committee on Commerce w.e.f. 13th December, 2012. 
 **    Nominated w.e.f. 9th January, 2013. 
   ***   Nominated w.e.f. 19th March, 2013. 
         ****   Nominated w.e.f. 1st May, 2013.

6 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy - Director 
 3. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
  

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
          I,  the  Chairman, Standing Committee on Labour (2012-13) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,  present this 
37th Report on `Welfare of legal heirs of deceased workers of Rourkela Steel 
Plant – A case study'.   
 
2. The Committee (2010 -11) during the ir study visit to Bhubaneswar in  
December, 2010 received a representation from the dependants of deceased 
employees of Rourkela Steel Plant regarding denial of employment on 
compassionate grounds by the Rourkela Steel Plant.  Considering the merits of 
the case, the Committee took up the matter with the concerned authorities and 
after having detailed deliberations the Committee decided to present a report 
thereon. 
 
3. The Committee constituted for the year 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 took 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Steel, Rourkela Steel Plant 
(RSP) and SAIL on 30.1.2012, 2.5.2012 and  23.8.2012.  The present 
Committee (2012 -13) continued the evidence and  had meeting  with the 
representatives of Ministry of Steel, SAIL and RSP on 12.12.2012.  
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the 
Ministry of Steel, SAIL and Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP) for appearing and 
furnishing the informat ion as desired by them in connection with the 
examination of the subject. 
 
 
5. The Committee before considering the report ratified the subject and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 3rd May, 2013. 
 
6. For facility of reference, the observations a nd recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.                   
    
 
 New Delhi;                       DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
 3 May, 2013                                                                CHAIRMAN,  
13  Vaisakha,1935 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
 

8 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS IN THE REPORT 
 
1. SAIL  : Steel Authority of India Limited 
2. NJCS : National Joint Committee for the Steel   
    Industry 
3. INTUC : Indian National Trade Union Congress 
4. AITUC : All India Trade Union Congress 
5. HMS  : Hind Mazdoor Sabha 
6. CITU  : Centre of Indian Trade Unions 
7. RSP  : Rourkela Steel Plant 
8. EFBS : Employees' Family Benefit Scheme 
9. PF  : Provident Fund 
10. DA  : Dearness Allowance 
11. PSU  : Public Sector Undertaking 
12. CEO  : Chief Executive Officer 
13. SLP  : Special Leave Petition 
14. ACR  : Annual Confidential Report 
15. CMD  : Chairman cum Managing Director 
16. HR  : Human Resources 
 
 
  

9 
 
Report 
Introduction 
 After independence the builders of modern India worked with 
a vision to lay the infrastructure for rapid industrialization of the 
country. The steel sector was to propel the economic growth . 
Hindustan Steel Private Limited was set up on January 19, 1954 to 
manage initially the plant that was coming up at Rourkela which 
was the first integrated steel plant in the public sector in India. 
 
2. A policy statement to evolve a new model for managin g 
industry was presented to the Parliament in 1972 by the Ministry of 
Steel and Mines which led to the creation of a holding company to 
manage inputs and outputs under one umbrella. Steel Authority of 
India Limited (SAIL) was incorporated in 1973 and was m ade 
responsible for managing five integrated steel plants at Bhilai, 
Bokaro, Durgapur, Rourkela and Burnpur. In 1978 SAIL was 
restructured as an operating company. 
 

10 
 
3. The guidelines/ rules for dealing with wages and allied matters 
in these plants emanate from the decisions taken at the level of the 
National Joint Committee for the Steel Industry (NJCS). The NJCS 
is a bipartite forum consisting of representatives both from the 
employers’ side and employees’ side. The employees are represented 
through three members each from the four Central Trade Union 
Organizations of INTUC, AITUC, HMS and CITU and one each from 
recognized trade union organizations of the main steel plants. 
FACTS OF THE CASE 
4. The Standing Committee on Labour  during their study visit to 
Bhubaneswar on 21st December, 2010 received a representation 
from the dependents of deceased employees of Rourkela Steel Plant 
(RSP) and also met them who were suffering due to inconsistent 
policy for compassionate appointments . 18 such cases were 
brought to the notice of the Committee where the legal heirs had 
been denied employment on compassionate grounds. The 
Committee after considering their representation decided to take up 
the matter with the concerned authorities since t hese cases 
displayed in- humanitarian and stolid attitude of a PSU towards its 
own employees in case of grave need. 

11 
 
5. The NJCS agreement provided for the following benefits in 
cases of death or permanent total disablement of employees during 
their service period: 
 In case of death or permanent disablement due to accident 
arising out of and in course of employment, employment to 
one of the direct dependants will be provided. However, 
instead of employment, the dependant may opt for benefits 
under Employees’ Family Benefit Scheme (EFBS). 
 
 In order to help the family overcome financial crisis, ‘Employee 
Family Benefit Scheme ‘(EFBS) was introduced with effect from 
1.1.1989. This Scheme provided for monthly payment 
equivalent to last drawn basic pay and DA of th e deceased 
employees to dependants till notional date of superannuation, 
subject to depositing an amount equal to PF and gratuity in 
case of death/ permanent total disablement of an employee 
while in service. 
6. In addition to benefits provided in the NJCS  agreement, 
different plants and units of SAIL were also operating differing 
schemes at plant/unit level for compassionate employment. The 

12 
 
SAIL did not provide for a uniform policy in any of its plants till 
2011 and most of the plants had not documented th e policies and 
some of them even considered the compassionate appointments on 
case-to-case basis. 
 
7. Rourkela Steel Plant had a scheme which provided for 
compassionate employment to dependents of employees, both in 
cases of natural death and where the emp loyee was declared 
medically unfit by the Competent Authority. 
 
8. In terms of tripartite agreement a new scheme for appointment 
on compassionate grounds on account of death due to three listed 
diseases viz. cancer, kidney failure and heart stroke was introduced 
retrospectively from 22.11.1992.  
 
9. The cases of death resulting from any three of the aforesaid 
diseases were covered by a scheme first circulated on 1.1.1996. 
This scheme was extended retrospectively through a Tripartite 

13 
 
Agreement dated 18 -12-1998 to cover such disease death cases 
from 22-11-1992 upto 31-12-1995 also. 
 
10. The SAIL/RSP stated, in its reply, that ‘In the year 1995, 
Rourkela Shramik Sangh, the then recognized union requested the 
Management for introduction of a scheme by which the dependent 
of the employees who died due to heart stroke, cancer and kidney 
failure can get employment on compassionate ground. Similar 
request was also received from other trade unions. The matter was 
discussed at various levels. Accordingly, a scheme was introduced 
for providing employment on compassionate ground to the 
dependent of the ex -employees dying on account of the following 
three listed diseases. 
a) Failure of kidneys. 
b) Heart strokes 
c) Cancer 
 This scheme was also ratified through a tripartite settlemen t 
between the Management of Rourkela Steel Plant and Rourkela 
Shramik Sangh, the recognized union, made in the presence of 

14 
 
Assistant Labour Commissioner -cum- Conciliation Officer, Govt. of 
Orissa, and Rourkela and was given effect w.e.f. 22-11-1992.’ 
 
11. SAIL issued uniform guidelines for dealing with compassionate 
cases for all its plants in 2010 -11. The latest guidelines provide for 
compassionate appointment to dependent of an employee in the 
following cases: 
  * Death/permanent total disablement of the employee 
   due to accident arising out of and in course of   
   employment- cases covered under NJCS agreement. 
  * Medical invalidation of the employee due to   
   suffering  from certain listed chronic debilitating  
   diseases. 
 
12. The uniform guidelines for dealing with compassionate cases 
have been implemented in plants and units of SAIL superseding the 
differing practices prevalent at plants/units. 

15 
 
13. These guidelines have been implemented at Rourkela Steel 
Plant w.e.f 01.09.2011 and the scheme prevalent at RSP w.e.f. 
22.11.1992 was dispensed with. 
14. A comparative statement of the guidelines/ rules dealing with 
compassionate employment, provided at RS P over the period of 
time, is placed at Annexure-I. 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE CASES/POLICIES ON COMPASSIONATE 
APPOINTMENTS 
 
15. A statement containing details of the cases brought before the 
Committee and the reasons given for denying compassionate 
employment is placed at Annexure-II. 
16. An analysis of cases shows that the decisions of RSP 
management were lacking on humanitarian front: 
1. In the first case, the widow was denied employment because 
she was non matriculate.  
2. In the second case and case no 18, the sons of  the deceased 
employees were denied employment since as per Company 
rules  the deceased employees had not served the plant for 10 
years.  

16 
 
3. In case nos.3,6,7,11,12,13,14,15,16,17 the compassionate 
employment was denied since the diseases which the 
employees suffered from/ died of were not covered under three 
listed diseases as per the policy in vogue after 22.11.1992.  
4. In case no. 4, the RSP issued an option letter to the dependent 
of the employee pursuant to the orders of the Court but when 
the dependent app roached the management, he was told that 
the letter was issued by mistake and, therefore, he was denied 
employment. 
5. In case no. 9, a case of head injury with multiple injuries with 
fracture ribs and death due to same and shock was not 
considered sufficient  enough for offering compassionate 
employment as it did not fall under the three listed diseases 
and hence compassionate employment was denied. 
6. In case no. 5, the employee died in a road accident, but his 
son was denied employment since the case did not fa ll under 
injury on duty.  
It is pertinent here to mention that in the case of T.K. 
Meenakshi vrs.SAIL, the employee fell ill while taking his wife 
to hospital and died, the Supreme Court directed SAIL to give 

17 
 
employment to his son on compassionate grounds even when 
the employee was not on duty. 
7. In case no 10, the employee fell seriously ill and applied for 
being declared medically unfit in 1991, he was asked to take 
voluntary retirement. The case was overtly stretched till the 
Rourkela Steel Plant changed its policy  in 1992 after which he 
was declared unfit in 1994. 
8. In case no 8, there is a similar instance of medical non -fitness 
which was not covered under policy after 22.11.1992 but in 
case of Shri Ajay Kumar Mitra who was declared medically 
unfit on 7.9. 1996, the High Court of Odisha directed RSP to 
give employment on compassionate ground. 
Eight of the above cases are sub-judice at present. 
17. When questioned on the absolute non-humanitarian approach 
of RSP as evident from the case of Sh. D.K.Mohanty  whose widow 
was denied employment on compassionate grounds since she was 
not matriculate, the representative of SAIL stated that, “The request 
of the dependant of the deceased employee, was examined in terms 
of the rules/guidelines which were prevalent at  the time of death of 
the ex -employee. As the case was not fulfilling the extant 

18 
 
rules/guidelines, employment on compassionate ground could not 
be provided”. 
18. On being asked that  son of late Shri Jaideb Mallik, was given 
an option letter by the Rourkela  Steel Plant as per the orders of the 
High Court,  but he was not allowed to exercise the option stating 
that the let ter was issued by mistake, the representative of SAIL 
stated that “The request of the dependant of the deceased employee, 
was examined in terms of the rules/guidelines which was prevalent 
at the time of death of the ex -employee. As the case was not 
fulfilling the rules/guidelines, employment on compassionate 
ground could not be provided to him.” 
19. As regards, the case of late Shri D.N.Das w here the employee 
applied for being declared medically unfit in 1991,  when the earlier 
policy was in vogue,  but he was asked to take VRS instead and his 
file was kept pending till the policy changed.  In this regard SAIL 
stated as follows: 
 “ The request of the dependant of the deceased employee, was 
 examined in terms of the rules/guidelines which was prevalent 
 at the time of removal of the ex -employee. As the case was not 
 fulfilling the rules/guidelines, employment on compassionate 
 ground could not be provided”. 
 

19 
 
20. When enquired about the case of late Sh. Khali Rout who was 
admitted in hospital for treatment of head injury with multiple 
injuries with fractured ribs and he died the same day.   It was a 
case of accident but the RSP denied compassionate appointment 
since he was not covered under listed diseases. The  SAIL informed 
that the request of the dependant of the deceased employee, was 
examined in terms of the rules/guidelines which were prevalent at 
the time of death of the ex -employee. As the case was not fulfilling 
the rules/guidelines in vogue, employment on compassionate 
ground could not be provided. 
 
21. When asked about the reason for not giving any relaxation in 
such genuine cases, the Secretary, Ministry of Steel stated as 
under: 
 “...Sir, as I mentioned earlier, SAIL is actually in the market in 
 deregulated sector. They are competing against private sector 
 players. If they are in profit, it is very good for the country. 
 Tomorrow, if they are in loss, then they have to go through the 
 process of being a loss- making company. We do not want that 
 to happen. The percentage of cost of employees today is 18 
 percent of the cost of production of one tonne of steel as 
 compared to the private sector where this cost is two percent.  
 Now the whole attempt of the SAIL is to be competitive in the 
 market”.  
 

20 
 
22. When further queried that SAIL is a Government owned 
company and profit motive only would not be in the public interest, 
the Secretary stated that, “But SAIL is not getting any  grant from 
the Government. SAIL is only getting loans from the banks like 
private sector”. 
 
23. The Committee invited the attention of the officials of SAIL and 
Rourkela Steel Plant towards the observation of the hon’ble 
Supreme Court in Balbir Kaur vrs. SAIL case (Appeal (civil) 
11881 of 1996) (Appeal (civil) 11882 of 1996)  that  “The 
socialistic pattern of society as envisaged in the Constitution has to 
be attributed its full meaning. A person dies while taking the wife to 
the hospital and the cry of the lady for bare subsistence would go 
unheeded on certain technicality. T he bread earner is no longer 
available and prayer for compassionate appointment would be 
deemed as `It is likely to open Pandora’s Box’. This is the resultant 
effect of our entry into the new millennium. Can the law courts be 
mute spectator in the matter o f denial of such a relief to the 
horrendous sufferings of an employee’s family by reason of the 
death of the bread earner?” 

21 
 
24. On being asked why the RSP did not consider all the cases on 
the basis of the above judgment of the hon’ble Supreme Court, the 
CEO, RSP stated that “...In these cases judiciary has decided it. In 
other cases if judiciary comes in, we will honour the judiciary. If we 
give it of our own, there will be a thousand of cases coming up and 
there will be no justification then in denying this in other cases...” 
 
25. Three cases have been decided in favour of the heirs of the 
deceased employees by the hon’ble Supreme Court i.e. Balbir Kaur 
verses SAIL, T.K. Meenakshi vrs. SAIL and an SLP filed before the 
Supreme Court by SAIL against the deci sion of the High Court of 
Odisha which was dismissed.  
 
26. On the issue of policy for compassionate appointment, the 
Secretary Ministry of Steel during evidence before the Committee  
on 2 nd May, 2012 stated that "...I would just clarify that that the 
Government of India policy is applicable to armed forces and the 
Government of India. The PSUs have their own policy. I do admit 
that if the policy of the PSU is more restrictive then they should 
make it as open as the Government of India policy…" 

22 
 
Analysis of scheme for compassionate employment prior to 
1992 
 
27. The scheme prior to 1992 provided for compassionate 
employment to dependents of employees, both in cases of natural 
death and where the employee was declared medically unfit by the 
Competent Authority. 
 
28. The CMD, SAIL during his evidence before the Committee on 
2nd May, 2012 stated that, “…There were four pre -conditions for 
compassionate employment i.e. dependent to be atleast matriculate, 
ex-employee to have served minimum 10 years, last three year ACR 
ratings should be good and no major punishment should have been 
given to ex-employee during the last five years”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
Analysis of Employee Family Benefit Scheme introduced in 
1989: 
 
 
29. According to the reply furnished by the SAIL ‘ The Employees 
Family Benefit Scheme (EFBS) was formulated and introduced in 
terms of decision at the level of National Joint Committee for the 
Steel Industry (NJCS) which is a bipartite forum consisting of 
representatives both from the Employers’ side as w ell as the 
Employees’ side. The employees are represented through three 
members each from the four Central Trade Union Organizations of 
INTUC, AITUC, HMS and CITU and one each from recognized trade 
union organizations of the main steel plants.   
 
30. EFBS was introduced with effect from 01.01.1989 in order to 
help the family to overcome urgent financial crisis on account of 
death/permanent total disablement of the employee while in 
service. This Scheme provides for monthly payment equivalent to 
last drawn basic pay & DA of the deceased employees to dependents 
till the notional date of superannuation of the employee, subject to 
depositing an amount equal to PF and gratuity. The deposited 
amount is returned after cessation of monthly payments.  
 

24 
 
31. The hon'ble Supreme Court in Balbir Kaur vrs SAIL observed 
that, “…the introduction of family benefit scheme cannot be a 
ground to refuse benefit of compassionate appointment...`There is a 
mandate of statute that gratuity is to be paid to the employee on his 
retirement or to his dependents in the event of his early death. The 
introduction of Family Pension Scheme by which the employee is 
compelled to deposit the gratuity amount, as a matter of fact runs 
counter to this beneficial piece of legislation…The provident fund, is 
payable to the employee under the provisions of the statute and this 
statutory obligation cannot possibly be deferred in the event of 
untimely death of a worker or an employee. The family needs the 
money in lump -sum and availability of this amount i s the only 
insulating factor in such a grief stricken family... and ...this Family 
Benefit Scheme cannot be in any way equated with the benefit of 
compassionate appointments…” 
 
Analysis of scheme introduced in 1992: 
 
32. The scheme provided that: 
 In case o f death or permanent total disablement due to 
accident arising out of and in course of employment, 

25 
 
employment to one of the direct dependents will be 
provided. However, instead of employment, the dependent 
may opt for benefits under Employees’ Family Benef it 
Scheme (EFBS). 
 
 In order to help the family overcome financial crisis, 
‘Employee Family Benefit Scheme' (EFBS) was introduced 
with effect from 01.01.1989. This Scheme provides for 
monthly payment equivalent to last drawn basic pay & DA 
of the deceased e mployees to dependents till notional date 
of superannuation, subject to depositing an amount equal 
to PF and gratuity in case of death /permanent total 
disablement of an employee while in service.  
 
  A scheme was introduced for providing employment on 
compassionate ground to the dependant of the ex -
employees who die on account of the following three listed 
diseases. 
 Failure of kidneys 
 Heart Stroke 
 Cancer 

26 
 
 
33. The scheme introduced in 1992 was circulated  on 01-01-1996 
and extended retrospectively w.e.f. 22.11.1992 through a Tripartite 
Settlement dated 18.12.1998 between the Management of Rourkela 
Steel Plant and the recognized union, made in the presence of 
Assistant Labour Commissioner-cum-Conciliation Officer, Rourkela, 
Government of Odisha. The scheme was different from the earlier 
one available for appointments on compassionate basis. Legal heirs 
of those employees who died due to three specific diseases chosen 
arbitrarily by the trade union/ managemen t were made eligible for 
compassionate appointments from 1996. In 1998 the above policy 
was given retrospective effect to cover cases during 1992 -95.  Legal 
heirs of 34 employees (who died during 1992 -98) could not get 
employment on compassionate grounds d ue to the policy change in 
1992, 16 got relief due to the retrospective effect given to the 
circular of 1996 in 1998 and 18 were left in lurch. 
 
34. On being asked, when in 1996, the policy was changed and  
given retrospective to benefit 16 people, why cannot this be done 
again that too when the Chairman, SAIL  has the powers to 
supersede the Board, the CMD, SAIL replied as follows : 

27 
 
 
"I would submit before   the Committee two or three things. 
Since September, 2011, a new policy has been adopted.  Today, 
there is no other previous policy in vogue. The only policy which 
is applicable is the September, 2011 policy which is now 
uniformly applicable to all the Plants.  Secondly, besides the se 
18 cases, there were  three other cases. Yes, I agree that we 
have go ne against the policy. But in respect of these three 
specific cases, I would submit that they are not strictly speaking 
covered by the policy. These appellants had gone to the 
Supreme Court and got the orders. The Supreme Court 
judgement says that SAIL is directed to consider the cases on 
compassionate ground, of appointment insofar as the 
appellants are concerned.  In view of the judgement, we had 
given employment to three employees who were not covered 
strictly speaking by the policy but as per the judgem ent 
delivered. In 18 cases, some of the employees’ affected family 
members, have gone to the Court. We will always have to abide 
by the orders of the Court. There cannot be any two opinions 
about that." 
  

28 
 
35. When asked about the powers of CMD, SAIL in this regard and 
whether the  Chairman, SAIL is the competent authority to modify 
and withdraw this scheme at his discretion , he replied, " I will 
submit to the Committee that this enabling clause is there in 
relation to this policy. My humble submission will be  that since  
around 8 cases are pending and at advanced level of disposal, if the 
Committee permits, let us wait and as we have done in other cases 
we have to abide by the orders of the Court so that this would save 
us from the botheration." 
 
Analysis of policy after August 2011 
 
36. As per the reply furnished by SAIL, ‘ For bringing uniformity in 
the matter of compassionate employment at all plants and units of 
SAIL, uniform guidelines for providing relief / benefit to dependent 
family members of employees in cases of death, permanent total 
disablement and medical invalidation were formulated and 
circulated at Plants and Units covering the following cases:  
 

29 
 
 Death/total permanent disablement due to accident arising 
out of and in course of employment (flowing from NJCS 
agreement)  
 Employee being declared medically invalid to perform duty 
due to suffering from chronic debilitating diseases listed in 
the guidelines 
 
- The dependent family members/employees also have the 
option to opt for benefits under EFBS in lieu of employment. 
 
- For consideration under medical invalidation cases, all 
employees are eligible excluding those working as trainees 
or on stipend basis or  those having less than one year of 
service left on the date of medical invalidation. 
 
- The minimum qualification for dependent opting for 
employment is matriculation with maximum age as 35 
years. However, for widows, the minimum qualification can 
be relaxe d if dependent son/daughter is not eligible. 
Further widows are given relaxation in the prescribed 
maximum age by 5 years. 

30 
 
 
- List of diseases covered under list of debilitating diseases in 
the guidelines have been broad -based and more than those 
which were covered at the steel plants earlier. 
 
- The new uniform guidelines have been implemented at all 
plants and units from 2010 -11 onwards. The earlier 
practices/schemes/provisions pertaining to compassionate 
cases prevalent at Plants/units have been dispensed wi th 
after implementation of these uniform guidelines.  
 
37. The  policy introduced w.e.f. 1.9.2011 in the RSP stipulates 
that compassionate appointment may be considered for dependent 
family members on ‘medical invalidation’ of an employee on 
specified ‘deb ilitating diseases’ which is a big difference from the 
policy of 1992. The policy also provides for relaxation in case of 
minimum qualification of matriculation in case of widow if 
dependent son/ daughter are not eligible. The policy takes away the 
condition of minimum 10 years service which was necessary as 
death or medical invalidation of the bread earner has similar 
consequences for families of the deceased employees. 

31 
 
 
38. When asked whether any drafting Committee was constituted 
for finalizing the uniform guidelines, the Ministry replied that: 
 "The uniform guidelines were finalized keeping in background 
 the differing practices which were then prevalent at the 
 different plants and units of SAIL.  No specific drafting 
 committee was constituted for the purpose.  However, views 
 from plants and units were taken and the draft scheme was 
 discussed in the Heads of Personnel Meeting also before 
 finalization.  At Rourkela Steel Plant, after receipt of the new 
 uniform guidelines, discussions were held with t he recognized 
 union, in writing, for introduction of the new scheme as per 
the  SAIL guideline, the revised guideline dealing with 
 compassionate  employment cases was implemented at 
 Rourkela Steel Plant w.e.f. 01.09.2011." 
 
39. When asked about the reas ons for implementing uniform 
policy, the Director (Personnel) SAIL stated that: 
  " …We will go by directions definitely but then it is basically 
 all  other plants, there have been different policy for this 
 compassionate appointments. This is the first t ime on 
 1.9.2011  that we started the common policy because of all 
 these aberrations. Lot of complaints were coming from  other 
 units also i.e. Bhilai, Durgapur. There are different  practices. 
 From very old times, it was coming up and then with lot of 
 difficulties, we could do it…" 
 
40. On the same issue, the CMD, SAIL, during his evidence before 
the Committee on 2nd May, 2012 stated that: 
  

32 
 
  "…it is a fact that earlier we were having different schemes in 
 different plants and they kept on changing them with the 
 passage of time due to changing requirements.  But since 
 1.9.2011, we are having a uniform policy across all the plants.  
 These 18 cases pertain to the period prior to that. The 15 
 cases pertain to the period post 21.11.1992 and three cases 
 are prior  to 21.11.1992.  Though they are falling under the 
 scheme, they  are not satisfying the qualifying criteria.  
 Fifteen  cases are not  covered under the Scheme. Over the 
 years, we have given employ ment on compassionate 
 grounds in RSP alone to 1821  people.  Besides that, about 
 1164 employees have availed the Employee Benefit Scheme.  
 Besides this, three cases were  adjusted against the specific 
 orders passed by the Supreme  Court and they were a lso not 
 covered by the policy and under the rules.  But they were 
 the specific cases in which the  Supreme Court gave 
 judgement.  While giving the judgement,  the hon. Supreme 
 Court has said that to consider the cases of  compassionate 
 employment so far as the applicants are  concerned, it said 
 that it is always open for the employer to  have a new policy for 
 compassionate employment. My only earnest request to  the 
 hon. Chairman and the hon. Members is  that these are the 
 cases where we are having full sympathy.   But the policy 
 is not permitting us to do it though we want to do it. We are 
 handicapped by the policy directives.  In addition to this,  there 
 are other similar cases which are not surfacing.  But we are 
 having details which run into few hundreds in  number for 
 RSP and for the SAIL as a whole.  My only request  to the 
 hon. Chairman and the hon. Members would be kindly  allow 
 us.  We will see that in what other way we can help them, 
 may be by giving them training, etc. But giving employment at 
 this stage to these family members, since it is not covered by 
 the policy, we find it very difficult.”  
 
41. On being asked to take steps to give employment to these 
heirs on humanitarian grou nds, the CMD, SAIL on 2.5.2012 stated 
that he would go to the Board with the request to condone the delay 

33 
 
of the families who had not opted for EFBS within 6 months of the 
death of the employee and would recalculate the benefits available 
to them under the  scheme.  He also requested the Committee to 
allow him two months time for the same. 
 
 
42. The Secretary, Ministry of Steel, during the evidence held on 
23.8.2012, stated that "SAIL has put up a proposal for extending 
the EFBS to those cases who were not entitled because they have to 
apply for EFBS within six months of the death of the employee. The 
SAIL has sent the proposal to the Board’s sub -Committee as per 
their procedure in the meeting of 4 th July 2012. However, the sub -
Committee deferred its consideration and, however, considered it in 
their meeting held on 1.8.2012. The sub -Committee has 
recommended the proposal for approval of the Board and this 
proposal will be sent to the SAIL Board in the next meeting shortly". 
 
43. As per the written reply of th e SAIL, after the intervention of 
the Committee "A proposal for extending benefits under EFBS to the 
eligible cases has been submitted to the SAIL Board for its 
consideration. The following modalities have been proposed : 

34 
 
 
 Dependents of ex-employees would be required to deposit 
with the Company a non interest bearing amount 
equivalent to the entire PF and Gratuity, as payable at 
the time of separation of ex-employee, for a duration 
equivalent to the period from actual date of separation to 
notional date of superannuation. 
 
 The monthly benefit equivalent to the last pay drawn by 
the ex-employee i.e. Basic Pay + DA would be payable to 
the dependents under the scheme. Such payments would 
continue on monthly basis for a duration equivalent to 
the period from actual date of separation to notional date 
of superannuation of the ex-employee. 
 
 On expiry of the said equivalent duration, the monthly 
payment by the company would cease and the amount so 
deposited would be refunded to the depositor or his/her 
nominee.  
 

35 
 
 Dependents desirous to avail the above benefit under 
EFBS would be required to withdraw cases filed in Court 
of Law against the Company.  
 
 The decision of the SAIL Board is awaited." 
 
44. The CMD, SAIL during his evidence before the Committee held 
on 23.8.2012, stated that, "After the last meeting we took up the 
cases in our Board level of HR sub -Committee and the cases were 
discussed at length. There are 6557 cases in the various plants in 
respect of those employees who had died and their kith and kin had 
not availed of the benefit of Employee Family Benefit Scheme 
(EFBS) because one has to apply within six months to avail benefit 
under this scheme. We pleaded these cases with the Board -level 
sub-Committee on HR and we also made a reference of the 
discussions that had taken place in the Standing Committee. After 
a great deal of hectic persuasion with the Board members, finally in 
the second meeting, we were successful in getting the nod of the 
Board-level sub -Committee on HR. They had recommended that 
though the next kith and kin of these eligible employees had not 
applied to get benefit under the EFBS, but these cases, as a special 

36 
 
case, which shall not be cited as precedents in future, may be 
recommended to the Board. Our next meeting of the Board is on  
10.09.2012. I am hopeful that we will be able to get this resolution 
passed in our ensuing Board meeting and these eligible employees 
will be covered under the EFBS. Sir, while we are doing, I am also 
conscious and the Board -level sub -Committee on HR was also 
conscious of the fact that there will be many such cases which may 
arise in future since the number of such cases is 6,557 as the next 
wards of these employees, who also died, may also apply for such 
scheme, but we have not taken any view about the re maining cases 
in various plants. We will see to them on case to case basis because 
we cannot have a policy decision. The Board has very categorically 
said that these will not be cited as precedents in future. Sir, with 
this recommendation of the Board -level Sub-Committee on HR, we 
are going ahead with recommendations to be placed in the ensuing 
meeting of the Board on 10.09.12. I will try and ensure that these 
recommendations of the Board -level Sub -Committee on HR are 
passed by the Board in the meeting. The n, we will be able to give 
the benefit of the scheme to those people". 
 

37 
 
45. The Secretary, Ministry of Steel during the same sitting of the 
Committee further added that, "The reason why SAIL is not able to 
agree to compassionate appointment and giving the employee family 
benefit scheme, one major reason for this is that SAIL has a 
number of employees which is much larger than its competitors. 
SAIL has no money coming in from the Government of India. They 
do not receive any grants, loans or any funds from th e Government 
of India. They are their own in the market. Steel is a deregulated 
sector. They have to compete in the market along with the private 
players. They do not have a specialised place or quota from the 
Government. They are equal in the market when compared to TATA 
Steel or JSW or any other steel company. The cost of manpower in 
SAIL is 18 per cent of the total cost of one tonne of steel in 
comparison to TATA Steel which is 12 per cent. TATA Steel is a very 
old steel plant and thereby they have many more labour. But if you 
look at the newer companies like JSW and JSPL, their percentage of 
cost of labour is two per cent to three per cent. What we are saying 
is that they are not able to give compassionate appointments 
because of these type of problems. But they will extend the 
Employees Family Benefit Scheme. The Employees Family Benefit 
Scheme basically is that employee at the time of death, within six 

38 
 
months of death has to deposit the amount which he or she would 
have got from the provident fund and t he gratuity payment. Since 
he has deposited that amount with the SAIL, SAIL would then pay 
the next heir who has deposited the amount, a monthly payment 
equal to the last drawn basic pay and DA of the deceased. Thereby, 
the amount which the family gets und er this scheme is far larger 
than he would get from the bank interest. A bank interest would 
give ten per cent or nine per cent or maybe 11 per cent in some 
cases. If we calculate in percentage terms, the monthly payment he 
will get will be much higher and  the employee is actually 
benefitted". 
 
46. During the  sitting of the Committee held on 12.12. 2012, 
Members were furious over such reply and attitude of SAIL in the 
matter.  Members particularly pointed out t hat huge amount of 
money was being spent by SAIL  on fighting cases against poor 
workers and going to the hon'ble Supreme Court  against the 
decision of High Court (s).  The Members were of the view that once 
the hon'ble Supreme Court has  already given a decision in a 
particular case  of compassionate appo intment, the same should 
have become precedent/guideline for SAIL in the similar  cases.  

39 
 
Members also vociferously objected to the frequent changes in the 
policies for compassionate employment and the arbitrary decision 
having taken  by the Plants under SAIL.  The Members were 
particularly critical of the Ministry's failure to review the policies 
adopted by SAIL, a PSU under its administrative control.  The 
Members were of the view that being the largest shareholder in the 
PSU, the Mi nistry should have exercised control over the policies 
adopted by SAIL and its Plants.  The Members criticized the 
representative of the Ministry on the Board of SAIL and termed 
them `mute-spectators'.  The Members were shocked to hear that 
the Plants did not have any codified policies and cases were being 
decided purely on the whims of the officers.  The Members 
unequivocally demanded that these 18 legal heirs be given jobs on 
compassionate grounds immediately thereby t otally reject ing the 
EFBS benefit which was being proposed by the CMD, SAIL. 
 
47. The SAIL in their post evidence reply stated that: 
 "(a) Extension of the above benefits under EFBS would be 
 made applicable to the above 15 cases only as a special and 
 one time dispensation and shall not be c ited as a precedent in 
 future either at RSP or any other plant/unit of SAIL. 
 (b) Before implementation of the above special dispensation 
 in respect of the 15 cases, proposal shall be taken before the 

40 
 
 Hon'ble Parliamentary Standing Committee for their 
 consideration and consent."  

41 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
48.  The Committee observe that as per the policy of 
compassionate employment implemented in Rourkela Steel 
Plant prior to 1992, the dependent to be eligible had to be 
matriculate, deceased should have served for at least 10 years 
before his /her separation, his /her last three ACR grading s 
should have been good and he /she must not have got a major 
punishment in last 5 years. The Committee find that a needy 
widow with a small child was denied employme nt since she 
was non -matriculate and hence ineligible according to the 
above criteria. The Committee fail to understand that how 
could the management of RSP be so callous and ignore the  
plight of a woman whose husband ha d died and deny her 
employment knowing very well that she has a small child and 
was not educated enough. Similarly, in two other cases that 
were brought before the Committee, the dependents were 
denied employment because both the employee s had not 
completed ten years of service. The Committe e feel that all 
the above criteria smack of non humanitarian approach of the 
RSP management towards its own employees .  The Committee 

42 
 
are of the firm view that a grieving family needs immediate 
relief and, therefore, should not be subjected to unnecessary 
rigorous and inhuman  technicalities. The views of the 
Committee also find endorsement in the latest guidelines 
issued by the SAIL wherein most of the faulty policies/rules 
have been amended.  
 
49.  The Committee note that a new policy was 
introduced by RSP  in 1992 which did not incorporate the 
provisions of earlier policy for compassionate appointments on 
the ground of death due to illness and then in 1995 when the 
trade unions approached the Management, death due to three 
diseases was made eligible for com passionate appointment 
w.e.f. 1.1.1996. The Committee are not able to comprehend 
the rationale behind the approach of the Management to only 
follow and agree with the trade union(s) without 
supplementing from their experience and research in the 
matter and the prevalent best practices . The Committee 
further find that in 1998, the inclusion of above three diseases 
was given retrospective effect from 1992. The Committee 
strongly feel that this action doubled the wrong already done 

43 
 
since it ratified the discrimination done in 1996  by giving it a 
retrospective effect.  
 
50.  The Committee would like to point to the case of one 
Shri D.N. Das, whose request for declaring him medically unfit 
and giving compassionate employment to his son was kept 
pending by the senior officials of the RSP till the change of the 
policy. The Committee feel that had the officials acted in time, 
the dependent would have got the job.  The Committee are of 
the view that this case should have been decided as per the 
policy prevalent at the time when the application for declaring 
the employee medically unfit was first received. The 
Committee also observe that the RSP relied on flimsy grounds 
for rejecting the claims for compassionate employment in 
other cases also. The Committee find that i nstead of acting 
positively now when the flaws in the policies of compassionate 
appointment of RSP are wide open and evident, the SAIL is 
spending its valuable resources in fighting against the poor 
dependents in Courts.  
 
 

44 
 
51.  The Committee note that alt hough SAIL was neither 
involved nor had any direct role in finalizing the extant 
policies regarding wages and allied matters but being a party to 
the litigations, had full knowledge of the cases being filed in 
the courts against the policies of the Rourkel a Steel Plant. The 
SAIL, however, chose to remain a mute spectator for a long 
time before issuing uniform guidelines for all its Plants in 
September, 2011 only after irreparable damage and injustice 
had already been done. The Committee are anguished to 
further find that to add to the woes caused by its inaction in 
remedying the policies, the SAIL went to hon'ble Supreme 
Court against the orders of Odisha High Court and filed an SLP 
in Shri Ajay Kumar Mitra's case which was eventually dismissed 
by the hon’bl e Supreme Court. The Committee express their 
displeasure that the SAIL moved Supreme Court in a case of 
compassionate appointment thereby acting in an apathetic and 
non-humanistic manner against a needy and deprived family.  
 
 

45 
 
52.  The Committee are surprised to observe that the 
SAIL has been lauding about the EFBS, introduced in 1989  
which offers nothing more than a monthly income scheme of 
the Banks. The Committee would like to refer to the 
observation of the hon'ble  Supreme Court in the case of Balbir 
Kaur vrs.SAIL  in which several f laws in the EFBS have been 
pointed out. The Court held that the scheme goes against the 
very purpose of the welfare schemes since it requires the 
amount of PF and Gratuity receivable at t he time of the death 
to be deposited with the company in order to get the monthly 
income. The Committee find that the SAIL has proposed that 
the benefit under the same EFBS may be given to these legal 
heirs as a special concession. The Committee fail to 
comprehend as to how  these dependents would , now, arrange 
the lumpsum amount they received at the time of the death of 
their family head. They further find it illogical, the extent to 
which the monthly income based on the basic pay that was 
drawn around twen ty years ago would be of help to the 
dependents now.  
 

46 
 
53.  The Committee are pained to note that the policies 
for compassionate employment followed by various plants 
under the SAIL over the years were not even documented till 
2011 when SAIL issued uniform  guidelines. The Committee are 
shocked to note that  the livelihood and future of so many 
families was being decided by various Steel Plants under SAIL 
without any sound basis by the managements in the absence of 
any definite, uniform and codified policies . The Committee are 
saddened to note that this rampant injustice was being 
perpetrated by a public sector plant of a ‘Maharatna’ company 
on the unfortunate families of its ex-employees.  
 
54.  The Committee note the apprehension of the SAIL 
that giving emp loyment to all these heirs now would open a 
Pandora’s Box since all the compassionate cases which have 
not come in open till now will also surface. After examination 
of all these cases in detail, they are of the considered opinion 
that since each plant of SAIL had a different sets of policies on 
compassionate employment, there is no question of similar 
cases cropping  up. Further, in RSP faulty policies were 
implemented without any accountability which resulted in 

47 
 
gross injustice to the 18 aggrieved families .  Since these 
families are still suffering because of the wrongs done to them, 
it is the responsibility of the Government to help them  and 
dispense justice irrespective of the number of persons 
involved. The Committee further observe that in the instant 
case of giving compassionate employment to the 18 legal heirs 
of Rourkela Steel Plant, SAIL has maintained that taking such 
a step would adversely affect the profits of the company. The 
Committee would like to remind a company which is owned by 
the Governme nt of a Welfare State should not be unduly 
concerned about profits and a compassionate approach 
towards its employees is always desirable. In this connection, 
attention is invited to the observation of hon'ble Supreme 
Court in the case of Balbir Kaur vrs. SAIL   
 "…..The employer being Steel Authority of India, 
 admittedly an  authority within the meaning of Article 12 
 has thus an  obligation to act in terms of the avowed 
 objective of social  and  economic justice as enshrined in 
 the Constitution but  has the  authority in the facts of 
 the matters under  consideration acted  like a model 
 and an ideal  employer…” 

48 
 
 
55.  The Committee  note that the Rourkela Steel 
Plant/SAIL like other PSUs are following the policy on 
`Corporate Social Responsibility' (CSR) whereunder they are 
requirred to spend a certain amount for the welfare activities 
and development of the peripheral areas.  The Committee, 
however, find it shocking that though RSP is  looking after its 
peripheral villages and community neighbours, it has chosen 
to turn a blind eye towards the families of its own employees. 
The Committee are unable to understand that when RSP can 
adopt 16 villages why  it has left 18 families to suffer for 
almost 20 years now. The Committee would like to remind RSP 
that charity begins at home which it has conveniently 
forgotten. 
 
56.  It is evident from the foregoing observations of the 
Committee that faulty policies fo r compassionate employment 
were implemented by the Rourkela Steel Plant resulted in gross 
injustice to the aggrieved families. The Steel Authority of India 
Limited (SAIL), too,  failed miserably in exerting any control on 

49 
 
the welfare policies implemen ted b y plants under its control  
and has not been able to offer anything concrete for the 
betterment of these heirs as yet.  
 
57.  The Committee are constrained to note that experts 
are not involved at any level viz Ministry/SAIL/ NJCS in the 
process of policy f ormulation in regard to wages and allied 
matters and recommend that the Ministry issue comprehensive 
set of guidelines for policy formulation  and review the existing 
policies in the light of these guidelines  in respect of PSUs 
under their purview. 
 
58.  The Committee also expect  PSUs to move higher 
Courts against the decision of lower Courts in cases relating to 
compassionate employment only after threadbare discussion 
with experts in human relations, labour and legal affairs. 
 
 

50 
 
59.  The Committee further desire that an inquiry may be  
instituted against the officers responsible for causing hardship 
by their inhumanitarian approach towards the poor heirs of 
their own employees and also for framing and implementing  
faulty policies in regard to compassionate e mployment viz. 
inclusion of death due to only three diseases  i.e. Failure of 
Kidneys,  Heart strokes and Cancer for being eligible and giving 
it retrospective effect later  on, linking the matter with length 
of service or ACR gradings of the deceased employ ees etc.  
They would like to be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter. 
   
60.  The Committee do not agree with the contention of 
the SAIL as observed by them elsewhere in this Report that 
giving compassionate employment to these heirs will adversely 
affect its profits. The Committee are of the firm view that since 
most of the heirs are in their mid or late 40s and early 50s , 
giving them jobs in the lowest rung in the RSP would not at all 
be any financial burden on SAIL. 
 

51 
 
61.   The Committee consider t he concession under EFBS 
as proposed by SAIL which involves lumpsum deposit of 
amount equivalent to Gratuity and Provident Fund and 
monthly payment based on the last drawn basic pay (pertaining 
to 1990s), a mockery of compassion and feel that nothing less 
than regular employment will ensure justice to hapless heirs 
suffering for last two decades due to sheer indifferent attitude 
of Management of RSP. 
 
62.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee while 
deprecating apathy and wrong policies of the Management of 
RSP/SAIL strongly recommend the Ministry of Steel to issue 
appropriate directions to give employment on compassionate 
ground to all the 18 affected rep resentationists within three 
months. 
 
New Delhi;                       DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
3  May, 2013                                                                CHAIRMAN,  
13  Vaisakha,1935 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-I 
GUIDELINES / RULES FRAMED FOR PROVIDING EMPLOYMENT ON COMPASSIONATE GROUND 
Prior to 22/11/1992 From 22/11/1992 to 30/08/2011 From 01/09/2011 
 Separation on account of the following 
reasons were considered for providing employment 
under compassionate ground :- 
 
1.  1st  Priority ;      
 
Death due to accident arising out of and in course of 
employment including extension to road accident 
cases. 
 
2.  2nd Priority  : 
 
Removal on account of permanent medical unfitness 
under Standing Orders. 
 
Discontinued w.e.f. 21 -11-92 on extension of 
Employees’ Family Benefit Scheme (EFBS) to cover 
medical unfit cases. 
 
3.  3rd Priority : 
 
Cases of natural death. 
 
Discontinued w.e.f. 07 -08-91 when EFBS was 
introduced. However after Hon’ble High Court’s 
order in Shanti Bhattacherjee case, such deaths 
between 07-08-91 and 21-11-92 were considered. 
 
 Separation on account of the following 
reasons were considered for providing 
employment under compassionate ground :- 
 
 
(a) Death due to accident arising out of and in 
course of employment including extension to 
road accident cases. 
 
(b) Sickness in shop floor shifted to IGH 
followed by death. 
 
(c) IOW cases leading to Permanent Total 
Disablement as provided for in NJCS 
Agreement of 1995. 
 
(d) Cases of IOW leading to loss of earning 
capacity of 50% and above but less than 
100% if found to be not re-deployable  
 
(e) Cases of death resulting from any of 3 
specific diseases – Cancer, Heart Stroke and 
Kidney Failure vide a Scheme circulated on 
01-01-1996.This scheme has been extended 
retrospectively through a Tripartite 
Agreement dated  18 -12-98 to cover such 
disease death cases from 22 -11-1992 up to   
31-12-1995. 
 
 
 
 
In order to bring uniformity in 
the matter of compassionate 
employment across all the 
Plants/Units of SAIL, the 
guidelines for dealing with 
compassionate employment 
cases was circulated vide letter 
No. PER/IR&W/2009 dtd 
28/08/2009 of ED (P&A), SAIL 
Corporate Office for 
implementation. These 
guidelines have been 
implemented at RSP 
w.e.f.01/09/2011. 
 
The cases covered for providing 
compassionate employment are 
:- 
  
1. Death/Permanent total 
Disablement due to accident 
arising out of and in course 
of employment including 
extension to road accident 
cases 
 
2. Sickness on duty and death 
with causal connection with 
work. 
 

53 
 
4.  4th Priority : 
 
Superannuation. 
Discontinued w.e.f. April’78, on account of objection 
raised by State Government. 
 
3. Medical Invalidation due to 
listed debilitating diseases. 
 

54 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Dependant as per 
representation and 
Relationship 
Name, PL. No., 
Designation, 
Department 
of Ex-Employee 
Date of 
Death/ 
Removal 
Cause of  Separation Remarks 
[1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] 
1. 
Jayanta Kumar 
Mohanty 
Son 
Late D.K.Mohanty, 
Pl.No. 24960,  
Ex- Helper, 
Repair Shop (Elec) 
15/12/1985 
Admitted for treatment 
of Head and Chest 
Injury and expired due 
to “Cardio Respiratory 
Failure” as per Death 
Certificate dated 
20/12/1985 
The request of Smt. Diptibala 
Mohanty, W/o Late D.K. Mohanty 
was considered for compassionate 
employment. However, she was not 
provided job as she was non-
matriculate.    
2. 
Pradeep Kumar 
Mohanty 
Son 
Late Udaynath 
Mohanty 
Pl. No.43741 
Ex-Khalasi 
SMS (Opn.) 
01/03/1986 
Admitted for treatment 
of “Carcinoma Bladder 
and expired due to 
Carcinoma Bladder 
with Secondary 
Metastasis” as per 
Death Certificate 
dated 03/03/1986 
The case was not considered as the 
ex-employee had not completed 
minimum 10 years of service in the 
Company as per rules. 
Sri Pradeep Kumar Mohanty has 
filed a writ petition bearing WP(C) 
No.10118/08 in the Hon’ble High 
Court of Orissa.  The case is 
presently subjudice. 
3. Arun Naik 
Son 
Late Khali Naik 
Pl. No. 4196, 
Ex-Operator, 
Plate Mill (O) 
20/02/1993 
Admitted for treatment 
of  Hypertension with 
I.C.Haemorrhage and 
expired on  due to 
“Cardio Respiratory 
Failure” as per Death 
Certificate dated 
23/03/1993 
This being a case of death, 
occurring after 21/11/1992 and 
cause of death being not coming 
under the three listed diseases as 
per Circular No.PL-RR-20(2) dated 
01/01/1996 and Tripartite Settlement 
dtd18/12/1998, was not covered for 
compassionate employment under 
Company’s guidelines. 
4. Pravat Kumar Mallick 
Son 
Late Jaydeb Mallick 
Pl. No.1110 
Ex-Sr. Operative 
Coal Chem. (Opn.) 
03/07/1993 
Admitted for treatment 
of  “P.T. with massive 
Haemoptysis with 
Diabetes and expired 
due to  Massive 
This being a case of death, 
occurring after 21/11/1992 and 
cause of death being not coming 
under the three listed diseases as 
per Circular No.PL-RR-20(2)dtd 

55 
 
Haemoptysis, P .T.B 
(endobronchial TB) 
with DM” as per Death 
Certificate dated 
15/07/1993 
01/01/1996 and Tripartite Settlement 
dtd18/12/1998, was not covered for 
compassionate employment under 
Company’s guidelines. 
 
Sri Pravat Kumar Mallick, S/o Late 
Jaydeb Mallich has filed a writ 
petition bearing WP (C) 
No.14938/2004 in the Hon’ble High 
Court of Orissa.  The case is 
presently subjudice. 
5. 
Susanta Kumar 
Mohanty 
Son 
 
Late Adwaita Charan 
Mohanty 
Pl. No.1573 
Ex-Sr. Operator 
(Cranes) 
Blast Furnaces (Opn.) 
22/07/1993 
Admitted for treatment 
of 
“Brain Stem, Injury, 
Diabetic Ketoacidosis 
Septicaemia” and 
expired as per Death 
Certificate (Duplicate) 
dated 26/10/1998 
This being a case of road accident, 
not coming under Injury on Duty 
(while coming to and going back 
from duty) was not covered for 
compassionate employment under 
Company’s guidelines. 
6. Anu Kiran Sanga 
Son 
Late Mahadeo Sanga 
Pl. No. 7834, 
Ex-Chargeman, 
Foundries (Opn.) 
22/09/1993 
Admitted for treatment 
of  “Diabetes Mellitus 
with Septicaemia” and 
expired on 22/09/1993 
as per Death 
Certificate dated 
25/11/1993 
This being a case of death, 
occurring after 21/11/1992 and 
cause of death being not coming 
under the three listed diseases as 
per Circular No.PL-RR-20(2) dated 
01/01/1996 and Tripartite Settlement 
dtd18/12/1998, was not covered for 
compassionate employment under 
Company’s guidelines. 
7. Anil Tirkey 
Son 
Late Sitaram Tirkey 
Pl. No. 55031, 
Ex-Service Assistant 
Canteen Deptt. 
03/11/1993 
Admitted for treatment 
of “Diabetic 
Ketoacidosis with CVA 
and expired due to the 
same with Cardio 
Respiratory failure” as 
per Death Certificate 
dated 16/11/1993 
This being a case of death, 
occurring after 21/11/1992 and 
cause of death being not coming 
under the three listed diseases as 
per Circular No.PL-RR-20(2) dtd. 
01/01/1996 and Tripartite Settlement 
dtd18/12/1998, was not covered for 
compassionate employment under 
Company’s guidelines. 
8. Rashmi Ranjan 
Panda 
Late Bhaskar Panda 
Pl. No. 8119, 13/08/1994 Found “Permanently 
Medically Unfit” under 
There is no provision to provide 
compassionate employment in case 

56 
 
Son Ex-Jr. Refractpry 
Inspector 
Refractories. 
Clause 23 of S.O. of Permanent Medical Unfit under 
Clause-23 of Standing Order after 
21/11/1992. 
 
Smt. Swarna Prabha Panda, W/o Sri 
Bhaskar Panda has filed a writ 
petition bearing WP (C) 
No.4483/2005 in the Hon’ble High 
Court of Orissa.  The case is 
presently subjudice. 
9. Ashok Kumar Rout 
Son 
Late Khali Rout 
Pl. No.9220 
Ex-
Techn/Elect./Elec.Fitter 
SMS (Elect.) 
23/10/1994 
Admitted for treatment 
of 
Head Injury with 
multiple injuries with 
fracture ribs and 
expired due to the 
same and shock as 
per Death Certificate 
dated 28/10/1994. 
This being a case of death, 
occurring after 21/11/1992 and 
cause of death being not coming 
under the three listed diseases as 
per Circular No.PL-RR-20(2) dated 
01/01/1996 and Tripartite Settlement 
dtd18/12/1998, was not covered for 
compassionate employment under 
Company’s guidelines. 
10. Swapan Das 
Son 
Late D.N.Das 
Pl. No.6291 
Ex-SSW 
Communication Engg. 
31/10/1994 
Found “Permanently 
Medically Unfit” under 
Clause 23 of S.O. 
There is no provision to provide 
compassionate employment in case 
of Permanent Medical Unfit under 
Clause-23 of Standing Order after 
21/11/1992. 
 
Sri Swapan Kumar Das, S/o D.N. 
Das has filed a writ petition bearing 
OJC No.7704/95 in the Hon’ble High 
Court of Orissa.  The case is 
presently subjudice. 
11. Bhima Moharana 
Son 
Late Banchhanidhi 
Maharana 
Pl. No. 9236, 
Ex-Technician, 
T & RM 
12/12/1994 
Admitted for treatment 
of  Bronchial Asthma 
with chronic 
Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease 
with Corpulmonale 
and expired due to 
“Cardio Respiratory 
Failure” as per Death 
This being a case of death, 
occurring after 21/11/1992 and 
cause of death being not coming 
under the three listed diseases as 
per Circular No.PL-RR-20(2) dated 
01/01/1996 and Tripartite Settlement 
dtd18/12/1998, was not covered for 
compassionate employment under 
Company’s guidelines. 

57 
 
Certificate dated 
27/12/1994 
12. Pramod Kumar Ray 
Son 
Late N. K. Ray 
Pl. No. 20849, 
Ex-Office Attendant 
CO & CCD (Mech.) 
19/12/1994 
Brought Dead to IGH  
(may be due to 
Hypertension or IHD 
as indicated in M.T. 
Book) as per Death 
Certificate dated 
05/01/1995 
This being a case of death, 
occurring after 21/11/1992 and 
cause of death being not coming 
under the three listed diseases as 
per Circular No.PL-RR-20(2) dated 
01/01/1996, was not covered for 
compassionate employment under 
Company’s guidelines. 
13. Sandip Singh 
Son 
Late Samuel Singh 
Pl. No. 62928, 
Ex-Techn-cum-Painter 
T.E (Elect.) 
16/08/1995 
Admitted for treatment 
of  Diabetic Mellitus, 
Hyper Tension with 
Hapatic 
Encephalopathy and 
expired due to Hapatic 
Encephalopathy as 
per Death Certificate 
dated 21/08/1995 
This being a case of death, 
occurring after 21/11/1992 and 
cause of death being not coming 
under the three listed diseases as 
per Circular No.PL-RR-20(2) dated 
01/01/1996 and Tripartite Settlement 
dtd18/12/1998, was not covered for 
compassionate employment under 
Company’s guidelines. 
 
Smt. Rupabati Singh, W/o. Late 
Samuel Singh has filed a writ 
petition bearing 
OJC No.13999/96 in Hon’ble High 
Court of Orissa.  The case is 
presently subjudice. 
14. Ramesh Biswakarma 
Son 
Late Kailash Mistry 
Pl. No. 12048, 
Ex-Sr. Technician, 
R.S. (Mech.) 
06/06/1996 
Admitted for treatment 
of  “Cirrhosis of Liver 
with Hepatic Coma” 
and expired as per 
Death Certificate 
dated 28/06/1996 
This being a case of death, 
occurring after 21/11/1992 and 
cause of death being not coming 
under the three listed diseases as 
per Circular No.PL-RR-20(2) dated 
01/01/1996, was not covered for 
compassionate employment under 
Company’s guidelines. 
15. Saroj Sahoo 
Son 
Late Alekha Mohan 
Sahoo 
Pl.No.8944 
Ex-Sr. Loco Operator 
24/01/1997 
Admitted for treatment 
of  “Ischemic Cardio 
Myopathy & old ASMI 
and expired due to 
This being a case of death, 
occurring after 21/11/1992 and the 
case being not coming under the 
purview of Circular No.PL-RR-20(2) 

58 
 
T&RM Ischemic Cardio 
Myopathy” 
as per Death 
Certificate 
dated 11/02/1997  
dtd. 01/01/1996, was not covered for 
compassionate employment under 
Company’s guidelines. 
 
Smt. Monorama Sahoo, W/o. Late 
A.M. Sahoo has filed a writ petition 
bearing OJC No. 5943/01 in the 
Hon’ble High Court of Orissa.  The 
case is presently subjudice.  
16. Nausad Ahmed 
Son 
Late Jahangir Ansari 
Pl.No.19470 
Ex-Operator (Cranes) 
SPP (Opn.) 
24/01/1998 
Death due to 
“Multiorgan 
Dysfunction & 
Caronary Artery 
Disease” as per Death 
Certificate dated 
24/01/1998  of B. M. 
Birla Heart Research 
Centre 
This being a case of death, 
occurring after 21/11/1992 and the 
case being not coming under the 
purview of Circular No.PL-RR-20(2) 
dated 01/01/1996, was not covered 
for compassionate employment 
under Company’s guidelines. 
 
Smt. Fatima Khatoon, W/o. Late J. 
Ansari has filed a writ petition 
bearing OJC No. 11954/98 in the 
Hon’ble High Court of Orissa.  The 
case is presently subjudice.  
 
17. Mrutunjoy Bose 
Son 
Late Atul Ch. Bose 
Pl. No. 16895, 
Ex- Store Keeper,  
Repair Shop (Elect.) 
22/08/1998 
Admitted for treatment 
of  “Bilateral 
Pneumonia with  
Septic Shock” and 
expired as per Death 
Certificate dated 
19/11/1998 
This being a case of death, 
occurring after 21/11/1992 and the 
case being not coming under the 
purview of Circular No.PL-RR-20(2) 
dated 01/01/1996, was not covered 
for compassionate employment 
under Company’s guidelines. 
 
Smt. Gita Bose, W/o. Late Atul Ch. 
Bose has filed a writ petition bearing 
OJC No. 1747/2000 in the Hon’ble 
High Court of Orissa.  The case is 
presently subjudice.  
18 Mahendra Kumar 
Sahoo 
Late R.N. Sahoo 
Pl.No. 24207 24/09/1974 Admitted on 
22/09/1974 for 
The case was not considered for 
employment, as Late R.N. Sahoo 

59 
 
Son Ex- Khalasi 
ERWPP 
treatment of Delirium 
Tremens and expired 
on 24/09/1974 as per 
Death Certificate 
dated 29/10/1974 
had not completed 10 years of 
service. 
 
 
  

 
ANNEXURE-III 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 30TH JANUARY, 2012.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee 
Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to have (i) further 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry  of Information and 
Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati Broadcasting Corporation on 
regularization of casual workers/Artists of Radio Kashmir, CBS Radio 
Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar; and (ii) evidence of the 
representatives of Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) and Rourkela Steel 
Plant on the issue of rehabilitation of legal heirs of deceased employees 
of Rourkela Steel Plant. 
         PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.     Dr. Virendra Kumar 
3.     Shri Narahari Mahto 
4.     Shri Hari Manjhi  
5.     Ms. Mausam Noor 
6.     Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
  
  RAJYA SABHA  
7. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
8. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
9. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
10. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 

61 
 
11. Shri Rajaram 
12. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  SECRETARIAT 
        1. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
2. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Under Secretary 
 
2.  XX    XX    XX 
 
3.  XX    XX    XX 
4.  XX    XX    XX 
5. The Committee, thereafter, called in the officials of the Steel 
Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) and Rourkela Steel Plant  on the issu e of 
rehabilitation of legal heirs of deceased employees of  Rourkela Steel 
Plant.  The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) was also present 
during the sitting 
6. The following officials of the Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) and 
Rourkela Steel Plant were present:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer 
Designation 
1. Shri B.B. Singh Director (Personnel), SAIL 
2. Shri G. S. Prasad CEO, Rourkela Steel Plant 
3. Shri Anutosh Maitra ED, Chairman's office, SAIL 

62 
 
4. Shri D. Basu ED (P&A), Rourkela Steel Plant 
5. Shri Atul Srivastava GM(Personnel), SAIL 
 
7. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Steel Authority 
of India Ltd. (SAIL) and Rourkela Steel Plant .  First of all, the Chairman 
deprecated the casual attitude of the CEO, Rourkela Steel Plant towards 
the parliamentary work as he took unduly and time in furnishing the 
requisite information to the Committee.  The Chairman also lamented 
the fact that Chairman, SAIL who was supposed to be present during 
the sitting sought exemption without giving s pecific reasons for the 
same.  Thereafter, the officials of SAIL and Rourkela Steel Plant briefed 
the Committee on the issue of rehabilitation of legal heirs of deceased 
employees of  Rourkela Steel Plant .  The Members raised the following 
issues:- 
(i) Reasons for discontinuation of the compassionate appointment 
scheme of 1992. 
(ii) Introduction of Employees Family Benefit Scheme. 
(iii) Implementation of Uniform policy for compassionate appointments 
in all the Steel Plants. 

63 
 
(iv) Decision of the Supreme Court  in Balbir Kaur case & A. K. Mitra 
case regarding appointment on compassionate ground. 
(v) Action taken by the management of Rourkela Steel Plant for 
compassionate appointment of legal heirs of 18 deceased 
employees who had submitted memoranda to the Committee. 
(vi) Policy of compassionate appointment in other Public Sector 
Undertakings. 
8. The officials of the Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) and 
Rourkela Steel Plant  Ministry briefed the Committee on the issues 
raised by the members. 
9. A list of points was also handed to the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), Rourkela for furnishing written replies. 
10. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of the 
organisation for free and frank replies to the queries of the Members on 
the subject and directed the officials of the organisation  to furnish 
written replies to the queries raised by the Members which could not be 
replied during the meeting,  within a fortnight  along with the replies to 
the List of Points handed over to them.  As th e issues raised by the 
Members on the subject remained inconclusive, the Committee decided 

64 
 
to all again the representatives of Ministry of Steel, SAIL and Rourkela 
Steel Plant. 
11. A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
__________________________________________________________________ 
XX Do not pertain to this report. 
 
  

65 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 2ND MAY, 2012.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in the  Committee 
Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to take  further evidence 
of the representatives of the Ministry of Steel, Steel Authority of India 
and Rourkela Steel Plant on the issue of rehabilitation of legal heirs of 
deceased employees of Rourkela Steel Plant. 
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Dr. Virendra Kumar 
     3.  Shri Jayaram Pangi 
      4.  Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
    5.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
    6.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA  
            7.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
      8.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
      9.  Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
     10. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
   SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

66 
 
Witnesses 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF STEEL, SAIL AND ROURKELA 
STEEL PLANT 
Sl. No. Name of the Officer   Designation 
 
1. Shri D.R.S. Chaudhary Secretary  (Steel) 
2. Shri Upendra Prasad Singh Joint Secretary (Ministry of 
Steel) 
3. Smt. Indrani Kaushal  Director 
4. Shri C.S. Verma Chairman (SAIL) 
5. Shri H.S. Pati Director (SAIL) 
6. Shri G.S. Prasad CEO, Rourkela Steel Plant 
7. Shri B. Dhal Executive Director (SAIL) 
8. Shri D. Basu Executive Director (RSP, SAIL) 
9. Shri Atul Srivastava GM, SAIL 
10. Shri S.K. Nayak DGM, RSP, SAIL 
11. Shri Samir Swarup AGM, SAIL 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri D.R.S. Chaudhary , 
Secretary, Ministry of Steel, Shri C.S. Verma, Chairman, SAIL and  Shri 
G.S. Prasad , CEO, Rourkela Steel Plant and other officials of the 
Ministry of Steel, SAIL and Rourkela Steel Plant and invited their 
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 (1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker.   

67 
 
3. The Secretary , Ministry of Steel apprised the Committee of the 
policy of SAIL regarding compassionate appointments followed by 
various Steel Plants under SAIL.  He further submitted that the new 
policy evolved by the SAIL effective from 1.9.2011 was more liberal 
towards its employees as compared to the different policies pursued by 
different Plants in the matter of compassionate employment.  The CMD, 
SAIL while conceding that prior to 1.9.2011 different Plants were having 
different policies which kept on changing with the changing  
requirements but expressed constraints in giving employment on 
compassionate ground to a few number of employees as they, statedly, 
did not satisfy the eligibility criteria despite their full sympathy.  On 
being asked to explain the eligibility criteria, the representative 
submitted that compassionate employment is given on three grounds, 
viz., (a) death/permanent total disablement due to accident arising out 
of and in course of employment including extension to road accident 
cases (b) sickness on duty and  death with casual connection with work 
and (c) medical invalidation due to listed debilitating diseases.   The 
representative also submitted that if a deceased employee had earned 
bad Confidential Report, his dependents are debarred from 
compassionate appointment.   
 
4. The Members, thereafter, raised various issues and sought specific 
clarifications on the issue of rehabilitation of legal heirs of deceased 
employees of Rourkela Steel Plant.   The Members expressed their 
unhappiness over;    

68 
 
(i) the insensi tive attitude of management of Rourkela Steel Plant 
 towards the plight of the legal heirs of the deceased employees; 
(ii) the inconsistent policies followed by various plants of SAIL  over 
 the years and constrictive nature of the new policy of  SAIL 
which come into force w.e.f. 1.9.2011; 
(iii) the denial of relief to the legal heirs even after the courts have 
 ruled against Rourkela Steel Plant in various cases; 
(iv) the lopsided control by SAIL over its Plants in  respect of their 
 policy of compassionate appointments; and 
(v) the rationale for changes made by Rourkela Steel Plant in 
 policy for compassionate appointments arbitrarily over the 
 years.  
(vi) withholding of the Provident Fund and Gratuity of the  deceased 
till his date of retirement had he lived. 
 
5. There was unanimous view in the Committee that the guidelines 
were highly constrictive and devoid of compassion that is expected from 
an organ of the State like the SAIL and its constituent Steel Plants.  The 
Members were of the considered view t hat the compassionate 
employment policy could not be frozen given the admission of the 
representative of Ministry of Steel and SAIL that the policy had to be 
changed according to requirement in the past.  The Committee also 
deplored the provisions relating  to bad CR  earned by deceased 

69 
 
employee and the limited causes of death.  The Members were 
unanimous and emphatic in their assertion that a death in harness of 
an employee for whatever reason and regardless of the track record of 
his service should be cons trued as a valid ground for compassionate 
employment since compassion is intended to mitigate the financial 
distress of the family of the deceased. 
6. The Committee, after sustained examination of the witnesses and 
the documents made available to them, resolved   unanimously that one 
time relaxation be given for employment to the legal heirs of 18 
deceased employees and if necessary, the CMD, SAIL may invoke his 
overriding power in view of the assurance given by the then Minister for 
Steel to give employmen t to them on compassionate ground. The 
Chairman thereupon directed that the Chairman, SAIL revisit the issue 
and report back to the Committee within a month. 
7. The CMD, SAIL, thereupon, assured the Members that he would 
have a relook at these cases with a view to providing some relief to the 
legal heirs of the deceased in consultation with the Board and would 
and sought two months for necessary corrective measures and to report 
back to the Committee.  
8. The Chairman conceded the request of the Chairman, SAIL and 
thanked the Secretary and the other witnesses for giving valuable 
information and full cooperation to the Committee on the subject. 
 
 

70 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record]. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

71 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
 
The Committee sat on 23 August, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 
hrs. in the  Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
   2.  Dr. Virendra Kumar 
   3.  Shri Jayaram Pangi 
   4.  Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
   5.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure   
 
   RAJYA SABHA  
        6.         Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
     7.  Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
         8.  Dr. E.M.Sudarsana Natchiappan 
            9.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
   10.  Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
   
  SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

72 
 
 
 
Witnesses 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF STEEL, SAIL AND  
ROURKELA STEEL PLANT 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer   Designation 
1. 
 
Shri D.R.S. Chaudhary Secretary, Steel 
2. 
 
Shri Upendra Prasad Singh Joint Secretary 
3. 
 
Smt. Indrani Kaushal Director 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAIL) 
4. Shri C.S. Verma Chairman, SAIL 
 
5. Shri H.S. Pati Director (Personnel), SAIL 
 
6. Shri B. Dhal  Executive Director (P&A), 
SAIL 
 
ROURKELA STEEL PLANT 
7. Shri G.S. Prasad CEO,  Rourkela Steel Plant 
8 Shri D. Basu Executive Director (P&A), 
Rourkela Steel Plant 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of 
Steel, Chairman, SAIL and CEO, Rourkela Steel Plant and other officials 
of the Ministry of Steel, SAIL and Rourkela Steel Plant and invited their 
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 (1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker.   

73 
 
3. The Secretary , Ministry of Steel apprised the Committee of the 
efforts made by SAIL since the last sitting of the Committee to provide 
relief to the 18 legal heirs in question.  The Committee were informed 
that a sub-Committee of the Board of SAIL has recommended that these 
legal heirs be given benefit under EPBS and that the SAIL Board will 
consider the same at its next sitting to be held on 7th September, 2012.  
The CMD, SAIL stated that there are 6557 such cases where legal heirs 
have not opte d for the EFBS within 6 months after the death of the 
employees. Further, the sub -Committee has proposed the EFBS be 
extended to the legal heirs as a special case and that a final decision 
would be taken in the Board meeting to be held on 7th September, 
2012. 
4. The Members expressed their reservation on the EFBS and raised 
the issue of fallout of discriminatory policies of Rourkela Steel Plant on 
the families of the deceased employees.  The witnesses responded to the 
queries raised by the Members.   
5. The Committee reiterated unanimously that one time relaxation be 
given to the legal heirs of 18 deceased employees  by giving them 
employment on compassionate ground. The Committee thereupon 
asked the Chairman, SAIL to revisit the issue with a humanitarian 
approach and report back to the Committee. 
6. The Chairman then thanked the Secretary and the other witnesses 
for giving valuable information and full cooperation to the Committee on 
the subject. 

74 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew.) 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record]. 
 
 
 
7.  XX    XX    XX 
8.  XX    XX    XX 
9.  XX    XX    XX 
      
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
XX Do not pertain to this report. 
 
  

75 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 12th December, 2012 from 1530 hrs. to 
1700 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
   MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
3. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
4. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
5. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
6. Shri Makhan Singh Solanki 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
8. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
9. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
10. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
11. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
12. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
13. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
 
 
 
 

76 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary  
 2.  Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
  3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
  
Witnesses 
       REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF STEEL, SAIL AND 
ROURKELA STEEL PLANT 
S Sl.No.    Name of the Officer    Designation 
1. Shri D.R.S. Chaudhary Secretary 
2. Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan AS & FA 
3. Shri Upendra Prasad Singh JS 
4. Shri C.S. Verma Chairman, SAIL 
5. Shri G.S. Prasad CEO, RSP 
6. Shri B. Dhal ED, SAIL 
7. Shri D. Basu ED, SAIL 
8. Shri H.S. Pati Director, SAIL 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of 
Steel, Chairman, SAIL and CEO, Rourkela Steel Plant and other officials 
of the Ministry of Steel, SAIL and Rourkela Steel Plant and invited their 
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 (1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker.   

77 
 
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Steel and CMD, SAIL apprised the 
Committee of the efforts made by SAIL since the last sitting of the 
Committee to provide relief to the 18 legal heirs of Rourkela Steel Plant.  
The Committee were informed that the recom mendation of the Sub -
Committee of the Board of SAIL that these legal heirs be given benefit 
under EFBS was placed before the SAIL Board.  The SAIL Board 
considered the issue and has sought further information relating to the 
financial implications of such relaxation to be given in all such cases.  
4. The Members , however, expressed their reservation on extending 
Employees Family Benefit Scheme to the 18 legal heirs and severely 
criticized Rourkela Steel Plant/SAIL for choosing death due to only 
three diseas es eligible for compassionate appointment. The witnesses 
responded to the queries raised by the Members.   
5. The Committee reiterated unanimously that the legal heirs of 18 
deceased employees be given employment on compassionate ground on 
the lines of the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the earlier cases.   
6. The Chairman then thanked the Secretary and the other witnesses 
for giving valuable information and full cooperation to the Committee on 
the subject. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

78 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 3 rd May, 2013 from 0930 hrs. to 1050 hrs. 
in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
  PRESENT 
  Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   2.  Dr. Virendra Kumar 
   3.  Shri Narahari Mahato 
   4.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
   5.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
   6.  Shri Ashok Argal 
   7.  Dr. Manda Jagannath 
   8.  Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
       9.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
          10.  Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot  
 
SECRETARIAT 
        1. Shri A.K Singh    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy   - Director 
3. Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
3.  Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Dr. Manda Jagannath  a 
new Member to the Committee. The Chairman then apprised the 
Members regarding the Memorandum circulated to them for rectifying 
the evidence taken by the previous Committee on the subject ‘Welfare of 

79 
 
legal heirs of deceased workers of Rourkela Steel Plan t- A case study’ 
and also to consider the draft report thereon for adoption. 
 The Chairman thereafter invited attention of the Members towards 
Committee’s visit to Mau in January, 2013 where they saw the pathetic 
conditions of weavers in the area and also the absence of any welfare 
schemes or social security for those weavers. The Chairman proposed 
that ‘Welfare of small weavers of Mau and adjoining areas- A case study’ 
as a subject, may be selected for examination during the current term of 
the Committee. 
3. The Members agreed. 
4. The Committee then took up the draft Report on ‘Welfare of legal 
heirs of deceased workers of Rourkela Steel Plant – A case study’, for 
consideration. After detailed deliberations, the Committee adopted the 
draft Report with minor modifications. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
Report in view of the consequential changes arising out of factual 
verification and to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 XX   XX   XX  XX 
 (A copy of the verbatim proceeding of the sitting was kept for record.) 
The Committee then adjourned 
__________________________________________________________________ 
XX Do not pertain to this report. 