 
22 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
THE MINES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011  
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
    NEW DELHI 
                December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 
 


TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
THE MINES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2011    
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2011  
             
 
 
          LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
        NEW DELHI 
                December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
2. Shri Raj Babbar 
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
4. Shri Virendra Kumar 
         5. Shri Pakauri Lal 
6. Shri Narahari Mahato 
         7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Ms. Mausam Noor 
10. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
14. Ms. J. Shantha 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
*16. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
     21. Vacant 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
25. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        28. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
        29. Shri Rajaram 
        30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri G. N. Ratanpuri 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*   Nominated w.e.f 25th November, 2011. 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
                
1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director  
3.    Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Under Secretary 
     
   
   
   
 
  

CONTENTS 
PAGE (S) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE    (iii)  
    
INTRODUCTION        (v)   
 
REPORT        
 Chapter-I           
 Chapter-II          
 Observations/Recommendations      
 
ANNEXURES 
 (i) The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011. 
 (ii) Minutes  of  the sittings  of   the  Standing  Committee   
  on Labour held  on *28.4.2011, *11.5.2011, *19.5.2011,  
  *30.5.2011 and 14.12.11.    
   
 
 
 
   
 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Will be appended at the time of printing  

INTRODUCTION 
                     
          I,  the  Chairman, Standing Committee on Labour (2011 -12), 
having been authorized by t he Committee do present this Twenty 
Second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on `The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 
2011'.  
2.  The Government  introduced  "The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 
2011 in the Rajya Sabha on 23.03.2011 which was referred to the 
Committee on 01 April, 2011 by the Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 
331E(b) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha for examination and report. 
  
3. In the process of examination of the Bill, the Committee 
invited the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment on 28th April, 2011 and heard their views. The 
Committee also sought written information on various clauses of 
the Bill from the Ministry.  
 
4. The Committee invited the views of major Central Trade 
Unions on the Bill through Memorandum.  In  response AITUC, 
INTUC and BMS furnished their comments/suggestions on various 
clauses of the Bill.  On 11, 19 and 30 May, 2011, the 
representatives of Trade Unions also deposed before the Committee 
to share their views and gave their suggestions on the pr oposed 
amendments in the Bill. The Committee also heard the views of the 

representatives of CII on 19th May, 2011on the proposed 
amendments proposed by the Government.  
 
5. The Committee also undertook an on -the-spot study visit to 
Raipur, Ahmedabad , Ranchi and Dhanbad from 04.06.2011 to 
10.06.2011  to hear the views of various mine workers, mine owners 
and trade unions on the amendments proposed in the Bill. 
 
6. The Committee further invited the views/suggestions on the 
Bill from individuals/experts /institutions interested in the Bill 
through a Press Communiqué . 
 
7. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their 
sitting held 14th December,  2011. 
 
8. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of 
the Ministry of Labour and E mployment and representatives of 
Trade Unions for tendering evidence before the Committee and 
furnishing  detailed written notes/suggestions on the amending 
Bill. 
 
  
 

9. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep 
sense of appreciation of t he commitment, dedication and valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
10. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been prin ted in thick type 
in the body of the Report.                   
  
 
New Delhi;                          HEMANAND BISWAL 
 14th December, 2011                                              CHAIRMAN  
23  Agrahayana,1933(Saka)      STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
 
  

REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
  The Mines Act, 1952 is the principal Act which lays down 
safety, health and welfare measures for workers employed in mines 
and oilfields extending to the whole of India including up  to its 
territorial waters.  The first Mines Act was enacted in 1901 and 
came into force on 22nd March, 1901.   The Act was re -enacted in 
1952 and was brought into force from 1st July, 1952  and last 
amended in 1983.  Since several development took place giving rise 
to new safety and health risk s in work places, the Government 
introduced the Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011 in the Rajya Sabha 
on 23rd March, 2011. 
 
1.2  The objects and reasons of `The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 
2011'  are as follows:- 
(i) To keep pace with the technological, social and 
environmental changes at workplaces in the mining 
sector and thereby attempting to effectively manage the 
safety and health risk to the work persons employed in 
these sectors in light of several developments in the area 
of technology, scale of operation, workin g environment 
and work practices in coal, non-coal and oil sector. 
 

 
 
(ii) To extend the jurisdiction of the Mines Act beyond 12 
nautical miles i.e. upto Exclusive Economic Zone and 
Maritime Zone of India to cover safety aspect in offshore 
mining. 
 
 (iii) To  prevent  evasion  of  responsibility and any confusion  
  regarding  management hierarchy,  the term  `Agent'  is  
  proposed to be  amended  whereby `Agent' means every  
  person being superior to the manager.  
 
(iv) To ensure that the `Owner' is some one in -charge of 
 decision making in the corporate hierarchy, the proposed 
 definition of `Owner' means every person or authority 
 having ultimate control over the affairs of the mines and 
 specifies such person (viz. Chief Executive Officer or 
 Managing D irector) or authority under all possible 
 circumstances in the present scenario. 
 
 (v) To provide that every person who contracts for the   
  services or operations in the mines, and includes a   
  contractor and sub-contractor, shall also be the owner.   

 (vi) To revise the penalty provisions as they have never been  
  revised since 1952 when the Act came into force. 
 
1.3  The salient features of `The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 
2011' are as follows:- 
 
Amendment to the Long Title 
 The Bill seeks to amend the ― Long Title‖ of the Act so as to  
reflect therein the regulation of conditions of work and welfare 
of persons employed in mines. 
 
Amendment to Section 1 
 To clarify that the applicability of the Act to whole of India 
includes upto  the Exclusive Economic Zone and Maritime 
Zones of India as defined under the Territorial Waters, 
Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other 
Maritime Zones Act, 1976. 
 
Amendment to Section 2 
 To clarify the superiority of `agent' over `manager' for ensuring 
effective hierarchical control on mining operations in a multi -
disciplinary work environment.  

 
 The Bill seeks to define ―foreign company‖ with reference to 
the Companies Act, 1956. 
 
 The Bill seeks to substitute the definition of  ―owner‖ so as to 
provide that a person or authority having ultimate control over 
the affairs of the mine be the owner and specifically provide for 
the person who would be the owner in the case of (i) company 
incorporated in India; (ii) foreign company; (iii) firm and ot her 
association of persons.  
 
Amendment to Section 18 (Insertion of Section 18A)  
 To make provisions for appointment of sufficient number of 
―officials‖ having prescribed qualifications for the effective 
supervision of all operations, equipment, installations and sets 
to ensure compliance of the provisions of the Act and rules. 
 
Amendment to Section 58 
 To amend the Mines Act, 1952, inter alia , to give power to 
Central Government to make rules in respect of section- 18A. 
 
 
 

 
Amendment to Section 63 
 To increase the penalties ‗in case of obstruction of Chief 
Inspector or an Inspector in the discharge of his duties under 
section 63, from ―five hundred rupees‖ to ―fifty thousand 
rupees‖. 
 
Amendment to Section 64 
 To amend the Mines Act, 1952, inter alia  to increase the 
penalties in case of falsification of records under section 64, 
from ―one thousand rupees‖ to ―one lakh rupees‖.  
 
Amendment to Section 65 
 To increase the penalties in case of using false certificate of 
fitness under section 65, from ―two hundred rupees‖ to 
―twenty thousand rupees‖. 
 
Amendment to Section 66 
 To increase the penalties in case of omission to furnish plans, 
etc. under section 66, from ―one thousand rupees‖ to ―one 
lakh rupees‖. 
 

 
Amendment to Section 67 
 To increase the penalties in case of contravention of provisions 
regarding employment of labour under section 67, from ―one 
thousand rupees‖ to ―one lakh rupees‖. 
 
Amendment to Section 68 
 To increase the penalties in case of employment of persons 
below eighteen years of age under  section 68, from ―five 
hundred rupees‖ to ―fifty thousand rupees‖. 
 
Amendment to Section 69 
 To increase the penalties in case of failure to appoint a 
manager of mines, in contravention of the provisions of section 
17, under section 69, from ―three months,  or with fine which 
may extend to two thousand and five hundred rupees‖ to ―one 
year, or with fine which may extend to two lakh and fifty 
thousand rupees‖. 
 
Amendment to Section 70 
 To increase the penalties in case of failure to give notice of 
accident, in contravention of the provisions of sub -section (1) 

of section 23, under section 70, from five hundred rupees‖ to 
―fifty thousand rupees‖. 
 
Amendment to Section 72A 
 To increase the penalties  in case of contravention of certain 
regulations under section 72A, from, ―six months, or with fine 
which may extend to two thousand rupees‖ to ―one year, or 
with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees‖. 
Amendment to Section 72B 
 To increase the penalties in case of contravention of the any 
order issued under section 22 relating to powers of inspectors 
when causes of danger not expressly provided against exist or 
when employment of persons is dangerous, under section 72B, 
from ―two years imprisonment and fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees to ―five years imprisonment and fine 
which may extend to five lakh rupees‖. 
 
Amendment to Section 72C 
 Seeks to increase the penalties provided in section 72C of the 
Act for contravention of law with dangerous results. 
 
 
 

 
Amendment to Section 73 
 Seeks to increase the penalties provided in section 73 of the 
Act for contravention of any provision of the Act or of any rule 
or regulation or bye -law or of any order made thereunder of 
which no penalty is specified in the Act. 
 
Amendment to Section 74 
 Seeks to insert a new section 74A so as to shift the burden of 
proof upon the person who is being prosecuted or proceeded 
against to prove that it was not reasonably practical, or, all 
practical meas ures to satisfy the safety requirements were 
taken. 
 
Amendment to Section 76 
 Seeks to amend section 76 so as to enlarge the scope to cover 
the foreign companies and to take away the ―manager‖ out of 
the scope of the said section. 
 Seeks to insert a new sect ion 76A to provide that the person 
who has actual ultimate control over the affairs of the mines 
would continue to be liable for the contravention of the 
provisions of the Act or of any rule or regulation or by -law or 
order made there under. 

CHAPTER II 
 
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE ANALYSIS OF 'THE MINES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2011' 
 
Amendment to Long Title 
2.1  In the Mines Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in the long title, for the words ―regulation of labour  
and safety in mines‖, the words ―regulation of conditions of work 
and welfare of persons employed in mines and safety in mines and 
to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto‖ 
shall be substituted. 
 
2.2  The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
"The Act does not regulate all aspects of labour sector. It 
basically regulates safety, health and welfare aspects of the 
persons employed in mines and hence such changes are 
proposed in the preamble." 
 
 

2.3  When asked regarding substituting the word `Safety' with 
the words `Occupati onal Safety and Health' in the L ong Title, the 
Ministry replied that: 
 "The proposed amendment in the Long Title of the Act 
 `Regulation of conditions of work and welfare of  persons 
 employed in mines and safety in mines and to provide for 
 matters connect ed therewith or incidental thereto' was 
 examined in detail during framing of the amendment.  All the 
 aspects of safety, health and welfare have been considered 
 not only for the persons employed in mines but also of the 
 matters `incidental thereto or connected therewith' so as to 
 take care of the conditions existing in mines and the area 
 connected therewith." 
  
2.4  On being asked to comment on the suggestion o f one of 
the trade union s that the words " and to provide for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto shall be de leted as they 
have wider ramification including settlement of trade union 
conflicts." The Ministry stated that the words have been included in 
the Long Title to cover a complete spectrum of activities and 
matters related to regulation of conditions of work and welfare of 
persons employed in mines and safety in mines, which is in 
consonance with the spirit of the Mines Act. 
 

 
 
2.5  As re gards, the occupational health survey of workers 
who are employed on daily basis, the Ministry stated that: 
 "The provisions of medical examination and medical 
 attendance are applicable to persons who are employed on 
 regular basis and are not applicable to those persons who are 
 employed on purely temporary or casual basis for continuous 
 period of less than six months in accordance with the 
 provision of Rule 29 A of the Mines Rules, 1955." 
 
2.6  On being asked about the mines in unorganized sector 
and safety of workers working there, the Ministry stated that: 
 "It is a fact that most of the mines in non -coal sector are in 
 private sector. Only few mines engaged in extraction of Iron 
 Ore, Manganese, Copper, Gold etc are in public sector... The 
 Mines eng aged in extraction of non -coal minerals are 
 mostly in unorganized sector. Only few of those mines are 
 submitting notice of opening and returns whereas most of the 
 mines are not on records of this Directorate… Whenever, 
 there is an accident in such mines, the  information of  such 
 accidents are received through newspaper or in the  form of 
 complaints. Then only, this Directorate comes  to know 
 about the existence of such mines. When the Officers of  this 

 Directorate go for enquiries into accidents and  complaints, 
 then we take legal actions and prosecute the  offenders in the 
 court of Law. ..The Field Inspecting Officers conduct 
 inspections of  such mines, and issue  violation  letters, 
 notices and prohibitory orders to the mine operators." 
 
2.7  On the issue of provision for medical attentions to the 
retired workers  and whether  the occupational health survey 
includes people who have retired from their job , the Ministry stated 
that: 
 "At present there is no provision for medical attendance to 
 the retired workers and the occupational health survey for 
 who  have retired from their job." 
  
Amendment to Section 1  - Extension of Mines Act, 1952 to 
Offshore area beyond 12 nautical miles:  
  
2.8  In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), after 
the words ―whole of India‖, the words and figures ―including the 
territorial waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone and 
other maritime zones of India as defined under the Territorial 
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other 
Maritime Zones Act, 1976‖ shall be inserted. 

 
2.9  The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
"(i) The Offshore Area Mineral (Development and Regulation) 
Act 2002 has been framed for regulation & development 
of minerals in offshore up to exclusive economic zones of 
India. 
(ii) The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act 1948 has 
also been extended upto exclusive economic zones of 
India 
(iii) Since there is no la w on the matters related to safety & 
labour applicable to offshore area beyond 12 nautical 
miles, this has been proposed to be extended up to the 
exclusive economic zone & Maritime Zones of India." 
 
Amendment to section  2 -Hierarchy of Agents vis -a-vis 
manager, definition of  foreign company, definition of owner  
  
2.10  In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), clause 
(c), for the words ―every person‖, the words ―every person, being 
superior to the manager‖ shall be substituted; 
 

2.11  The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
"(1)(c) The amendment ensures superiority of agent to manager 
which is necessary because agent takes part in management, 
control, supervision or direction of the mine or any part 
thereof on behalf of the owner. Further with the making of an 
agent superior to a manager in the hierarchy possibility of any 
interference, confusion and communication gap will be 
avoided especially in a work environment which is multi -
disciplinary in nature." 
 (ii) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, 
 namely:- 
 ‗(ga) ―foreign company‖ means the company falling under 
 section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956;‘; 
2.12  The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
"(ga) Definition of ―foreign company‖ is required in view of the 
proposed change in definition of the ―owner‖." 
 (iii) for clause (l), the following clause shall be substituted, 
 namely:- 
 (l) ―owner‖  when used in relation to a mine, means a  person 
 or authority having ultimate control over the affairs of the 
 mine: 

 Provided that where the mine belongs to,- 
 (i) a company incorporated in India,  the managing director 
 thereof, and if there is no managing director,  all the whole -
 time directors of  the board of directors of the company, as the 
 case may be, shall be the owner; 
 (ii) a foreign company, the   principal officer, by whatever name  
 called, including its director and secretary, shall be the owner; 
 (iii) a  firm or other association of persons, all the individual 
 partners or members thereof, shall be the owner: 
 Provided further that, in the case of a body corporate without 
 a managing director, or in the case of a firm or other 
 association of persons, whe re a specific nomination has been 
 made, in favour of a whole -time director, managing partner or 
 member, as the case may be, such whole -time director, 
 managing partner and member shall be the owner: 
 Provided also that where a mines belongs to,- 
 (i) a l ocal authority or body, the person having the ultimate 
 control over such authority or body; 
 (ii) a person who has the prospecting license, mining lease or 
 mining right, such person; 
 (iii) a liquidator or receiver, such liquidator or receiver, as the 
 case may be, shall be the owner: 

 Provided also that any contractor or sub - lessee for the 
 working of a mine or any part thereof, shall also be the owner, 
 but, not so as to exempt the owner from any liability. 
 Explanation: For the purposes of this clause,- 
 
 (i) the expressions  ―body corporate‖, ―board of directors‖, 
 ―company‖,  ―director‖, ―firms‖ and ―managing director‖ shall 
 have the same meanings respectively assigned to them under 
 the Companies Act, 1956; 
 
 (ii) th e expressions ―prospecting license‖ and ―mining lease‖ 
 shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them 
 under the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
 Act, 1957;" 
  
2.13  The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
"To give due importance to the cause of safety, health and 
welfare of persons employed in mines, it is essential that such 
responsibility must rest with the person having the ultimate 
control over the affairs of the mine. The change in the 
definition of ―owner‖ will ensure that those in charge of 
decision-making in the corporate hierarchy are made 
accountable and not merely someone designated by the 

company to take the responsibility.  For foreign companies 
desirous of operating in India, due provision has been kept for 
the principal officer residing in India to own the responsibility 
for safety, health and welfare of persons.  Responsibility of 
contractor and sub-lessee has been made clearer." 
  
2.14  Operation of mines has changed with the advancement in 
Science and Technology and people are going 50 kms to 60 kms 
from on-shore to off-shore.  When asked whether the Ministry have  
examined the  working conditions in the mines as which are not 
same in on shore and off shore and whether the Ministr y have 
applied their mind to see that the workers work under those 
conditions are protected.  In response the Ministry replied that: 
  
 "Today, we go up to 12 nautical miles and now we will be 
 going up to 200 nautical  miles and the mining operations are 
 being opened to private sector.  So, the health and safety of 
 workers becomes very relevant.  We have already trained our 
 officers.  We have sent our officers to USA, Australia, South 
 Africa, Germany  and to many other countries so that they are 
 prepared to handle  the workmen  upto 200 nautical miles.  
 Up to 12  nautical miles we are already doing,  but this use of 
 technically equipp ed inspection machinery with the latest 

 knowledge of health and safety in off -shore mines, we have 
 already started the job." 
 
Insertion of new section 18A - Appointment of officials and 
agents in mines   
 
2.15  After section 18 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
 ―18A.(1) Without prejudice to any of the provisions of this Act 
 or any other law for the time being in force, the owner of every 
 mine shall appoint,- 
 (a) sufficient number of his officials, as may be prescribed, for 
 the effective supervision of all operations, equipment, 
 installations and sites, in the mine of such  owner to ensure 
 compliance with the provisions of the Act and of the rules and 
 regulations made and of any order issued, there under; 
 (b) such number of his agents, as may be prescribed, 
 specifying their functions, duties and responsibilities in 
 respect of each of his mines. 
 Explanation. – For the purpose of this sub -section, the 
 expression ―official‖ means a person, having such 

 qualifications, as may be prescribed and appointed by, or, on 
 behalf of the owner, to perform the duties of supervision in 
 mine of such owner or part thereof, in such capacity as may 
 be prescribed. 
 (2) Every agent referred to in clause (b) of sub -section (1) 
 shall,- 
 (a) possess such qualifications and experience , as may be 
 prescribed; 
 (b) be resident in India for at least one hundred and eighty-two 
 days during any year or such other period as may be 
 prescribed. 
 (3) The owner shall, in respect of every agent referred to in 
 clause(b) of sub -section(1), forthw ith send notice of 
 appointment of such agent to the Chief Inspector and the 
 Inspector, specifying the functions, duties and responsibilities 
 of every such agent in respect of the mine for which he is 
 appointed as such;‖. 
 
2.16  The Ministry in their ex planatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
"18A(1): It is very essential to have sufficient number of 
qualified persons for supervision in the mine to ensure safe 
operations. This requirement would be mandatory on the part 

of the owner to ensure a dequate & effective supervision 
through appointment of competent & qualified Supervisors.  
This provision is necessary to avoid any gap in communication 
and giving instructions to the manager by unauthorized 
persons.    
18A(2): Qualifications and experience have become relevant in 
today‘s context due to multi -disciplinary cadres of 
management, particularly in the organized sector. With multi -
national companies (MNCs) now operating in India, such 
persons are also required to be resident in the country for 
their accountability.    
18A(3): Confusion amongst the agents regarding their 
responsibilities will be avoided as the functions, duties and 
responsibilities of each such agent appointed by the owner will 
be specified and their notices of appointment will be  sent to 
the Chief Inspector and the Inspector of Mines." 
  
2.17  When asked to explain the status of the agents who have 
already  been appointed by the management but do not possess 
desired qualifications and experience.  The Ministry in their written 
reply stated that: 
 "After coming into force of this amendment with the due date 
 of  effectiveness, the owner will have to appoint agents with 
 prescribed experience and qualifications.  The agents, who 

 have already been appointed, will be re -appointed by t he 
 owner clearly specifying their area of jurisdiction in 
 accordance with their qualifications and experience which they 
 possess presently.  Therefore, the provisions have been made 
 for appointment of more number of agents in different areas of 
 specialization like personal, finance, materials management, 
 electrical, mechanical, occupational health etc." 
 
2.18  On being asked to modify the definition of `agent' `s ince 
all agents are to be re -appointed, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated that: 
 "Agent takes part in management, control, supervision or 
 direction of the mine on behalf of the owner; therefore, agent 
 should be superior to the mine manager in hierarchy so that 
 interference, confusion and communication gap is avoided 
 especially in a work environment which is multi - disciplinary 
 in nature. Therefore, the amendment is essential." 
 
2.19  The Ministry further replied that: 
  
 "Whether appointed as such or not‖ is a saving clause. This is 
 to cover the eventuality of the owner‘s failure to appoint a 
 person as agent, when such person appointed in any capacity 

 acts on behalf of owner and exercises supervision, 
 management and control over the activities of the mine. 
 Therefore, it is essential to retain the same."  
 
2.20  When asked to clarify the h ierarchy of qualified officials 
to be appointed as per the proposed section vis -à-vis agents and 
managers, the Ministry stated that the s tatus of officials has been 
defined appropriately in the sub ordinate legislation, framed under 
the provisions of the Mines Act, which is subordinate to `agent' and 
`manager'. 
 
2.21  The Ministry further stated that: 
   
 "The concept of multiple agent exist and inclusive to the Mines 
 Act, 1952. In large organizatio n with multidisciplinary staff 
 functional units, manager alone cannot be accountable to all 
 the functions. The present amendment is aimed to make the 
 role & function of agent(s) explicit, being superior to manager. 
 The owner shall clearly define the sp here of activity and 
 domain of responsibility of each of the agents appointed by 
 him, leaving no room for confusion. 
  In view of the above, no difficulties are anticipated in this 
 regard." 

 
2.22  When the attention of the Ministry was…to the fact that 
appointment of officials is also dealt in section 57 (1) of the existing 
Act and asked why do we need this repetition,  the  Ministry 
submitted that as per the provisions of subordinate  legislation 
framed under the Mines Act, owner, agent or  manager shall 
appoint such number of competent persons, including officials and 
technicians after assessing their competence by qualifications, 
experience and actual tests.  
 
Amendment to section 58 :- Power to Central Government to 
make rules, regulation -  
 
2.23  In section 58 of the principal Act, after clause (a), the 
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:-―(aa) number of officials 
to be appointed under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 18A; 
(ab) number of the agents to be appointed under clause (b) of sub-
section(1) of section 18A; 
(ac) the qualifications of the officials to be appointed under sub -
section (1) of section 18A; 
(ad) the qualifications and experience of the agents under clause (a) 
of sub-section (2) of section 18A; 

(ae) the period during  which the agent shall be resident in India 
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 18A;‖. 
 
2.24  The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
"In view of the proposal of new section 18A in the Act, it is 
required to g ive power to Central Government to make 
Regulations, Rules & Bye-laws regarding: 
(aa) number of officials to be appointed, 
(ab) number of the agents to be appointed, 
(ac) the qualifications of the officials to be appointed, 
(ad) the qualifications and experience of the agents, and 
(ae) the period during which the agent shall be resident in 
India." 
 
2.25  Asked to give their views on the suggestion that agents 
should only be allowed to leave country after getting NOC from 
DGMS, the Ministry replied that: 
 " Agent is a person authorized to act on behalf of the Owner, in 
 respect of management, control, supervision or direction of a 
 mine. In absence of Agent, Owner is solely responsible for the 

 above functions. In view of this, NOC from DGMS in such 
 cases appears to be not necessary." 
  
Amendment to section s 63 to 73: - Revision in the penalty 
provisions  
 
2.26  In section 63 of the principal Act,_ 
(a) In sub-section (1) for the words ―five hundred rupees‖, the words 
―fifty thousand rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
(b) In sub -section (2) for the words ―three hundred rupees‖, the 
words ―thirty thousand rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
 In section 64 for the words ―one thousand rupees‖, the words 
―one lakh rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
 In section 65 for the wo rds, ―two hundred rupees‖, the words 
―twenty thousand rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
  In section 66 for the words, ―one thousand rupees‖, the words 
―one lakh rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
 In section 67 for the words, ―one thousand rupees‖, the words 
―one lakh rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
  In section 68 for the words, ―five hundred rupees‖, the words 
―fifty thousand rupees‖ shall be substituted. 

  
 In section 69 for the words, ―three months, or with fine which 
may extend to two thousand and five hundred r upees‖, the words 
―one year, or with fine which may extend to two lakh and fifty 
thousand rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
 In section 70 in     sub-sections (1) and (2), for the words ―five 
hundred rupees‖ at both the places, where they occur, the words 
―fifty thousand rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
   
Amendment to section 72A 
2.27  In section 72A of the principal Act, for the words ―six 
months or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees‖, the 
words ― one year, or with a fine which may extend to two lak hs 
rupees‖, shall be substituted. 
   
Amendment to section 72B 
2.28  In section 72B of the principal Act,- 
(a) for the words ―two years and shall also be liable to fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees‖, the words ―five years and 
shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five lakh rupees‖ 
shall be substituted. 

(b) for the words ―two thousand rupees‖, th e words ‗two lakh 
rupees‖ shall be substituted.  
 
2.29  The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
"Prohibitory orders are issued only when the conditions in the 
mine are extremely dangerous posing serious threat to the lif e 
and health of persons employed therein. Any contravention of 
such orders thus needs to be contained through suitable 
punitive measures.   
There has not been any revision in the penalty provisions 
since the enactment of the Mines Act, 1952.  
The penalties  (fine and imprisonment) mentioned are the 
maximum. The actual amount of fine and term of 
imprisonment so imposed shall be awarded by the judiciary 
commensurate to the nature of offence."   
 
Amendment to section 72C 
2.30  In section 72C of the principal Act,- 
 (a) in sub-section (1),- 
 (i) in clause (a), for the words ―two years, or with fine which 
 may extend to five thousand rupees‖, the words ―five years or 

 with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees‖ shall be 
 substituted; 
 (ii) in  clause (b), for the words ―three thousand rupees‘, the 
 words ―three  lakh rupees‖ shall be substituted; 
 (iii) in clause (c), for the words ―three months‘ or with fine 
 which may extend to one thousand rupees‖, the words ―one 
 year, or with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees‖ 
 shall be substituted. 
 (iv) in the proviso, for the words ‗shall not be less than three 
 thousand rupees‖, the words ―shall not be less than three lakh 
 rupees‖ shall be substituted; 
 (b) After sub -section (1), the following  sub- section shall be 
 inserted, namely:- 
 ―(1A) where the contravention falls under any of the three 
 clauses of sub-section (1), the award of punishment shall be in 
 accordance with the maximum punishment provided under 
 the clauses being so contravened.‖. 
2.31  The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
"Contraventions that lead to loss of human lives or serious 
bodily injury to any person must attract the maximum 
penalty." 
 

Amendment to section 73 
 
2.32  In section 73 of the principal Act,- 
 
 (a) for the words ―which may extend to three months, or with 
 fine which may extend to one thousand rupees,‖ the words 
 ―which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend 
 to one lakh rupees,‖ shall be substituted; 
 (b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
 ―Provided that in case the contraventions of any provision of 
 this Act or of any rule, or regulation, bye -law or of any order 
 made there under continues, additional fines shall be imposed 
 which may extend to one thousand rupees for each day on 
 which the contravention is continued, and, if such 
 contravention continues beyond a period of one year after the 
 date of conviction or contravention, the offender shall be 
 punishable with imprisonme nt for a term, which may extend 
 to seven years.‖. 
2.33  The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
have stated that:- 
"There has not been any revision in the penalty provisions 
since the enactment of the Mines Act, 1952.  

The penalties (fine and imprisonment) mentioned are the 
maximum. The actual amount of fine and term of  
imprisonment so imposed shall be awarded by the judiciary 
commensurate to the nature of offence.   
Repetitive contraventions have been made more stringent. 
Similar provision  exists under The Environment (Protection) 
Act, 1986." 
  
2.33  When the Ministry were  informed that increase in penal 
provisions and punishment will affect workers and supervisory staff 
more than the management  and that Professional lapses cannot be 
compared with criminal offences as in mining industry much 
depends on the natural forces, to which the Ministry replied that: 
 "There has not been any revision in the penalty provisions 
 since the enactment of the Mines Act, 1952 and therefore, the 
 very purpose of penalties serving as a deterrent to committing 
 offences is not met with.  The penalty (fine) mentioned is the 
 maximum. The actual amount of fine so imposed shall be 
 awarded by the judiciary  commensurate with the nature of 
 offence." 

2.34  When asked to give their views on the suggestion that i n 
case of loss of lives owner of the mine should invariably be held 
responsible and penalty be imposed on owner based on the number 
of lives lost and injured victims, the Ministry responded as follows: 
 "In case  of fatal accidents, an enquiry is conducted by the 
 Chief Inspector or an inspector of mines to ascertain the cause 
 and circumstances leading to the incident and affixing 
 responsibility for the same, including the Owner."  
2.35  The Ministry were asked why the amount, collected in 
form of penalties, cannot be paid to the victims as compensation 
statutorily, the Ministry stated that n ecessary provision in this 
regard already existed in the Mines Act.  
2.36  When asked to give their views on adding provisi ons on 
the lines of Federal Mines Safety and Health Act of USA in the 
Mines Act, 1952 and the need for establishment of an Independent 
Review Commission, the Ministry in their written reply stated:  
 "In Indian conditions, as per Mines Act, 1952, the juris diction 
 and authority to decide on the quantum of penalty in the form 

 of fine and/or imprisonment rests solely with judiciary.   The 
 penalty (fine) mentioned is the maximum. The actual 
 amount of fine so imposed shall be awarded by the judiciary 
 who shall give due consideration to cause and circumstances 
 leading to committing of the offence by the operator and, 
 commensurate with the nature of offence. The present system 
 in India adequately addresses the  concerns of the operator, 
 and no change appears to be  necessary. Under section 12 of 
 the Mines Act,1952, provision for  formation of a Committee 
 already exists. The Committee is to  be constituted by the 
 Central Government, whose functions,  among others, 
 include;…hear and decide such appeals or objections against 
 notices or orders under this Act or the regulations, rules or 
 bye-laws made there under, as are required to be referred to it 
 by this Act or as may be prescribed.  As adequate mechanism 
 for gr ievance redressal already exists, and is already 
 functioning satisfactorily. 
 

2.37  On the issue of s trict action against DGMS officials who 
fail to give reports on the apparent shortcomings , the Ministry 
stated that: 
 "As per the Mines Act, the responsibility of ensuring the safety, 
 health and welfare of miners is that of Owner, Agent and 
 Manager and other officials appointed by the Owner. This is 
 also in accordance to International law." 
  
Burden of Proof- Insertion of new section 74A 
 
2.38  After section 74 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
 ―74A. Where any person is prosecuted, or proceeded against, 
 for contravening any of the provisions of this Act or of any 
 rule, or regulatio n, or bye -law or order made there under, it 
 shall be for the person who is alleged to have failed to comply 
 with such duty or requirement, to prove that it was not 
 reasonably practicable, or, as the case may be, all practicable 
 measures, were taken, to satisfy the safety requirements, duty 
 or other requirements, as the case may be.‖. 
 

 
2.39  The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
"This new provision will deter defaulters from non -compliance 
with the provisions of the statute and thereby create the 
requisite safety culture. It will also facilitate prosecution in 
cases of violation of the provisions.  Similar provision also 
exists in section 104A of the Factories Act, 1948." 
 
2.40  When asked si nce the burden of proof has been shifted 
on the person who is being prosecuted or proceeded against , poor 
workers or middle/lower level officials are likely to be made 
scapegoats by higher authorities, the Ministry were of the view that: 
 "This new provision will deter defaulters from non -compliance 
 with the provisions of the statute and thereby create the 
 requisite safety culture. It will also facilitate prosecution in 
 cases of violation of the provisions.  Similar provision also 
 exists in section 104A of the Factories Act, 1948." 
2.41  When asked to change the proposed amendment so as to 
bring it in tune with the accepted legal practices, the Ministry 
replied as under:- 
 "Mining is most hazardous operation of peacetime. Inferences 
 drawn from the inquiries conducted into the causes of and 

 circumstances attending to accidents and dangerous 
 occurrences in mines point to the fact that most of them were 
 caused due to human failure, and in essence,  were 
 preventable.   This new provis ion would deter multinationals 
 from inadequate punishment, and would unburden the 
 judiciary as  well as legal expenses, and deter the defaulters 
 from non- compliance with the provisions of the statute and 
 thereby  create the requisite safety culture in  line with 
 international  norms. It will also facilitate prosecution in 
 cases of violation of  the provisions, which is often associated 
 with serious consequences from the point of view of mine 
 safety. Similar provision also exists in section 104A of t he 
 Factories Act, 1948." 
 
Exclusion of manager – Amendment of section 76 
2.42  In section 76 of the principal Act,- 
 (a) for the words ―all or any of the directors thereof‖, the words 
 ―managing director; all or any of the directors thereof or where 
 the owner of a mine is a foreign company, all or any of its 
 principal officers, by whatever name called, including its 
 director or secretary‖ shall be substituted. 
 (b) in the proviso,- 
 (i) in clauses (a), (b) & (c) the words ―or managers‖ occurring at 
 the end, shall be omitted. 

 
 (ii)  after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, 
 namely:- 
     ―(d) in the case of a foreign company, any of its principal 
 officers, by whatever name called, including its director or 
 secretary.‖ 
 (iii) after clause (d) as so inserted, in the long line, the words 
 ―or manager‖ occurring at both the places, shall be omitted. 
2.43  The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
"Amendment is necessary to ensure compatibility with the  
proposed amendment of section 2 of the Act, regarding 
definition of the owner." 
 
2.44  Further the Ministry in their written reply stated that: 
 " Manager is a paid employee of the company. He is junior  
 officer and subordinate to the General Manager and other 
 Senior Officials of the company including Agent and the 
 Owner. He does not hold the power which is vested with the 
 Senior Officials and Director or Managing Director of the 
 Company.  Therefore, M anager cannot be nominated or 
 considered to be the Owner of the Mine. However, the term 
 ―manager‖ has been mentioned at  many places in the Act 

 under sections 16 – for notice to be  given of mining 
 operations, section 17- Managers regarding  appointment of 
 manager for operation of every mine and the  qualifications 
 prescribed under the regulations and under  section – 18 
 regarding Duties and responsibilities of owners,  agents 
 and managers. Statutory duties of the managers have  also 
 been defined under the Coal Mines Regulations, 1957,  The 
 Metalliferous Mines Regulations, 1961 and the Oil Mines 
 Regulations, 1984. Thus the term ―managers‖ in the 
 provisions of section 76  leads to confusion and duality of 
 roles and responsibility in the Act.  In order to obviate any 
 ambiguity in the matter, DGMS has proposed suitable 
 amendment in the aforesaid section of  the Mines Act, 1952 
 to the effect that the term ―manager‖ may be deleted from 
 the clauses (a); (b) and ( c) of the proviso to Section 76." 
 
Continuance of liability - Insertion of new section 76A 
 
2.45  After section 76 of the principal act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
 ―76A. Nothing contained in this Act shall absolve any 
 person  from his liability under this Act, if  such person 
 had or has ultimate control over the affairs of the  business 
 of the mines.‖ 

  
2.46  The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
"New section 76A is proposed to be inserted so as to ensure 
continuance of liabi lity. It is explicitly clear that if any officer 
other than members of the Board of Directors are  nominated 
as the Owner under Section 76 of the Miners Act, 1952, the 
main motto and purpose of the special enactment shall be 
defeated. In the interest of the cause of safety of the mine and 
mine workers, it is imperative that the ownership must lie with 
the post/person in the organisation who is vested with real 
and ultimate authority in control, management and direction 
of the mine….A separate sub-clause 76A has been inserted to 
cover the foreign company operating as owner of the mine, 
which stipulates ― Nothing contained in this Act shall absolve 
any person from his liability under this Act, if such person had 
or has ultimate control over the affairs of the business of the 
mines." 

 CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Long title  of the Bill 
3.1 The Committee note that t he Bill proposes to amend the 
long title of the principal Act by substituting the words 
“regulation of conditions of work and welfare of persons 
employed in mines and safety in mines” for the words 
“regulation of labour and safety in mines”.  Going through the 
provisions of the Act, Committee find that there is no 
provision for medical examination and medical attendance for 
retired /temporary/casual workers who have less than six 
months of continuous service.  Taking note of the Nat ional 
Policy on Safety, Health & Environment at Work Place of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment, the Government of India 
is committed to regulate all economic activities for 
management of safety and health risks at workplace and to 
provide measures so as to ensure safe and healthy working 
conditions for every working man and woman in the nation, the 
Committee desire that the health and safety of all the workers 

irrespective of their status 
(permanent/temporary/casual/retired) be shouldered by the 
Government.  Accordingly, the Committee recommend that the 
words “regulation of labour and safety in mines” be substituted 
with the words “regulation of conditions of work, welfare and 
health of persons retired/employed in mines and safety in 
mines and to provid e for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto”.  Similarly, the Committee also desire that 
adequate provisions be made in the Act to protect the workers 
of unorganized mines as visualized in the long title of the Act. 
 
Extension of application of the Mines Act,1952 
3.2 The Bill seeks to amend section 1 of the principal Act to 
include the territorial waters, continental shelf, Exclusive 
Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976.  The 
Committee feel that in the absence of any law , with respect to 
safety of labour, applicable to offshore areas beyond 12 nautical 
miles, this amendment was necessary and hence appreciate the 
proposed amendment. 

Definition of Agent 
 
3.3 The Bill propose s to amend section 2 sub -section (1) to 
ensure superiority of agent over the man ager by substituting 
the words “every person being superior to the manager” in the 
definition of agent.  The Bill also proposes to insert section 18 
(A) to make it mandatory for appointment of agents.  The 
proposed amendment also provides  for sending notice of 
appointment of such agents to Chief Inspector specifying 
therein the functions, duties and responsibilities of each agent.  
The Committee are of the view that the definition of the agent 
"when used in relation to mines means every persons 
appointed, acting, purporting to act on behalf of the owner, 
takes part in the management, control, supervision or direction 
of the mine or any part thereof " needs to be further modified.  
The Committee hope that once the proposed amendments are 
implemented, all the agents will be appointed/reappointed and 
the notice of their appointment will be sent to the Chief 
Inspector or Inspector in writing specifying all the relevant 
details.  The Committee do not concur with the contention of 

the Government regarding substitution of the clause “whether 
appointed as such or not” as the same contravenes the very 
provision for mandatory appointment of agent. 
 The insertion of section 18-A, provides  for appointment 
of sufficient number of agents.  In such an eve ntuality, the  
sole manager appointed under section 17 of the Mines Act, 
1952 would be accountable to more than one agents 
consequent to the proposed amendments.  The Committee feel 
that having too many bosses is against the principle of Unity of 
Command.  The Committee are apprehensive that if a manager 
has multiple superior authorities, it would create conflicting 
lines of command.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Government to have a re -look into the practical problems that 
may entail the implementation of proposed amendment.  
  

Definition of Owner 
3.4 The Committee note that to give due importance to the 
causes of safety and health in mines, the definition of owner is 
proposed to be changed.  The Committee agree with the 
proposal of the Governmen t to change the definition of owner 
to ensure that those in charge of decision -making in the 
corporate hierarchy are made accountable. 
 
Definition of Foreign Company 
3.5. The Committee also find the insertion of the definition of 
foreign company in view of  the proposed change in the 
definition of `owner' justified.  Hence, the Committee agree 
with the proposal of the Government.  
 
Appointment of Qualified Officials 
3.6 The Bill seeks to amend section 58 of the principal Act by 
inserting a new section, namel y, 18-A regarding the number of 
officials to be appointed, qualifications of officials, experience 

of the agents, the period during which the agent shall be 
resident in India.  The Committee find the insertion 
appropriate and in accordance with the section  18-A (1), and 
are in agreement with the new insertion.  
 
Enhancement in penalties 
3.7 The Bill seeks to amend sections 63 -70, 72 & 73 of the 
principal Act relating to penalties.  The Committee are  of the 
view that merely increasing the penalties manifold would not 
serve the purpose unless a sense of responsibility and 
acknowledgment of the harm done is imparted to the offenders. 
The Committee are of the considered view that while 
determining the qu antum of penalty, the history of previous 
violations by the offender, the size of the business (in case 
owners/company/corporation is an offender), negligence on the 
part of the offender, gravity of violation, the harm done, loss of 
lives and the demonstra ted good faith of the offender in 
attempting to achieve rapid compliance after notice of 
violation is given be taken into account. The Committee 

recommend that an express provision in this regard be inserted 
in the principal Act. The Committee desire the G overnment to 
consider setting up of  an independent authority on lines of the 
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  as exists 
in USA to hear cases relating to contravention of the provisions 
of Mines Act, 1952 having appellate provision of judi cial 
review.  
Onus of Proof 
3.8 The Bill seeks to insert a  new section 74 A regarding 
burden of proof.  The Committee note that as per the proposed 
amendment, the burden of proof would be on the alleged 
defaulters.  The Government claimed that such a shif t in the 
burden of proof would deter non -compliance with the 
provisions of the statute and help create the requisite safety 
culture in line with international norms.  Further, it would 
facilitate prosecution of the law violators. The Committee, 
however, feel that the amendment is against the principles of 
natural justice. According to legal dictionary "the plaintiff is 
normally charged with the burden of proof, but the defendant 

can be required to establish certain defences and in criminal 
cases, the burden of proof is placed on the prosecution, who 
must demonstrate that the defendant is guilty before a jury 
may convict him or her.         
The Committee are, therefore, of the firm view that the 
proposed amendment is not in consonance with the prevailing 
legal practices.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the onus of proof may not be shifted on the alleged defaulter. 
 
Determination of owner in certain cases 
 
3.9 The Committee note that the amendment proposed to 
section 76 of the Act is in general accord and harmony with the 
amendment proposed in section 2 of the principal Act, widens 
the scope of ownership and is labour friendly.  The Committee, 
therefore, concur with the amendment proposed. 
  

 
Continuance of liability 
3.10  The Committee note that the Government propose to 
insert section 76 A to ensure continuance of liability of such 
person who had or has ultimate control cover the affairs of the 
business of the Mines.  The Committee, while agreeing to the 
proposal, recommend that a provision for vicarious liability  be 
also inserted in the Act so that the employer, manager or the 
person employed are held responsible severally for the offence 
attributable to connivance, neglect or prior knowledge.  
 
 
New Delhi;                          HEMANAND BISWAL 
14th December, 2011                                               CHAIRMAN  
23 Agrahayana, 1933(Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
 
 
  

As introduced in the Rajya Sabha 
 
 
Bill No. X of 2011 
 
 
 
THE MINES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
further to amend the Mines Act, 1952. 
 
 
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -second Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
 
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Mines (Amendment) Act, 2011. 
  (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
  may,  by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
  
 2.  In the Mines Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), 
  in the long title, for the words ―regulation of labour and safety in  
  mines‖, the words ―regulation of conditions of work and welfare of  
  persons employed in mines and safety in mines and to provide for  
  matters connected therewith or incidental thereto" shall be   
  substituted. 
 
 3.  In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the words  
  ―whole of India‖, the words and figures ―including the territorial  
  waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone and other   
  maritime zones of India as defined under the Territorial Waters,  
  Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime  
  Zones Act, 1976" shall be inserted. 
 
 4.  In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 
  (i) in clause (c), for the words ―every person‖, the words "every  
  person, being superior to the manager" shall be substituted; 
  (ii) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
  ‗(ga) ―foreign company‖ means the company falling under section  
  591 of the Companies Act, 1956; 
  (iii) for clause (l), the following clause shall be substituted,   
  namely:— 

 
  ‗(l) ―owner‖, when used in relation to a mine, means a person or  
  authority having ultimate control over the affairs of the mine: 
   
  Provided that where the mine belongs to,— 
   
   (i) a company incorporated in India, the managing director  
   thereof, and if there is no managing director, all the whole- 
   time directors of  the board of directors of the company, as  
   the case may be, shall be the owner; 
 
   (ii) a foreign company, the principal officer by whatever name 
   called, including its director and secretary, shall be the  
   owner; 
 
   (iii) a firm or other association of persons, all the individual  
   partners or members thereof, shall be the owner: 
   
  Provided further that, in the case of a body corporate without a 
 managing director, or in the case of a firm or other association of 
 persons,  where a specific  nomination has been made, in favour of a 
 whole-time director, managing partner or member, as the case may be, 
 such whole-time  director, managing partner and  member shall be the 
 owner: 
 
  Provided also that where a mine belongs to,— 
 
  (i) a local authority or body, the person having the ultimate control 
  over such authority or body; 
  
  (ii) a person who has the prospecting licence, mining lease or  
  mining right, such person; 
  
  (iii) a liquidator or receiver, such liquidator or receiver, as the case 
  may be, shall be the owner: 
  
 Provided also that any contractor or sub-lessee for the working of a mine 
 or any part thereof, shall also be the owner, but, not so as to exempt the 
 owner from any liability. 
 
 Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause,— 
  
 (i) the expressions ―body corporate‖, ―board of directors‖, 
 ―company‖, ―director‖, ―firms‖ and ―managing director‖ shall have the 
 same meanings respectively assigned to them under the Companies Act, 

 1956; 
  
 (ii) the expressions ―prospecting licence‖ and ―mining lease‖ shall 
 have the same meanings respectively assigned to them under the Mines 
 and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957;‘. 
 
 
 5.  After section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
 inserted, namely:— 
  
 ‗18A. ( 1) Without prejudice to any of the provisions of this Act or any 
 other law  for the time being in force, the owner of every mine shall 
 appoint,— 
 
            
 (a) sufficient number of his officials, as may be prescribed, for the 
 effective supervision of all operations, equipment, i nstallations and sites, 
 in the mine of  such owner to ensure compliance with the provisions of 
 the Act and of the rules  and regulations made and of any order issued, 
 thereunder; 
 
 (b) such number of his agents, as may be prescribed, specifying their 
 functions, duties and responsibilities in respect of each of his mines. 
 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, the expression ―official‖ 
means a person, having such qualifications, as may be prescribed and 
appointed by, or, on behalf of the owner, to perform the duties of supervision in 
mine of such owner or part thereof, in such capacity as may be prescribed. 
 
(2) Every agent referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), shall,— 
 
 (a) possess such qualifications and experience, as may be prescribed; 
 (b) be resident in India for at least one hundred and eighty-two days 
 during any year or such other period as may be prescribed. 
 
(3)  The owner shall, in respect of every agent referred to in clasue (b) of 
 subsection  (1), forthwith send notice of appointment of such agent to the 
 Chief  Inspector  and the Inspector, specifying the functions, duties and 
 responsibilities of every such agent in respect of the mine for which he is 
 appointed as such.‘. 
 
 6.  In section 58 of the principal Act, after clause (a), the following 
 clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
 

  ―(aa) number of officials to be appointed under clause (a) of sub- 
  section (1) of section 18A; 
 
  (ab) number of the agents to be appointed under clause (b) of sub- 
  section (1) of section 18A; 
 
  (ac) the qualifications of the officials to be appointed under sub- 
  section (1) of section 18A; 
   
  (ad) the qualifications and experience of the agents under clause  
  (a) of subsection (2) of section 18A; 
 
  (ae) the period during which the agent shall be resident in India  
  under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 18A;‘‘. 
 
 7.  In section 63 of the principal Act,— 
 
 (a) in sub-section (1), for the words ―five hundred rupees‖, the words ―fifty 
 thousand rupees‖ shall be substituted; 
 
 (b) in sub -section (2), for the words ―three hundred rupees‖, the words 
 ―thirty thousand rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
 
 8.  In section 64 of the principal Act, for the words ―one thousand  
  rupees‖, the words ―one lakh rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
  
 9.  In section 65 of the principal Act, for the words ―two hundred  
  rupees‖, the words ―twenty thousand rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
 
 10.  In section 66 of the principal Act, for the words ―one thousand  
  rupees‖, the words ―one lakh rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
 11.  In section 67 of the principal Act, for the words ―one thousand  
  rupees‖, the words ―one lakh rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
 
 12.  In section 68 of the principal Act, for the words ―five hundred  
  rupees‖, the words ―fifty thousand rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
 
 13.  In section 69 of the principal Act, for the words ―three months, or  
  with fine which may extend to two thousand and five hundred  
  rupees‖, the words ―one year, or with fine  which may extend to two 
  lakh and fifty thousand rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
  
 14.  In section 70 of the principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and (2), for  
  the words ―five hundred rupees‖ at both the places where they  
  occur, the words ―fifty thousand rupees‖ shall be substituted. 

 
 15.  In section 72A of the principal Act, for the words ―six months, or  
  with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees‖, the words  
  ―one year, or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees‖ shall  
  be substituted. 
 
 16.  In section 72B of the principal Act,— 
 
  (a) for the words ―two years, and shall also be liable to fine which  
  may extend to five thousand rupees‖, the words ―five years and  
  shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five lakh rupees‖  
  shall be substituted; 
  (b) for the words ―two thousand rupees‖, the words ―two lakh  
  rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
  
 17.  In section 72C of the principal Act,— 
 
  (a) in sub-section (1),— 
  (i) in clause (a), for the words ―two years, or with fine which may  
  extend to five thousand rupees‖, the words ―five years or with fine  
  which may extend to five lakh rupees‖ shall be substituted; 
   
  (ii) in clause (b), for the words ―three thousand rupees‖, the words  
  ―three lakh rupees‖ shall be substituted; 
 
  (iii) in clause (c), for the words ―three months, or with fine which  
  may extend to one thousand rupees‖, the words ―one year, or with  
  fine which may extend to one lakh rupees‖ shall be substituted; 
 
  (iv) in the proviso, for the words ―shall not be less than three   
  thousand rupees‖, the words ―shall not be less than three lakh  
  rupees‖ shall be substituted; 
 
 (b) after sub -section ( 1), t he following sub -section shall be inserted, 
 namely:— 
 
  ―(1A) Where the contraventions falls under any of the three clauses 
  of sub-section (1), the award of punishment shall be in accordance  
  with the maximum punishment provided under the clauses being  
  so contravened.‖. 
 18.  In section 73 of the principal Act,— 
 
  (a) for the words ―which may extend to three months, or with fine  
  which may extend to one thousand rupees,‖, the words ―which may 

  extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one lakh  
  rupees," shall be substituted; 
 
  (b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
  ―Provided that in case the contraventions of any provision of this  
  Act or of any rule, or regulation, bye-law or of any order made  
  thereunder continues, additional fines shall be imposed which may 
  extend to one thousand rupees for each day on which the   
  contravention is continued, and, if such contravention continues  
  beyond a period of one year after the date of conviction or   
  contravention, the offender shall be punishable with    
  imprisonment for a term, which may extend to seven years.‖. 
 
 
 19.  After section 74 of the principal Act, the following section shall  be 
 inserted, namely:— 
 
  ―74A. Where any person is prosecuted, or proceeded against, for  
  contravening any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, or  
  regulation, or bye-law or order made thereunder, it shall be for the  
  person who is alleged to have failed to comply with such duty or  
  requirement, to prove that it was not reasonably practicable, or, as 
  the case may be, all practicable measures, were taken, to satisfy  
  the safety requirements, duty or other requirements, as the case  
  may be.‖. 
 
 20.  In section 76 of the principal Act,— 
 
  (a) for the words ―all or any of the directors thereof‖, the words  
  ―managing director, all or any of the directors thereof or where the  
  owner of a mine is a foreign company, all or any of its principal  
  officers, by whatever name called, including its director or   
  secretary‖ shall be substituted; 
   
  (b) in the proviso,— 
 
  (i) in clauses (a), (b) and (c), the words ―or managers‖ occurring at  
  the end, shall be omitted; 
 
  (ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
   
  ―(d) in the case of a foreign company, any of its principal officers,  
  by whatever name called, including its director or secretary,‖; 
 

  (iii) after clause (d) as so inserted, in the long line, the words ―or  
  manager‖ occurring at both the places, shall be omitted. 
 
 
 21.  After section 76 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
 inserted, namely:— 
  
 ―76A. Nothing contained in this Act shall absolve any person from his 
 liability under this Act, if such person had or has ultimate control over 
 the affairs of the business of the mines.‖. 
  

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
 The Mines Act, 1952, was enacted with a view to amending and 
consolidating the law  relating to the regulation of labour and safety in mines. 
The Act, inter alia, regulates the  working conditions in mines by providing for 
measures to be taken for the safety of the  workers employed therein and 
certain amenities for them. The said Act was amended i n 1983 by the Mines 
(Amendment) Act, 1983, inter alia , to provide for the prohibition of the  
employment of persons below eighteen years of age, inspection of mines by 
workers representatives, safety committees and to regulate the use of 
machinery to take c are of the  hazards associated with the introduction of new 
types of machines. 
 
2. Since the last amendment was made in 1983 there have been several 
developments in the area of technology, scale of operation, working 
environment and work practices in  coal, non-coal and oil sector. Operations 
are getting more and more mechanised with  introduction of heavy machines, 
shallow deposits are getting depleted and mines are  becoming deeper and 
complicated and operators from other parts of the world have started  acquiring 
mining rights and managing mining operations within our country. This has 
created a new safety and health risk scenario at the work places in these 
sectors. In view of such  developments the amendments have been proposed to 
the Bill mainly to keep  pace with the  changes at work places in the mining 
sector and thereby attempting to effectively manage  the safety and health risk 
to the work persons employed in these sectors. 
 
3. The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011 proposes to amend the Mines Act, 1952, 
inter alia, to,— 
 
 (a) amend the ‗‗long title‘‘ of the Act so as to reflect therein the regulation 
 of conditions of work and welfare of persons employed in mines; 
 
 (b) clarify that the applicability of the Act to whole of India includes up to 
 the Exclusive Economic Zone and Maritime Zones of India as defined 
 under the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone 
 and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976; 
 
 (c) substitute the definition of ‗‗owner‘‘ so as to provide that a person or 
 authority having ultimate control over the affairs of the mine be the 
 owner and specifically provide for the person who would be the owner in 
 the case of (i) company  incorporated in India; (ii) foreign company; (iii) 
 firm and other association of persons; 
 (d) define ‗‗foreign company‘‘ with reference to the Companies Act, 1956; 
 

 (e) make provisions for appointment of sufficient number of ‗‗officials‘‘ 
 having prescribed qualifications for the effective supervision of all 
 operations, equipment, installation and sets to ensure compliance of the 
 provisions of the Act and rules; 
 
 (f) increase the penalties,— 
 
 (i)  in case of obstruction of Chief Inspector or an Inspector in the 
 discharge of his duties under section 63, from ‗‗five hundred rupees ‘‘ to 
 ‗‗fifty thousand rupees‘‘; 
  
 (ii)  in case of falsification of records under section 64, from ‗‗one 
 thousand rupees‘‘ to ‗‗one lakh rupees‘‘; 
 
 (iii)  in case of using false certificate of fitness under section 65, from 
 ‗‗two  hundred rupees‘‘ to ‗‗twenty thousand rupees‘‘; 
  
  (iv)  in case of omission to furnish plans, etc., under section 66, from 
 ‗‗one thousand rupees‘‘ to ‗‗one lakh rupees‘‘; 
  
 (v)  in case of contravention of provisions regarding employment of 
 labour under section 67, from  ‗‗one thousand rupees‘‘ to ‗‗one lakh 
 rupees‘‘; 
 
 (vi) in case of employment of persons below eighteen years of age 
 under section 68, from ‗‗five hundred rupees‘‘ to ‗‗fifty thousand rupees‘‘; 
 
 (vii)  in case of failure to appoint a manager of mines, in contravention 
 of the provisions of section 17, under section 69, from ‗‗three months, or 
 with fine which may extend to two thousand and five hundred rupees‘‘ to 
 ‗‗one year, or with fine which may extend  to two lakh and fifty thousand 
 rupees‘‘; 
 
 (viii)  in case of failure to give notice of accident, in contravention of the 
 provisions of sub -section (1) of section 23, under section 70, from ‗‗five 
 hundred rupees‘‘ to ‗‗fifty thousand rupees‘‘; 
 
 (ix)  in case of contravention of certain regulations under section 72A, 
 from, ‗‗six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand 
 rupees‘‘ to ‗‗one year, or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees‘‘; 
 
 (x)  in case of contravention of the any order issued under section 22 
 relating to powers of inspectors when causes of danger not expressly 
 provided against exist or when employment of persons is dangerous, 
 under section 72B,  from ‗‗two years imprisonment and fine which may 

 extend to five thousand rupees‘‘ to ‗‗five years imprisonment and fine 
 which may extend to five lakh rupees‘‘; 
 
 (xi)  provided in section 72C of the Act for contravention of law with 
 dangerous results; 
  
 (xii)  provided in section 73 of the Act for contravention of any provision 
 of the Act or of any rule or regulation or bye -law or of any order made 
 thereunder of which no penalty is specified in the Act; 
 
 (g)  insert a new section 74A so as to shift the burden of proof upon 
 the person who is being prosecuted or pr oceeded against to prove that it 
 was not reasonably  practicable , or, all practicable measures to satisfy 
 the safety requirements were taken; 
 
 (h) amend section 76 so as to enlarge the scope to cover the foreign 
 companies and to take away the ‗‗manager ‘‘ out of the scope of the said 
section; and  
 
  (i) to insert a new section 76A to provide that the person who has  
  actual ultimate control over the affairs of the mines would continue 
  to be liable for the contravention of the provisions of the Act or of  
  any rule or regulation or bye-law or order made thereunder. 
 
 4.  With all the above amendments new mining legislation has become 
utmost necessary  that should not only embrace the current needs of the 
prevailing environment but also address the future needs of the profession. 
 
 5.  The bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
 
 
MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
NEW DELHI; 
The 9th March, 2011. 
  

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE MINES ACT, 1952 
(35 OF 1952) 
 
 An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to the regulation of 
labour and safety in mines. 
 
*    *    *    *    * 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
 1. (1)  *   *   *   *   * 
 
(2)  It extends to the whole of India. 
 
   *   *   *   *   * 
 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
  
  *   *   *   *   * 
 
 (c)  "agent", when used in relation to a mine, means every person, 
 whether appointed as such or not, who, acting or purporting to act on 
 behalf of the owner,  takes part in the management, control, supervision 
 or direction of the mine or of any part thereof; 
   
  *   *   *   *   * 
 
 (l) "owner", when used in relation to a mine, means any person who is 
 the immediate proprietor or lessee or occupier of the mine or of any part 
 thereof and in the  case of a mine the business whereof is being carried 
 on by a liquidator or receiver, such  liquidator or receiver; but does not 
 include a person who merely receives a royalty,  rent or fine from the 
 mine, or is merely the proprietor of the mine, subject to any lease,  grant 
 or licence for the working thereof, or is merely the owner of the soil and 
 not interested in the minerals of the mine; but any contractor or sub -
 lessee for the working  of a mine or any part thereof shall be subject to 
 this Act in like manner as if he were an  owner, but not so as to exempt 
 the owner from any liability; 
  *   *   *   *   * 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER IX 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
 
 63. (1) Whoever obstructs the Chief Inspector, an Inspector, or any 
person authorised under section 8 in the discharge of his duties under this 
Act, or refuses or  wilfully neglects to afford the Chief Inspector, Inspector or 
such person any reasonable  facility for making any entry, inspection 
examination or inquiry authorised by or under  this Act in relation to any mine, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which  may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
 
 (2) Whoever refuses to produce on the demand of the Chief Inspector or 
Inspector any registers or other documents kept in pursuance of this Act, or 
prevents or attempts to  prevent or does anything which he has reason to 
believe to be likely to prevent any p erson from appearing before or being 
examined by an inspecting officer acting in pursuance of his  duties under this 
Act, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees. 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 
Definitions. 
8 
Obstruction. 
9 
64. Whoever— 
 
 (a) counterfeits, or knowingly makes a false statement in, any certificate, 
or any official copy of a certificate, granted under this Act, or 
 
(b) knowingly uses as true any such counterfeit or false certificate, or 
 
(c) makes or produces or uses any false declaration, statement or evidence 
knowing the same to be false, for the purpose of obtaining for himself or for any 
other person a certificate, or the renewal of a certificate, under this Act, or any 
employment in a mine, or 
 
(d) falsifies any plan, section, register or record, the maintenance of which is 
required by or under this Act or produces before any authority such false plan, 
section, register or record, knowing the same to be false, or 
 
(e) makes, gives or delivers any plan, return, notice, record or report containing 
a statement, entry or detail which is not to the best of his knowledge or belief 
true, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 

three months, or with  fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
 
65. Whoever knowingly uses or attempts to use as a certificate of fitness 
granted to  himself under section 43 a certificate granted to another person 
under that section, or,  having been granted a certificate of fitness t o himself 
under that section, knowingly allows  it to be used, or allows an attempt to use 
it to be made by another person, shall be punishable  with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one months, or with fine which may extend  to two 
hundred rupees, or with both. 
 
66. Any person who, without reasonable excuse the burden of proving which 
shall lie upon him, omits to make or furnish in the prescribed form or manner 
or at or within the  prescribed time any plan, section, return, notice, register, 
record or report required by or under this Act to be made or furnished shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
 
67. Whoever, save as permitted by section 38, contravenes any provision of 
this Act or of any regulation, rule or bye -law or of any order made thereunder 
prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment or presence of persons in 
or about a mine shall be punishable  with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, 
or with both. 
 
68. If a person below eighteen years of age is employed in a mine in 
contravention of section 40, the owner, agent or manager of such mine shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
 
69. Whoever in contravention of the provisions of section 17, fails to appoint a 
manager shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to three months,  or with fine which may extend to two thousand and five 
hundred rupees, or with both. 
 
70. (1) Whoever in contravention of the provision of sub -section (1) of section 
23 fails to give notice of any accidental occurrence or to post a copy of the 
notice on the special notice board referred to in that sub -section and to keep it 
there for the period specified shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with fine  which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or with both. 
 
(2) Whoever in contravention of a direction made by the Central Governm ent 
under sub-section (3) of section 23 fails to record in the prescribed register or 
to give notice of any  accidental occurrence shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 

72A. Whoever contravenes any provision of any regulation or of any bye -law or 
of any order made thereunder, relating to matters specified in clauses ( d), (i), 
(m), (n), (o), (p),(r), (s) and (u) of section 57 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may  extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
 
72B. Whoever continues to work in a mine in contravention of any order issued 
under sub-section (1 A), sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of section 22 for 
under sub-section (2) of section 22A shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to two  years, and shall also be liable to fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees: 
 
 Provided that in the a bsence of special and adequate reasons to the 
contrary to be recorded in writing in the judgment of the court, such fine shall 
not be less than two thousand rupees. 
 
72C. (1) Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any regulation, 
rule or  bye-law or of any order made thereunder other than an order made 
under sub -section ( 1A) or sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of section 22 or 
under sub-section (2) of section 22A shall be punishable— 
 
(a) if such contravention results in loss of life, with imprisonment which may 
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or 
with both; or 
 
(b) if such contravention results in serious bodily injury, with imprisonment 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend  to three 
thousand rupees, or with both; or 
 
(c) if such contravention otherwise causes injury or danger to persons 
employed in the mine or other persons in or about the mine, with 
imprisonment which may extend  to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both: 
 
 Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
contrary to be  recorded in writing in the judgment of the court, such fine, in 
the case of a contravention referred to in clause (a), shall not be less than three 
thousand rupees. 
 *   *   *   *   * 
 
73. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any regulation, rule or 
byelaw or of any order made thereunder for the contravention of which no 
penalty is hereinbefore  provided, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months,  or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 

* * * * * 
76. Where the owner of a mine is a firm or other association of individuals, all, 
or any of the partners  or members thereof or where the owner of a mine is a 
company, all or any of the  directors thereof or where the owner of a mine is a 
Government or any local authority, all or  any of the officers or persons 
authorised by such Government or local authority, as the case  may be, to 
manage the affairs of the mine, may be prosecuted and punished under this 
Act for any offence for which the owner of a mine is punishable: 
 
 Provided that where a firm, association or company has given notice in 
writing to the Chief Inspector that it has nominated,— 
 
 (a) in the case of a firm, any of its partners or managers; 
 
 (b) in the case of an association, any of its members or managers; 
 
 (c) in the case of a company, any of its directors or managers, 
 
who is resident, in each case in any place to which this Act extends and who is 
in each case either in fact in charge of the management of, or holds the largest 
number of shares in such  firm, association or company, to assume the 
responsibility of the owner of the mine for the  purposes of this Act, such 
partner, member, director or manager, as the case may be, shall, so  long as he 
continues to so reside and be in charge or hold the largest member of shares as 
aforesaid, be deemed to be the owner of the mine for the purposes of thi s Act 
unless a notice  in writing cancelling his nomination or stating that he has 
ceased to be a partner, member,  director or manager, as the case may be, is 
received by the Chief Inspector. 
 
Explanation.—Where a firm, association or company has different 
establishments or branches of different units in any establishment or branch, 
different persons may be nominated  under this proviso in relation to different 
establishments or branches or units and the person  so nominated shall, with 
respect only to the est ablishment, branch or unit in relation to which  he has 
been nominated, be deemed to be the owner of the mine. 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
further to amend the Mines Act, 1952. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Mallikarjun Kharge, Minister of Labour and Employment) 
GMGIPMRND—7175RS(S3)—15-03-2011. 

 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 28TH APRIL, 2011.  
 
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee 
Room `B‘, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi to have briefing by 
the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment on (i) 
―The Labour Laws (Exemption from furnishing returns and 
maintaining registers by certain establishments) Amendment Bill, 
2011‖ and (ii)―The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011‖. 
  
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.     Shri K. Murugesan Anandan 
3.     Shri Raj Babbar 
4.     Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
5.     Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
6.     Shri Hassan Khan 
7.     Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8.     Shri P. Lingam 
9.     Shri Hari Manjhi 
10. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Ramkishun 
12. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
13. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
14. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
15. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
16. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
17. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
18. Shri Rajaram 
19. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 

20. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
21. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
  SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 2.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 
 
Witnesses 
Ministry of Labour and Employment 
Sl.No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri P.C. Chaturvedi Secretary (L&E) 
 
2. Shri Ravi Mathur Additional Secretary  
 
3. Dr. Vinita Kumar Labour & Employment Adviser 
 
4. Shri A.C. Pandey Joint Secretary 
 
5. Shri N.K. Prasad Chief Labour Commissioner 
(Central) 
 
6. Shri K.M. Gupta Economic Adviser 
 
7. Shri Satish Puri DGMS 
 
8. Shri A.K. Sinha Director of Mines Safety 
 
9. Shri B.P. Singh Director of Mines Safety 
 
 
 
 
 

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
the Ministry of Labour &  Employment to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing by them on ‗The Labour Laws 
(Exemption from furnishing returns and maintaining registers by 
certain establishments) Amendment Bill, 2011‘ and the ‗The Mines 
(Amendment) Bill, 2011‘.  Aft er introduction by the representatives 
of the Ministry, the Committee first took up ―The Labour Laws 
(Exemption from furnishing returns and maintaining registers by 
certain establishments) Amendment Bill, 2011‖.   
 
3. XX    XX    XX 
   
4. XX    XX    XX 
  
5. Some Members suggested that the Committee hear the views 
of Trade Unions on the proposed amendments before suggesting 
amendments to the Bill. 
6. The Committee then took up ‗The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 
2011‘. The Committee were briefed about the proposed  
amendments in the Bill with the help of power point presentation.  

Members sought clarifications on the amendments.  The Secretary 
responded to the queries of the Chairman and members. 
7. The main discussion on the ‗ The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 
2011‘ was held on the following points:- 
(i) Working conditions of the off shore workers. 
(ii) Need to disburse the amount collected from fines as 
compensation to the victims of a mishap. 
(iii) Need to increase penalty and imprisonment to the convicts in 
case of loss of life. 
(iv) Need to clarify ‗person who has ultimate control over affairs‘ 
under newly inserted sec 76(a). 
(v) Need to set the time frame for notifying the regulation under 
section 58. 
(vi) Need to give negative points to those employers who violate 
labour laws, against whom charges are framed and are 
penalized while determining the eligibility for grant of a new 
license or renewal of license etc. and such information to be 
put up on the website. 

8. The Members were unanimously of the view that the 
Committee should undertake a study visit, preferably in the last 
week of May, 2011 or first week of June, 2011 to some major mines 
including oil mines in Bihar, C hhattisgarh and  Gujarat so as to 
interact with the mine workers and mine owners in order to enable 
them to formulate an objective Report on the Bill.  The Chairman 
concurred with the views of the Members and directed the 
Committee Secretariat to prepare a tentative study visit programme  
covering coal, oil and iron mines. 
9. A copy each of List of Points  relating to proposed amendments 
in both the Bills was handed over to the Secretary for furnishing 
replies thereto to the Committee, within a week. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
10. A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
XX--Do not pertain to this report. 
  

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 11TH MAY, 2011.  
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee 
Room `B‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to hear the views of 
the Central Trade Unions on the  (i) ―The Labour Laws (Exemption 
from furnishing returns and maintaining registers b y certain 
establishments) Amendment Bill, 2011‖ and (ii)―The Mines 
(Amendment) Bill, 2011‖. 
  
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
    2.  Shri K. Murugesan Anandan 
3.  Shri Raj Babbar 
    4.  Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
    5.  Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
    6.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
    7.  Shri P. Lingam 
    8.  Shri Hari Manjhi 
    9.  Shri P.R. Natarajan 
  10.  Shri S. Pakkirappa 
  11.  Shri P.L. Punia 
  12.  Shri Ramkishun 
  13.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
  14.  Dr. Virendra Kumar 
   RAJYA SABHA  
  15.   Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
   16. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 17. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 18. Shri Rajaram 
 19. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 20. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
21.   Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 

  SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 
 
Witnesses 
LIST OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF CENTRAL TRADE UNIONS 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Central 
Trade Union 
Name of the Representative 
1.  Bhartiya Mazdoor 
Sangh 
(i)  Shri Shyam Sunder 
Sharma 
(ii) Shri Barun Kumar Sinha 
2.  Centre of Indian Trade 
Unions 
 Shri A.K. Padmanabhan, 
President 
 
3. All India United Trade 
Union Centre 
Shri R.K. Sharma Member, 
AIUTUC 
4. Hind Mazdoor Sabha Comrade R.A. Mital, National 
Secretary 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
the Central Trade Unions to the sitting of the Committee convened 
to hear their views on ‗The Labour Laws (Exemption from furnishing 
returns and maint aining registers by certain establishments) 
Amendment Bill, 2011‘ and the ‗The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011‘ 
and also drew their attention to Direction 55 of Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha.  The Chairman, thereafter, sought their views 

on the various  provisions of  `The Labour Laws (Exemption from 
furnishing returns and maintaining registers by certain 
establishments) Amendment Bill, 2011‘ in the first instance. 
 
3. XX    XX   XX 
4. The representatives of the Trade Unions expressed their views 
and gave their suggestions on various provisions of the `The Mines 
(Amendment) Bill, 2011‘ as under:-  
(i) Non-inclusion of health and safety and other measures for 
 improving the working conditions. 
(ii) Restriction for the foreign investment in mine operations. 
(iii) Special Economic Zone (SEZ) and Export Promotion Zone 
 (EPZ) have been left out. 
(iv) Exclusion of `Manager‘ in Section -2 of Clause `C‘ of the 
 Principal Act, reasons not given. 
(v) In Clause (1) of the Principal Act the definition of `Owner‘ has  
 been amended restricting to a `person or authority having 
 ultimate control‘.  Such restricted meaning assigned the term 
 owner certainly excludes the other important authorities, who 
 have been authorized by the owner to manage the various 
 activities of the mines.  
(vi) In the amendment sought for enhancing the penalties and 
 punishment the words `five hundred rupees‘ has been 
 replaced by inserting `Rupees fifty thousand‘.  The amendment 

 had not been proposed keeping in view the gravity of offence, 
 hence it should be at least Rupees one lakh. 
 
5. The queries raised by members, pertaining to both the Bills, 
were also responded to by the representatives of Trade Unions. 
 
6. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of Trade 
Unions for giving valuable suggestions on both the Bills. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
XX Do not pertain to this report. 
 
  

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 19TH MAY, 2011.  
 
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee 
Room `D‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to hear the views of 
the Central Trade Unions on the  (i) ―The Labour Laws (Exemption 
from furnishing returns and maintaining registers by  certain 
establishments) Amendment Bill, 2011‖ and (ii)―The Mines 
(Amendment) Bill, 2011‖. 
  
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
    2. Shri K. Murugesan Anandan 
    3. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
    4. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
    5. Shri P. Lingam 
    6. Shri Hari Manjhi 
    7. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
    8. Smt. Mausam Noor 
    9. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
   10.Shri Ramkishun 
   11.Dr. Virendra Kumar 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 12.Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
 13.Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
 14.Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 15.Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 16.Shri Rajaram 
 17.Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
18.Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 

  SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 
Witnesses 
(A)  REPRESENTATIVES OF CENTRAL TRADE UNIONS 
 
1. Indian National Trade 
Union Congress (INTUC) 
Shri G.B. Nagpure, (Safety 
Expert) 
2. All India Trade Union 
Congress 
Shri H. Mahadevan, Dy. 
General Secretary 
    
(B) REPRESENTATIVES OF FICCI 
 
1. Shri Ravi Wig, Member 
2.  Shri H.S. Tandon, Member Executive 
 
 
 (C) LIST OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF CII 
 
1. Shri B. Muthuraman, President, CII 
2. Shri Sushanta Sen, Principal Advisor 
3.  Dr. Sarita Nagpal, Dy. Director General 
4.  Shri Sunil Mishra, Director 
5.  Shri Shreeram Lakshman, Deputy Director 
6.  Shri Sanjay Tripathi, DGM-HRD 
7.  Shri Sanjay Kumar, Senior Manager (Legal), Teamlease 
Services 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
the Central Trade Unions to the sitting of the Committee convened 
to hear their views on ‗The Labour Laws (Exemption from furnishing 
returns and maintaining registers by certain establishments) 

Amendment Bill, 2011‘ and the ‗The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011‘ 
and also drew their attention to Direction 55 of Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha.  The Chairman, thereafter, sought their views 
on the various provisions of the Bills, one by one. 
3. No co mments were offered by FICCI on 'The Mines 
(Amendment) Bill, 2011'. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The views of CII on 'The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011' were: 
 
Views of CII:- 
 
(i) The definition of owner in the Act be made as in the 
Companies Act in Section 5 w hich defines a certain 
delegation of authority and responsibility. 
(ii) The definition of the ownership and accordingly whatever 
offences are made should be in line with the ownership 
definition. 
4. The queries raised by the Members on both the Bills, were also 
responded to by the representatives of the Trade Unions and the 
representatives of the federations of industry. 

5. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Trade 
Unions and the representatives of the federation of industry for 
giving valuable suggestions on both the Bills before they withdrew. 
 
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 30TH MAY, 2011.  
 
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1230  hrs. in Committee 
Room `B‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to hear the views of 
the representatives of (i) Trade Unions and (ii) Federation of Indian 
Micro and Small & Medium Enterprises on `The Labour Laws 
(Exemption from furnishing returns and maintaining registers by 
certain establishments) Amendment Bill, 2011‘ and `The Mines 
(Amendment) Bill, 2011‘. 
 PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   2.  Shri K. Murugesan Anandan 
   3.   Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
   4.   Shri Hassan Khan 
   5.   Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
   6.   Shri Hari Manjhi 
   7.   Shri P. Balram Naik 
   8.   Shri P.R. Natarajan 
   9.   Shri P. L. Punia 
  10.  Shri Ramkishun 
  11.  Dr. Virendra Kumar 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 12.  Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
 13.  Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
 14.  Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 15.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 16.  Shri Rajaram 
 17.  Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
   

 
SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 
Witnesses 
LIST OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF TRADE UNIONS  
Sl.
No 
Name of the Central 
Trade Union Name of the 
Representative 
1. All India Central Council 
of Trade Unions (AICCTU) 
Shri Santosh Roy,  National 
Secretary 
2. Trade Union 
Coordination Centre 
Shri S.P. Tiwari, General 
Secretary 
3. National Front of Indian 
Trade Unions  
Shri S.K. Mishra, Vice 
President  
4. Federation of Indian 
Micro and Small & 
Medium Enterprises 
(i) Shri Naveen Jain -CEC 
Member & Former 
Treasurer 
(ii)Shri V.N. Sastry -Joint 
Secretary (Projects) 
5. Labour Progressive 
Federation 
Shri C. Kuppusami, Ex -MP, 
President 
6. United Trades Union 
Congress (UTUC) 
Shri Abani Roy, President 
 
 
 
 

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
the Central Trade Unions to the sitting of the Committee convened 
to hear their views on ‗The Labour Laws (Exemption from furnishing 
returns and maintaining registers by certain establishments) 
Amendment Bill, 2011‘ and the ‗The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011‘ 
and also drew their attention to Direction 55 of Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha.  The Chairman, thereafter, sought their views 
on the various provisions of `The Labour Laws (Exemption fro m 
furnishing returns and maintaining registers by certain 
establishments) Amendment Bill, 2011‘ in the first instance. 
3. XX   XX   XX 
 
Views of FISME:- 
Welcomed the amendments as suggested in the Bill. 
4. The representatives of the Trade Unions expressed their views 
and gave their suggestions on various provisions of the `The Mines 
(Amendment) Bill, 2011‘ as under:-  
 

Views of Trade Unions:- 
 
(i) Punishments  needs to be increased. 
(ii) The proposed amendments should not help in reducing the 
responsibility of the owners and management of any level. 
 Views of FISME:- 
 
The FISME while supporting the Bill and stated that they will 
sent their views in fifteen days in writing. 
 
5. The queries raised by members, pertaining to both the Bills, 
were also responded to by the representatives of Trade Unions. 
6. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of Trade 
Unions for giving valuable suggestions on both the Bills. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX Do not pertain to this report. 

 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 14TH DECEMBER, 2011.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs in Room 
No.116, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt 
the draft Reports on `The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011‘  and `The 
Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employ ment and 
Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2011'  of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment.  
 
PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   2. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
   3. Shri Pakauri Lal 
   4. Shri Narahari Mahato 
   5.  Shri Hari Manjhi 
   6.  Shri P. Balram Naik 
   7.  Shri Jayaram Pangi 
   8.  Shri S. Pakkirappa 
   9.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
 10.  Ms. J. Shantha 
 11.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
22.  Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
24.  Shri Aayanur Manjunatha  
25.  Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
26.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
27.  Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 

 
 
  
  SECRETARIAT 
          
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
3. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Under Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the draft Reports on  `The Mines (Amendment) 
Bill, 2011‘  and `The Inter -State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2011'   
  
3. The Committee took up the draft Reports for consideration. 
The Committee  adopted the draft Reports without any modification.   
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the 
same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  
 
  

 