 
1 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-10) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
             
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December 2009/Agrahayana,  1931 (Saka) 


       FIRST REPORT 
 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-10) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
  
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009 
 
           
Presented to  Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2009   
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on9th December, 2009  
 
 
    
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December 2009/Agrahayana  1931 (Saka) 


CONTENTS 
PAGE(s)                
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION                              (iv) 
 
          
REPORT            1-39 
           
     
                                                   ANNEXURES 
        
 (i)         The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009     
(ii)          Minutes of the sitting of the Committee   
                                                         
  
 
  
 
 
   
   
   

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL-CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
     2. Shri  M. Anandan  
     3. Shri  P. Balram (Mahabubabad)  
     4. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq    
     5. Shri  Sudarshan Bhagat  
     6. Shri  Hassan Khan  
     7. Shri  Kaushalendra Kumar  
     8. Shri P. Lingam  
     9. Shri  Hari Manjhi  
    10. Shri  P.R. Natarajan  
    11. Km. Mausam Noor  
    12. Shri  S. Pakkirappa  
    13. Shri  Ramkishun  
    14. Shri  Mahendra Kumar Roy  
    15. Shri  Chandu Lal Sahu  
    16. Shri  Murari Lal Singh  
***17. Shri Raj Babbar  
    18. Vacant     
    19. Vacant  
    20. Vacant  
    21. Vacant 
 
 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
    22. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy  
    23. Shri  Rudra Narayan Pany  
 **24. Shri  Pyarelal Khandelwal  
    25. Shri  Rajaram  
    26. Smt. Renubala Pradhan  

   27. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
  *28. Shri  Mohammad Adeeb  
   29. Vacant    
   30. Vacant   
   31. Vacant  
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*   Changed the nomination from Committee on Labour to         
Committee on Commerce w.e.f. 17th September, 2009. 
      **  Expired on 6th October, 2009. 
            ***  Nominated w.e.f. 3rd December, 2009. 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
                
1.    Shri Devender Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri B.S. Dahiya    - Director  
3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
4.    Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja   - Under Secretary 
     
  

            INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this First Report on `The Industrial Disputes 
(Amendment) Bill, 2009‘ of the Ministry of Labour and Employment.   
 
2. The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009‘ was 
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 26 th February, 2009 and  referred to 
the Committee by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in consultation with the 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha for examination and report within three 
months from the date of publication of the reference of the Bill in 
Bulletin Part- II of Lok Sabha dated 9th September, 2009.    
3. In the process of examination of the Bill, t he Committee 
invited the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment on 22 nd October, 2009 and heard their views. T he 
Committee also sought written information on various aspects of 
the Bill from the Ministry.   
 

 
4. The Committee invited the views of major Central Trade 
Unions on the Bill through Memorandum.  On 3rd November, 2009, 
the representatives of Trade Unions also deposed before the 
Committee to share their views and give their suggestions on the 
proposed amendments. 
 
5. The Committee further took oral evidence of the officials of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment on 11th November, 2009 on the 
proposed amendments by the Government.  
 
6. The Committee considered and adopted the ir draft R eport on 
the Bill at their sitting held on  4th December, 2009.  
 
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
representatives of Trade Unions for tendering evidence before the 
Committee and furnishing written inputs/suggestions on the 
amending Bill. 

 
8. For facilitation of reference and convenience, the observations 
and recommendations of the Committee have been pri nted in bold 
in the body of the Report.  
    
 
NEW DELHI;                               HEMANAND BISWAL,      
                                    Chairman, 
4th December,  2009      Standing Committee on Labour  
13  Agrahayana, 1931  (Saka) 
  
         
  

 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Introductory 
 
 The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 essentially applies to 
organized sector, mainly benefits unskilled and semi -skilled 
workers, provides for conciliation and adjudication and regulates 
strikes and lock -outs.  In short, the Act primarily provides for a 
framework for investigation and settlement of industrial disputes.  
The Act was last amended in 1982. 
2. The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009 seeks to 
provide for: 
 
(1) amendment of the term ―appropriate Government‖ 
defined under section 2 (a) of the Act to amplify the 
existing definition; 
 
(2) enhancement of wage ceiling of a workman from one 
thousand six hundred rupees per month to ten thousand 
rupees per month under section 2 (s) of the Act; 
 
(3) direct access for t he workman to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal in case of disputes arising out of section 2A of 
the Act; 
 
(4) expanding the scope of qualifications of Presiding Officers 
of Labour Courts or Tribunals under sections 7 and 7A of 
the Act; 
 
(5)  establishment of Grievance Redressal Machinery in every 
Industrial establishment employing twenty or more 

workmen for the resolution of disputes arising out of 
individual grievances; 
 
(6) empowering the Labour Court or Tribunal to execute the 
awards, orders or settlements arrived at by Labour Court 
or Tribunal.   
 
3. The amendment proposals were discussed with social partners 
during 40 th session of Indian Labour Conference (ILC) held in 
December, 2005.  The Bill contains the proposals on which 
consensus was evolved among social partners.     
4. The Ministry of Labour and Employment also discussed the 
proposed amendments with the representatives of employers and 
employees on 21.6.2006.  The Standing Labour Committee (SLC) 
during its 41 st session held on 20.12.2006, after consi dering the 
Action Taken Report on the conclusions of 40 th session of Indian 
Labour Conference suggested that the Government should go ahead 
with those amendments on which consensus has been arrived at.    
The consensus was arrived at on the following six proposals:- 
(i) Section 2 (a)- Amplification of definition of `Appropriate 
Government‘. 
 
(ii) Section 2A - Direct reference of disputes to Central 
Government Industrial Tribunals -(CGITs)-cum-Labour 
Courts (CGITs) in cases of 
termination/dismissal/retrenchment/discharge. 
 
(iii)  Relaxation of qualifications of Presiding Officers  (POs) 
under Section 7 and 7A. 
 
(iv) Chapter-IIB- Setting up of Grievance Redressal 
Machinery for redressal  of grievances of individual 
workman. 
 

(v) Section 38 (2) (c ) - Salaries and Allowances and other 
terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officers of 
CGIT-cum-Labour Courts and National Tribunals. 
(vi)  Section 11 - Power to enforce decree by Central 
Government Industrial Tribunals -cum-Labour Courts 
and National Tribunals. 
 
5. The salient features of the Industrial Disputes Amendment 
(Bill), 2009 are as follows:- 
 Amendment to Section 2 
 The Bill seeks to amplify the definition of 
`Appropriate Government‘ to remove certain 
ambiguities in its interpretations. 
 
 In addition to existing provision the Central 
Government shall be `Appropriate Government‘ for: 
* any company whose share capital is held 
by the Central Government to the extent 
of 51% or more. 
* any corporation established under any 
Act of Parliament. 
* subsidiary compa nies and autonomous 
bodies in the Central sphere. 
 State Government shall be the Appropriate 
Government for State PSUs, subsidiary companies 
and autonomous bodies in State sphere and all 
others not covered by the Central Government. 
 
 

Amendment to Section 2 (s) (iv) 
 At present, persons employed in supervisory 
capacity drawing wages exceeding Rs.1600/ - per 
month is not treated as workman. 
 
 The Bill seeks to enhance the wage ceiling to 
Rs.10,000/- per month. 
 
 This will bring parity with other labour legislatio ns 
and match ground realities. 
 
Amendment to Section 2 A 
 In the existing provision, adjudication by CGIT -
cum-LC only after reference by the `Appropriate 
Government‘. 
 
 This causes delay in grievance redressal. 
 
 The Bill provides for direct access to Industrial 
Tribunals/Labour Courts to the individual 
workman. 
 
 Direct access is limited to cases of retrenchment, 
discharge, dismissal or termination of services of an 
individual workman. 
 
 Individual workman can directly access the CGIT -
cum-LC after the ex piry of 3 months from the date 
of making an application to the conciliation officer.  

 
 Direct access can be made before expiry of 3 years 
from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
etc. 
Amendment to Section 7 & 7 A 
 The Bill seeks to expand the sco pe of eligibility for 
appointment for the posts of Pos in CGITs-cum-LC. 
 
 In addition to the existing qualifications, the 
following will also become eligible: 
 
* Officers of the CLS in Grade -III and Officers of 
State Labour Service of the rank of Joint 
Labour Commissioner with 7 years post law 
degree experience including 3 years as 
Conciliation Officer.  
* Officers of the Indian Legal Service in Grade -
III. 
* The officers of the Central/State Labour 
Departments will not be appointed unless they 
resign from the service. 
 Setting up of Grievance Settlement Authorities – Chapter 
IIB. 
 Grievance Settlement Authorities provided for in 
Chapter IIB of ID (Amendment) Act, 1982 could not 
be enforced in the absence of notified rules for the 
purpose. 
 The rules could not be notified due to lack of 
unanimity among Trade Unions. 
 Now the modified provision is sought to be made 
with adequate details.  There will be no need to 
frame separate rules. 

 The Bill makes provision for setting up of GRM to 
provide for in-house dispute resolution mechanism. 
 All industrial establishments with 20 or more 
workmen shall set up GRM with one stage appeal. 
 These provisions shall not apply to the workmen for 
whom there is an established Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism in existence. 
Amendment to Section 11 
 At present, Tribunals have no power to enforce the 
Awards/orders given by them. 
 
 For effective enforcement, the Bill provides: 
* That any award, order or settlement by a 
Tribunal/NIT shall be executable as a 
decree of Civil Court. 
* And also to pro vide for transmitting to 
Civil Courts having civil jurisdiction for 
execution. 
  
Amendment to Section 38 
 At present, there are no specific provisions in the Act 
with regard to salaries and allowances and other terms 
and conditions of service of Presiding Officers. 
 
 The Bill now empowers the Government to  
  *  make rules to decide and review the salaries  
   and  allowances and other terms and   
   conditions of  appointment of POs. 
  

CHAPTER-II 
 
Clause by Clause analysis of  `The Industrial Disputes 
(Amendment) Bill, 2009’ 
 
I. Appropriate Government-Amendment to Section 2  
6. (a) In sub-clause (i), for the words ―major port, the Central 
  Government, and‖, the words ―major port, any company  
  in which  not less than fifty-one per cent of the paid-up  
  share capital is held  by the Central Government, or any  
  corporation,  not  being  a corporation referred to in this  
  clause,  established   by  or  under   any  law  made  by  
  Parliament,  or  the  Central Public sector undertaking,  
  subsidiary   companies    set   up   by    the   principal  
  undertaking   and   autonomous   bodies   owned   or  
  controlled  by  the Central Government, the Central   
  Government, and‖ shall be substituted; 
 
(b) for sub -clause (ii), the following sub -clause s hall be 
 substituted, namely:- 
 
      ―(ii) in relation to any other industrial dispute, 
 including  the  State public sector undertaking, 
 subsidiary  companies set  up by the principal 
 undertaking and  autonomous bodies owned or 
 controlled by the State  Government, the State 
 Government.‖; 
 
 

 
 
7. The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment 
stated as follows:- 
―It  is  sought  to  amplify  the  definition  of  Appropriate 
Government under Section 2(a) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act,  1947. It is further clarified that the Central 
Government would be appropriate Government for any 
company in which not less than fifty -one  per cent of the 
paid-up share capital is held by the Central Government, 
or any corporation, (not being a corporation referred to in 
this clause) established by or under any law made by 
Parliament, or the Central Public Sector Undertaking, 
subsidiary companies set up by the principal 
undertaking and autonomous bodies owned or controlled 
by the Central  Government. 
  The Central Government is the appropriate 
Government in respect of categories listed in Section 2 (a) 
(i) of the I.D. Act, 1947 . In addition to  this State 
Government  will  be  the appropriate Government   in 
relation to any other industrial d ispute, including the 
State Public Sector Undertaking, subsidiary companies 
set up by the principal undertaking and autonomous 
bodies owned or controlled by the State Government.‖   
8. When asked why `Industrial disputes between the contractor 
and the cont ract labour engaged in an enterprise/establishment‘, 
as recommended by the Second National Labour Commission, have 
not been included under the amended definition of the appropriate 
government, the Ministry in their post evidence reply stated as 
follows:- 
 

―Contractors  establishment is also an establishment having 
distinct identity different from that of  principal employer.  If 
the definition of ‗appropriate Government‘ for the Contractor 
under Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is based on industrial 
establishment, they are working  it may create 
complications when the contractor goes from one 
establishment to the other after completion of the work as it 
happens in case of provident fund  account.‖ 
  
II. Enhancement of wage ceiling -Amendment to Section 2 (s) 
 (iv) 
 
9. It is proposed to enhance the upper wage limit to Rs.10,000/ - 
from Rs.1600/- per month in respect the workmen who are engaged 
in supervisory work and as such one not covered under the Act. 
 
10. The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendmen t 
stated:-  
―As per the existing provision, the definition of `workman‘ 
under Section 2 (s) and definition of wages under Section 
2 (rr), a person employed in a supervisory capacity 
drawing wages exceeding Rs.1600 per month is not 
treated as a workmen unde r the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947.   
 Due to increase in wages of industrial workers  over 
the years, most of the supervisors get wages far more 
than Rs.1600 per month, and as such  are not   covered 
under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947.  In other enactments, namely  the Payment of 
Bonus Act, 1965, the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 and 
the Employees State Insurance Act, 1948, the wage limit 
for covering of the `workman‘ has been enhanced.‖ 

11. On being asked why the supervisory staff should not be kept 
out of the ‗workman‘ category irrespective of the wages they are 
drawing and be clubbed with administrative and managerial 
personnel, the Ministry in their post evidence reply stated:- 
 ―In case of small establishments, the supervisory persons 
 are paid a low salary.  If these low paid supervisors are 
 kept out of the purview of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
 they would be deprived of the benefit of  an inexpensive 
 dispute settlement mechanism.  Accordingly it is felt that 
 supervisors drawing salaries of Rs.10,000/-per month  or 
 less should be treated as workman under Industrial 
 Disputes Act, 1947.‖ 
12. When further asked to give their views on the suggestion that 
the Governme nt should lay down a list of highly paid jobs which 
presently come under ‗workman‘ category as being outside the 
purview of the laws relating to workmen, the Ministry in their reply 
stated as under:- 
 
―Apparently, the suggestion that Government should lay 
down a limit of highly paid job outside the purview of 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 appears to be reasonable.  
However, for example, if pilots who are highly paid are 
kept out of the definition of ‗workman‘, there will be no 
dispute settlement machinery f or them.   There will be 
nobody to deal with strike resorted by these pilots.  It is, 
therefore, felt that such highly paid workman doing a 
manual or clerical or technical job should continue to be 
workman until an alternative dispute resolution 
mechanism is put in place.‖ 
13. A representative of the Central Trade Union while deliberating 
on the issue stated:- 
―With regard to the next amendment, that is, section 2 (4)  
on wage limit, I think the entire trade union movement in 
the country is in one voice tha t the wage ceiling should 
go.   According to the annual survey of industries 2004 -
05, the average wages for the sugar staff, etc. were around 

Rs.20,000, to be specific, it was Rs.18,995 in 2004-05.  In 
2009-10, we are proposing an amendment of Rs.10,000, 
which is totally away from the ground reality.  So, without 
making any  argument for increasing the ceiling, we 
say that it should be totally removed…In today‘s context, 
wage cannot be a primary consideration, it should be the 
nature of job and the delegation of power...   The Supreme 
Court judgement is that  the nature of job should be 
considered and whether one has got the financial or 
 administrative power should be the criteria.  In the 
original  provision of the Act it is written,  `exercise 
either by nature of duties attached to the office or  by 
reason of power‘.  So, there is no question of ceiling.  It 
 should be totally removed.  That is our submission….‖  
   
14. In the same context, another representative of Central Trade 
Union stated that:- 
―One is regarding Section 2 about salary of Rs.10,000 for 
the  supervisors.  A lot of justification has been given by 
my  friends.  The original Act was enacted in 1947.  It   
has taken  more than 62 years to amend the Act.  If it 
takes about 63  years, then will this  Rs.10,000, or 
Rs.20,000, or  Rs.25,000 even if we suggest something 
like Rs.30,000 –have any relevance after 5 years, or 10 
years or 15 years…If it will have no relevance, then this 
Committee can make a recommendation that if the 
amount is strictly to be mentioned in the Act or the Bill, 
there should be some indexation so that the Act remains 
relevant; …Of course, the best thing would be that it is 
not mentioned at all; it is eliminated.‖ 
 

III. Direct reference of disputes to CGIT-cum-LCs- 
 Amendment  to Section 2 A 
 
15. Section 2A of the Principal Act shall be numbered as sub -
section (1) thereof and after sub -section (1) as so numbered, the 
following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-         
―(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10, 
any such workman as is specified in sub -section (1) may, 
make an application direct to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal for adjudication of the dispute referred to 
therein after the expiry of three months from the date he 
has made the application to the Co nciliation Officer of 
the appropriate Government for conciliation of the 
dispute, and in receipt of such application the Labour 
Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to 
adjudicate upon the dispute, as if it were a dispute 
referred to it by t he appropriate Government in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and all the 
provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such 
adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial 
dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government. 
(3)  The application referred to in sub -section (2) shall 
be made to the Labour Court or Tribunal before the 
expiry  of three years from the date of discharge, 
dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as  specified in sub-section (1)‖. 
16. The Ministry in their explanatory note have stated:- 
―It is sought to amend section 2A of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947  providing individual workman direct 
access to Labour Courts/Tribunals in cases of disputes 
arising out of cases falling under Section 2 A. The 
workman will be allowed to make a petition to the Labour 
Court/Tribunal within three years of the date of his 

dismissal, discharge, retrenchment or termination.  
However, the direct access to Labour Courts/Industrial 
Tribunal shall be allowed to the  individual workman only 
after allowing a time period of  three months from the 
date of making  an application to the Conciliation Officer 
for conciliation of the dispute.‖ 
17. The Bill provides that a workman can make an application 
direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication of the 
dispute after the expiry of three months from the date he has made 
the application to the Conciliation Officer. 
18. On being enquired why the workman should not be given an 
option to either go for conciliation or ap proach the Labour Court 
directly, the Ministry in their post evidence reply stated as follows:- 
―Immediately after disciplinary action is taken by the 
management, the relation between  employer and 
workman tends to be acrimonious and even the workman 
does not  feel like taking recourse to conciliation.  
However, after  passage of a few days, the attitude of 
both the parties gets  softened and  an atmosphere 
is created for  settlement in conciliation. Perhaps, this 
is the reason that 10% of the disputes aris ing out of 
termination of service (i.e. Section 2A ) are settled in 
conciliation.  If this three months limit is not kept, the 
 workman  would like to go the Labour Court 
straightaway  and miss the opportunity of settlement in 
conciliation which is most in expensive and easy method 
of resolution of industrial  dispute.   
 Settlement in conciliations heals the wound of the 
past and smoothens the way to future.  Even if a 
workman wins in Tribunal or Higher Court; its 
implementation becomes difficult due to  prolonged 
litigations. However, it has been observed that 
implementation of settlement arising out of conciliation is 
spontaneous rather than  awards by the Tribunal/Higher 
Courts.  It is, therefore, felt that the three months is ideal 
to allow these advantages to the parties mentioned above.  

Three month limit would also help in avoiding the 
choking of Tribunals with avoidable litigations.‖    
 
19. When asked by the Committee regarding difficulty in waiving 
of the period of three months for a workmen for goi ng to a Labour 
Court, the Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment stated:- 
―We will just examine this again.  We have absolutely no 
intention to dilute or curtail the advantage that is 
available to a worker.  The intension was to give him 
benefit.   But, as I said, normally, a dispute is referred 
to by the  appropriate Government to the Central 
Government  Tribunal.  After this amendment, if the 
dispute is not settled within a  period of three months, 
he can directly approach the Central Tribunal.  Tha t was 
the intention.  We will certainly examine it if it is to the 
disadvantage of the worker.‖ 
 
20. The representative of the Trade Union deliberating on the 
issue deposed:- 
―The proposal to directly approach the Labour Court is a 
welcome step.  The Conci liation Officer/Machinery used 
to take months and even years for reference of the matter 
to the Court and even in certain cases the matter was not 
referred to the Labour Court at all.  The worker should 
have the liberty either to go to the Labour Court or the 
Conciliation Officer.  It should be his choice as he is a 
dismissed person.  You are creating three months time 
and he has to wait for the Conciliation Officer and has to 
be at his mercy.  So, the worker has to spend three 
months unnecessarily.  The Co nciliation Officer does not 
have any power except to call both the parties and ask 
them to just compromise.  He has no right to give award 
or give a decision.  It is already taking ten years for the 

dismissed person to get an award from the Labour 
Court...After the expiry of three months, a retrenched 
employee  can go to CGIT or Labour Court.  I feel that 
this time  limit  of three months is too much and it 
should be reduced to 45 days.  For three months, the 
worker will not get any wages,  and he will be a lready 
coming under the pressure of livelihood.  So, it should be 
reduced to 45 days.‖ 
 
IV. Eligibility for appointment of Presiding Officers in   
 CGIT-cum-LC 
  Amendment to Section 7 
21. In section 7 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause 
(e), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- 
―(f) he is or has been a Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner(Central) or Joint Commissioner of the 
State Labour Department, having a degree in law and at 
least seven years‘ experience in the labour depar tment 
after having acquired degree in law including three years 
of experience as Conciliation Officer: 
 Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner or Joint Labour Commissioner shall be 
appointed unless he resigns from the service of the 
Central Government or State Government, as the case 
may be, before being appointed as the Presiding Officer; 
or 
          (g) he is an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade III  
  with  three years‘ experience in the grade.‖ 
 
 

 
22. In section 7A of the princip al Act, in sub -section (3), after 
clause (aa), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- 
 ―(b) he is or has been a Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner(Central) or Joint Commissioner of the 
State Labour Department, having a degree in law and at 
least s even years‘ experience in the labour department 
after having acquired degree in law including three years 
of experience as Conciliation Officer: 
 Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner or Joint Labour Commissioner shall be 
appointed unless he resigns from the service of the 
Central Government or State Government, as the case 
may be, before being appointed as the Presiding Officer; 
or 
       (c) He is an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade III with  
  three years‘ experience in the grade.‖ 
 
23. Citing the reasons for the amendment, the Ministry in their 
explanatory note stated:- 
―At present serving/retired High Court/District Judges 
are eligible to work as Presiding Officers in the Central 
Government Industrial Tribunals -cum-Labour Courts  
(CGIT-cum-LCs).   This   is   creating   considerable 
problems in the availability of officers willing to serve as 
 Presiding  Officers in the Central Government 
Industrial Tribunals-cum-Labour Courts.  The proposed 
expanding of the scope of qualification  of  Presiding 
Officers will enable the Government to appoint the 
Presiding Officers from wider range of eligible officers 
from the relevant field.‖  
  

24. The representatives of the Central Trade Union while 
deliberating on the issue during their evidence  before the 
Committee stated that there were number of Labour Courts and 
Tribunals which do not have any Presiding Officers.  If there is a 
case in Labour Court, workers have to wait for the Presiding Officer 
and his appointment.  The Workers are not sure when the Presiding 
Officer would be appointed.  This is also a complicated problem due 
to which workers had to face many difficulties and there was a need 
to pay attention to this issue. 
25. On being asked to furnish details of vacancies of Presiding 
Officers in various Labour Courts and tribunals at present and the 
emoluments being paid to them, the Ministry in their post evidence 
reply stated thus:-   
 ―The present vacancy position of Presiding Officer in 
CGIT-cum-Labour Courts are seven which includes 
Bangalore, Mumbai -1, Ahmedabad, Dhanbad -II, 
Chandigarh-II, Kolkata and Bhubaneshwar.   
 
 The salary of Presiding Officers at National 
Tribunals carries the pay scale of Rs.80,000/ - fixed 
whereas the scale of pay attached to the post of Presiding 
Officer of  the  CGITs-cum-Labour Courts  (other than 
 National  Tribunals) are as  follows: 
  (i) District Judge (Entry level) – Rs.16,750-400-19,150- 
   450-20,500/- 
  (ii) District Judge (Selection Grade) – Rs.18,750-400- 
   19,150-450-21,850-500-22,850/- 
  (iii) District Judge (Super time scale) – Rs.22,850-500- 
   24,850/- 
 
        The procedure of selection of Presiding Officers is  
  time  consuming and sometimes selected candidates  
  show their inability to join the assignment.   

               
 Ministry are aware of the problems of getting eligible 
candidates from serving and retired High Court judges 
and District Judges as Presiding Officers.  To address 
this problem  the amendment has been sought to 
include experienced  Officers of Indian Legal Service and 
Central Labour Service  having Law degree etc.  The 
benefit of this amendment will  also be available to the 
State Government who have not yet  amended their rules 
under Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  relaxing the 
qualification for appointment of Presiding  Officers of 
Labour Court/ Tribunal.‖ 
 
V. Setting up of Grievance Settlement Authorities-   
 Insertion of New Chapter IIB. 
 
26.  After Section 9 B of the Principal Act, for Chapter IIB, the 
following Chapter shall be substituted namely; -  Chapter IIB –
Grievance Redressal Machinery. 
9C.(1) Every industrial establishment employing twenty 
or more workmen shall have one or more Grievance 
Redressal Committee for the resolution of disputes 
arising out of individual grievances. 
(2) The Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of 
equal number of members from the employer and the 
workmen. 
(3) The chairperson of the Grievance Redressal 
Committee shall be selected from the employer and from 
among the workmen alternatively on rotation basis every 
year. 

(4) The total number of members of the Grievance 
Redressal Committee shall not exceed more than six: 
   Provided that there shall be, as far as practicable, 
one woman member if the Grievance Redressal 
Committee has two  members and in case the number of 
members are more  than two, the number of women 
members may be increased proportionately. 
(5)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, 
the setting up of Grievance Redressal Committee shall 
not affect the right of the workman to raise industrial 
dispute on the s ame matter under the provisions of this 
Act. 
(6) The Grievance Redressal Committee may complete its 
proceedings within forty -five days on receipt of a written 
application by or on behalf of the aggrieved party. 
(7) The workman who is aggrieved of the decis ion of the 
Grievance Redressal Committee may prefer an appeal to 
the employer against the decision of Grievance Redressal 
Committee and the employer shall, within one month 
from the date of receipt of such appeal, dispose off the 
same and send a copy of hi s decision to the workman 
concerned. 
(8) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the 
workmen for whom there is an established Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism in the establishment concerned.‖ 
27. The Ministry in their explanatory note have  stated the 
following motive for bringing the amendment:- 
―In order to promote better industrial relations at the 
industrial  establishment  level,  there  has  been   a long -
felt need to provide for an in -house grievance redressal 
machinery  which   would  work  as  an  elaborate 
grievance ventilation within an  establishment and reduce 
the  burden on adjudicators. 

 Although, provision of Grievance Settlement 
Authorities was made vide Section 7 and 22 of the 
Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1982 and 
incorporated in the principal Act as Chapter IIB vide 
Section 9 C and in Section 38 (2) (ab).  However, this 
provision could not be notified in the absence of framing 
of rules for the purpose due to lack of unanimity among 
the Central Trade Union Organisations. 
 Now, this modified provision is sought to be made 
with adequate details and there will be no need to frame 
separate rules for execution of the same.‖ 
28. When asked to explain the reason for specifying the limit of 20 
or more workmen for setting up of  Grievance Redressal Machinery 
in an establishment, the Ministry in their post evidence reply  
stated:- 
―The limit of 20 workmen has been kept for Grievance 
Redressal Machinery because for a small establishments 
employing less than 20,  it would be difficu lt for them to 
constitute a Committee for this purpose.  Besides in small 
establishments, the interaction between employer and 
workmen is direct, much easier and on day to day basis 
where such Committees may not be required.‖ 
29. On being asked regarding the rationale for prescribing a period 
of 45 days for completion of proceedings by the Grievance Redressal 
Machinery, the Ministry replied as follows:- 
―As the Committee consists of members from 
management and trade unions, the immediate hurdle is 
to find o ut convenient time for all the members because 
they have their own duties and the task assigned to them 
to work as a member of the Committee would be in 
addition to their normal work.  At least two to three 
sittings may be required to take decisions involv ing 
conflicting interests.  Moreover, forty five days is the 
outer limit.  If a dispute is settled before forty five days 

that would not also violate the norms of GRM.  Therefore, 
it is felt that the limit of forty five days is reasonable and 
just.  With regard to thirty days time for appeal it may be 
mentioned that the Appellate Authority may be a senior 
functionary with multifarious responsibility and for him 
to decide the issue within one month appears to be just 
and reasonable‖. 
 
30. In the context of i ntroduction of Grievance Redressal 
Machinery when asked to give their views on the roles of Works 
Committee vis-à-vis Grievance Redressal Machinery, the Ministry in 
their post evidence reply stated:- 
―As per the provision of section 3 of the ID Act, 1947, the 
duty  of the Works Committee is to promote measure for 
securing amity and good relations between the employer 
and workmen  and, to that end to comment upon 
matters of their common  interest.  Over  the years it has 
become an established practice that Works Committees 
are to decide the collective matters of common interests 
mostly welfare measures and holidays etc. and not 
settling of individual grievance concerning individual 
workman.  To address gr ievances concerning   individual 
workman, this provision in the amendment is necessary.‖   
 
VI. Powers to enforce Awards/Orders by Tribunals 
31. In section 11 of the principal Act, after sub -section (8), the 
following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:- 
 ―(9) Every award made, order issued or settlement 
arrived at by or before Labour Court or Tribunal or 
National Tribunal shall be executed in accordance with 
the procedure laid down for execution of orders and 
decree of a Civil Court under order 21 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908. 

(10) The Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal, 
as the case may be shall transmit any award, order or 
settlement to a Civil Court having jurisdiction and such 
Civil Court shall execute the award, order or set tlement 
as if it were a decree passed by it.‖ 
32. The Ministry in their explanatory note stated as follows:- 
―The amendment seeks to provide that any 
award/order/settlement  made by a tribunal or national 
tribunal shall be executable as  a decree of a Civi l Court.  
In  addition  any  tribunal  or  national  tribunal may 
transmit any award/order/settlement to a Civil Court 
having civil jurisdiction for execution of the same as if it 
were a decree.‖ 
33. The representatives of Trade Union during their deposition on 
the Bill stated:- 
―Though we welcome this addition of Chapter of Grievance 
 Redressal Machinery, yet, we feel that this limit of 20  
workers  should go. Having a Grievance Redressal 
Machinery in small  establishments is more important 
because generally those workers are not unionized. 
 In larger interest, in establishments the workers 
have a tendency to form union, but the workers of small 
and medium  scale industry establishments having less 
than 20 in number  need more protection for resolution 
of their day-to-day  grievances. In this chapter, 
unfortunately, no role has been given to trade unions.  
We feel that in establishments wherever  the unions 
already exist, at least, those unions should have the 
authority to nominate the workmen in the grievan ce 
committee. 
 A provision has been made that once an issue is 
referred  to the grievance committee, it takes about 45 

days and if the  workman is not satisfied he can appeal to 
the higher authority.  The higher authority takes about 
another 30 days.  We f eel that this 75 days is too big a 
period.  This period should be further reduced.‖ 
 
34. Another representative of the Trade Union expressed his views 
on Grievance Redressal Machinery as follows:- 
―There is a Trade Union where a cell for grievance 
procedure for twenty workers is proposed.  If you nullify 
the role of trade union, it is possible that if somebody 
wants to create a trade union, he will have to face a lot of 
problem, they still face problem.  Number of the workers 
should not be important in a fa ctory for that purpose to 
end their grievances.  If a factory has then workers and a 
dispute erupts, there is a requirement of a mechanism to 
solve the problem, because nomination will create 
dispute.  As you have said that three persons will be 
nominated from the each side that will cause dispute and 
election will be held through secret ballot and hence an 
activity will start that will caused disruption in industrial 
work.‖ 
35. Another  representative of the Trade Union speaking on 
Grievance Redressal Machinery stated as follows:- 
―Sir, I straightway go to the Grievance Redressal 
Machinery.  I also support the view that any industrial 
establishment employing 20 or more persons, this 
number of 20 should be eliminated.  But  I am 
simultaneously apprehensive that if we reduce it to below 
10, can we have a trade union or can we have an 
establishment where we will be in a position to set up the 
Grievance Redressal Machinery at all?  That has also to 
be  kept  in view.  I  think, instead of eliminating, we can 
reduce the number  to 10, which will be a more practical 
solution. If somebody is running an industry with five 

employees and then  we say, Now, you have the 
Grievance Redressal Machinery, then, where three or two 
representatives will come; it is a little com plicated 
problem.‖ 
 
VII. Salaries, Allowances and terms and conditions of service 
 of  Presiding Officers 
 
36. In section 38 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (2),- 
  (i) Clause (ab) shall be omitted; 
  (ii) For clause (c), the following clause shall be   
   substituted, namely:- 
―(c) the salaries and allowances and the terms and 
conditions for appointment of the presiding officers of the 
Labour court, Tribunal and the National tribunal including 
the allowances admissible to members of Courts, Boards 
and to assessors and witnesses; 
37. The Ministry, citing the reasons for amendment of Section 38,   
have stated in their explanatory note as follows:- 
―It is sought to make a specific provision in section 
38(2)(c) of the Act empowering Government to make rules 
to decide and review the salaries and allowances and 
other terms and conditions for appointment of Presiding 
Officers.‖ 
  
  

CHAPTER-III 
Analysis of other important sections of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947  which not covered by the Industrial Disputes 
(Amendment) Bill, 2009 
 
Chapter VB – Special provisions relating to lay off, 
retrenchment and closure in certain establishments 
 
38. The Chapter applies to an industrial establishment in which 
not less than one  hundred workmen are employed.  The Chapter 
provides that no workman whose name is borne on the muster rolls 
of the industrial establishment shall be laid off or retrenched except 
with the prior permission of the appropriate government.  The 
Chapter also p rovides that an employer who intends to close down 
an undertaking of an industrial establishment has to apply for prior 
permission at least ninety days before the date of intended closure 
and if the appropriate government does not communicate the order 
granting or refusing to grant permission to the employer within a 
period of sixty days, the permission will deemed to have been 
granted.  
39. When asked to explain the reasons for not amending Chapter 
VB of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, which requires pr ior 
permission of the appropriate Government in respect of lay off and 
retrenchment in an establishment employing 100 or more workers 
and has attracted huge criticism from different quarters and also 
started off a public debate, the Ministry in their writt en reply 
stated:- 
―Only those amendment proposals could be included in 
the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009 in which 
a consensus could be arrived at the 40 th Indian Labour 
Conference. As no consensus could be arrived at 
regarding amendment to Cha pter VB of the Act, this 
could not be included in the Bill.  Section 25 O of the 

Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 lays down procedure for 
closing down an undertaking.  The prescribed limit of 
sixty days is ordinarily binding on the Government.  In 
case no refusal is communicated to grant the permission 
to employer for closure within that period, the permission 
applied for shall be deemed to have been granted on 
expiry of the sixty days notice period. The delay occurs in 
cases where in the employer fails to fol low the prescribed 
procedure such as informing the representatives of the 
workman in the prescribed manner etc.‖   
40. A representative of the Trade Union during his evidence on the 
Bill, stated as follows:- 
―The proposed amendment for the award which is 
given by the arbitration is a welcome step.  Some 
amendments should have been proposed 
regarding closure, retrenchment and 
compensation because many labourers are being 
affected due to closure of many factories.  This 
should have also been included in propo sed 
amendments and this aspect should have been 
kept in mind.  Today the situation of closure, 
retrenchment and compensation is rampant.  We 
want to draw your attention towards the workers 
who are being retrenched and do not getting their 
compensation and dues.‖ 
 Payment of Subsistence Allowance during suspension: 
(ii) Second National Commission had recommended that any 
 worker who, pending completion of domestic enquiry, is placed 
 under suspension, should be entitled to 50% of his wages as 
 subsistence allowance and 75% of wages for the period beyond 
 90 days if the period of suspension exceeds 90 days, for no 
 fault of  the worker, so however, the total period of 
 suspension shall not, in  any case exceed one year.  

41. On being asked to explain the reason for non-inclusion of such 
a vital aspect in the Amendment Bill, the Ministry replied thus:- 
―Payment of subsistence allowance comes under 
Industrial Employment (Standing Order) Act, 1946.  This 
may be looked into when IE (SO) Act, 1946 is amended‖. 
Compulsory Recognition of Trade Unions 
(iii) The representatives of the Trade Unions drew attention of the 
Committee regarding compulsory recognition of registered Trade 
Unions by the industrial establishments, covered under the 
Industrial Dispute Act, 1947.  When asked as what they have to say 
in this regard, the Ministry stated in their written reply:- 
―Recognition of Trade Unions is carried out in terms of 
the Code of Discipline where it is laid down that the 
management agree `to recognize th e union in accordance 
with the criteria evolved at the 16 th Session of the Indian 
Labour Conference held in May, 1958‘.  However, Code of 
Discipline does not have any legal mandate.  It solely 
depends on the voluntary approach  of both the 
management and w orkers.  Presently, recognition is not 
mandated statutorily.  However, interference of the 
employer either in making or not making a Trade Union 
is an unfair labour practice.  The employer can be 
punished for indulging in unfair labour practices.‖ 

     CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
42. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 was enacted by Parliament 
to provide machinery and forum for the investigation and 
settlement of industrial disputes.  The Industrial Disputes Act is a 
benign measure which seeks to pre -empt industrial tensions and 
provides the mechanics and necessary infrastructure for dispute 
resolutions so that the energies of partners in production may not 
be dissipated in counter -productive battles and assurance of 
industrial justice may creat e a climate of peace and enduring 
goodwill.    Hence, the goal to which the Industrial Disputes Act is 
geared, is legal mechanism for canalising conflicts along 
conciliatory or adjudicatory processes.  
Appropriate Government 
43. The Committee note that to eliminate ambiguities in 
interpretation of the term `Appropriate Government’, the 
Government proposes to amplify its definition.  The Central 
Government will be the `Appropriate Government’ for any 

company in which not less than 51% of the paid up share 
capital is held by the Central Government.  Similarly, State 
Government will be the `Appropriate Government’ in relation to 
any other industrial dispute in companies owned or controlled 
by the State Government.  The Committee, concur with the 
proposed amendm ent, of the term `Appropriate Government’.  
As regards, the inclusion of disputes between a Contractor and 
Contract Labour under the purview of the definition of 
`Appropriate Government’, the Committee do not find the 
contention of the Government that “it may create 
complications when the contractor goes from one 
establishment to the other after completion of work”, plausible.  
The Committee feel that it  may be specified in the Act itself so 
that if there is a dispute between a contractor and the contract 
labour employed through him, the dispute would fall under the 
purview of the `Appropriate Government’ of the Industrial 
establishment where the dispute first arose.  The Committee 
feel that industrial disputes between a contractor and contract 
labour, empl oyed in an industrial establishment, as 
recommended by the Second National Labour Commission  also 

needs to be  brought under the purview of the definition of  
`Appropriate Government’.  The Committee hope that the 
Labour Courts will be suitably strengthen ed and their members 
commensurately increased as the amplification of the 
definition will bring more cases within the purview of Labour 
Courts.  
Enhancement of wage ceiling 
 
44. The Committee note with serious concern that the 
Government have raised the wa ge ceiling to Rs.10,000/ - from 
Rs.1,600/- per month after the lapse of twenty five years.  The 
Committee are of the view that it would be logical for the 
Government to keep the supervisory staff out of the `workman’ 
category irrespective of the wages they are drawing.  The 
Committee urge the Government that supervisory staff be 
clubbed with the managerial and administrative employees.  
The Committee strongly feel that the social security benefits 
should be available to all employees including administrative , 
managerial and supervisory employees which can be done 

through a separate legislation.    The Committee believe that, 
in today’s scenario of economic liberalisation, there would be 
hardly any supervisor drawing a salary of Rs.10,000/ - per 
month and if th e Government is of the view that the low paid 
supervisors should not be deprived of  the benefit of an 
inexpensive dispute settlement mechanism, the Government 
may consider fixing a wage ceiling which is pragmatic and 
substantially reasonable enough, viz. Rs.25,000/-.  The 
Committee also urge the Government to lay down a list of 
highly paid jobs which presently come under the `workman’ 
category, as being outside the purview of the laws relating to 
workmen, as workmen like airline pilots are quite capable of  
negotiating their terms of employment on their own since they 
hardly take recourse to the Industrial Disputes Act.  
Direct reference of disputes to CGIT-cum-LCs  
 
45. The Committee appreciate the amendment proposed by 
the Government regarding provision of  direct access for a 
workman to the Labour Court.  The Committee note that 10% 

of the disputes arising out of termination of service are settled 
in conciliation which implies that 90% of the cases go to 
courts.  The argument of the Government that three mo nth 
limit would help in avoiding choking of Tribunals with 
avoidable litigations is far from sustainable.  The Committee 
feel that a period of forty -five days is sufficient for the 
settlement of a dispute through conciliation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the waiting period of three months, 
as has been prescribed in the proposed amendment, may be 
reduced to forty-five days.   
 
Appointment of Presiding Officers in CGIT-cum-Labour Courts 
 
46. The Committee note  that there are several Labour Courts 
and Tribunals without Presiding Officers due to which the 
workers are facing difficulties.  According to the Ministry at 
present only serving/retired High Court/District Judges are 
eligible to work as Presiding Officer s resulting in the 
considerable problems in the availability of Officers for 

appointment as Presiding Officers.  The Committee agree in 
principle with the proposal that the scope of qualification of 
Presiding Officers be expanded to enable Government to 
appoint Presiding Officers from the officers of Indian Legal 
Service and Central Labour Service found eligible. The 
Committee, however, find no valid reason as to the year of 
acquisition of law degree.  In their considered opinion 
acquisition of law degree c oupled with the seniority 
contemplated in the amendment would suffice.  The 
Committee hope and trust that the recruitment of Presiding 
Officers will be done immediately by the Government so that  
the cases which are pending before the Labour Courts for wan t 
of Presiding Officers could be settled speedily.  
 
Grievance Redressal Machinery   
  
47. The Committee note that in order to promote better 
industrial relation at the industrial establishment level, it has 
been proposed that every industrial establishmen t employing 

twenty or more workman shall have one or more Grievance 
Redressal Committee for the resolution of disputes arising out 
of individual grievances.  The Committee note that since the 
Grievance Redressal Machinery for establishments employing 
less than 10 workers has already been spelt out in unorganized 
workers’ Social Security Act, 2008, the establishments having 
10 to 20 workmen have been left out.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the provision of Grievance 
Redressal Machinery under Indu strial Disputes Act, 1947 
should be made for industrial establishment employing 10 or 
more workmen.   
48. The Committee note that a period of 45 days has been 
prescribed for completion of proceedings by the Grievance 
Redressal Machinery.  As per the reply of the Government, the 
rationale behind prescribing the period  of 45 days is that the 
Members have to discharge their normal work duties in 
addition to the duties to be performed as a Member of 
Grievance Redressal Machinery.  The Committee do not agree 
with the contention of the Government and feel that an in -

house set up can decide a case much faster. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the period of 45 days specified for 
completion of proceedings should be reduced to one month.  
 
49. The Bill seeks to substitute Chapter IIB to introduce 
Grievance Redressal Machinery within the organization having 
20 or more workmen with one stage appeal at the level of Head 
of the Industrial establishment to settle maximum disputes 
within the organization itself  wit h minimum necessity for 
adjudication.  The Committee find that though the provision 
was made vide Sections 7 and 22 of the Industrial Disputes 
(Amendment) Act, 1982 and incorporated in the Principal Act 
as Chapter IIB vide Section 9C and in Section 38 (2) (ab) the 
same could not notified in the absence of framing of rules due 
to lack of unanimity among the Central Trade Union 
Organisations.  The Committee observe that the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 already provides for the constitution of 
Works Committee s in case of any industrial establishment 
having 100 or more workmen, whereas the present amendment 

seeks to cover industrial establishment having 20 or more 
workmen for the purpose of setting up of the Grievance 
Redressal Machinery.  The Committee are in agreement with 
the present amendment for introduction of GRMs in the 
industrial establishment. They, however, desire that the 
number of 20 workmen be reduced to 10 as the workers of 
small and medium establishments need more protection for 
resolution of their day-to-day grievances.   
50. The Committee find that since the provision of Works 
Committee with similar powers is already there in the case of 
any industrial establishment having 100 or more workmen, the 
GRM should be avoided to escape dilatory procedu res.  The 
Committee observe from the reply of the Government that 
presently the Works Committee’s role has been confined to 
decide the collective matters of common interests, mainly, 
welfare measures and holidays etc. and not settling of 
individual grievance of  workman.  The Committee therefore, 
recommend that rather than having two separate entities for 
the same purpose, the Works Committee be laced with the 

additional powers as prescribed for the GRMs and the GRMs 
may only be confined to the industrial establishment having 10 
to 100 workmen. 
Powers to enforce Awards/Orders by Tribunals 
 
51. The Committee note that at present the Tribunals under 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 do not have any powers to 
enforce the awards/orders given by them.  In the absence of 
any specific provision regarding power to tribunals under the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 it becomes extremely difficult to 
enforce the award/order given by them.  The Committee, 
therefore, support the proposed amendment in the Act, so that 
the Central Government, Industrial Tribunals, Labour Courts 
and National Tribunals be empowered t o execute their 
awards/orders/settlements as a decree of the civil court.  
 
 
 
 

Terms and Conditions of Service of Presiding Officers 
 
52. The Bill proposes to substitute Section 38 (2) (c) of the 
Act, for empowering the Government to make rules to decide 
and review the salaries and allowances and other conditions for 
appointment of Presiding Officers.  The Committee find that 
presently the Act does not contain any specific provision in 
this regard.  The Committee are, therefore, in agreement with 
the propos ed amendment which would empower the 
Government to make rules to decide and review the salaries 
and allowances and other terms and conditions of Service of 
Presiding Officers.  The Committee, however, desire that after 
the proposed amendment, the Governmen t should come out 
with a blue print of the rules so framed. 
 
  

General Observations 
 
Special provisions for lay off, retrenchment and closure   
 
53. The Committee have analyzed the views of both the 
parties i.e. employers and trade unions.  The employers feel 
that the introduction of new technology often renders some of 
the workers as surplus and secondly, at times, retrenchment is 
necessary to reduce costs and maintain global competitiveness 
and therefore, Chapt er VB should be scrapped altogether.  
Trade Unions, on the other hand, feel that total scrapping of 
this chapter would mean sudden loss of jobs and incomes and  
may lead to starvation of workers and their families.  
Therefore, the Committee feel that both,  economic efficiency 
of the establishment and job security for the workmen, are 
important considerations.  The Committee opine that the 
Government should try to evolve consensus through 
consultations with both the sections and consultation should 
include p rovision of prior notice, adequate compensation 
package and other benefits for the retrenched workers.  

 
 
 
Subsistence Allowance during suspension 
 
54. The Committee has been informed that payment of 
subsistence allowance during the period of suspension co mes 
under Industrial Employment (Standing order) Act, 1946 and 
strongly feel that provision for payment of subsistence 
allowance should be made part of the Model Standing Orders 
which shall be applicable where an establishment has no 
Standing Orders or whe re draft Standing Orders are still to be 
finalized.  
 
  

 
Compulsory Recognition of Trade Unions 
 
55. The Committee note with deep concern that as soon as 
employers come to know about the attempt of the workers to 
register their unions, the employers start transferring and 
victimizing the workers. The Committee feel that a specific 
provision in the Act should be made for compulsory recognition 
of registered trade unions by the industrial establishments 
covered  under the Industrial  Dispute Act, 1947. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                               HEMANAND BISWAL,      
                                    Chairman, 
4th December,  2009           Standing Committee on 
Labour  
13  Agrahayana , 1931  (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
   

ANNEXURE 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
Bill No.VI of 2009 
 
 
 
 
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
 
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Industrial Disputes 
 (Amendment) Act, 2009. 
 
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
 Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
 appoint. 
 
 
2.  In the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Act), in section 2, — 
 
 (i) in clause (a),— 
 
(a)  in sub-clause (i), for the words ― major port, the  
 Central Government, and‖, the words ―major port,  
 any company in which not  less  than  fifty-one  
 percent. of the paid-up share capital is held by the  
 Central Government, or any corporation, not being  

 a corporation referred to in this clause, established 
 by or under any law made by Parliament, or the 
 Central public sector undertaking, subsidiary 
 companies set up by the principal undertaking and 
 autonomous bodies owned or controlled by the 
 Central Government, the Central Government, and‖ 
 shall be substituted; 
 
  
(b)  for sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause shall be  
 substituted, namely:— 
 
   ―(ii) in relation to any other industrial dispute,   
   including the State public sector undertaking,   
   subsidiary companies set up by the principal 
   undertaking and autonomous bodies owned or  
   controlled by the State Government, the State   
   Government.‖; 
 
 (ii) in clause (s), in sub-clause (iv), for the words ―one thousand 
 six hundred rupees‖, the words ―ten thousand rupees‖ shall be 
 substituted. 
 
 
3.  Section 2A of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-
section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so numbered, the 
following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 ―(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10, any 
 such workman as is specified in sub-section (1) may, make an 
 application direct to the Labour Court or  Tribunal for 
 adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry 
 of three months from the date he has made the application to 
 the Conciliation Officer of the  appropriate Government for 
 conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application 
 the Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and 
 jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the  dispute, as if it were a 
 dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in 
 accordance with the provisions of this Act and all the 

 provisions of th is Act shall apply in relation  to such 
 adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial dispute 
 referred to it by the appropriate Government. 
  
 (3) The application referred to in sub -section (2) shall be made 
 to the Labour  Court or Tribunal befo re the expiry of three 
 years from the date of discharge, dismissal,  retrenchment or 
 otherwise termination of service as specified in sub -section 
 (1).‖. 
 
4.  In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section(3), after clause 
(e), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 ―(f) he is or has been a Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner 
 (Central) or Joint  Commissioner of the State Labour 
 Department, having a degree in law and at least  seven years‘ 
 experience in the labour department after having acq uired 
 degree in law  including three years of experience as 
 Conciliation Officer: 
 
  Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour 
 Commissioner or Joint Labour  Commissioner shall be 
 appointed unless he resigns from the service of the Central 
 Government or State Government, as the case may be, before 
 being appointed as the presiding officer; or  (g) he is an officer 
 of Indian Legal Service in Grade III with three years‘ experience 
 in the grade.‖. 
 
5.  In section 7A of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after 
clause (aa), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 ―(b) he is or has been a Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner 
 (Central) or Joint  Commissioner of the State Labour 
 Department, having a degree in law and at least  seven years‘ 
 experience in the labour department after having acquired 
 degree in law  including three years of experience as 
 Conciliation Officer: 
 
 

 
  Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour  
 Commissioner or Joint Labour Commissioner shall be 
 appointed unless he resigns from the service of the Central 
 Government or State Government, as the case may be, before 
 being appointed as the presiding officer; or 
 
 (c)  he is an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade III with 
 three years‘ experience in the grade.‖. 
 
6.  After section 9B of the principal Act, for chapter IIB, the 
following Chapter shall be substituted, namely:— 
  
―CHAPTER IIB 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MACHINERY 
 
 9C. ( 1)Every industrial establishment employing twenty or 
 more workmen shall  have one or more Grievance Redressal 
 Committee for the resolution of disputes arising  out of 
 individual grievances. 
 
  (2)The Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of 
 equal number of members  from the employer and the 
 workmen. 
 
  (3) The chairperson of the Grievance Redress al 
 Committee shall be selected  from the employer and from 
 among the workmen alternatively on rotation basis every year. 
 
  (4) The total number of members of the Grievance 
 Redressal Committee shall not exceed more than six: 
 
  Provided that there shall be, as far as practicable,  one 
 woman member if the Grievance Redressal Committee has two 
 members and in case the number of members  are more than 
 two, the number of women members may be increased 
 proportionately. 
 
   

 
 (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section,  the 
 setting up of  Grievance Redressal Committee shall not affect 
 the right of the workman to raise  industrial dispute on the 
 same matter under the provisions of this Act. 
 
 (6) The Grievance Redressal Co mmittee may complete its 
 proceedings within  forty-five days on receipt of a written 
 application by or on behalf of the aggrieved party. 
 
 (7) The workman who is aggrieved of the decision of the 
 Grievance Redressal  Committee may prefer an appeal to the 
 employer against the decision of Grievance  Redressal 
 Committee and the employer shall, within one month from the 
 date of receipt of such appeal, dispose off the same and send a 
 copy of his decision to the workman concerned. 
 
 (8) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the 
 workmen for whom there  is an established Grievance 
 Redressal Mechanism in the establishment concerned.‖. 
 
7. In section 11 of the principal Act, after sub -section ( 8), the 
following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 ―(9) Every award made, order issued or settlement arrived at 
 by or before  Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal 
 shall be executed in accordance with  the procedure laid down 
 for execution of orders and decree of a Civil Court under order 
 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
 
 (10) The Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the 
 case may be, shall transmit any award, order or settlement to 
 a Civil Court having jurisdiction and  such Civil Court shall 
 execute the award, order or settlement as if it were a decree 
 passed by it.‖. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
8.  In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
 
 (i) clause (ab) shall be omitted; 
 (ii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
 
 ―(c) the salaries and allowances and the terms and conditions 
 for appointment of the presiding officers of the Labour Court, 
 Tribunal and the  National Tribunal including the allowances 
 admissible to members of Courts,  Boards and to assessors 
 and witnesses;‖. 
  
  

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
  
 The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 provides the machinery and 
procedure for the  investigation and settlement of industrial 
disputes. The provisions of the Act had been  amended from time to 
time in the light of experience gained in its actual working, case 
laws and industrial relations policy of the Government. 
 
2.  At present the workman, whose services have been 
discharged, dismissed,  retrenched, or otherwise terminated under 
section 2A of the Act, is unable to approach the  Labour Court or 
Tribunal in the absence of a reference of industrial dispute by the 
appropriate Government to Labour Court or Tribunal. This causes 
delay and untold suffering to the workmen. The Industrial Disputes 
(Amendment) Act, 1982 provided for an in-house Grievance 
Settlement Authority for the settlement of industrial disputes 
connected with an individual  workman employed in the Industrial 
establishment, but it does not permit the workman to  approach 
Labour Court or Tribunal unt il such dispute has been decided by 
the Grievance  Settlement Authority. The Labour Courts and 
Tribunals have no power under the Act to  enforce the awards 
published by the appropriate Government. 
 
3.  In view of the above, it is considered necessary to prov ide for 
workman a direct  access to Labour Court or Tribunal in case of 
disputes arising due to discharge, dismissal,  retrenchment or 
termination of service of workman. It is also proposed to establish a 
Grievance Redressal Machinery as an in -house mechanis m in an 
Industrial establishment with twenty  or more workmen without 
affecting the right of workman to raise an industrial dispute on the 
same matter under the provisions of the Act. 
 
  

4.  Accordingly, the Industrial Disputes ( Amendment) Bill , 2009, 
inter-alia, seeks to provide for– 
 
 (i) amendment of the term ―appropriate Government‖ defined 
 under section 2(a) of the Act to amplify the existing definition; 
 
 (ii) enhancement of wage ceiling of a workman from one 
 thousand six hundred  rupees per month to ten thousand 
 rupees per month under section 2(s) of the Act; 
 
 (iii) direct access for the workman to the Labour Court or 
 Tribunal in case of  disputes arising out of section 2A of the 
 Act; 
 
 (iv) expanding the scope of qualifications  of Presiding Officers 
 of Labour Courts or Tribunals under sections 7 and 7A of the 
 Act; 
 
 (v) establishment of Grievance Redressal Machinery in every 
 Industrial establishment employing twenty or more workmen 
 for the resolution of disputes arising  out of individual 
 grievances; 
 
 (vi) empowering the Labour Court or Tribunal to execute the 
 awards, orders or  settlements arrived at by Labour Court or 
 Tribunal. 
 
5.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       OSCAR FERNANDES. 
The 19th February , 2009. 
  
  

 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
 
 Clause 8 of the Bill confers power upon the Central 
Government to make rules relating  to the salaries, the terms and 
conditions for appointment of the Presiding Officers of the  Labour 
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal. 
 
2.  The rules made by the Central Government shall be laid as 
soon as may be, after  they are made, before each House of the 
Parliament. 
 
3.  The matters in respect of which rules may be made are 
generally matters  of procedure  and administrative details. The 
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
  

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
(14 OF 1947) 
 
 
*    *    *    *    * 
 
2.  In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,— 
 
 (a) "appropriate Government" means— 
 
(i) in relation to any industrial dispute concerning any 
industry carried on  by or under the authority of the 
Central Government, or by a railway company  for 
concerning any such controlled industry as may be 
specified in this behalf  by the Central Government or in 
relation to an industrial dispute concerning a  Dock 
Labour Broad established under section 5A of the Dock 
Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948 or the 
Industrial Finance Corporation of  India Limited formed 
and registered under the Companies Act, 1956 or the 
Employees' State Insurance Corporation established 
under section 3 of the  Employees' State Insurance Act, 
1948 or the Board of Trustees constituted  under section 
3A of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1948 or the Central Board of Trustees 
and the State Boards of  Trustees constituted under 
section 5A and section 5B, respectively, of the 
Employees' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Pro visions 
Act, 1952 or the Life  Insurance Corporation of India 
established under section 3 of the Life Insurance 
Corporation Act, 1956, or the Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited registered under the Companies Act, 
1956, or the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee 
Corporation established under section 3 of the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit  Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961, 
or the Central Warehousing Corporation  established 
under section 3 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 

1962, or the  Unit Trust of Ind ia established under 
section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963, or the Food 
Corporation of India established under section 3, or a 
Board of  Management established for two or more 
contiguous States under section 16,  of the Food 
Corporations Act, 1964 o r the Airports Authority of India 
constituted under section 3 of the Airports Authority of 
India Act, 1994, or a Regional Rural  Bank established 
under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, 
or the Export Credit and Guarantee Corporation Limited 
or the Industrial Reconstruction  Bank of India, the 
National Housing Bank established under section 3 of 
the National Housing Bank Act, 1987, or an air transport 
service, or a banking or an  insurance company, a mine, 
an oil field, a Cantonment Board, or a major port, the 
Central Government, and  (ii) in relation to any other 
industrial dispute, the State Government; 
 
*    *    *    *    * 
 
 
 (s) "workman" means any person (including an apprentice) 
employed in any  industry to do any manual, unskilled, skilled , 
technical, operational, clerical or  supervisory work for hire or 
reward, whether the terms of employment be express or  implied, 
and for the purposes of any proceeding under this Act in relation to 
an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has b een 
dismissed, discharged or  retrenched in connection with, or as a 
consequence of, that dispute, or whose dismissal,  discharge or 
retrenchment has led to that dispute, but does not include any 
such person— 
 
*    *    *    *    * 
    
  
  
 
 
 

(iv) who, being  employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages 
exceeding one thousand six hundred rupees per mensem or 
exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or 
by reason of the powers vested in him,  functions mainly of a 
managerial nature. 
 
*    *    *    *    * 
 
7. (1) *   *    *   *   * 
 
(3)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the 
presiding officer of a Labour Court, unless— 
 
 *   *    *    *    * 
 
7A. (1)   *    *    *    *   
 
(3)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the 
presiding officer of a Tribunal unless— 
 
 *    *    *   *   * 
 
38. (1) *   *   *  *   * 
    
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:— 
 
 *    *    *   *   * 
 
(ab) the constitution of Grievance Settlement Authorities referred to 
in section  9C, the manner in which industrial disputes may be 
referred to such authorities for  settlement, the procedure to be 
followed by such authoriti es in the proceedings in  relation to 
disputes referred to them and the period within which such 
proceedings shall be completed; 
 
*    *    *    *    * 

(c) the allowances admissible to members of Courts and Boards and 
presiding officers of Labour Courts, Tr ibunals and National 
Tribunals and to assessors and witnesses; 
 
  *   *    *   *   
  
  

 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
(Shri Oscar Fernandes, Minister of Labour & Employment) 
  
  

 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 22ND OCTOBER, 2009.  
 
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs in Committee 
Room `A‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to have briefing by 
the representatives of the Ministry of Labour an d Employment on 
`The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009‘  and `The 
Employees‘ State Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2009‘. 
  
PRESENT 
    Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri M. Anandan 
3.      Shri P. Balram 
4.      Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5.      Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6.      Shri Hari Manjhi 
7.      Shri P.R. Natarajan 
8.      Km. Mausam Noor 
9.      Shri S. Pakkirappa 
10.  Shri Ramkishun 
11.  Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
12. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
13. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
14. Shri Rajaram 

15. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
   
 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Under Secretary 
   
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & 
EMPLOYMENT 
 
1. Shri P. C. Chaturvedi, Secretary 
2. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Anil Swarup, Director General, Labour Welfare 
4. Shri S. K. Dev Verman, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri S. K. Mukhopadhyay, Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central) 
6. Shri Rajiv Dutt, Financial Commissioner, ESIC 
7. Shri B. K. Sahu, Insurance Commissioner, ESIC 
8. Dr. Mrs. K. Tyagi, Medical Commissioner, ESIC 
9. Dr. S.K. Jain, Deputy Medical Commissioner, ESIC  
2.  XX  XX    XX  
 
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment to the sitting of the Committee convened to 
have briefing by them on ‗The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 
2009‘ and ‗The Employees‘ State Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 
2009‘.  After the introduction by the representatives of the Ministry, 
the Committee first took up ‗The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) 

Bill, 2009‘.  The Secretary, Ministry of Labour briefed the 
Committee on the amendments proposed in ‗The Industrial 
Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009‘.  Members sought certain 
clarifications on the Bill.  The Secretary and other officials of the 
Ministry replied to the queries of the Chairman and other Members. 
4. The main discussion on the Bill was on the following 
amendments:- 
(i) role of Grievance Redressal Committee vis -à-vis Works 
Committee. 
(ii) direct access for workman to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal after expiry of three months from the date of 
making an application to the Conciliation Officer. 
(iii) enhancement of wage ceiling prescribed for supervisors 
from Rs. 1,600/- to Rs. 10,000/-. 
(iv) compulsory recognition of Trade Unions. 
(v) non-implementation of recommendations made by first 
and second National Labour Law Commission. 
 
5.  XX    XX     XX 
6. XX    XX     XX  
 
7. A copy each of List of Points relating to amendments on both 
the Bills was handed over to t he Secretary for furnishing replies 
thereto to the Committee, within a week. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 The verbatim proceedings were kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 

 XX   Do not pertain to this Report.  

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 3RD NOVEMBER, 2009.  
 
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs in Committee 
Room `B‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to hear the views of 
the representatives of Central Trade Unions on `The Industrial 
Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009‘  and `The Employees‘ State 
Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2009‘. 
   
 PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri K. Murugesan Anandan 
3. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
4. Shri Hassan Khan 
5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6. Shri P. Lingam 
7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
9. Shri Ramkishun 
10. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 11. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 12. Shri Rajaram 
 13. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
   
 SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2.  Shri B. S. Dahiya  - Director 
 3. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Under Secretary 
 

 REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CENTRAL TRADE UNIONS  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Organisation 
Name of the representative  Designation 
1. Bharatiya 
Mazdoor Sangh 
 
Shri R. V. Subba Rao Vice President 
 
2. Hind Mazdoor 
Sabha 
Shri R. A. Mittal Secretary 
 
3. Centre for Indian 
Trade Unions 
Shri Swadesh Dev Roye National Secretary  
4. Indian National 
Trade Union 
Congress 
Shri Chandra Prakash Singh President 
5. All India Trade 
Union Congress 
(i) Shri D.L. Sachdev 
 
(ii) Shri G. L. Dhar 
Secretary 
Secretary  
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
the Trade Unions to the sitting of the Committee convened to hear 
the views of the Trade Unions on ‗The Industrial Disputes 
(Amendment) Bill, 2009‘ and ‗The Employees State Insurance 
(Amendment) Bill, 2009‘ and also drew their attention to Direction 
55 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  The Chairman, 
thereafter, sought their views on the various provisions of ‗The 
Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009‘ in the first instance. 
 
 
 

 
 
3. The representatives of the Trade Unions deposing before the 
Committee expressed their views and gave their suggestions on 
various provisions of the Bill.  Some of the major views expressed by 
them related to the following provisions:-  
(i) definition of ‗Appr opriate Government‘ under Section 2(i) 
of the Act. 
(ii) enhancement of wage ceiling of a workman from one 
thousand six hundred rupees per month to ten thousand 
rupees per month under section 2(s) of the Act; 
(iii)  direct access for the workman to the Labo ur Court or 
Tribunal in case of disputes arising out of section 2A of 
the Act; 
(iv) establishment of Grievance Redressal Machinery in every 
Industrial establishment employing twenty or more 
workmen for the resolution of disputes arising out of 
individual grievances by inserting a new chapter II B. 
4.   XX    XX   XX 
 
5.  XX    XX   XX 
 
6. The queries raised by members, pertaining to both the Bills, 
were also responded to by the representatives of Trade Unions. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
7. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of Trade 
Unions for giving valuable suggestions on both the Bills. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
Verbatim proceedings of the sitting were kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX Do not pertain to this Report. 
  

 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 11TH NOVEMBER, 2009.  
 
The Committee met from 1400 hrs. to  1545 hrs in Committee 
Room No. `139‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to have oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment on `The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009‘  
and `The Employees‘ State Insurance (Amendm ent) Bill, 2009‘ and 
to consider and adopt draft Action Taken Reports. 
  
PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Shri P. Balram 
4. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6. Shri Hassan Khan 
7. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8. Shri P. Lingam 
9. Shri Hari Manjhi 
10. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 12. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
 13. Shri Rajaram 
 14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 15. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
   

 
 SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh   - Joint Secretary 
         2.    Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
  3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
 4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Under Secretary 
   
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND 
EMPLOYMENT 
 
1. Shri P. C. Chaturvedi, Secretary 
2. Shri S. K. Dev Verman, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri S. K. Mukhopadhyay, Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central) 
4. Shri Rajiv Dutt, Financial Commissioner, ESIC 
5. Shri B. K. Sahu, Insurance Commissioner, ESIC 
6. Dr. Mrs. K. Tyagi, Medical Commissioner, ESIC 
7.     Shri Devender Singh, Director 
8.     Shri S.K. Verma, Director 
9.     Shri A.V. Singh, Director   
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take their oral evidence on ‗The Industrial 
Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009‘ and ‗The Employees‘ State 
Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2009‘.  The Committee first took up 
‗The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009‘. 
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Labour briefed the Committe e on 
the proposed amendments in the Bill.  Members sought 
clarifications on the amendments.  The Secretary and other officials 
of the Ministry responded to the queries of the Chairman and 
members. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
4. The main discussion on the Bill was on the following 
amendments:- 
(i) role of Grievance Redressal Committee vis -à-vis Works 
 Committee. 
(ii) direct access for workman to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal  after expiry of three months from the date of making 
an  application to the Conciliation Officer. 
 
(iii) enhancement of wage ceiling from Rs. 1,600/ - to Rs. 
 10,000/-. 
 
5.  XX    XX    XX 
 
6.  XX    XX    XX 
 
7. A copy each of supplementary list of points relating to 
amendments on both the Bills was handed over to the Secretary for 
furnishing replies thereto to the Committee, within three days. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 The verbatim proceedings of the sitting were kept for record. 
 
 

 
8.   XX    XX    XX  
9.   XX    XX    XX   
10.    XX    XX    XX 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX Do not pertain to this Report. 
 
 
 
  

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 4TH DECEMBER, 2009.  
 
The Committee met from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs in Committee 
Room `E‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and 
adopt the draft reports on `The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) 
Bill, 2009‘  and `The Employees‘ State Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 
2009‘.  
 
PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri P. Balram 
3.  Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4.      Shri Hassan Khan 
5.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6.  Shri P.R. Natarajan 
7.  Shri S. Pakkirappa 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 8. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
 9. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 10. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
   
 SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
  
   
 
 

 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the draft Reports on `The Industrial Disputes 
(Amendment) Bill, 2009‘ and on `The Employees‘ State Insurance 
(Amendment) Bill, 2009‘. 
  
3.  The Committee  first took up the draft Report on `The 
Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009‘ for consideration.  The 
Committee adopted the same without any modification.   
 
 
4.   XX    XX    XX 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the 
Reports to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------  
 XX Do not pertain to this Report. 
 

 
 
 
 
 