1 
 
  31 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-12) 
 (FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
`ABSORPTION/REGULARIZATION OF TEMPORARY 
DRIVERS OF ALLAHABAD BANK.'    
 
         THIRTY FIRST  REPORT 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
          August, 2012/Shravana, 1934 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 


2 
 
    
         THIRTY FIRST  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 
(FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.08.2012  
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09.08.2012 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
          August, 2012/Shravana, 1934 (Saka) 
  
  


3 
 
                      CONTENTS 
PAGE (S) 
    
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE    (iii)  
    
INTRODUCTION        (v)   
 
      REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I           Introductory   
 
              
CHAPTER-II   Observations/Recommendations 
 
ANNEXURES 
 (i) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 14th July,   
  2011, 20th July,2012 and 30th July, 2012 
 (ii) Form-H- Memorandum of settlement arrived at between the   
  Management of Allahabad bank and All India Allahabad bank  
  Employees' Co-ordination Committee (affiliated to All India   
  Bank Employees'  Association) under section (3) of the Industrial  
  Disputes Act, 1947 in the matter of appointment of personal   
  drivers of Executives of Allahabad bank as peon-cum-driver in  
  the subordinate cadre in the bank.              
  
  

4 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
 
2. Shri Raj Babbar 
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
        **5. Shri Pakauri Lal 
6. Shri Narahari Mahato 
         7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Smt. Mausam Noor 
10. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
14. Ms. J. Shantha 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
*16. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
   ****17. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
     21. Vacant 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
25. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
***26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        28. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
        29. Shri Rajaram 
     ***30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri G. N. Ratanpuri 
   ***** 32.    Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 

5 
 
*   Nominated w.e.f 25th November, 2011. 
**  Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon 
his nomination to Standing Committee on Coal & Steel 
w.e.f. 3rd January, 2012. 
***   Retired w.e.f. 02.04.2012 and 03.04.2012 respectively. 
****  Nominated w.e.f. 12th April, 2012. 
*****Nominated w.e.f. 4th May, 2012. 
 
  
 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director  
 4.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
      
   
  
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I,  the  Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour (2011 -12) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Thirty First Report on `Absorption/regularization 
of temporary Drivers of Allahabad Bank.'    
               
2. The Committee took up the subject `Deployment of Contract/Casual 
workers/Sanitation workers for perennial nature of jobs in 
Government/PSU offices/establishments including at Railway Stations’ 
for detailed examination.  Since, the contractual arrange ments are 
widespread and the workers so engaged are being denied their legitimate 
statutory rights, the Committee decided to examine various 
organisations/undertakings/establishments under the Government of 
India.  
 
3. The plight of temporary drivers of Al lahabad Bank came to  the 
notice of the Committee when some representatives of the Allahabad 
Bank Drivers’ Association met the Members of the Committee and 
narrated their grievances during their Study Visit to Kolkata in June, 
2010.  They also submitted a representation detailing their grievances 
and problems for the consideration of the Committee. 
  
4. The Committee called for a factual note from the Allahabad Bank.  
The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Allahabad 
Bank along with the Deputy Labour Commissioner (Central) on 14th July, 

7 
 
2011.  The Committee then heard the representa tives of Allahabad Bank 
on 31st December, 2011.   
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of 
the Allahabad Bank for placing before them their views and also for 
providing detailed written notes and information solicited by the  
Committee and for the cooperation extended to them. 
 
6. The Committee considered the draft Report on 20th July, 2012 and 
made certain suggestions and observations.  The revised draft Report was 
considered and adopted at their sitting held on 30th July, 2012. 
 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the 
Observations/Recommendations have been printed in bold type in the 
body of the Report.                
         
          
New Delhi,                     (HEMANAND BISWAL)   
7th  August, 2012,                    CHAIRMAN,                                                             
16 Shravana, 1934 (Saka)      STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
 
 
  

8 
 
REPORT 
Part-I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
   One of the main functions assigned to the Departmentally Related 
Standing Committee on Labour, constituted under Rule 331C of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha is to consider the 
Annual Reports of the Ministries/Departments and make reports thereon.  
The Committee have under their jurisdiction the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and the Ministry of Textiles.  The main responsibility of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment is to protect and safeguard the 
interests of workers in  general and those who constitute the poor, 
deprived and disadvantaged sections of the society, in particular with due 
regard to creating healthy work environment for higher production, 
promotion of social security and welfare of the labour force.  The Min istry 
is responsible for administration of as many as 44 Labour Acts.  The 
jurisdiction of the Committee on Labour is therefore co -extensive with the 
works allocated to the Ministries of Labour and Employment and Textiles.  
Thus the Committee, have the man date to oversee the various issues 
concerning the labour  in regard to their conditions of work, health, 

9 
 
safety, welfare and social security.  The Committee at their sitting held on 
22nd September, 2011, selected the subject `Deployment of 
Contract/Casual workers/Sanitation workers for perennial nature of jobs 
in Government/PSU offices/establishments including at Railway 
Stations’. 
2.   Concerned over the reports of plightful working conditions of jute 
workers engaged by the jute Mills, the Committee undert ook a study visit 
to Kolkata on 16 -17 June, 2010 to oversee the implementation of social 
security schemes for the welfare of workers of Jute Mills.  During the 
study visit, some representatives of the Allahabad Bank Drivers’ 
Association met the Chairman an d Members of the Committee.  They 
narrated their grievances and submitted a representation for the 
consideration of the Committee and prayed for their intervention. 
 
3. The Drivers’ Association in their representation stated as follows: 
(i) Drivers attached with the Executives of the Allahabad Bank  are 
working for last 20-25 years in a temporary capacity on a  salary of 
Rs.5000/- p.m.  

10 
 
(ii)   Drivers perform duties for 16-20 hrs. a day and are also  called on 
holidays by the Executives for which  they are paid  only Rs.500/ - a 
month, additionally. 
(iii) Drivers are not entitled for any casual leave/medical leave. 
(iv) No medical benefits/facilities are given to them. 
(v) They are not covered under any social security scheme.   
(vi) Provident Fund and other benefits are also not given to them  by 
the Bank. 
(vii) Even after rendering 15 -25 years of service, their services have  
 not been regularized till date and their long and continuous 
 service shows that they are performing perennial nature of  job.  
(viii) They are always at the mercy, whims and fancies of the  Executives 
of the Bank. 
(ix) With such a meagre salary, it is difficult for them and their 
 families to survive and they have to undergo a lot of  hardships. 

11 
 
(x) In the absence of any Identity card they are often subjected to  police 
scrutiny and avoidable harassment with the result they  reach home late 
at night. 
4. The Allahabad Bank founded on April 24, 1865 and nationalized on 
19th July, 1969, has approximately 22,000 employees in various 
capacities.  The Bank was requested to furnish a factual note in the 
matter.  While furnishing the reply, the Allahabad Bank, also informed 
that they have increased remuneration of these temporary drivers from 
Rs.5000/- to Rs.6000/- p.m. and they are also paid Rs .40/- per day if 
they perform duty beyond 8 hours.  The Committee recorded the oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Allahabad Bank on 14th July, 2011.  
The Minutes of the sitting are reproduced at Annexure-I. 
5. Asked about regularization/absorption  of these drivers, the 
representatives of Allahabad Bank deposed during evidence as under: 
  "The personal drivers forming an Association in the name of 
 Allahabad Bank Drivers Association fought a protracted legal  battle 
with the Bank for their absorption by filing a writ  petition, contempt 
petition before the High Court of Calcutta.   Having lost their cases in 
the High Court, the said Drivers  Association filed a SLP before the 
hon. Supreme Court, which  was finally dismissed as withdrawn" 

12 
 
6. They furt her informed that in its meeting held on 26th June, the 
Banks' Board accorded its approval for absorption of personal drivers of 
Executives who are in continuous engagement for five years or more as on 
31st March, 2010, in the regular service, in the cadre of subordinate staff, 
with the direction that the matter be informed to the Ministry of Finance, 
Government of India.  Accordingly, the Ministry of Finance was informed 
on 14th August, 2010 and on being called for a joint discussion, 
conciliation proceedi ngs before the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner 
(Central) on 17th June, 2011, the representatives of the management 
headed by General Manager (HR) and the Union representatives held a 
threadbare discussion on this issue before the Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central).  It was further submitted that "finally, a tripartite 
settlement was signed by the representatives of the management and the 
Union on 17th June, 2011 in conciliation proceedings in the presence of 
the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Ce ntral) under Section 12 (3) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act of 1947.  In terms of the said settlement, 
Bank will consider, appointing in the service of the Bank, only such 
personal drivers engaged with the Executives  for driving Bank's own 
vehicle and exis ting as on the date of settlement and as per the 
settlement, those who have completed minimum 5 years of continuous 
engagement as personal drivers, subject to the condition inter-alia that 

13 
 
they fulfill the educational qualification prescribed by the Bank f or 
appointment of subordinate cadre in the Bank. The settlement also 
provides that the process of appointment of such eligible personal drivers 
will be completed within a period of four months from 17th June, 2011.  
Accordingly, the Bank invited applicatio ns from the eligible personal 
drivers in a prescribed format through the Executives, who have engaged 
 them, to be submitted by 4th July, 2011.  It is estimated that 
around 130 personal drivers will be found eligible to apply for 
appointment in Bank service. 
7. Accordingly, a settlement was arrived on 17th June, 2011 between 
the Management of Allahabad Bank and All India Allahabad Bank 
Employees' Co-ordination Committee under Section 12(3) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947.  The settlement so arrived is reproduced as 
Annexure-II. 
8. When asked how All India Allahabad Bank Employees' Co-ordination 
Committee came into picture when the dispute was primarily between the 
Management and the Allahabad Bank Drivers' Association, the Allahabad 
Bank informed that a ll Memoranda of Settlements (MOS) pertaining to 
service matters are signed with the representatives of the recognized 
(majority) Workmen Union of our Bank, which is affiliated to  All India 

14 
 
Bank Employees' Association (AIBEA).  In our Bank,  All India 
Allahabad Bank Employees' Coordination Committee (AIABECC) is the 
representative body of AIBEA.  Accordingly all  settlements are signed 
with the representatives of AIABECC. 
 Earlier Memoranda of Settlements (MOS) dated 13th March, 1993 
was signed with the  aforesaid union under Sections 2 (p)  and 18 (1) of 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 in the matter of appointment of personal 
drivers and the eligible personal drivers were offered appointment in the 
Bank in terms of the said settlement. 
9. The representative f urther submitted that the majority workmen 
union has been taking up the cause of the personal drivers for a long time 
requesting the Management for their appointment in the Bank's service.  
In each Industrial Relations Machinery (IRM) meeting at the Head O ffice 
level, the said Union keeps it as an agenda for  discussion with the 
Management. The Tripartite Settlement signed between the Management 
and the said majority workmen union of the Bank, under Section 12(3) of 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  during the conciliation proceedings in the 
presence of the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) under the 
 witnesses of the Regional Labour commissioner (Central) and the 
Assistant Labour Commissioner (Central) is binding on the parties even if 

15 
 
they are not pa rty to the settlement.  Thus, the terms of the tripartite 
settlement will also be applicable to the personal drivers of Executives 
who fulfill the eligibility criteria in terms of the said settlement. Allahabad 
Bank Drivers' Association is an outside body not connected to the 
workmen employed in the Bank and as such, no settlement could have 
been signed with them. 
10. When asked about the reasons for not calling the representatives of 
the aggrieved Drivers' Association to witness the settlement and raise 
their points, the Allahabad Bank informed that in our Bank, AIBEA (All 
India Bank Employees' Association) is the majority workmen union.  As 
such, all settlements are signed with their representatives.  Since the 
Drivers'  Association is an outside body not connected to the workmen 
 employed in the Bank, no settlement can be signed by the Bank with 
them.  As there is no employer-employee  relationship between the Bank 
and the personal drivers engaged by the Executives, the Drivers' 
Association representing th em does not have any locus standi  even to 
discuss the issue with the Management of the Bank.  The Drivers' 
Association have lost their cases in the Hon'ble High Court and 
withdrawn their SLP in the Hon'ble Supreme Court. 

16 
 
11. The Dy.CLC (C), Ministry of Labour and Employment who was also a 
signatory to the Settlement when asked to clarify the position, submitted 
that till the joint discussion/conciliation proceedings were held,  there 
was no knowledge to the conciliation officer about the  existence of the 
Drivers' Association.  Only during the conciliation, it was known that the 
Drivers Association filed cases in the Hon'ble High Court, Kolkata and 
that the order of the court was not in their favour.  It was also known that 
the case filed by them in the Apex Court was also dismissed by the  Apex 
Court as withdrawn.  When it was enquired with the management about 
the demand of the Drivers' Association, it was known that the association 
also wanted absorption/regularization of personal drivers.  At that point 
during the conciliation, the management of the Bank had  almost 
agreed for absorption/ regularization of personal  drivers. 
12. As per the Settlement, these drivers were considered for 
regularization as Peon-cum-driver subject to the condition that they hol d 
valid driving licence for driving light and heavy vehicle; they would have 
passed minimum Class VIII but not passed 10+2 Exam and have 
rendered continuous service of 5 years as personal drivers.   
13. Asked to explain the rationale for the educational qu alification 
prescribed when the drivers were driving Bank's vehicles satisfactorily for 

17 
 
the last 25 -26 years, the Bank made the written submission that the 
requirements prescribed, as aforesaid, are as per the Government 
guidelines and Recruitment Policy o f the Bank and cannot be dispensed 
with. 
14. When asked about the number of Executives eligible for availing 
bank's car vis -à-vis the number of drivers who have represented for 
regularization, the Bank intimated that the number of Executives in the 
rank of Assistant General Manager and above in the B ank is around 220.  
However, some of the cars provided to the Executives are driven by 
regular Peon -cum-Drivers of the Bank.  About 130/135 number of 
applications of eligible personal drivers are estimated to be received. 
15. Asked to explain the differenc e in emoluments of a regular driver 
and the drivers engaged by the Executives after considering all the 
paraphernalia attached to both the categories and the annual burden in 
case all the temporary drivers are absorbed, the Bank informed that
 "Executives o f the Bank are being reimbursed the following 
maximum amounts for engaging personal drivers: 
 Monthly remuneration :Rs.6000/- (in Metro areas),    
 Rs.5750/- (in other areas) 

18 
 
 Out of the pocket expenses for odd hour duty:Rs.60/- per day. 
 Car cleaning charges : Rs.300 per month 
 Festive Season Ex-gratia:Rs.6000/5750 per year 
 Non-official uniform:Rs.500/-per year 
 Winter Pullover: Rs.400/- per year 
  
 
 Monthly emolument of Peon-cum-Drivers on appointment  
 in the Bank's service in Metro areas, is as follows: 
 Basic Pay (initial)   : Rs.5850/- 
 Dearness Allowance (variable) : Rs.3854/- 
 HRA      : Rs.730/- 
 Special Allowance   : Rs.1450/- 
 Total     : Rs.11884/- 
 In case about 135 personal drivers are appointed in the Bank's 
service, the annual additional burden on the Bank on  account of their 
salary bill will be approximately Rs.57 lacs." 
16. When asked whether any fresh directions were called from the 
Ministry of Finance for regularization of these drivers, the Bank informed 
that the decision to appoint the  personal drivers of Executives was taken 
by the Bank's Board on the strength of the autonomy granted to the 
Public Sector Banks by Government of India, Ministry of Finance, in the 

19 
 
matter of framing HR policies relating to promotion, recruitment, etc.  
However, the matter was informed to the Ministry of Finance on 
14.08.2010. 
17. On the question of the procedure followed for circulation/furnishing 
of application forms to these drivers and to ensure that each driver got 
the form, the Bank submitted that the application forms were distributed 
through the Executives who engaged the personal drivers. 
18. As Regards the date of reckoning the eligibility of 5 years as on 31st 
March, 2010 when the Tripartite Settlement was made in June 2011, the 
Bank informed that the eligibility date was fixed `as on 31st March, 2010' 
in terms of the Board Resolution dated 26.06.2010. 
19. Regarding availability of list of drivers attached to the Executives, 
the Bank informed that the personal drivers are engaged by the 
Executives and not  by the Bank. They are required to report for duty to 
the Executives. Bank does not maintain their attendance.  Hence,  Bank 
does not maintain any list of personal drivers. 
20. On 31st December, 2011, during their study visit the Committee 
again heard the representatives of Allahabad Bank in Kolkata about the 
regularization of the drivers.  The Committee were informed that '115 

20 
 
temporary drivers have been regularized on the terms of Tripartite 
settlement dated 17.06.2011'.  It was also submitted that  six candidates 
were not found eligible in terms of the said settlement. Four out of six 
were debarred for want of minimum stipulated educational qualification, 
one driver could not submit documents in support of his educational 
qualification and another had not completed five years of engagement as a 
personal driver.   
21. When asked whether these were the only persons left due to non -
completion of five years, the Bank informed that those who did not 
complete minimum 5 years of continuous engagement as per sonal driver 
of Bank's Executives as on 31st March, 2010 were not eligible to apply for 
appointment as  peon-cum-driver in terms of the Tripartite Settlement 
dated 17.06.2011.  Shri Mumtaj was the only person who applied 
 without fulfilling the above criteria. 
22. Regarding the particulars of drivers engaged by the Executives who 
have not completed five years alongwith the date of their engagement, the 
Bank informed that since the personal drivers are engaged by the 
Executives of  the Bank, no such list is available with us. 

21 
 
Part-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
23. The Committee find  that the temporary drivers 
attached to the Executives of the Allahabad Bank are being 
continuously engaged over last 15 to 25 years.  These 
drivers have been driving the Bank owned cars, maintaining 
the log-books but are not on the pay-roll of the Bank and get 
a consolidated amount through the Executives they are 
attached with.  The Committee note that these drivers do 
not get any of the statutory dues and benefits available to 
the regular employees of the Bank, besides they do not 
enjoy any statutory soci al security. The Committee observe 
that engagement of drivers for such a long period spanning 
over 15 to 25 years indicates beyond any manner of doubt 
that they are performing a perennial nature of job.  The 
Committee deplore any such contractual arrangeme nt 
whereby perennial nature of jobs are outsourced just to 
evade employer-employee relationship and to deny statutory 

22 
 
protections and safeguards to persons so employed.   The 
Committee are, therefore, of the considered view that if the 
Executives of the Bank avail facility of Bank owned vehicles 
and other concomitant benefits on a regular basis, then it is 
also incumbent upon the Bank to bring these chauffeurs in 
the regular employment of the Bank.  
 
24.  The Committee note that a dispute was raised 
before the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) by the All 
India Allahabad Bank Employees' Coordination Committee 
in June, 2011 against the management of Allahabad Bank in 
the matter of absorption of personal/temporary drivers.  
After the conciliation proceedings,  a Memorandum of 
Settlement was signed between the Management and the 
Coordination Committee on 17.06.2011. The Committee, 
however, note that the conciliation proceedings were 
conducted without the participation of affected Drivers' 
Association.  Resultant ly, the main issue of age and 

23 
 
educational qualification etc. were given consideration while 
overlooking more relevant aspects like driving skills, 
dedication and long duration of service etc.  The 
Committee, therefore, feel that in such cases a 
humanitarian view need to be taken and therefore, 
recommend that the Allahabad Bank review their decision 
and extend relaxation to those uncovered drivers under the 
present settlement. 
 
25.  The Committee find that the All India Allahabad 
Bank Employees' Coordination  Committee raised an 
industrial dispute during June, 2011 with the CLC (C).  After 
conciliation proceedings, a Tripartite Settlement was signed 
amongst the Management of the Bank, All India Allahabad 
Bank Employees' Coordination Committee and the Dy. 
CLC(C) on 17th June, 2011.  However, the cut off date for 
completion of minimum five years of continuous 
engagement was set as 31st March, 2010.  The Committee 

24 
 
feel that the cut -off-date should have been the year of 
settlement i.e. 31st March, 2011.  Had it bee n so, some 
more drivers could have been covered.  They, therefore, 
desire that the cut -off-date be revised to meet the end of 
justice. 
 
26.  The Committee are, however, happy to note that 
pursuant to their examination, the Allahabad Bank have 
regularized 1 15 out of 121 temporary drivers who had 
applied for regularization after fulfilling the eligibility 
criteria with effect from 01.09.2011. The Committee find 
that the remaining drivers, were reportedly ineligible for 
want of requisite educational qualificat ion. The Committee 
find little justification to withhold their regularization for 
want of prescribed educational qualification when the 
Executives of the Bank found their services satisfactory for 
over such a long period of time.  Having due consideration 
to their age, long and unblemished service record and the 

25 
 
fact that at such a ripe age they would have bleak prospects 
of getting alternative employment, the Committee 
recommend that the condition of educational qualification 
be relaxed in case of these drivers as a onetime measure and 
they may also be considered for regularization on 
humanitarian ground. 
27.  The Committee find that the application forms 
were handed over to the prospective drivers through the 
Executives with whom they were attached.  Such a 
mechanism does not inspire confidence and the Committee 
apprehend due to some chance slip some drivers might have 
been denied a fair chance to apply for regularisation.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that all such temporary 
drivers, fulfilling the criteria, be issued application forms 
and considered for regularization. 
 
 

26 
 
28.  The Committee note that besides 121 drivers who 
had completed 5 years of regular service as on 31st March, 
2010, there were 117 more drivers who had not completed 5 
years of service as on 31st March, 2010.  The Committee are 
dismayed to note that though the Bank has the information 
regarding number of drivers attached with the Executives, it 
could not have the names of the drivers and the date of 
their engagement. They, therefor e, desire that a detailed 
database of all the drivers engaged by the Executives of 
Allahabad Bank be maintained and also furnished to them. 
 
29.  The Committee further find that the Allahabad 
Bank  have a policy of providing Bank owned vehicle to their 
Executives for which it bears the cost of petrol, 
maintenance and other attendant costs besides giving a 
fixed amount of Rs.6000/ - to their Executives for hiring 
drivers.  The Committee were also informed that the 
disbursement of this amount is available only  to those 

27 
 
Executives hiring the drivers and not for self driven 
vehicles.  The Committee are of the view that since driving 
is a perennial nature of job, they, recommend that 
henceforth, after absorption/ regularization of the present 
drivers who have completed 5 years of continuous service, a 
transparent policy may be framed for recruitment of regular 
drivers to avoid/prevent further dispute/litigation in the 
matter.  They desire to be apprised of the action taken in 
the matter.   
 
30. The Committee also s ought information from some 
leading Nationalised Banks regarding engagement of drivers 
for their Executives who were entitled for vehicle.  After 
perusing the replies so received, the Committee find that 
more or less the same procedure of hiring drivers is  
prevalent in almost all the Banks, though their wages are 
higher as compared to Allahabad Bank.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that necessary instructions be issued by 

28 
 
the Ministry of Finance, (Department of Financial Services) 
to all the Nationalised Banks for framing a uniform policy 
and transparent guidelines for recruitment of regular drivers 
in the Banks and also for regularization of drivers engaged 
continuously for five years and above. 
 
 
New Delhi,                 HEMANAND BISWAL,   
7th August, 2012,                CHAIRMAN,                                                             
16 Shravana, 1934 (Saka)   STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

29 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 14TH JULY, 2011.  
 
The Committee met from 1430 hrs. to 1700 hrs in Committee 
Room No.62, Parliament House, New Delhi to   
PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri  K. M. Anandan, 
3. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
        4. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
  5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6. Shri P. Lingam 
7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
9. Shri S.Pakkirappa 
10. Shri Ramkishun 
11. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
12. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
13. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
14. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
15. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        16. Shri Rajaram 
17. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
18. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 
    
 
 
 

30 
 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri B. S. Dahiya   - Director  
 2. Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
   
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF ALLAHABAD BANK DRIVERS' ASSOCIATION 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer   Designation 
1. Shri Nemai Ghosh President 
2. Shri  Manik 
Choudhury 
Vice President 
3. Shri Debabrata Das    
4. Shri   Deep Kumar 
Chettri  
General Secretary 
5. Shri Tapan Roy President, Allahabad 
Bank Retirees 
Congress 
6. Shri Subhash Bose In-charge Amnesty 
International  
REPRESENTATIVES OF ALLAHABAD BANK 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer   Designation 
1. 
 
Shri J.P. Dua 
 
Chairman and 
Managing Director 
2. 
 
Shri D.Sarkar Executive Director 

31 
 
3. Shri V.S. Krishna 
Kumar 
General Manager 
(HR) 
4. Shri P.S. Chakraborty Assistant General 
Manager 
               
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Officer   Designation 
 
1. 
 
Shri V. Murali Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner 
(Central) 
2. Shri S.K. Chand Regional Labour 
Commissioner 
(Central) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the 
Allahabad Bank's Drivers' Association to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to hear their grievances for regularization/absorption in 
Allahabad Bank.   
  
3. The concerns and questions raised by the members centered mainly 
on  
(i) regularisation of their services in Allahabad Bank as Drivers.   

32 
 
(ii) They have cited two cases where the drivers are suffering form 
medical problems but since they are not the employ ees of the 
Bank, the Bank did nothing for them.  They informed that they 
are paid Rs.6000/ - p.m. consolidated and Rs.60/ - per day as 
overtime allowance which has a cap of Rs.500/- a month. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Dy. CLC(C) was called for   
  
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
      A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

33 
 
                    MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee sat on 20 July, 2012 from 1130 hrs. to 1230 hrs. in 
the  Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.     Shri Raj Babbar 
3.     Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4.     Shri Narahari Mahato 
5.  Shri Hari Manjhi 
6.     Shri P. Balram Naik 
7.  Smt. Mausam Noor 
8.     Shri Jayaram Pangi 
9.  Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
10. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy    
11. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
13. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
15. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
16. Shri Rajaram 
17. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
18. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
    
 
 
 

34 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri P.V.L.N.Murthy  - Director 
  3. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about the draft Report on  `Absorption/regularization of temporary 
drivers of Allahabad Bank.'    
                
 3. After detailed deliberation, the Chairman directed decided that the 
suggestions made by the Members be incorporated in the draft report and 
the same may be considered again for adoption during the next sitting to 
be held on 30th July, 2012. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

35 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee sat on 30 July, 2012 from 1130 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in 
the  Room No.116, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   2. Shri Raj Babbar 
   3. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
   4. Shri Narahari Mahato 
   5. Shri Hari Manjhi 
   6.  Shri P. Balram Naik 
   7.  Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
   8.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy    
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 9. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 10. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
 11. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
 12. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 13. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
 14. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 15. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
    
 
 SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri P.V.L.N.Murthy  - Director 
  2. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairma n welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about the revised draft Report on  ` Absorption/regularization of 
temporary drivers of Allahabad Bank.'    

36 
 
         
3. The Committee took up the revised draft Report for consideration. 
After some discussion, the Committee  adopted the Report without any 
modification.   
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the Report 
to both the Houses of Parliament. 
     
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

ANNEXURE-II 
FORM 'H' 
 MEMORANDUM OF SETTLEMENT ARRIVED AT BETWEEN 
 THE MANAGEMENT OF ALLAHABAD BANK AND ALL INDIA 
 ALLAHABAD BANK EMPLOYEES' CO-ORDINATION  COMMITTEE 
(AFFILIATED TO ALL INDIA BANK EMPLOYEES'  ASSOCIATION) 
UNDER SECTION (3) OF THE INDUSTRIAL  DISPUTES ACT, 1947 I N 
THE MATTER OF APPOINTMENT OF  PERSONAL DRIVERS OF 
EXECUTIVES OF ALLAHABAD  BANK AS PEON -CUM-DRIVER IN THE 
SUBORDINATE CADRE  IN THE BANK.              
    NAME OF PARTIES 
REPRESENTING    REPRESENTING ALL ALLAHABAD 
BANK     INDIA ALLAHABAD BANK   
      EMPLOYEES' CO-    
      ORDINATION      
      COMMITTEE 
  
S/SHRI       S/SHRI 
 1. V.S. Krishna Kumar  1. Dhananjay Tewari 
    General Managar (HR)      President       
     2. Mahesh Kumar  
         Sharma 
            Vice president  
  
 2. P.S. Chakraborty    3. Gour Das 
  Assistant General Manager  (HR)     General Secretary 
 
  
3. B. Abhiram     4. Anjan Bose 
  Chief Manager (HR)      Deputy General   
                  Secretary 

38 
 
         
        5. Y.P Singh 
            Deputy General  
            Secretary 
         
         
        6. R.M. Vyas 
           Asstt. General   
           Secretary 
         
        7. P.K. Chakravorty 
           Asstt. General   
           Secretary 
         
        8. Deepak Sharma 
           Asstt. General   
           Secretary  
SHORT RECITAL OF THE CASE 
 WHEREAS, Allahabad Bank (hereinafter referred to as the Bank) 
and All India Allahabad Bank Employees' Co -ordination Committee 
(hereinafter referred as the "Employees' Co -ordination Committee") had 
signed a Settlemen t dated 13.03.1993 in the matter of appointment of 
some Personal Drivers of the Executives of the Bank as a one -time 
exercise in full and final settlement of the issue. The Settlement outlived 
its utility with the appointment of the eligible Personal Drive rs of the 
Executives of the Bank as "Peon-cum-Driver" in the service of the Bank. 

39 
 
2. AND WHEREAS, thereinafter, the Employees' Co -ordination 
Committee raised an issue with the Bank and demanded that as was 
done by way of Settlement dated 13.03.1993, the ba nk should absorb 
and regularize all the personal drivers of the Executives of the Bank in 
the service of the bank and also undertook the agitational programme 
including call for an All India Strike on 26th June, 2006 on the said 
issue besides certain other issues. 
3. AND WHEREAS, as a consequence of the above agitational 
programme called by the Employees' Co -ordination Committee, a Small 
Committee Meeting was convened at the Head Office of the Bank on 
19.06.2006 and the matter was discussed. 
4. AND WHEREAS,  this issue was further discussed between the 
parties in the meeting of Negotiating Committee held on 24.04.2007 at 
the Head Office of the Bank. 
5. AND WHEREAS, this issue was once again discussed between the 
parties in the meeting of the Negotiating Committee held on 04.09.2008. 
6. AND WHEREAS, this issue was further discussed between the 
parties in the meetings of Negotiating Committee held on 17.09.2009 
and 18.01.2001. However, despite protracted discussion over a period of 

40 
 
about five years between the p arties, the same could not be resolved 
amicably between them. 
7. AND WHEREAS, in the interregnum Allahabad Bank Drivers' 
Association, claiming itself to be representing its members, who are 
personal drivers of Executives of the Bank, filed a Writ Petition before 
the Hon'ble High Court of Calcutta, inter -alia, seeking regularization of 
the personal drivers of the Executives of the Bank in the service of the 
Bank. The said Writ Petition No.17180 of 1998 was dismissed by the Ld 
Single Judge by his judgement & order dated 08.07.2004. Writ Appeal 
No. 2373 of 2004 filed before the Division bench of the Hon'ble High 
Court of Calcutta also came to be dismissed by the Hon'ble High Court 
by judgement and order dated 25.02.2009. The said Drivers Association 
filed an SL P before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, which was 
dismissed as withdrawn vide order dated 10.07.2009. 
8. AND WHEREAS, it is in the above background, the Employees' Co-
ordination Committee has raised the present Industrial Dispute for 
absorption and re gularization of all the personal drivers of the 
Executives of the Bank. 
9. AND WHEREAS, the Bank took a stand that the Personal Drivers 
of the Executives are the drivers engaged by the Executives of the Bank 

41 
 
in their personal capacity and they are neither the employees of the 
Bank nor they can claim so and this stand of the Bank stood upheld by 
the High Court of Calcutta in the judgement referred to above. 
10. AND WHEREAS, the Employees' Co -ordination Committee sought 
the intervention of the good office of the Chief Labour Commissioner 
(Central), New Delhi to impress upon the Management for resolving the 
matter amicably between the parties.  
11. AND WHEREAS, the Management requested the Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi, to intervene in resolving  the issue 
on mutually agreed and/ or acceptable terms and conditions, which are 
found just, fair and reasonable by the Conciliation Officer in the 
peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case. 
12. AND WHEREAS, the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), 
New Delhi, held protracted discussions with both the parties and held 
conciliation proceedings on 17.06.2011. 
13. NOW, therefore, the parties have arrived at the settlement 
described below, during the course of conciliation proceedings before 
the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), New Delhi, with his 
good office and he having found it just, fair and reasonable. 

42 
 
TERMS OF SETTLEMENT 
I. That the Bank will consider appointing in the service of the Bank 
only such Personal Drivers engaged by the Executives for driving Bank's 
own vehicles and existing as on date of this settlement and who have 
completed minimum 5 years of continuous engagement as Personal 
Driver as on 31st March, 2010, as "Peon -cum-Driver", subject to the 
condition that:-  
 (a) they fulfill the educational qualification prescribed by the 
Bank  for appointment in "sub-ordinate cadre" in the Bank and  
 (b) they hold valid driving license for driving light and heavy 
vehicle, provided that if any candidate does not hold valid driving  
license for driving heavy vehicle, he will obtain the same within six 
months from the date of his appointment. 
II. The Bank will invite applications only from such Personal Drivers 
of Executive, who are eligible as per the conditions prescribed in para I 
above. 
III. The applications so received from the eligible Personal Drivers of 
the Executives of the Bank will be processed and examined with regard 
to the eligibility criteria prescribed in para I above and they shall be 

43 
 
appointed as "Peon-cum-driver" in the service of the Bank. They will be 
entitled to the applicable service benefits from the date of their such 
appointment in terms of this settlement. 
IV. That consequent upon appointment of such Personal Drivers as 
"Peon-cum-driver" in the service of Bank , as mentioned in para III 
above, the Bank Shall be free to utilize their services as per its 
requirement and exigencies and not necessarily at the place of their 
present engagement/choice. 
V. That the terms and conditions of this settlement between the 
parties are in satisfaction of all claims of the Personal Drivers, who will 
be appointed pursuant to this settlement, against the Bank of any 
nature monetary or otherwise. 
VI. That this settlement has been arrived between the parties in the 
peculiar facts an d circumstances of the case as a one -time exercise in 
full and final settlement of the issue and the same shall not be quoted 
as precedence in future against the Bank. 
VII. It is agreed that no further demand/ issue beyond the terms of 
this settlement will be raised with the Bank in connection with the 

44 
 
appointment of the personal dirvers of Executives who will be appointed 
in terms of this settlement. 
VIII. Both the parties a gree that the settlement shall be effective from 
the date of signing of this settlement and the process of appointment of 
the personal dirvers of the Executive, who are eligible in terms of this 
settlement, will be completed within a period of four months from this 
date. 
IX. That if any doubt or difficulty arises regarding interpretation of any 
of the terms of settlement, the matter shall be taken up only at the level 
of Head Office of the Bank and the Employees' Co-ordination Committee 
for mutual discussion and clarification. 
X. The parties will report implementation of this settlement to the 
Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), New Delhi and 
Conciliation Officer under ID ACt, 1947 within 30 days after completion 
of the process of appointment as per para VIII of this settlement. 
  Signed by the parties on this 17th day of June, 2011 at New 
Delhi. 
For & on behalf of Allahabad Bank  For & on behalf of All India  
        Allahabad Bank Employees' 
        Co-ordination Committee 

45 
 
1. (V.S. Krisna Kumar)              1. (Dhananjay Tewari) 
2. (P.S. Chakraborty)      2. (Mahesh Kumar Sharma) 
3. (B.Abhiram)      3. (Gour Das) 
        4. (Anjam Bose) 
               5. (Y.P. Singh) 
               6. (R.M. Vyas) 
               7. (P.K. Chakravorty) 
               8. (Deepak Sharma)   
 WITNESSESS: 
 1. (S.K. Chand) 
 RLC(C), Headquarters. 
 2. (P.K. Vashisht) 
 ALC (C), Headquarters 
 3. (Anil Kumar) 
 Manager, SC/ST Cell 
 Allahabad Bank, 
 Zonal Officer, New Delhi 
(V.MURALI) 

DEPUTY CHIEF LABOUR COMMISSIONER  (CENTRAL) AND 
CONCILIATION OFFICER UNDER ID ACT, 1047  
 