 
5  
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirtieth 
Report of Standing Committee on Labour on the 
`Functioning of the Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation] 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December,   2009/ Agrahayana,  1931 (Saka) 
  

  
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirtieth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on the 
`Functioning of the Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2009 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2009 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2009/ Agrahayana 1931 (Saka) 
 

  
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
       
     PAGE(S) 
       
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………    
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
accepted by the Government………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s reply…………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration…………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
which  replies of the Government  are interim  
in nature    …………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 11.11.2009    
    
 
II.      Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the   
Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL-CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
2. Shri  M. Anandan  
3. Shri  P. Balram (Mahabubabad)  
4. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq    
5. Shri  Sudarshan Bhagat  
6. Shri  Hassan Khan  
7. Shri  Kaushalendra Kumar  
8. Shri P. Lingam  
9. Shri  Hari Manjhi  
10. Shri  P.R. Natarajan  
11. Km. Mausam Noor  
12. Shri  S. Pakkirappa  
13. Shri  Ramkishun  
14. Shri  Mahendra Kumar Roy  
15. Shri  Chandu Lal Sahu  
16. Shri  Murari Lal Singh  
***17. Shri Raj Babbar  
18. Vacant     
19. Vacant  
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy  
23. Shri  Rudra Narayan Pany  
**24. Shri  Pyarelal Khandelwal  
25. Shri  Rajaram  
26. Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
 27. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
 *28. Shri  Mohammad Adeeb  
 29. Vacant    
30. Vacant   
    31. Vacant  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*   Changed the nomination from Committee on Labour to Committee on  
     Commerce w.e.f. 17th September, 2009. 
 **  Expired on 6th October, 2009. 
*** Nominated w.e.f. 3rd December, 2009. 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
                
1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri B.S. Dahiya    - Director  
3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
     

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been 
authorised  by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Fifth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on  the `Functioning of the 
Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation.’ 
 
2. The Thirtieth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha  
and also l aid in  Rajya Sabha on 21.10.2008.  The Ministry of Labour and 
Employment furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 20.2.2009.  The Report was 
considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Labo ur at their 
sitting held on 11.11.2009. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For the facility of r eference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed in 
thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                          HEMANAND BISWAL 
 3rd November, 2009                                            CHAIRMAN, 
12 Kartika, 1931 (Saka)       STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
   

CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Labour deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Thirtiet h Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on `Functioning of 
Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation’ relating to the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 21.10.2008. 
 
2 The Ministry of Labour and Employment were req uested to furnish 
action taken replies to the recommendations contained in the Thirtieth 
Report within three months from the presentation of the Report i.e. by 21 st 
January, 2009.  The action taken replies of the Government in respect of 
all the 18  recommendations contained in the Report were received on 20 th 
February, 2009.  These have been categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 
12, 13, 16, 17 and 18.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply – Paragraph 
Sl. Nos. 14 and 15. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee a nd 
which require reiteration--Nil. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are interim in nature — Paragraph Sl. Nos. 7 
and 9. 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect of 
recommendations contained in Ch apter I and final action taken 
notes in respect of recommendations contained in Chapter -V for 
which only interim replies have been given by the Government 
may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later 
than 3 months of the presentation of this Report.   

4.      The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations which need reiteration or 
merit comments in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Amendment to Employees’ Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.2, Paras 1.9 and 1.10) 
 
5. The Committee in their original Report observed that amendment to 
the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 
has been pending since long and and there has  been no sincere efforts to 
bring it around.  The Committee noted that proposal for carrying out 
amendments in the EPF and MP Act, 1952 was considered by the CBT as 
back as in July, 2002.  The Ministry’s view point that decision for amending 
the Act would be taken at an appropriate time was regretful.  The delay on 
this count has only exacerbated the problems of beneficiaries and also of 
the organization.  The ever growing inoperative account, mounting arrears 
for recovery, increasing number of defaulting e stablishments and swelling 
court cases under various sections of the Act and also under IPC were the 
testimony that urgent remedial measures were the need of the hour for the 
smooth functioning of the EPFO and satisfaction of its beneficiaries. 
 
The Commit tee strongly recommended that immediate necessary 
steps should be taken to have a comprehensive review of the EPF and MP 
Act, 1952 to effect necessary amendment in the Act.  The amendments 
should inter-alia include the automatic coverage of establishments as and 
when it came up, complete coverage of all the workers of the 
establishments, timely realization of EPF dues, stringent penal action for 
default by the establishments, accountability of the officers responsible for 
their act of omissions and commissi ons, modernizing and revamp of the 
system and functioning of this Organization, including better fund 
management. 
 
6. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
stated as follows :- 
 
`The Central Board of Trustees in its 183 rd meeting held on 5.7.2008 
has approved the proposal for reducing the threshold li mit for 
coverage under the EPF and MP Act, 1952 from 50 to 20 in respect of 

co-operative institutions working without aid of power and from 20 to 
10 in respect of other establishments. 
  The reduction of threshold limit for coverage under the EPF and 
MP Act, 1952 would require amendment to Sections 1(3) and 
16(1)(a) of the EPF and MP Act, 1952.   
The amendment proposal was considered by Cabinet on 
16/10/2008 and the Cabinet directe d to re -examine the proposal in 
consultation with concerned Ministries which is being done.  Once 
implemented this proposal would greatly enhance the coverage of 
establishments. 
 
After a detailed and meticulous exercise the proposal for 
appointment of Mult i Fund Managers was placed before the Central 
Board of Trustees (EPF) who in its 181 st meeting held on 29/07/2008 
has decided to mandate the four bidders namely – HSBC AMC, ICICI 
Prudential AMC, State Bank of India and Reliance Capital AMC for 
managing the  corpus of EPFO.  It is expected that this move will 
bring in better yields to Provident Fund corpus and give better 
returns to EPF subscribers in future by installing competition amongst 
fund managers.  Proposal for amendment to the other provisions of 
the Act is also under examination.’ 
 
7. While appreciating the fact that the Government have 
already initiated the process for reducing the threshold limit for 
coverage under the Employees’ Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, the Committ ee urge the 
Ministry to amend the other provisions of the Act, as 
recommended by them earlier, within a specific time frame, for 
smooth functioning of EPFO and for more benefits to the 
subscribers.    The Committee also expect that there should be a 
well established and proper mechanism to oversee the functioning 
of Multi Fund Managers namely HSBC AMC, ICICI Prudential AMC, 

SBI and Reliance Capital AMC appointed for managing the corpus 
of EPFO so that there is no misuse or misappropriation of the fund.  
 
B. Compliance 2001 Programme 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.3, Para 1.20) 
 
8. The Committee in their Report, while examination of the working of 
EPFO found that the coverage of workers is extremely meagre in spite of 
several initiatives taken by the Government to en hance it.  The Committee 
noted that ‘Compliance 2001 Programme’ was one such drive launched to 
maximize the coverage based on the concept of suo motu and voluntary 
action on the part of the employers/establishments to provide EPF 
coverage to its workers. H owever, the programme could not achieve the 
desired objectives fully.  The Committee recommended that the strategic 
changes in the `Compliance 2001 Programme’ should be made in a time 
bound manner with a view to reducing the evasion of the eligible units t o 
the minimum and to extend its coverage to the large manpower working in 
the private/unorganized sector.  
 
9. In their action taken reply the Ministry stated as follows :- 
 
`The Sub-Committee for Strategic Adjustments in Compliance 2001 
Programme has dire cted all Addl. CPFCs (Zones) to convene the 
meeting of RPFCs, in -charge of the regions and collect the 
information which would enable the Sub -Committee to review the 
Compliance 2001 programme.  The data furnished by the in -charge 
of the regions and their f eedback is being discussed with the 
employer’s and employees’ representatives.  The recommendation of 
the Committee shall be formulated after collating all the data 
received and shall be placed before the Standing Committee as soon 
as possible.’ 
 
 
 
 

 
10. The Committee are concerned to note that the data which 
will enable the Sub -Committee for Strategic Adjustments to 
review the Compliance 2001 Programme is still awaited from 
Regional Provident Fund Commissioners (R PFCs), in-charge of the 
regions. The Committee urge the Ministry to expedite the work of 
collecting data from RPFCs so that the concerned Committee may 
give its recommendations in time and further action in the matter 
could, accordingly, be initiated.  The Committee would also like to 
be apprised about the progress made in this regard.  
 
C. Recovery of arrears 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.7, Para 1.34) 
 
11. The Committee in their original Report noted with concern that the 
arrears due for recovery were continuously mounting year after year 
against the def aulting establishments.  The reasons for non -realisation of 
arrears have been adduced on account of stays granted by 
courts/tribunals, establishments having gone into liquidation/closure/lock -
outs, sanction of installments by courts/higher authorities and 
establishments in respect of which rehabilitation scheme had been 
sanctioned by BIFR.  The Committee felt that EPFO should strengthen its 
grievance redressal machinery so that more cases are resolved and 
establishments did not approach courts too often.  S imilarly, legal unit of 
the Organisation should have constant coordination with 
courts/tribunals/BIFR, etc. to save time in settlement of cases. 
 
 
 
 

 
12. In their action taken reply the Ministry stated as follows :- 
 
`Instructions are issued from time to t ime to the Regional Offices for 
constant coordination with courts / tribunals / BIFR etc. to save time 
in settlement of cases has also further improve collections of other 
arrears.  The Central Board of Trustees, EPF in its meetings consider 
the request fo r waiver of damages moved by the employers and 
grants waiver or reduction of damages in appropriate cases in 
relation to an establishment which is a sick industrial company and in 
respect of which a scheme for rehabilitation has been sanctioned by 
BIFR.’   
 
13. The Committee find the reply of the Government far from 
satisfactory as it does not reflect any seriousness on their part to 
solve such a grave problem of recovery of ever increasing arrears 
against defaulting establishments. The Committee, therefore , 
reiterate that EPFO should strengthen its Grievances Redressal 
Machinery so that the pending cases for evasion/arrears against 
the defaulting establishments could be settled expeditiously. 
D. Defaulting establishments 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para 1.43) 
 
14. In their Report the Committee noted that the number  of defaulting 
establishments during the last three years i.e., 2005, 2006 and 2007 was 
40608, 76476 and 72554 respectively.  EPFO, as an organization to handle 
this menace had been found wanting in solving this problem.  The 
Committee desired that a fresh look to have a comprehensive view about 
the phenomena of default among the establishments (both exempted and 
unexempted sectors) was essential.  The Committee recommended that 
EPFO should take stron g administrative and judicial measures, even by 
making appropriate changes in the relevant Act and Rules, if required. 
 

15. In their action taken reply the Ministry stated as follows :- 
 
`A comprehensive exercise is being undertaken by the Sub -
Committee on  Strategic Adjustment to the Compliance 2001 
Programme to find out the ways and means by which evasion of 
membership by various establishments and non -extension of the Act 
to the coverable establishments can be curbed. ‘  
  
16. The Committee are unhappy to  note that no tangible action 
has been taken by the Ministry to secure strict compliance of the 
Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
1952.  The Committee note that the Sub -Committee, constituted 
by Chairman, Central Board of Trustees in January, 2008, has been 
tasked to find out the ways and means by which evasion of 
membership by various establishments and non -extension of the 
Act to the coverable establishment can be curbed.  The Sub -
Committee, enjoined to give their report within t hree months of 
its constitution i.e. by April/May, 2008, is yet to submit its report.  
The Committee, therefore reiterate that necessary corrective 
measures must be taken without further delay by the Government 
to protect and safeguard the interest of work ers as envisaged in 
the Act.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
E. Allotment of National Social Security Number (NSSN) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para 1.53) 
 
17. The Committee in their Report found that the process of allotment of 
National Social Security Number (NSSN) has been under taken with a view 
to providing a unique identity to each employed person so that social 
security benefits as stipulated under the statutes were ensured to him/her 
despite switching  over  of  jobs  by  the concerned employee.  Although 
the process of allot ment of NSSN was continuous in nature as employable 
persons keep joining the employment, still there was a huge backlog of 
employed workforce who were yet to be covered under this umbrella.    
Accordingly, the Committee urge upon the Government to expedite  the 
process clearing backlog of allotment of NSSN so as to complete it within a 
period of two years. 
 
18. The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as follows :- 
 
`In the present revised strategy being adopted with the help of NIC, 
allotment of a un ique number to every subscriber is NOT mandatory 
for the rollout of the project.  The existing PF Number is being 
treated as unique number.  The allotment of SSN will be made in the 
2nd phase of the project by integrating with the existing number.’ 
 
19. The Committee note that the Government intend to initiate 
the process for allotment of SSN in the 2 nd phase of the project.  
However, in order to achieve the desired results, the Committee 
desire that a foolproof and time bound strategy for the purpose 
may be chalked out.  The Committee also urge upon the Ministry 
to keep them posted about the progress in this regard. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
F. Grievances Redressal Machinery (GRM) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.12, Paras 1.62 and 1.63) 
 
20. The Committee in their Report noted that t he grievance of 
subscribers of EPFO mainly resolved around  (i) Claims not settled; (ii) 
Accounts Slips not issued; (iii) Members not enrolled; (iv) Delay in transfer 
of accounts; (v) Delay in release of pension/dispute on quantum 
calculation; (vi) Delay i n issue of Schemes Certificate; and (vii) 
Return/Rejection of claims.  There was a provision stipulating a definite 
time-frame for the solution of the problem, but instances were galore 
wherein the time limit was hardly adhered to as far as solution of pro blem 
was concerned.  Even holding of adalats to redress the grievances 
appeared to be a sham exercise.  The receipt of less than 2 cases per 
adalats spoke volumes about the dismal performance of the programme 
and sincerity of the organisation in the redres sal of grievances.  To 
mitigate the hardships of the subscribers in this regard, a proper and 
institutionalized system needed to be put in place. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the existing 
grievance redressal mechanism of the Organisation being old fashioned and 
not rising to the occasion in the changed scenario of employment pattern 
needed a thorough revamp.  Instead, a realistic, responsive and user 
friendly mechanism was an urgent need of the Organisation that could take 
care not only the grievances of the subscribers but also act as a catalyst to 
their welfare. 
 
21. In their action taken reply the Ministry stated as follows :- 
 
`The Customer Services Division has already initiated steps to 
streamline the entire grievance handling mechanism of EPFO.  For 
efficient handling and tracking of grievances entire system and 
procedure is being proposed to be IT enabled which shall not only 
facilitate faster transmission of grievances to the respective offices 
anywhere in the country, but also it will enable the offices to respond 
in a quicker manner.  The proposed system works without the 

geographical and spatial restrictions and subscribers can lodge 
grievances 24 x 7 without visiting the office. 
 
The system also allows for handling of grie vances which are 
received through letters in respect of members who cannot access 
internet.  It is transparent, fast and accountability oriented system 
with in-built escalation plan.  EPFO has assigned this project to NIC 
and the system will be in place sh ortly.  Thereafter the same will be 
stabilized in a phased manner across the country.  In order to make 
our staff customer friendly, NATRSS and ZTIs are already organizing 
CRM training modules to inculcate responsiveness towards handling 
of grievances in a responsible and sensitive manner.’ 
 
22. The Committee note that the Ministry have initiated steps to 
streamline the entire grievance handling mechanism of EPFO 
which would be IT enabled so as to facilitate faster handling, 
transmission and tracking of gri evances, including the complaints 
received through post, and equally quicker response from the 
concerned offices.  The Committee hope and trust that the new 
system will be able to address all the grievances of the 
subscribers as mentioned by the Committee in their original 
Report.  The Committee desire that this work should be completed 
at the earliest and should also be reviewed by the EPFO at regular 
intervals so that the entire system is in place and operational 
within a year.  
 
 
 
 

G. Rate of interest to subscribers vis-à-vis investment of EPFO 
corpus 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para 1.71) 
 
23. The Committee in their Report noted with concern that the rate of 
interest payable to subscribers of EPFO had always been an issue of 
perennial disagreement.  The C ommittee found that EPFO had not paid 
more than 8.5 per cent rate of interest to its subscribers since last three 
years.  The Committee in their Report had also noted that with a view to 
earning better returns from investments of EPFO corpus, the Central B oard 
of Trustees, EPFO agreed to certain recommendations regarding changing 
the investment pattern such as investments in NSCs and POTDRs 
investments in TDRs of private sector banks etc. and accordingly certain 
financial institutions like ICICI, HSBC and R eliance Capital have been 
selected to manage the corpus of EPFO.  The Committee had been assured 
by the Ministry that it is for maximization of returns on the funds and the 
funds will be invested by these institutions as per Government given 
guidelines/parameters.  Given the very fact that the funds belonged to the 
workers, the main principle for fund management should be to give 
workers a minimum assured return which takes care of the prevailing bank 
interest rates as investments and due compensation for t he inflation.  The 
Committee also urged upon the Government to take necessary steps to 
ensure that the entire process of selection of fund managers is competitive, 
transparent and above board. 
 
 
24. In their action taken reply the Ministry stated as follows :- 
 
` The CBT, EPF selected four Fund Managers to introduce competition 
in Fund Management as to have better return on investments as listed 
below: 
 
1. HSBC Asset Management (India) Pvt. Ltd. 
2. ICICI Prudential Asset Management Company.  
3. Reliance Capital Asset Management Ltd. 
4. State Bank of India. 
 
 
 
 

Though as per the existing regulations regarding Portfolio 
Management Service, there cannot be a guarantee of a Minimum 
return, yet it is expected that the subscribers of EPFO would benefit by 
professional management of EPF funds and competition therein. 
  
 As regards protection from inflation is concerned, it is submitted that 
the fund, of EPFO are invested as per the pattern of investment 
prescribed by the Government. The eligible instruments do offer returns 
as per the prevalent market dynamics, which may or may not reflect the 
inflation rates.’ 
 
25. The Committee are happy to learn that CBT, EPFO has 
already selected four fund managers to introduce competition in 
fund management and also to give better returns o n investments 
as far as the corpus of EPFO is concerned.  The Committee hope 
that subscribers of EPFO would benefit from such a set up.  
 
 The Committee, however, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that there should be a minimum assured return 
to the subscribers.  The Committee also urge upon the Ministry to 
ensure that these fund managers function as per Government 
given guidelines/parameters.  
 The Committee also desire that in order to have proper check 
on the functioning of the fund managers, an yea rly appraisal 
report should be sought from them by the EPFO containing details 
of the contribution made by the employer, employee and worker 
and the interest accumulated on the principal amount.  The report 

should further be checked and verified by the EPF O and 
workers/employees should be allowed to have access to their 
account through official website of EPFO and also manually in its 
offices all over the country.  The EPFO should also launch an 
awareness campaign for the benefit of workers in this regard.     
 
H. Manpower planning in EPFO 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.16, 17 and 18 Paras 1.77, 1.78 and 1.79) 
 
 
26. The Committee in their Report observed that a large number of 
vacancies were lying vacant almost in every cadre of the EPFO.  Out of 
sanctioned of 23,345 in various cadres, only 19,304 persons are in position. 
 
The Committee further felt that not only the staff strength but the 
structure of the Organisation needed appropriate revamping after proper 
analysis of its strength and weaknesses and a scientific manpower study.   
Being an Organisation dealing primarily with the finances of the not so 
educated and skilled workers of the country, the staff of the Organisation 
should have been adept to handle the intricacies of the complex financial 
matters to protect workers’ interest.  In view of the expanding membership 
of the Organisation, it was all the more essential to have an adequate staff 
for providing timely and efficient service to the subscribers. 
 
The Committee, therefore, urged upon the Government to fo resee 
the enormous task before the Organisation in the present scenario and 
take tangible and affirmative action for restructuring the Organisation and 
manning it efficiently.  For the purpose, special drives, if deemed 
necessary, might also be launched to  recruit the manpower as per the 
need of the Organisation. 
   
 
 
 
 

 
27. In their action taken reply the Ministry stated as follows :- 
 
`Status Report to fill up vacant posts in EPFO. 
 To fill up 1276 posts of Social Security Assistants (SSAs), an 
examination was conducted. 1159 SSAs have reported for duty. Fresh 
vacancies as on 30.09.08 are being assessed for further recruitment. 
 A departmental examination was conducted for filling up 29 vacant 
posts of Junior Hindi Translators. 20 candidates qualified. Howev er 
only 07 accepted. For 16 vacancies the process has been initiated. 
 Process is on to fill up 63 posts of EDP supervisors by promotion. 
 Process is on for filling up 11 posts of Junior Engineers through an 
open competitive exam. 
 Process is on to recruit 80 DEOs through direct recruitment. 
 For the group D posts all field offices have been directed to fill up 
existing vacancies at the earliest. 
 
To assess the manpower requirements for efficient functioning of 
EPFO a study was conducted by XLRI which submitted its report in June 
2006. The Central Board of Trustees, Employees' Provident Funds in its 
meeting held on 24.09.2007 decided to constitute a subcommittee of 
Central Board of Trustees, to examine the report of XLRI on 
Organisational restructuring and cadre  review in Employees' Provident 
Fund Organisation for appropriate recommendations. The Sub -
committee under the Chairmanship of Special Secretary (L&E) has 
submitted an interim report. The Central Board has approved the 
following creations of posts as recommended by the committee: 
 06  posts of Addl. Central PF Commissioner level officer  
 14 post of the level of Regional PF Commissioner-I  
 53 posts of the level of Regional PF Commissioner-II  
 162 posts of the level of Assistant PF Commissioner  
 520 posts in the grade of EO/AAO 
 697 posts of Section Supervisor  
 995 posts of Social Security Assistant.’ 
 
 

 
28. The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry have 
taken steps to fill up the vacant posts  in the various grades.   The 
Committee hope that the Ministry would make concerted efforts to 
fill up all the vacant posts and also ensure that adequate and 
efficient manpower is made available on regular basis for the 
efficient functioning of EPFO.  
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1, Para 1.8) 
 
The Committee observes that the Employees’ Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 has been in operation since its inception 
with some amendments here and there.  With the sea change in the nature 
of establishments/industries coming under the Act for coverage, wages of 
the employees, overall industrial environment, employer -employee 
relations, favourable conditions for employers in the liberalised economic 
scenario vis-à-vis employees, the current provisions of the Act are finding it 
difficult to catch up with the growing requirements of the beneficiaries and 
industries as well.  Resultantly, there has been sustained increase in the 
incidents of defaults in coverage, rec overy of arrears, redressal of 
grievances, pendency of court cases and need for efficient administration 
of the various schemes under the Act.  Even though several administrative 
measures have been taken to improve the working of the Organisation, 
more steps are needed to make it an efficient, decentralized, focused, good 
fund manager and diversified entity from time to time.  The core areas 
which need immediate attention are the coverage of establishments and 
total coverage of the beneficiaries of these es tablishments, timely 
realization of dues from the covered establishments, prompt payments of 
the dues to the beneficiaries and efficient fund management.  This will not 
only minimize the legal wrangles but will also ease the functioning of the 
grievance re dressal machinery thereby saving the valuable time and 
resources of the Organisation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
For improvement in the core areas of coverage of establishment and 
total coverage of the beneficiaries of such establishment, timely realization  
of dues from the covered establishments, a Sub -Committee of Central 
Board of Trustees, EPF has been constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Joint Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment. The Sub-Committee is 
gathering suggestions from all the stake hol ders. The Sub-Committee shall 
be suggesting measures for the adjustment in the existing programme of 
compliance.  So far, the entire corpus of funds with Employees’ Provident 
Fund Organisation was managed by a single fund manager i.e. State Bank 

of India.  In order to have greater efficiency and lower cost of fund 
management and optimization of returns, four fund manager namely HSBC 
AMC, ICICI Prudential AMC, State Bank of India and Reliance Capital AMC 
have been appointed for managing the corpus of EPFO.  To undertake a 
comprehensive information technology reform agenda, aimed at creating 
country-wide integrated information network, the ‘Re -inventing EPF, India’ 
project was started by EPFO.  The project has been revisited.  The revised 
project has since bee n approved by the Central Board of Trustees (EPF) 
and the first phase of the revised project will be completed by 31/05/2009.  
To assess the manpower requirements for efficient functioning of EPFO a 
study was conducted by XLRI which submitted its report in June 2006. The 
Central Board of Trustees, Employees' Provident Funds in its meeting held 
on 24.09.2007 decided to constitute a subcommittee of Central Board of 
Trustees, to examine the report of XLRI on Organisational restructuring 
and cadre review in Emp loyees' Provident Fund Organisation for 
appropriate recommendations. The Sub-committee under the Chairmanship 
of Special Secretary (L&E) has submitted an interim report with a specific 
recommendation to increase the manpower in various levels. The Central 
Board has approved the creations of posts as recommended by the 
committee     
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2, Paras 1.9 and 1.10) 
 
The Committee are distressed to note that the amendment in the Act 
has been pending since long and there has been no sincere efforts to bring 
it around.  The proposal for carrying out amendments in the EPF and MP 
Act, 1952 was considered by the CBT as back as July, 2002.  The Ministry’s 
view poin t that decision for amending the Act would be taken at an 
appropriate time is regretful.  The delay on this count has only exacerbated 
the problems of beneficiaries and also of the organisation.  The ever 
growing inoperative account, mounting arrears for r ecovery, increasing 
number of defaulting establishments and swelling court cases under 
various sections of the Act and also under IPC are the testimony that 
urgent remedial measures are the need of the hour for the smooth 
functioning of the EPFO and satisfaction of its beneficiaries. 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that immediate 
necessary steps should be taken to have a comprehensive review of the 
EPF and MP Act, 1952 to effect necessary amendment in the Act.  The 

amendments should inter -alia include the automatic coverage of 
establishments as and when it comes up, complete coverage of all the 
workers of the establishments, timely realization of EPF dues, stringent 
penal action for default by the establishments, accountability of the officers 
responsible for their act of omissions and commissions, modernizing and 
revamp of the system and functioning of this Organisation, including better 
fund management. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Central Board of Trustees in its 183 rd meeting held on 5.7.20 08 
has approved the proposal for reducing the threshold li mit for coverage 
under the EPF and  MP Act, 1952 from 50 to 20 in respect of co -operative 
institutions working without aid of power and from 20 to 10 in respect of 
other establishments. 
 
The reduction of threshold limit for coverage under the EPF and MP 
Act, 1952 would require amendment to Sections  1(3) and 16(1)(a) of the 
EPF and MP Act, 1952.   
 
The amendment proposal was considered by Cabinet on 16/10/2008 
and the Cabinet directed to re -examine the proposal in consultation with 
concerned Ministries which is being done. Once implemented this proposal 
would greatly enhance the coverage of establishments.  After a detailed 
and meticulous exercise the proposal for appointment of Multi Fund 
Managers was placed before the Central Board of Trustees (EPF) who in its 
181st meeting held on 29/07/2008 have decided to mandate the four 
bidders namely – HSBC AMC, ICICI Prudential AMC, State Bank of India 
and Reliance Capital AMC for managing the corpus of EPFO.  I t is expected 
that this move will bring in better yields to Provident Fund corpus and give 
better returns to EPF subscribers in future by installing competition 
amongst fund managers.  Proposal for amendment to the other provisions 
of the Act is also under examination. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3, Para 1.2) 
 
The Committee note that the Employees’ Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 is a welfare leg islation enacted for the 
purpose of instituting a Provident Fund for employees working in factories 
and other establishments.  The Act aims at providing social security and 
timely monetary assistance to industrial employees and their families when 
they are in distress and / or unable to meet any family social obligations 
and to protect them in old age, disablement, early death of the bread 
winner and in some other contingencies.  The Committee are, however, 
dismayed to note that during the last over five de cades, the EPFO has 
been able to cover only 4.71 lakh units with 4.44 crore membership which 
amounts to about 10% of the workforce employed in the non -Government 
sector.  This figure includes the coverage from both exempted and 
unexempted sector.  The coverage position is extremely meager in spite of 
several initiatives taken by the Government to enhance it.  ‘Compliance 
2001 programme’ was one such drive launched to maximize the coverage 
based on the concept of suo moto and voluntary action on the part of the 
employers / establishments to provide EPF coverage to its workers.  
However, the programme could not achieve the objectives fully.  The 
Committee are inclined to infer that even the Government itself has been 
skeptic regarding its success, otherwise pr ovisions like gathering of 
information through own sources or receipt of specific information on non -
coverage of establishments might not have been kept alive.  With a view to 
assessing non -reporting, under reporting and to assess efficacy of 
‘Compliance 2 001 programme, the Government launched ‘Compliance 
Validation and Analysis Programme 2006’.  Scrutiny of 1% of the 
establishments selected on random basis in each Regional Office / Sub -
Regional Office under this programme revealed that evasion in coverage is 
most prevalent among the establishments and it was as high as 14%.  
Based on the findings of ‘Compliance Validation and Analysis Programme 
2006’, the Government has sought some strategic adjustments in the 
programme itself.  For this purpose, a Sub-Committee has been constituted 
in January, 2008 to look into the related aspects.  The Committee 
therefore, recommend that the strategic changes in the ‘Compliance 2001 
Programme’ should be made in a time bound manner with a view to reduce 
the evasion of the eligible units to the minimum and to extend its coverage 
to the large manpower working in the private / unorganized sector.  The 
Committee would await specific action taken by the Government in this 
regard. 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Sub -Committee for St rategic Adjustments in Compliance 2001 
Programme has directed all Addl. CPFCs (Zones) to convene the meeting of 
RPFCs, in-charge of the regions and collect the information which would 
enable the Sub -Committee to review the Compliance 2001 programme.  
The data furnished by the in -charge of the regions and their feedback is 
being discussed with the employer’s and employees’ representatives.  The 
recommendation of the Committee shall be formulated after collating all 
the data received and shall be placed befor e the Hon’ble Standing 
Committee as soon as possible.   
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para 1.26) 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that out of estimated more 
than 40 crore workforce in the private /unorganized sector in the country, 
the total membership of the EPFO as on 31.03.2006 is only 4.44 crore both 
in the exempted and unexempted sectors which is about 10 percent of the 
total workforce in private sector.  The C ommittee are not at all satisfied 
with this sorry state of affairs as far as coverage is concerned.  With a view 
to bring many establishments under the purview of the Act, various steps 
like Compliance 2001 Programme, special drives, creation of intelligen ce 
circles, etc. have been taken to achieve the target.  With a view to enhance 
the coverage, the Government has decided to lower the ceiling from 20 to 
10 workers to make the establishment eligible for coverage, and also 
adding some more establishments in  new areas, viz. companies offering 
life insurance, private airports and joint venture airports, electronic media 
companies and lodging houses, service apartments and condominiums to 
the list of establishments for the purpose of coverage.  The Committee feel 
that these steps initiated by the Government are in the right direction and 
will help in broad basing the EPF Scheme. 
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No comments.  It is however submitted that The Unorganised Sector 
Worker’ social Security Bill, 2008 has since been passed by Parliament on 
17/12/2008 to give thrust to the scheme formulated/to be formulated for 
the majority of Unorganised sector workers.  
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5, Para 1.27) 
 
Another area where the Committee would like the Government to 
concentrate is the establishments falling under Section 1(4) of the Act.  
The Committee find that section 1(4) of the Act is an enabling section for 
allowing employers w ho desires to extend statutory benefits attracted by 
such establishments.  Lawfully establishments which are not coming under 
the notified industries and classes of establishments under Schedule -I of 
the Act are not required to extend statutory benefits to  their workers.  
Organisation by itself do not have any legal ground to enforce coverage 
under section 1(4) of the Act in respect of establishments as well as 
employees unless both of them voluntarily subject themselves to the law.  
The committee, therefor e, recommend that with a view to protect the 
interest of workers who are beyond the ambit of coverage for want of 
consent, special awareness programmes be launched to educate the 
establishments about the benefits available so that the establishments are 
attracted to obtain voluntary coverage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Publicity Division of EPFO advertises the be nefits available under 
the EPF and MP Act, 1952 and the three schemes framed thereunder from 
time to time.  An advertisement is being published to advertise the 
provisions of Section 1(4) of the Act also. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No.6, Para 1.28) 
 
The Committee note that one of the provisions of the EPF and MP 
Act, 1952 provides that once a establishment is covered under the EPF 
Scheme, it continues even if number of employees drops below 20.  
However, from the State -wise information furnished by the Ministry, the 
Committee find that in West Bengal the number of  establishments covered 
under the Scheme has come down from 32458 in 2005 -06 to 29030 in 
2006-07.  The Committee would like the Government to examine this 
negative growth for taking necessary corrective measures.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is true that an establishment continues to be covered even if the 
number of employees drops below 20.  However, there are a number of 
establishments, which cease to exist due to closure, merger, etc.  As such 
the net or actionable establishments can be lower than the total number of 
establishments originally covered.  In the absence of any programme for 
identifying such establishments, they were not reported in the past.  Now 
the Computerise Compliance Tracking System (CCTS) programme has 
provided for identifying such e stablishments.  Accordingly, the Regional 
Office, Kolkata provisionally reduced 4851 establishments, which were 
found inoperative from the total workload in the year 2006 -07.  This has 
led to the apparent net decrease in the number of covered establishment s 
as on 31.03.2007, inspite of establishments having been newly covered by 
the Region during the year. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.7, Para 1.34) 
 
The Committee note with concern that the arrears due for recovery 
are continuously mounting year after year against the defaulting 
establishments.  The recovery position for the last three years has been 
Rs.1901.03 crore in 2004-05, Rs.1958.55 crore in 2005 -06 and Rs.1236.38 
crore in 2006-07.  Thus, it may be seen that there is substantial decrease 
in recover of arrears during the year 2006 -07.  Consequently, the arrears 
due for recovery during the corresponding period have increased to 
Rs.2144.82 crore, Rs. 2530.07 crore and Rs.2 607.47 crore respectively.  

The reasons for non -realisation of arrears have been adduced on account 
of stays granted by courts/tribunals, establishments having gone into 
liquidation/closure/lock-outs, sanction of installments by courts/higher 
authorities and establishments in respect of which Rehabilitation Scheme 
had been sanctioned by BIFR.  The Committee feel that EPFO should 
strengthen its grievance Redressal machinery so that more cases are 
resolved so as establishments do not approach courts too often .  Similarly, 
legal unit of the Organisation should have constant coordination with 
courts/tribunals/BIFR, etc. to save time in settlement of cases. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Instructions are issued from time to time to the Regional Offices for 
constant coo rdination with courts / tribunals / BIFR etc. to save time in 
settlement of cases has also further improve collections of other arrears.  
The Central Board of Trustees, EPF in its meetings consider the request for 
waiver of damages moved by the employers and grants waiver or reduction 
of damages in appropriate cases in relation to an establishment which is a 
sick industrial company and in respect of which a scheme for rehabilitation 
has been sanctioned by BIFR.   
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No .H-
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8, Para 1.35) 
 
The Committee while examining Demands for Grants for the year 
2007-08 had recommended in their 20 th Report that the Government 
should gear up the machinery to recover the outstanding dues by taking 
appropriate action including filing of caveat in the court, convincing BIFR to 
make provisions for payment of arrears of EPFO, realisation of dues from 
the process of liquidation of the establishments, etc.  The Committee, 
reiterate this recommendation and urge upon the Government to take all 
possible steps to recover the outstanding dues at the earliest.  The action 
taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee within a time span 
of three months. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
In the light of the judgment of the three judge full bench of Hon’ble 
High Court of Madras on 10.10.2006 (In WA Nos. 173 and 200 of 2006), 
the BIFR/AAIFR has been apprised of the legal position that principal dues 
under section 7A and interest unde r section 7Q of EPF & MP Act is outside 
the ambit of the protection under section 21(1) of SICA and field offices 
have been asked to bring this to the notice to BIFR/AAIFR whenever 
required. In respect of court cases etc. the Regional PF Commissioners 
have been advised to act in a well coordinated manner to expedite the 
issue.    
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.9, Para 1.43) 
 
The Committee note that the number of defaulting es tablishments 
during the last three years i.e. 2005, 2006 and 2007 was 40608, 76476 
and 72554 respectively.  EPFO as an Organisation to handle this menace 
has been found wanting in solving this problem.  The absence of proper 
format in the Organisation to maintain the information regarding evasion or 
under statement of EPF membership in an establishment is a glaring lacuna 
pointing towards the shortsightedness of the Organisation in dealing with 
the problem.  Lack of any deterrent action against the defaulti ng 
establishments only emboldens them to indulge in the act of omissions 
with impunity.  Even though major and habitual defaulters are kept under 
periodical and regular scrutiny, EPFO has no system of blacklisting of 
defaulting establishments.  On detection of a default, action is taken under 
section 7A of the Act for assessment of the due contribution.  Thereafter, a 
very protracted and cumbersome legal process is taken recourse to.  All 
these actions to discourage defaults have failed to yield the desired results.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that a fresh look to have a 
comprehensive view about the phenomena of default among the 
establishments (both exempted and unexempted sectors) is essential.  The 
Committee feel that the default, whether intentiona l or otherwise, deprives 
the workers of their legal and rightful claims and unlawfully benefit the 
organizations indulging in this malpractice.  With a view to eradicate this 
malady, the Committee recommend that EPFO should take strong 

administrative and judicial measures; even by making appropriate changes 
in the relevant Act and Rules, if required.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A comprehensive exercise is being undertaken by the Sub-Committee 
on Strategic Adjustment to the Compliance 2001 Programme to find o ut 
the ways and means by which evasion of membership by various 
establishments and non -extension of the Act to the coverable 
establishments can be curbed.   
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.10, Para 1.49) 
 
The Committee note with concern that as on 31 st March, 2007 an 
amount of Rs.1,624.69 crore has been lying with the Employees’ Provident 
Fund Organisation (EPFO) in the inoperative account.  The Committee have 
been informed th at as per existing scheme provisions, the amount lying 
under inoperative account cannot be utilized for any other purpose except 
for paying to the rightful claimants.  The Committee find that the total 
amount disbursed out of the inoperative account during  the last three 
years has been Rs.86.60 crore in 2004 -05, Rs.71.08 crore in 2005 -06 and 
Rs.77.47 crore in 2006 -07.  The Committee feel that since not large 
number of claimants are coming forward to settle their claims, a large 
amount of fund has been blocked which could be used elsewhere for better 
purposes.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that some percentage of 
the funds should be invested to earn better returns which may be utilized 
for the promotion of welfare measures of workers.  The Committee fu rther 
recommend that adequate publicity should be given in newspapers in all 
major languages to make subscribers aware about the unclaimed deposits 
with EPFO and existing facility to carry forward the account in 
new/changed employment.  The Committee also desire that the number of 
cases settled out of the inoperative account should be maintained 
alongwith the amount disbursed.  Besides, establishments covered under 
the scheme may be asked to have specific column in the service book 
format of their employees  about the existing EPF number, if any, in their 
previous employment. 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
All these inoperative account have a definite claimant, who can file 
their claims at any time for settlement of these dues and EPFO has to 
make the full payment s along with accrued interest.  EPFO have no legal 
rights/power to utilize these funds for any other purpose other than for 
making payment to the claimant/legal heir. 
 
The money in the inoperative account are invested alongwith the 
normal corpus of EPFO as  per the investment pattern prescribed by the 
Government of India and its level of earning are equivalent to the normal 
corpus of EPFO.  There is no separate mechanism/pattern in the Act or the 
Scheme for investment of their money.  EPFO releases advertise ment from 
time-to-time, highlighting the benefits and the provisions of the Scheme.  
This includes information from awareness of the members about the 
‘inoperative account’ and facility for transfer of funds to new accounts in 
case of change of employment.   The number of cases settled out of the 
Inoperative Account and their details are being maintained at the field 
offices of EPFO where the Inoperative Accounts of the Regions are 
maintained. 
 
As regards the recommendation of the Committee that the 
establishments covered under the scheme may be asked to have separate 
column in the service book format of the employees about the existing EPF 
number, if any, in their previous employment, it is submitted that already a 
provision exist under Para -34 of the Employ ees’ Provident Fund Scheme, 
1952 according to which the employer in relation to a factory or other 
establishment shall before taking any person into employment, ask him to 
state in writing whether or not he is a member of the Fund and if he is 
asked for th e account number and/or names and particulars of the last 
employer.  If he is unable to furnish the account number, he shall require 
such person to furnish and such person shall, on demand, furnish to him 
for communication to the Commissioner, particulars regarding himself and 
his nominee required for the declaration form.  Such employer shall enter 
the particulars in the declaration form and obtain the signature or thumb 
impression of the person concerned. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No.11, Para 1.53) 
 
The Committee find that the process of allotment of National Social 
Security Number (NSSN) has been undertaken with a view to provide a 
unique identity to each employed perso n so that social security benefits as 
stipulated under the statutes are ensured to him/her despite switching over 
of jobs by the concerned employee.  This will also smoothen the 
functioning of EPFO as the Organisation will have the definite identity of 
the person in settling the claims irrespective of change in the employment.  
However, the Committee are pained to note that the pace of allotment of 
NSSN is tardy.  Out of 4.44 crore enrolled workforce in the country, only 
33,48,191 workers have been issued N SSN till March 2008.  In the States 
like UP, Bihar and in North Eastern Region, NSSN has been issued to 
15336, 38658 and 7565 subscribers respectively.  In the State of 
Chattisgarh, not even one person has been covered under the drive.  The 
figures amply d emonstrate the seriousness which the Organisation is 
attaching to such an important task.  The process of allotment is linked to 
Business Process Re-engineering (BPR) and is being implemented with the 
cooperation of NIC.  NIC has its network throughout the  country and the 
allotment of NSSN to the less than 1% of the identified workforce in the 
country defies all logic except highlighting the callous attitude of the 
Government in implementing such a significant measure for the welfare of 
the workers.  Althou gh the process of allotment of NSSN is continuous in 
nature as employable persons keep joining the employment, still there is a 
huge backlog of employed workforce who are yet to be covered under this 
umbrella.  Hence the Committee vehemently urge upon the Government to 
expedite the process clearing backlog of allotment of NSSN so as to 
complete it within a period of two years. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In the present revised strategy being adopted with the help of NIC, 
allotment of a unique number to every subscriber is NOT mandatory for the 
rollout of the project.  The existing PF Number is being treated as unique 
number.  The allotment of SSN will be made in the 2 nd phase of the project 
by integrating with the existing number. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Empl oyment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No.12, Paras 1.62 and 1.63) 
 
The Committee note that the grievance of subscribers of EPFO mainly 
revolve around (i) Claims not settled; (ii) Accounts Slips not issued; (iii) 
Members not enrolled; (iv) Delay in transfer of accounts; (v) Delay in 
release of pension/dispute on quantum calculation; (vi) Delay in issue of 
Scheme Certificates; and (vii) Return/Rejection of claims.  Although, 
various steps have been taken to redress the grievances of the subscribers 
and there are settlements of about 90 per cent of the received complaints, 
yet this is an area which required constant vigil at the highest level.  The 
attitude and approach of the persons entrusted with handling the 
grievances is also an important aspect which has a bearing on their 
Redressal.  There is a provision stipulating a definite time frame for the 
solution of the problem, but instances are galore wherein the time limit is 
hardly adhered to as far as solution of problem is concerned.  Even though, 
a web-enabled mechanism has been put in place to help the subscribers, 
given the nature and education of the subscribers of the EPFO, it is 
doubtful whether this step will be helpful to subscribers in the redressal of 
their problems.  Even holding of adalats to redress the grievances appears 
to be a sham exercise.  As many as 1306 adalats were organized in the 
year 2006-07 in which only 2110 cases were received out of which 2087 
cases were disposed of.  The receipt of less than 2 cases per adalats 
speaks volumes about the dismal performance of the programme and 
sincerity of the Organisation in the redressal of grievances.  The figures 
submitted regarding grievances and their redressal also appear to be 
unrealistic keeping in  view the huge number of subscribers enrolled with 
EPFO and the number of complaints received and redressed.  In the 
present economic scenario, workers particularly skilled workers tend to 
switch over the assignments leading to non -settlement of their dues  or its 
non-carriage to the new assignments leading to swelling of inoperative 
account.  To mitigate the hardships of the subscribers in this regard, a 
proper and institutionalised system need to be put in place. 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recomme nd that the existing 
grievance redressal mechanism of the Organisation being old fashioned 
and not rising to the occasion in the changed scenario of employment 
pattern needs a thorough revamp.  Instead, a realistic, responsive and user 
friendly mechanism i s an urgent need of the Organisation that can be 
taken care not only the grievances of the subscribers but also act as a 
catalyst to their welfare. 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Customer Services Division has already initiated steps to 
streamline the entire grievance handling mechanism of EPFO.  For efficient 
handling and tracking of grievances entire system and procedure is being 
proposed to be IT enabled which shall not only facilitate faster transmission 
of grievances to the respective offices anywhere i n the country, but also it 
will enable the offices to respond in a quicker manner.  The proposed 
system works without the geographical and spatial restrictions and 
subscribers can lodge grievances 24 x 7 without visiting the office. 
 
The system also allows for handling of grievances which are received 
through letters in respect of members who cannot access internet.  It is 
transparent, fast and accountability oriented system with in-built escalation 
plan.  EPFO has assigned this project to NIC and the syste m will be in 
place shortly.  Thereafter the same will be stabilized in a phased manner 
across the country.  In order to make our staff customer friendly, NATRSS 
and ZTIs are already organizing CRM training modules to inculcate 
responsiveness towards handli ng of grievances in a responsible and 
sensitive manner. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.13, Para 1.71) 
 
The Committee note with concern that the rate of interest payable to 
subscribers of EPFO has always been an issue of perennial disagreement.  
It has been slated that the rate of interest is determined keeping in view 
the projected income and projected interest payment liabilities during a 
particular year.  The Committee find that EPFO has not paid more than 8.5 
per cent rate of interest to its subscribers since last three years.  The 
Committee note that with a view to earn better returns from investment of 
EPFO corpus, the Central Board of Trustees, EPF agreed to certain 
recommendations regarding changing the investment pattern such as 
investments in NSCs and POTDRs, investments in TDRs of private sector 
banks subject to a limit of 5% of deposit base, TDRs of public sector banks 
upto 3 years and merger of two categories of 25% and 15% of Central and 
State Government securities, respectively to make a single category of 
40% of Government securities; treat the category -wise percentage norms 

as indicative and not mandatory and to do away with any floor in any 
single category.  The Committee have gathered from press reports that 
some steps have reportedly been taken to corporatize the fund 
management and accordingly certain financial institutions like ICICI, HSBC 
and Reliance Capital have been selected with the responsibilities to manage 
the corpus of EPFO.  In this context, the Committee have been assured by 
the Ministry that the process is for maximization of returns on the funds 
and the funds will be invested by these institutions as per Government 
given guidelines/parameters.  Gi ven the very fact that the fund belong to 
the workers, the main principle for fund management should be to give 
workers a minimum assured return which takes care of the prevailing bank 
interest rates as investments and due compensation for the inflation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The CBT, EPF selected four Fund Managers to introduce competition in 
Fund Management as to have better return on investments as listed below: 
 
1. HSBC Asset Management (India) Pvt. Ltd. 
2. ICICI Prudential Asset Management Company.  
3. Reliance Capital Asset Management Ltd. 
4. State Bank of India. 
 
Though as per the existing regulations regarding Portfolio Management 
Service, there cannot be a guarantee of a Minimum return, yet it is 
expected that the subscribers of EPFO would benefit by profes sional 
management of EPF funds and competition therein. 
As regards protection from inflation is concerned, it is submitted that the 
fund, of EPFO are invested as per the pattern of investment prescribed by 
the Government. The eligible instruments do offer returns as per the 
prevalent market dynamics, which may or may not reflect the inflation 
rates. 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.14, Para 1.72) 
 
The Committee note that print media has highlighted serious lacunae 
in the process of selection of fund managers to manage provident Fund viz. 
HSBC, ICICI, SBI and Reliance Capital. Reportedly, in the original list of 
selected fund managers, the name of Reliance Capital did not figure a s 

they were not found eligible for selection. However, the reported inclusion 
of Reliance Capital’s name in the list of fund managers at the later stage 
has created suspicion in the whole process of selection not being 
transparent. The Vigilance Commission  is also reported to have sought 
details in the matter. The committee would therefore like the Government 
to have the matter thoroughly examined. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the outcome of such enquiry at the earliest. The Committee 
also urge upon the Government to take necessary steps to ensure that the 
entire process of selection of fund managers is competitive, transparent 
and above board. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Proposal to appoint multi fund managers was deliberated upon in 
the 89 th meeting of the Finance and Investment Committee (a sub 
committee of the Central Board of Trustees, Employees' Provident Fund) 
held on 19.11.2007. The CBT in its 180 th meeting held on 06.12.2007 has 
approved the decision of FIC to appoint a consultant to as sist EPFO in 
selecting portfolio managers. The Central Board of Trustees, in its 181 st 
meeting held on 24.01.08, approved the appointment of M/s. Crisil to assist 
EPFO in selection of fund Managers. A Committee had been constituted to 
carryout the task with assistance of the chosen Consultant.  
 
The Expressions of Interest from interested entities were called by 
publication of an advertisement in the leading dailies on 17.04.2008 and 
putting the detailed document on the EPFO's website. 21 expressions of 
interest including Reliance Capital were received. On eligibility criteria, 17 
entries were found eligible for sending the request for proposal including 
the technical and financial bids. A Pre-Bid Conference was held on 30th May 
08. The entities were asked t o submit the completed RFP documents by 
06.06.08  
 
After evaluation of technical bids, 10 entities including Reliance 
Capital were called for financial bids on 22 nd July, 2008. Three-member 
committee recommended three entities  HSBC AMC (L1), ICICI Prudenti al 
AMC (L2), SBI (L3) as Multiple Fund Managers for EPFO . The 
recommendation was placed in 92 nd Finance & Investment Committee 
meeting held on 24.07.2008.  While the Employers’ representatives 
accorded their approval on the recommendations of the committee , the 
Employees’ representatives wanted a wider discussion in the CBT, EPF. 
 

A special meeting of CBT, EPF was held on 29.07.2008 in which CBT 
approved four fund managers i.e. HSBC AMC (L1), ICICI Prudential AMC 
(L2), SBI (L3) and Reliance Capital AMC (L3)  for management of CBT, EPF 
Corpus.  The CBT, EPF while arriving at the decision deliberated that State 
Bank of India and Reliance Capital had submitted identical financial bids 
and also in terms of third party assets under management, Reliance Capital 
AMC is only second to State Bank of India among all bidders.  
The entire process of selection of Fund Managers is competitive, 
transparent and above the board. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.15, Para 1.73) 
 
The Committee also strongly recommend that with a view to 
generate more income from the corpus of EPFO, in addition to initiatives 
already taken, the organization should diversify its activities and explore 
the possibility of  venturing into the areas where the organization takes 
upon itself such activities be it financial, banking insurance, realties -which 
may generate sufficient returns so that a bench mark for the issue of the 
rate of interest is decided and workers may be g iven due incentives based 
on their contribution and accumulation for the surplus fund generated, if 
any. Besides, some mechanism be developed in the organization to 
supervise the functioning of the private fund managers so as to forewarn 
them about their a ction which is not financially viable as far as returns on 
investment is concerned and take pre-emptive measures, if the need is felt. 
The services of reputed financial experts may be requisitioned to achieve 
the objective in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
An Investment Monitoring Cell has already been established within 
EPFO to monitor the investments made by the Portfolio Managers.  M/s. 
Crisil, one of the leading financial advisory service providers, has been 
appointed  as consultant to assist th e Investment Monitoring cell for a 
period of one year. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
  

Recommendation (Sl. No.16, Paras 1.77, 1.78 and 1.79) 
 
The Committee observe that the organisational structur e with 
sufficient staff strength is the hallmark of any service Organisation.  It is 
regretted that a large number of vacancies are lying vacant almost in every 
cadre of the EPFO.  Out of the sanctioned strength of 23345 in various 
cadres, only 19394 perso ns are in position.  The worst hit is the Group ‘C’ 
cadre wherein more than 3300 vacancies exist.  It is this cadre, which has 
the direct interface with the subscribers.  Shortage of manpower in this 
category is bound to adversely affect the efficiency of the Organisation.  
The present staff strength has been worked out before the decision to 
revise the eligibility criteria of industries for the purpose of coverage.  With 
the lowering of number of persons from 20 to 10 in an establishment, the 
present figure of staff strength will go haywire, as it will be woefully short 
to cope up with the phenomenal increase in the number of subscribers.  
Due to addition of enterprises, like companies offering life insurances, 
annuities, private airports and joint venture condominiums in the list of 
industries for coverage, the staff position will be further overstrained 
undermining the efficiency.  In the absence of sufficient staff, the entire 
working of the Organisation will be slack.  The reply given by the Ministry 
regarding appropriate action being taken by them to fill up the vacant 
posts is far from satisfactory. 
 
The Committee fell that not only the staff strength but the structure 
of the Organisation need appropriate revamping after proper analysis of its 
strength and weaknesses and a scientific manpower study.  The adequate 
number of skilled manpower in the area of managing finance, handling 
public relations and addressing the grievances of the subscribers will do 
great service to the Organisation.  Being the Organ isation dealing primarily 
with the finances of the not so educated and skilled workers of the country, 
the staff of the Organisation should be adept to handle the intricacies of 
the complex financial matters to protect workers’ interest.  Their career 
progression should invariably take into account their performance in vital 
areas of coverage of establishments, recovery of arrears, defaults of the 
Organisation in their respective jurisdictions and functioning of the 
Grievance Redressal Machinery.  Also, the  locations of the offices of EPFO 
(ROs/SROs) should also be situated so as to enable the subscribers to have 
easy access involving minimum travel time, particularly in the North 
Eastern States of the country.  In view of the expanding membership of 
the Organisation, it is all the more essential to have the adequate staff for 
providing timely and efficient service to the subscribers. 

 
The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Government to foresee the 
enormous task before the Organisation in the present scenar io and take 
tangible and affirmative action for restructuring the Organisation and 
manning it efficiently.  For the purpose, special drives, if deemed 
necessary, may also be launched to recruit the manpower as per the need 
of the Organisation. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Status Report to fill up vacant posts in EPFO. 
 To fill up 1276 posts of Social Security Assistants (SSAs), an 
examination was conducted. 1159 SSAs have reported for duty. Fresh 
vacancies as on 30.09.08 are being assessed for further recruitment. 
 A departmental examination was conducted for filling up 29 vacant 
posts of Junior Hindi Translators. 20 candidates qualified. However 
only 07 accepted. For 16 vacancies the process has been initiated. 
 Process is on to fill up 63 posts of EDP supervisors by promotion. 
 Process is on for filling up 11 posts of Junior Engineers through an 
open competitive exam. 
 Process is on to recruit 80 DEOs through direct recruitment. 
 For the group D posts all field offices have been directed to fill up 
existing vacancies at the earliest. 
 Further, to assess the manpower requirements for efficient 
functioning of EPFO a study was conducted by XLRI which submitted 
its report in June 2006. The Central Board of Trustees, Employees' 
Provident Funds in its meeting held on 24.09.2 007 decided to 
constitute a subcommittee of Central Board of Trustees, to examine 
the report of XLRI on Organisational restructuring and cadre review 
in Employees' Provident Fund Organisation for appropriate 
recommendations. The Sub -committee under the Cha irmanship of 
Special Secretary (L&E) has submitted an interim report. The Central 
Board has approved the following creations of posts as recommended 
by the committee: 
 06  posts of Addl. Central PF Commissioner level officer  
 14 post of the level of Regional PF Commissioner-I  
 53 posts of the level of Regional PF Commissioner-II  
 162 posts of the level of Assistant PF Commissioner  

 520 posts in the grade of EO/AAO 
 697 posts of Section Supervisor  
 995 posts of Social Security Assistant. 
 
[Ministry of Labour a nd Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.14, Para 1.72) 
 
The Committee note that print media has highlighted serious lacunae 
in the process of selection of fund managers to manage provident Fund viz. 
HSBC, ICICI, SBI and Reliance Capital. Reportedly, in the original list of 
selected fund managers, the name of Reliance Capital did not fi gure as 
they were not found eligible for selection. However, the reported inclusion 
of Reliance Capital’s name in the list of fund managers at the later stage 
has created suspicion in the whole process of selection not being 
transparent. The Vigilance Comm ission is also reported to have sought 
details in the matter. The committee would therefore like the Government 
to have the matter thoroughly examined. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the outcome of such enquiry at the earliest. The Committee 
also urge upon the Government to take necessary steps to ensure that the 
entire process of selection of fund managers is competitive, transparent 
and above board. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Proposal to appoint multi fund managers was deliberated upon in 
the 89th meeting of the Finance and Investment Committee (a sub 
committee of the Central Board of Trustees, Employees' Provident Fund) 
held on 19.11.2007. The CBT in its 180 th meeting held on 06.12.2007 has 
approved the decision of FIC to appoint a consultant  to assist EPFO in 
selecting portfolio managers. The Central Board of Trustees, in its 181 st 
meeting held on 24.01.08, approved the appointment of M/s. Crisil to assist 
EPFO in selection of fund Managers. A Committee had been constituted to 
carryout the task with assistance of the chosen Consultant.  
 
The Expressions of Interest from interested entities were called by 
publication of an advertisement in the leading dailies on 17.04.2008 and 
putting the detailed document on the EPFO's website. 21 expressions of 
interest including Reliance Capital were received. On eligibility criteria, 17 
entries were found eligible for sending the request for proposal including 
the technical and financial bids. A Pre-Bid Conference was held on 30th May 

08. The entities were a sked to submit the completed RFP documents by 
06.06.08  
 
After evaluation of technical bids, 10 entities including Reliance 
Capital were called for financial bids on 22 nd July, 2008. Three-member 
committee recommended three entities  HSBC AMC (L1), ICICI Pr udential 
AMC (L2), SBI (L3) as Multiple Fund Managers for EPFO . The 
recommendation was placed in 92 nd Finance & Investment Committee 
meeting held on 24.07.2008.  While the Employers’ representatives 
accorded their approval on the recommendations of the com mittee, the 
Employees’ representatives wanted a wider discussion in the CBT, EPF. 
 
A special meeting of CBT, EPF was held on 29.07.2008 in which CBT 
approved four fund managers i.e. HSBC AMC (L1), ICICI Prudential AMC 
(L2), SBI (L3) and Reliance Capital AM C (L3) for management of CBT, EPF 
Corpus.  The CBT, EPF while arriving at the decision deliberated that State 
Bank of India and Reliance Capital had submitted identical financial bids 
and also in terms of third party assets under management, Reliance Capital 
AMC is only second to State Bank of India among all bidders.  
The entire process of selection of Fund Managers is competitive, 
transparent and above the board. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.15, Para 1.73) 
 
The Committee also strongly recommend that with a view to 
generate more income from the corpus of EPFO, in addition to initiatives 
already taken, the organization should diversify its activities and explore 
the possibil ity of venturing into the areas where the organization takes 
upon itself such activities be it financial, banking insurance, realties -which 
may generate sufficient returns so that a bench mark for the issue of the 
rate of interest is decided and workers ma y be given due incentives based 
on their contribution and accumulation for the surplus fund generated, if 
any. Besides, some mechanism be developed in the organization to 
supervise the functioning of the private fund managers so as to forewarn 
them about their action which is not financially viable as far as returns on 
investment is concerned and take pre-emptive measures, if the need is felt. 
The services of reputed financial experts may be requisitioned to achieve 
the objective in this regard. 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
An Investment Monitoring Cell has already been established within 
EPFO to monitor the investments made by the Portfolio Managers.  M/s. 
Crisil, one of the leading financial advisory service providers, has been 
appointed  as consultant to ass ist the Investment Monitoring cell for a 
period of one year. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
  

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
- NIL -

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.7, Para 1.34) 
 
The Committee note with concern that the ar rears due for recovery 
are continuously mounting year after year against the defaulting 
establishments.  The recovery position for the last three years has been 
Rs.1901.03 crore in 2004-05, Rs.1958.55 crore in 2005 -06 and Rs.1236.38 
crore in 2006-07.  Thus, it may be seen that there is substantial decrease 
in recover of arrears during the year 2006 -07.  Consequently, the arrears 
due for recovery during the corresponding period have increased to 
Rs.2144.82 crore, Rs. 2530.07 crore and Rs.2607.47 crore respec tively.  
The reasons for non -realisation of arrears have been adduced on account 
of stays granted by courts/tribunals, establishments having gone into 
liquidation/closure/lock-outs, sanction of installments by courts/higher 
authorities and establishments i n respect of which Rehabilitation Scheme 
had been sanctioned by BIFR.  The Committee feel that EPFO should 
strengthen its grievance Redressal machinery so that more cases are 
resolved so as establishments do not approach courts too often.  Similarly, 
legal unit of the Organisation should have constant coordination with 
courts/tribunals/BIFR, etc. to save time in settlement of cases. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Instructions are issued from time to time to the Regional Offices for 
constant coordination with cou rts / tribunals / BIFR etc. to save time in 
settlement of cases has also further improve collections of other arrears.  
The Central Board of Trustees, EPF in its meetings consider the request for 
waiver of damages moved by the employers and grants waiver or reduction 
of damages in appropriate cases in relation to an establishment which is a 
sick industrial company and in respect of which a scheme for rehabilitation 
has been sanctioned by BIFR.   
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Paragraph No.13  , Chapter-I of the Report] 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.9, Para 1.43) 
 
 
 
The Committee note that the number of defaulting establishments 
during the last three years i.e. 2005, 2006 and 2007 was 40608, 76476 
and 72554 respectively.  EPFO as an Organisation to handle this menace 
has been found wanting in solving this problem.  The absence of proper 
format in the Organisation to maintain the information regarding evasion or 
under statement of EPF membership in an establishment is a glaring lacuna 
pointing towards the shortsightedness of the Organisation in dealing with 
the problem.  Lack of any deterrent action against the defaulting 
establishments only emboldens them to indulge in the act of omissions 
with impunity.  Even though major and habitual defaulters are kept under 
periodical and regular scrutiny, EPFO has no system of blacklisting of 
defaulting establishments.  On detection of a default, action is taken under 
section 7A of the Act for assessment of the due contribution.  Thereafter, a 
very protracted and cumbersome legal process is taken recourse to.  All 
these actions to discourage defaults have failed to yield the desired results.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that a f resh look to have a 
comprehensive view about the phenomena of default among the 
establishments (both exempted and unexempted sectors) is essential.  The 
Committee feel that the default, whether intentional or otherwise, deprives 
the workers of their legal and rightful claims and unlawfully benefit the 
organizations indulging in this malpractice.  With a view to eradicate this 
malady, the Committee recommend that EPFO should take strong 
administrative and judicial measures; even by making appropriate changes  
in the relevant Act and Rules, if required.  
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
A comprehensive exercise is being undertaken by the Sub-Committee 
on Strategic Adjustment to the Compliance 2001 Programme to find out 
the ways and means by which evasion of membersh ip by various 
establishments and non -extension of the Act to the coverable 
establishments can be curbed.   
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, O.M. No.H -
11013/6/2006 SS-I (part) dated 20.02.2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
[Please see Paragraph No.16, Chapter-I of the Report] 
                
 
 
    New Delhi;              HEMANAND BISWAL 
                                                CHAIRMAN  
    3rd November, 2009         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
   12 Kartika, 1931 (Saka)

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
HELD ON 11TH NOVEMBER, 2009.  
 
The Committee met from 1400 hrs. to 1545 hrs in Committee Room No. `139’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to have oral evidence of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Labour and Employm ent on `The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) 
Bill, 2009’  and `The Employees’ State Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2009’ and to 
consider and adopt draft Action Taken Reports. 
  
PRESENT 
    Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri M. Anandan 
3.      Shri P. Balram 
4.      Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5.      Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6.      Shri Hassan Khan 
7.      Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8.      Shri P. Lingam 
9.      Shri Hari Manjhi 
10.      Shri P.R. Natarajan 
11.      Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
12.     Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
13.     Shri Rajaram 
14.     Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
15.     Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
   
SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
             2.        Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
  3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
 4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja   - Under Secretary 
    
  
 
 
2.  xx   xx   xx 
3.  xx   xx   xx 
4.  xx   xx   xx 
5.  xx   xx   xx 
6.  xx   xx   xx 
7.  xx   xx   xx 
 

8. The Chairman then informed the Members regarding consideration and 
adoption of following draft Action Taken Reports: 
(i) Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirtieth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on 
the `Functioning of the Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation’. 
 
(ii) Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty -Third Report of the Standing Committee on 
Labour on the `Development Schemes for Handicrafts Sector’. 
 
(iii) Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty -Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Labour on `General conditions of weavers in the 
country – A case study of Sircilla concentration zone of weavers’. 
 
9.  The Committee, then, took up the draft Reports for consideration.  The  
Committee adopted the draft Reports without any amendments/modifications.   
 
10. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to present the same 
to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
xx     Not pertain to this Report.  

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTIETH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
        Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations      18 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have       
  been accepted by Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,8,10,11,12,13,16, 17 and 18)     14  77.78% 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s  replies (Sl. Nos. 14 and 15).  2  11.11% 
       
       
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which  Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires  
reiteration- NIL.                 NIL  
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which     
final replies of Government are of interim in  nature 2    11.11%  
(Sl. Nos.7 and 9)                             ---------- 
              100% 
                              ------------ 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 