1 
 
  32 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-12) 
 (FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
WELFARE OF GLASS AND BANGLE WORKERS OF 
FIROZABAD – A CASE STUDY    
 
         THIRTY-SECOND  REPORT 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
          August, 2012/Bhadrapada 1934 (Saka) 
  
 
 


2 
 
 
   
         THIRTY -SECOND  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 
(FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
WELFARE OF GLASS AND BANGLE WORKERS OF 
FIROZABAD – A CASE STUDY    
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.8.2012   
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.8.2012  
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
          August, 2012/Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) 


3 
 
  
CONTENTS 
PAGE (S) 
    
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE    (iii)  
    
INTRODUCTION        (v)   
 
      REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I           Introductory   
 
              
CHAPTER-II   Observations/Recommendations 
 
ANNEXURES 
   
 (i) Pre-revised and revised norms for setting up of ESI hospitals 
 (ii) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 29.6.2012 and  
  23.8.2012 
  
 
 
 
  

4 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
 
2. Shri Raj Babbar 
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
        **5. Shri Pakauri Lal 
6. Shri Narahari Mahato 
         7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Smt. Mausam Noor 
10. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
14. Ms. J. Shantha 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
*16. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
   ****17. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
     21. Vacant 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
25. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
***26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        28. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
        29. Shri Rajaram 
     ***30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri G. N. Ratanpuri 
   ***** 32.    Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
 
 

5 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
*   Nominated w.e.f 25th November, 2011. 
**  Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon 
his nomination to Standing Committee on Coal & Steel 
w.e.f. 3rd January, 2012. 
***   Retired w.e.f. 02.04.2012 and 03.04.2012 respectively. 
****  Nominated w.e.f. 12th April, 2012. 
*****Nominated w.e.f. 4th May, 2012. 
  
 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director  
 4.    Smt. Bharti.S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
      
   
  
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I,  the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour (2011-12) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, do present this Thirty -Second Report on  `Welfare of 
Glass and Bangle Workers of Firozabad – A Case Study'.          
 
2. The Committee t aking note of the violation of Labour Laws  and 
poor working conditions of glass and bangle workers of Firozabad  
undertook a study visit to Firozabad on 15.4.2011 to  get a first hand 
information on the plight of these workers. The Committee, thereafter,   
selected the subject for detailed examination. 
 
3. The representatives of Ministry of Labour and Employment for 
tendered evidence on 29.6.2012. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Ministry of Labour an d employment for placing 
before them their views and also for providing detailed written notes 
and information solicited by them on the subject. 
 
5. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their 
sitting held on 23.8.2012. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the 
Observations/Recommendations have been printed in bold type in the 
body of the Report.                
         
 
          
New Delhi,                  (HEMANAND BISWAL)   
23 August, 2012,                 CHAIRMAN,                                                                    
1 Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)     STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
 

7 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
Introductory 
 Firozabad in Uttar Pradesh is famous world over for its beautiful 
bangles and other glass products like fancy lights, lamps, wine 
glasses and chandeliers. During ancient periods, invaders brought 
many glass articles to India. These glass articles when reje cted were 
collected and melted in locally made furnace called as “Bhainsa 
Bhatti.” This was the start of the glass industry in Firozabad. At 
present, the combined turnover of the glass industry runs into several 
crores of rupees every year. More than one lakh workers are employed 
directly in factories, the rest do home -based tasks and are also 
involved in transporting bangles from one -point to another. It is 
estimated that more than three lakh unorganized workers, help the 
bangle and glassware industry in Firozabad.  
 
2. While the main work is done in factories, the decoration,  
soldering of the joints, straightening and bending are done in homes 
by children particularly girls (who are not yet in their teens) to 

8 
 
supplement their family incomes. Each bangle passes at least 60 
hands, most of whom are low -paid workers. Out of seven -lakh 
population of the town, barring the factory owners, everyone else 
belongs to the working class. Each family is responsible for only one 
stage of bangle making, completes the ban gles in bundles and is paid 
after returning the completed bundles to the contractors. Each 
bundle contains 315 bangles and the family is paid two rupees per 
bundle for its completion. An average size family normally completes 
40 bundles in one day, which m eans an earning of 80 rupees. The 
fact that such a large number of workers work in homes indicates the 
cost advantages to the employers in terms of hiring an establishment 
and employing regular labour.  
 
3. The attention of the Standing Committee on Labour  was drawn 
towards the pitiable working conditions of the workers engaged in 
bangle and glassware industry in Firozabad.  The Committee 
concerned with the poor working conditions, continuous inhaling of 
the pollutants emitted during manufacturing of glass products by 
these workers leading to respiratory disorders, inadequate health care 
facilities, low wages, incidence of child labour and growing tendency 

9 
 
amongst the employers to do away with permanent workers took up 
examination of the subject. 
 
4. The following written information was furnished by the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment regarding various social security schemes, 
ESI facilities, Provident Fund, Child Labour and other issues in 
respect of glass and bangle industry in Firozabad: 
 
"ESI Facilities 
There are 315 factories and 4749 IPs in Firozabad. 
There are 2 dispensaries including 1 mobile dispensary and Branch 
Office of the ESIC for disbursement of cash benefit in Firozabad to 
cater to the needs of IPs and their family members." 
 
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner Office 
There are 395 establishments engaged in glass industry 89059 
members involved in these establishment are covered under This 
RPFC office. There are 45 defaulting establishment and 3724 
members are involved in these defaulting es tablishments. 
Rs.17,51,716.20 have been recovered from 34 defaulting 
establishments. Inquiry u/s 7A is in progress against 18 

10 
 
establishments and recovery action against 27 defaulting 
establishments is being taken."  
 
Wages 
Minimum wages fixed for un -skilled categories in bangle industries is 
Rs 140 per day, which is by and large paid to them. The proposal to 
revise rates of wages is in process. There are lots of categories of the 
workers in this industry and they are paid as per tripartite 
agreement." 
 
Child Labour 
No incident of child labour in factories has been detected. However, it 
has been reported that some child labour may be engaged in home 
based work." 
 
Working Conditions 
The majority of units are small and they are using old and traditional 
technology." 
 
 

11 
 
5. To ascertain the factual position, the Committee visited 
Firozabad in April, 2011 to interact with workers of some bangle 
factories and also visited a State run ESI dispensary which is as 
under: 
 
 (i)  The medical facilities provided to t he bangle workers were 
 far from adequate. The ESI dispensary for these workers was  in 
 a  dilapidated state, not a single doctor was there and at 
 did not have adequate medicines. 
 
 (ii) According to a case control study of chronic bronchitis in 
 glass a nd bangle workers; the exposure in glass bangle 
 factories  was  mainly due to the flue products emanating 
 from various coal furnaces and on -going chemical processes in 
 different units. The flue gases remained trapped within the 
 factory environment as only the main furnace is provided with  a 
 chimney, which partially removes the gases. The  high 
 prevalence of chronic bronchitis in the glass bangle industry 
 was the result of long -term exposure to pollutants emitted 
 during the manufacturing process. 

12 
 
 (iii) The factories were filthy and condition of workers  
 miserable. The factories did not have any working environment 
 and workers were exposed to immense heat and sound which 
 was for beyond permissible levels. 
 
 (iv) The employers did not give the work ers any lunch break 
 and  the workers could not ease themselves when they want to 
 or even wash their hands considered as wastage of time as 
 the furnace kept burning.  
 
 (v) The workers working at shop floor were not given 
 protective gear for their eyes or hands. As they worked in front 
 of furnace and accidents were also common. The tools used 
 were obsolete, technology was old and traditional.  
 
 (vi) Women worked in worse conditions usually employed  in 
 factories to clear the molten glass that fell ar ound the 
 furnaces. They were always at the mercy of the  supervisors.  
 
 (vii) The women were not only paid wages on par but also 
 denied maternity benefits. 

13 
 
 
 (viii) Children were employed in packing and sorting work.  
 
 (ix) Since child labour  is prohibited there is a tendency to 
 outsource the work to village homes. Due to this, children 
 are forced to forego their education and assist their parents. 
 
 (x) There are few National Child Labour Project (NCLP) 
 schools for education of these child ren but the location of 
 these schools is not decided on the basis of 
 incidence/concentration of child labour. 
 
6. When asked about the social security benefits available to glass 
and bangle workers, the Ministry replied: 
 "That in the organized sector, under ESI Scheme, there is no 
 specific benefit which is exclusively admissible to glass and 
 bangle workers, 11335 workers including glass and  bangle 
 workers working in factories/establishments belonging to 
 organized sect or are registered under ESI Scheme in 
 Firozabad. 
   
  As for workers covered under Employees’  Provident Fund 
 Scheme, the Employees’ Provident Fund Organization does 
 not maintain statistics pertaining to number of workers.  The 
 coverage of establishmen ts under the Employees’ Provident 
 Fund and Miscellaneous  Provisions Act, 1952 is done 
 irrespective of the fact whether  the  establishment falls under 

14 
 
 the  organized sector or  unorganized sector. There are 70061 
 workers covered under the Employees’ P rovident Fund and 
 Miscellaneous  Provisions Act, 1952 in respect of glass and 
 bangle industry, located in Firozabad district. The number of 
 glass and bangle workers in the unorganized sector is not 
 available."  
 
 
7. When asked about the number of ESI h ospitals/ dispensaries 
situated in and around Firozabad and other areas in Uttar Pradesh 
where glass and bangle workers are concentrated, the Ministry replied 
as under: 
 "There is one ESI Hospital situated in Agra and 02 ESI 
 dispensaries in and around Firozabad and Shikohabad." 
   
8. On being asked about the specialized hospitals that have bee n 
set up in and around Firozabad to take care of the medical needs of 
the patients of respiratory diseases and other occupational hazards, 
the Ministry stated that: 
        "Medical care needs of glass workers covered under ESI 
 Scheme are being provided through ESI Hospital, Agra and 
 other empanelled Hospitals." 
 
9. It was brought to the notice of the Committee during evidence 
that the muster rolls are not maintained  by the employers and 

15 
 
specially women are not shown in their rolls.  Also, the employers 
deposit the subscriptions with the EPFO in the names of fake 
employees. 
10. Regarding the steps taken by the Ministry to cover all the 
workers engaged in glass and ban gle industry under the social 
security schemes, the Ministry stated: 
 "So  far  as coverage of glass bangle factories in Firozabad 
 under Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 and  Employees’ 
 Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions  Act, 1952 is 
 concerned, all  coverable units have been  surveyed and 
 covered. Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana  which was 
 initially launched for BPL families ( a unit of  five)  in the 
 unorganized sector has been extended to certain 
 occupational groups.  It is the endeavour of the  Government 
 to  provide RSBY to other occupational  groups in    the 
 unorganized sector in a phased manner."  
  
11. When asked whether the feasibility report on setting up an ESI 
Hospital in Firozabad been prepared, the Ministry’s reply was: 
"For setting up of a new ESI Hospital in an area, ESI 
 Corporation has laid down following norms based on the 
 number of Insured Persons (IPs).  At present, for setting up of  a 
 new ESI Hospital in a area, there should be a minimum 
 number of 25000 IPs fo r 100 bedded hospital. In Firozabad 
 area, as per the last survey, the IP strength is around 19493. 
 As and when, this number reaches 25000, the proposal for a 

16 
 
 hospital will be considered.  The pre-revised and revised  norms 
 for setting up of ESI hospitals is given at Annexure." 
 
12. On being asked about the schemes formulated and notified by 
the Central government for the welfare of home -based-workers on 
matters relating to life and disability cover, health and maternity 
benefits and old age protection u nder the Unorganized Workers’ 
Social Security Act, 2008 and the number of workers engaged in the 
glass and  bangle industry are covered under each of these schemes, 
the Ministry in a detailed reply stated as under: 
"The Government launched the following schemes to  provide 
 social security to certain categories of  unorganized 
 workers, including home based workers.   These schemes are 
 also listed in Schedule-I of the  Unorganised Workers’ Social 
 Security Act, 2008. 
  The RSBY was launched on 01.10.2007 to provide for 
 smart card based cashless health insurance cover of 
 Rs.30,000/-per annum per family (a unit of five) to BPL 
 families in the  unorganized sector, including glass and bangle 
 workers. Category-wise coverage under RSBY is not  maintained.  
   
  The scheme became operational from 01.04.2008. The 
 scheme also provides maternity benefits. The scheme has 
 since been extended to certain occupational groups  in the 
 unorganised sector viz., building and other  construction 
 workers {registered under the Building and other Construction 
 Workers (Regulation of Employment  and Condition of Service) 
 Act,1996}, street vendors, beedi workers, MGNREGA 

17 
 
 beneficiaries (who have worked for more than 15 days during 
 the preceding  financial year)  and domestic workers. It is the 
 endeavour of the government to cover all unorganised workers 
 under the scheme in a phased manner.   
 
  The Aam Admi Bima Yojana (AABY) was launched on 
 02.10.2007 to provide insurance cover to t he head of family or 
 one earning member of rural landless households.   Under the 
 scheme, the head of the family or one earning member in the 
 family is insured. The benefits include Rs.30,000 in case of 
 natural death; Rs.75,000 for accident death or total  permanent 
 disability due to accident and Rs.37,500 for partial  disability 
 due to accident. The premium of Rs.200/- per  member per 
 annum is equally shared in the ratio of  50:50  between Central 
 Government and respective State  Government/ Union 
 Territory. The children of beneficiaries of  AABY studying 
 between classes IX and  XII are eligible to a  scholarship 
 @Rs.100/- per month  upto a maximum of two  children. 
 Category-wise coverage under AABY is not  maintained.  
 
             Indira  Gandhi National Old Age  Pension  scheme   
  (IGNOAPS) was expanded by revising the eligibility criteria.  
  The persons living below poverty line and in the age group 60- 
  79 years are eligible for old age pension of Rs.200/- per   
  month.  For BPL persons of 80 years and  above, the amount  
  of pension has been raised to Rs.500/-per month. District- 
  wise or category-wise information is not maintained under  
  IGNOAPS. The scheme is applicable to all eligible persons of  
  BPL  category including glass and bangle workers of BPL   
  category." 
         

18 
 
13. It has been stated that 11335 workers including glass and 
bangle workers are covered under ESI scheme in Firozabad. On the  
steps taken to address the medical care needs of rest of the workers 
who are en gaged in the industry but are not covered under ESI, the 
Ministry stated as follows: 
"In the unorganized sector following separate legislations  have 
 been enacted by Parliament to provide health ,  social security , 
 housing, medical care, educational and  recreational facilities 
 to workers employed in beedi  industry, certain non -coal 
 mines, and cine workers: 
 
 The Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1946; 
 The Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 
1972; 
 The Iron Ore, Manganese Ore and Chr ome Ore Mines Labour 
Welfare Fund Act, 1976; 
 The Beedi Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1976; and 
 The Cine Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1981." 
 
 Government has approved setting up 4 new Hospitals, 38 
 Static-cum-Mobile Dispensaries and 2 Static Dispensaries in 
 various LWO Regions. Under the Education Scheme, 
 instructions have been issued to all Welfare Commissioners to 
 pay the scholarship through Savings Bank Accounts. 
 
  Apart from the above, a Health Insurance Scheme 
 namely, the ‘Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yoj ana’ for BPL families 
 (a unit of five) in Unorganised Sector formally became 
 operational from 01.04.2008 and benefit under scheme started 
 accruing to the beneficiaries.   
 
  The beneficiaries under the scheme are entitled to smart 
 card based cashless h ealth insurance cover of  Rs.30,000  per 

19 
 
 family per annum on a family floater basis; coverage of all pre -
 existing diseases; coverage of hospitalisation expenses, 
 including maternity benefit and Payment of transportation 
 cost of Rs.100/- per visit."  
 
14. The Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment depositing 
before the Committee on the subject, stated that we are also grateful 
to you that you have sensitized the various stakeholders on the plight 
of the glass and bangle workers.  Due to your visit, w e have been able 
to take up the  matter with the State Government and a lot of new 
initiatives are now moving.  From our side, firstly, we are now going to 
include and glass and bangle workers in the sector of  unorganized 
workers which will be now eligibl e for extension of Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojana after we get the proposal  cleared by the 
Central Government. It has to get the Cabinet  approval.  The 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana, as you know, is a very laudable 
scheme, which is being implemented all over  the country and has 
got a lot of encomium from without and outside the country.  It is 
running very successfully and we are sure that once we include some 
of the different sectors of unorganized workers into the scheme, they 
will also be included be cause at present, it is for the below poverty 
line people in the country. But some unorganized sectors are  getting 

20 
 
in and we will also include the glass and bangle workers which will be 
approved shortly. It will be a good  booster for the people there. 
15. On the issue of opening a ESI hospital in Firozabad, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment during evidence stated 
as follows: 
  “The ESIC has conducted a further survey and based on that 
 survey, the number of workers in Firozabad and Sikhohabad  
 put together is coming to around 21,600 now and they are 
 planning to conduct another survey in July, 2012.  As you are 
 aware, a hospital can be given at a place where we have  20,793 
 insured persons (IPs). ESIC will conduct another  survey in 
 July and hopefully they will get these 25,000 IPs  and then we 
 can move the proposal for putting up a hospital  exclusively 
 for this particular sector in that area.  I am sure  that will be 
 a big help for the people there.”  
 
16. On the question of the dilapidated condition of the dispensary in 
Firozabad, which the Committee visited during their study visit to the 
district, the Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment stated: 
 "I am told that the dispensary, which the hon. Committee saw, 
 was in a bad conditi on.  I am happy to say that they have now 
 moved  the  dispensary to a  better building and personal 
 attention is being given by the DG, ESIC to ensure that  people 
 get their treatment and that area gets all the  benefit."    
 
 

21 
 
17. On the suggestion that  if Shikohabad is also included, the 
number of IPs will go up to 28,000 or 30,000 to enable ESIC to 
establish a hospital, the Secretary and the DG, ESIC stated that they 
are definitely eager to give a hospital there which will be  run directly 
by the ESIC.  The work for  the survey already started.  It can 
definitely stated that it will be run very well, subject to getting doctors 
to come and work there and stay there and deliver the services. As far 
as numbers are concerned, as on 31.3.2011 the registered number 
was 11,321. And after a series of surveys now the number of IPs 
increased to 19,493 and in the next drive it will be done.  A meeting of 
the employers’ association in  that area is scheduled for 6th July, 
2012.  Some more areas where there is a conc entration of coverable 
employees are also being identified for registration.  Regarding the 
issue of  the State run dispensary, it was stated that the building 
was in a very dilapidated condition has been shifted it to a new 
premises though the State was r equested to  run it in a better way.  
The Government also requested the State Government for an NOC  to 
start a Diamond Jubilee Dispensary cum Diagnostic Centre.  The 
State Government was requested and pursued the matter is being 
State Government has also been requested to identify land so that a 
hospital can start. 

22 
 
  
18. When asked whether the Government of Uttar Pradesh has 
formulated any scheme for the welfare of glass and bangle workers 
relating to provident fund, employment injury benefit, housing etc.  as 
contemplated under Section 3 of the Unorganised Workers' Social 
Security Act, 2008, the Ministry replied that as per information 
available, the State has not yet constituted the Social Security Board 
under Section-3 of  the  Act. Scheme relating to pro vident fund, 
employment injury benefit, housing etc. are the mandate of the State 
Social Security Board under the Act.  As such, no Central 
Government funding has yet been provided for scheme notified by the 
State Government under the Act. State Government  has been 
requested to constitute the State Social  Security Board several 
times.  However, no concrete action has yet been taken in this regard 
by the State Government. 
 
19. On being asked about the number of unorganized workers 
registered under the Act i n the Firozabad District and the number of 
identity cards issued under the Act, the Ministry replied: 
 

23 
 
         "Since the State has not yet constituted the Social Security 
 Board, the unorganised workers in Firozabad district have 
 not been registered und er the Act. However, these workers 
 have been registered by issuing smart cards under RSBY.   
   
  As on 02.07.2012, 3.04 crore smart cards have been 
 issued under RSBY.  Out of this, 12361 families are in the 
 Firozabad district. However, the occupational  group-wise 
 data is not maintained under RSBY." 
 
20. Whether any specialized centre for imparting skills in glass 
technology and latest advancements in the field to the workers have 
been envisaged, the Ministr y stated that vocational training is a 
concurrent subject. The decision for opening of new training institute 
as per local industrial need rests with the respective State 
Governments.   
 
21. It has also been observed that due to lack of training facilities  
the glass industry is moving back to bangle making. On the steps  
taken by the Ministry to give adequate training to the glass workers, 
the Committee were informed that the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and ILO  initiated to  pursue Central Developmen t 
Glass Institute (CDGI) under  Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium 

24 
 
Enterprises(MSME)  situated at Firozabad to undertake  the SDI 
programme further, as it is the only institute available in Firozabad 
with  adequate facilities to conduct  training in glassware courses. 
Total 04 number of course modules for glass industry have been 
developed under SDI programme. 
 
22. When asked about the response of local administration on the 
proposal for creation of training centre submitted to the local 
administration under  the SDI programme in Firozabad cluster, the 
Ministry replied:        
   "ILO  has  initiated a proposal through District Industries  
  Centre (DIC) to the  local  administration to set up a   
  training  centre that  will be run by the Government   
  Training and Extension Centre (GTEC) at the District   
  Industries Centre (DIC) premises in Firozabad city centre.  
  Due to administrative reasons, the proposal could not be   
  pursued further by the local administration."   
  
23. On the question of a suggestion that an international level Glass 
School be opened for skill development and creating new set of 
crafters to compete with demands of world market, the Ministry 
stated that no proposal has been received to open an international 

25 
 
level  Glass School for  skill development for creating new set of 
crafters  to compete with demands in the world market. However, 
there is already a Central Institute set up by Ministry of Micro, Small 
& Medium Enterprises for this purpose in Firozabad.  
 
24. When asked whether any census of glass workers been 
conducted to get the figures relating to the migration of skilled glass 
workers to other occupations, the Ministry replied in negative. 
 
25. When asked whether the Ministry gives financial assistance to 
the NGOs who are inv olved in welfare of glass and bangle workers in 
Firozabad, the Ministry stated that under the various Welfare 
Schemes, central share of premium contribution is released to the 
State Nodal Agencies.  No funds are released to NGOs.  
 
26. The workers who are working in factories are denied basic 
facilities like toilets, canteens, lunch period, recesses, leave and shift 
duties. Regarding steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that at least 
basic facilities are provided to those working in the glass and bangle 

26 
 
industry, the Ministry replied that the Factories Act, 1948 is the 
principal legislation for regulating various aspects relating to safety, 
health and welfare of workers employed in factories. The Act is a 
 Central enactment which aims at protecting workers employed 
in factories from industrial and occupational  hazards. The Sate 
Government/Union Territory from their  State Rules under Act and 
enforce provisions of the  Act and  Rules through their Factory 
Inspectorates. 
 
27. As per reports, the workers of gl ass industry in Firozabad are 
being denied even the basic facilities. They are not allowed to take 
lunch as it results in wastage of gas/fuel of glass furnace. On the 
efforts made by the Ministry to ensure that the workers are not denied 
such basic amenities, the Ministry responded as follows:  
 "The enforcement of the Factories Act, 1948 is with the  State 
 Government. The State Government has been  requested to 
 look into this issue and ensure that  appropriate action is 
 taken for providing suitable amenities to the workers of the 
 Glass Industry."  
 

27 
 
28. According to reports, the measure dozen differs for the workers 
and stands for 24 bangles but when sold in markets dozen is 
equivalent to usual 12 bangles which implies th at employers make 
hefty profits and workers earn meager amount. When asked whether 
all these facts are kept in mind while deciding the minimum wages to 
be paid to the workers, the Ministry stated that the subject matter 
relates to the Government of Uttar P radesh and information is being 
collected from the State Government.  
 
29. The Ministry stated that only 273 factories had canteens out of 
549 who were required to have canteens under the Factories Act, only 
43 out of 182 had crèches and 582 out of 877 had  rest rooms etc. On 
being asked about the steps been taken to ensure that others too 
have such facilities at earliest and action taken against the defaulting 
factories, the Ministry responded by stating that the  enforcement of 
the Factories Act, 1948 is w ith the State Government. The State 
Government has been  requested to  look into this issue and 
ensure that  appropriate action is taken for providing suitable 
amenities to the workers of the Glass Industry.  They have also been 
advised to take  appropriate action against the defaulters. 

28 
 
 
30. The Committee during their visit to Firozabad in April, 2011 also 
found that large numbers of children were engaged in home -based 
various processes of bangle making. Regarding steps taken/incentives 
given by the Minist ry to ensure that the children who are involved in 
home based work get basic/primary education and good health, the 
Ministry stated that c hildren who are engaged in home based work 
are  generally  engaged with their parents or relatives either at home 
or i n the fields and the Act does not prohibit the employment of 
children to any workshop wherein any process is carried on by the 
occupier with the aid of his  family or to any school established by 
or receiving  assistance or recognition from Government. How ever, 
Government has been initiating a lot of welfare schemes for their 
education and health safety.   Further, Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Education under Right to Education Act, 2009 provides 
compulsory and free education to children between  6-14 years as 
their fundamental Right. 
  
 

29 
 
31. As per various newspaper reports, child labour is still  rampant 
in Firozabad whereas the Ministry have been denying employment of 
child labour  in the factories in Firozabad.  When asked about the 
basis of denial and the efforts made by the Ministry to track such 
children and rehabilitate them, the Ministry in a detailed reply stated 
that the reply is based on the information furnished by Government of 
Uttar Pradesh vide letter dated 23.03.2011 from Deputy Labour 
Commissioners.  He has informed that  Government of Uttar 
Pradesh has  continuously conducted surveys in the glass bangle 
industry to identify children  working in factories/Industrial un its. 
They informed that neither any child labour was found working in any 
furnace/factory/Industrial units nor did they receive any information 
of such employment in any industrial unit  during the course of 
their survey. However, they have not ruled out t he possibility of 
children in home based work associated with glass bangle industry.  
 
In  this  context  it  may  be  informed that as per  proviso to 
section 3 of Child Labour (Prohibition &  Regulation) Act 1986, home 
based work is exempted from  the am bit of the Act. Government of 
India is considering  plugging this loophole by proposing suitable 

30 
 
amendments to  the  Act so  that commercial exploitation of children 
in the name of home based  work could be stopped.  
  
 Ministry of Labour and Employment is  implementing National 
Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme in 266 districts including 
Firozabad district. Under the NCLP Scheme, working children in the 
age group of 5-14 are rescued from their  employment and children in 
the age group of 5-9 are directly  mainstreamed into the regular 
school run under SSA or  schools run by State Government.  The 
working children in the  age group of 9 -14 years are enrolled in the 
NCLP special schools, where they are provided with formal / non -
formal education, vocational t raining, mid day meal, stipend of 
Rs.150/-per month health checkup etc. with the ultimate objective of 
mainstreaming them in the formal education system in appropriate 
classes for their age. Under the NCLP Scheme, 114 special schools 
with 50 children per s chool are sanctioned for rehabilitation of Child 
Labour in Firozabad district. The locations of the Special Schools are 
decided by  Project Society headed by the Deputy 
Commissioner/District Collector based on Survey conducted twice in 

31 
 
a plan period. During the last few years the children mainstreamed by 
the  NCLP Project Society, Firozabad are as under: - 
Year Number of Children Mainstreamed 
2005-06 1718 
2006-07 2209 
2007-08 1086 
2008-09 1754 
2009-10 & 2010 -
2011 
5159 
Total 11926 
 
 
32. When asked about the steps taken/incentives that are given by 
the Ministry to ensure that unhealthy and polluting technology is 
replaced by the state -of-the-art procedures and machinery, the 
Ministry responded that it did not come under their purview.  
 
33. The rates of minimum wages prescribed for different categories 
of workers in glass and bangle industry by the Uttar Pradesh 
Government and their comparison with other State Governments is 
given in the table below: 

32 
 
Sl.
No. 
State Employment Minimum Wages in  
Rupees (per day) 
01. Andhra Pradesh Glass Industry 197.15 
02. Bihar -do- 144.00 
03. Haryana -do- 186.42 
04. Jharkhand Glass Sheet 
manufacture 
145.54 
05. Karnataka Glass & 
Glassware 
Industry 
Area I   151.25 
Area II  150.85 
06. Maharashtra Glass Industry 192.13 
07. Orissa -do- 92.00 
08. Rajasthan Glass & China 
ware 
166.46 
09. Uttar Pradesh Glass Bangles 
(Unskilled) 
165.38 
10. Uttarakhand Glass Industry 144.04. 
 
  
34. The Ministry in their replies have shunned their responsibility by 
putting the onus on the State Government for providing basic 
amenities to the workers, training opportunities, setting up of training 
institutes, payment of minimum wages etc. On being asked that by 
doing so, the purpose of  providing subjects in concurrent list gets 

33 
 
defeated, the Ministry in a detailed reply stated that the State 
Government is responsible for the enforcement of  the Factories Act, 
1948 which includes provisions of basic  amenities to the workers. 
The Central Government advises the State Government in this regard.  
Directorate General, Factory Advice Service  & Labour Institutes 
(DG,FASLI), an attached  office of Ministry of Labour & Employment  
has prepared detailed Model Factory Rules  for use of the State 
Governments in framing the Subordinate Legislations. The Ministry 
seeks reports from the State Government wherever required. In the 
present case also, the Ministry has taken up the matter with State 
Government  for taking suitable action.    
 
Bangle Industries fall in the State sphere and the Minimum 
Wages are fixed by the State Government.  The enforcement of the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 is also done by  the State Government.   
 
 Skill Development Initiative (SDI) Scheme is a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme with 100% Central assistance.   The  Central and 
State Governments share responsibility for effective implementation  
of SDI scheme in the country.   The Directorate General of 

34 
 
Employment & Training (DGE&T),  Ministry of Labour  and 
Employment is the nodal body for formulating policies, standards, for 
the scheme. The State Governments through Vocational Training 
Providers (VTPs) impart skill based training in short term course 
modules based on Modular Employable Skills (MES). The Central 
Government provides funds to the States/ UTs for  reimbursement of 
training cost and assessment fee in order to improve the employability 
of workers.  However, ensuring welfare of workers and payment of 
minimum wages, etc. is entirely the responsibility of State 
Government.   
  

35 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
35. The Committee note as per rough estimates, there are four 
lakh glass and bangle workers in Firozabad out of which only 
19,493 workers are covered under ESI Scheme in Firozabad (UP) 
and there is only  one ESI hospital, that too in Agra, to cater to 
their medical needs. During their study visit, the Committee 
were concerned to observe the pathetic condition of the State 
run ESI dispensary in Firozabad. Although, the Government have 
taken steps to reloca te the dispensary, still, a lot needs to be 
done to meet the medical requirements of the glass and bangle 
workers. There is also an urgent need for a specialized hospital 
for respiratory diseases that most of the glass and bangle workers 
suffer from.  The Committee are happy to note from the 
Secretary’s submission made during the evidence that the 
Ministry are eager to open an ESI hospital in the region. The 
Committee recommend the Government to undertake a fresh 
process of remapping of the IPs for opening a new ESI hospital 
with speciality in the treatment of occupational diseases related 
to working in glass and bangle industry at the earliest.  They 

36 
 
desire to be apprised of the latest figures and areas covered in 
and around Firozabad in the remapping process. 
 
36. Taking serious cognizance of the steep rise in  sub-
contracting, outsourcing of work, home based work etc.,  the 
Committee feel that social security schemes like ESI scheme 
should be extended to these workers also. The Committee are  of 
the firm view that Ministry should explore the possibility of 
extending the ESI scheme to glass and bangle workers in the 
unorganized sector also if required by amending the ESI Act so 
that these poor workers have access to healthcare. 
 
37. The Committ ee are pleased to note that following their 
examination of the subject, the Government have decided to 
bring bangle workers under RSBY at the earliest. The Committee 
are of the view that till the time an ESI hospital comes up in 
Firozabad or RSBY scheme is  made applicable to the glass and 
bangle workers, the Ministry could consider providing Primary 
Healthcare to these workers by sending para-medics from ESIC to 

37 
 
undertake periodic health surveys of these workers and provide 
necessary medical relief to them. 
 
38. The Committee are anguished to note that the Ministry have 
distanced themselves from the issues connected with the 
replacement of unhealthy and polluting technology used by the 
glass and bangle workers. The Committee wish to invite attention 
to the M inistry's National Policy on Safety, Health & 
Environment at Work Place which declares Government's 
commitment to regulate all economic activities for management 
of safety and health risks at workplace and to provide measures 
so as to ensure safe and healt hy working conditions for every 
working man and woman in the country. The Committee strongly 
feel that since unhealthy and polluting technology directly 
affects workers' health, the Ministry with the help of State 
Governments should endeavour to take steps  to persuade the 
employers/ workers to adopt latest and eco -friendly techniques 
and technology. 
 

38 
 
39.  The Committee note that only 70061 workers are 
covered under the Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952 and 19,493  workers inclu ding glass and 
bangle workers working in factories/establishments belonging to 
organized Sector are covered under ESI Scheme in Firozabad  
whereas, it is estimated that there are more than 4 lakhs glass 
and bangle workers in Firozabad.  Considering the fact  that there 
is outsourcing of work in the glass and bangle industry and 
workers complete their work at home with the help of their 
family members and do not qualify for  these schemes, the 
Committee recommend that Ministry may find ways to ensure 
that at l east one member of each family engaged in glass and 
bangle industry is covered under any of the social security 
schemes so that each family can have some degree of social 
security in cases of distress. The Committee also note that there 
are no specific soc ial security benefits exclusively for glass and 
bangle workers. The Committee are of the view that it is 
imperative for the Government of a welfare State to provide 
these workers essential social security benefits i.e. medical 
facility, insurance, old age benefits etc. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that a dedicated social security scheme for 

39 
 
covering all glass and bangle workers should be chalked out and 
meanwhile adequate publicity of various ongoing social security 
schemes be made so that wo rkers can take benefit under these 
schemes. 
 
40. The Committee note that no census of workers engaged in 
glass and bangle industry has been conducted by the 
Government. The Committee feel that unless a census is 
undertaken, the Ministry cannot formulate an d implement 
schemes for this sector in the absence of any knowledge of the 
profile and number of the workers engaged in the industry. The 
Committee recommend that a census and a comprehensive 
survey of the industry be carried out every 10 years so that the  
Ministry is able to formulate specific schemes for the welfare of 
the glass and bangle workers.  
 
 
 

40 
 
41. As per inputs received by the Committee during their study 
visit to Firozabad in 2011, the workers working in factories are 
being denied basic facilities like toilets near the place of work, 
canteens, lunch break, recesses, leave and shift duties etc. The 
Committee are perturbed to find from the reply of the Ministry 
that it is the duty of the State Government to ensure that the 
facilities as prescribed under the Factories Act are made available 
to the workers. The Committee feel that Ministry should take 
steps to conduct surprise inspections of the premises frequently 
which are covered under the Factories Act. The Committee also 
feel that in absence of such inspections, the Ministry would not 
be able to derive assurance  about the effectiveness of the various 
labour Acts. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
immediate steps be taken to ensure basic facilities as required to 
be provided in the Statutes by the States who are required to 
implement the provisions of the Factories Act.  
 
 
 

41 
 
42. The Committee observe that due to lack of training facilities 
in glass industry, workers are either drifting away to other 
professions or moving back to bangle making. The Committee 
note that the decision for opening a new training institute as per 
local industrial need re sts with the respective State 
Governments. The Committee desire that the Ministry should 
take up with the State Governments, the need for training of 
workers and setting up of training institutes by the State 
Governments. The Committee also desire that Gov ernment may 
consider providing vocational education i.e. courses related to 
glass industry under the ISDS to the children of these glass 
workers in schools also so that they can compete the challenges 
faced by the industry. 
 
43. The Committee note that chi ldren are working with their 
parents at home in glass and bangle making. The Committee feel 
that this deprives the children of their childhood and ultimately 
affects their quality of life. The Committee are of the firm view 
that the Ministry need to take u p the issue of revision of 
minimum wages with the State Government since by increasing 

42 
 
the base minimum wage rates would go a long way in reducing 
the incidence of children working with their parents if not 
completely eliminating child labour. 
 
44. The Com mittee have come across a number of reports 
wherein it has been stated that children are working in the 
factories in Firozabad whereas the Ministry, based on the State 
Government replies, have denied the same. There have also been 
reports that children are  engaged in godowns by the factory 
owners.  The Committee desire that a fresh survey of all the 
establishments in and around Firozabad be made in collaboration 
with the State Government to find out the existence of child 
labour and immediate steps be taken to rehabilitate them.  
 
45. The Committee feel that simply taking children out of the 
employment may not serve the purpose. The Ministry have to 
study the mindset of the parents who make their children work 
and after making such an analysis a multi -pronged strategy 
including convincing the parents, should be framed to reduce the 
incidence of child labour. 

43 
 
 
46. The Committee find that muster rolls are not maintained 
properly by the employers and many workers, most of them 
women are not shown on the rolls. T he Committee are of the 
view that the Regional Labour Commissioners should carry out 
surprise checks in the mornings and in the evenings too at the 
gates of the establishments to ensure that the number of workers 
which figure on the muster rolls matches with the numbers found 
during such inspections.  
 
47. According to some reports, although the provident fund 
contribution is being deposited by some establishments in 
Firozabad with the EPFOs in accordance with the number of 
workers there however, the EPF be neficiaries are not the actual 
workers. The Committee wish to caution the Regional Provident 
Fund Commissioner to be extra cautious and take steps to cross 
check the identity of the genuine EPF account holders besides 
random inspection of the registers of the establishments.  
 

44 
 
48. The Committee are disturbed to note the reply of the 
Government stating that “… ensuring welfare of workers and 
payment of minimum wages, etc. is entirely the responsibility of 
State Governments”.  This is not acceptable to the  Co mmittee 
when crores of rupees are allocated by them every year to the 
State Governments for various welfare schemes and the State 
Governments are accountable as to how the funds have been 
utilized. The State Governments must be held responsible for not 
spending or for not properly utilizing the funds allocated for 
approved purposes and schemes within the given time and 
manner and this must also be taken into account while allocating 
funds to such States in future.  The  Committee, therefore, 
expect the Unio n Ministry of Labour and Employment to play a 
more proactive role to safeguard the interest of the poor workers 
keeping in view the constitutional injunction that the State shall 
secure a just social order for the promotion of welfare of the poor 
people. 
 49. The Committee are anguished to find that the Social 
Security Board under Unorganized Workers Social Security Act, 
2008 has not yet been constituted by the State Government of 
Uttar Pradesh. Consequentially, no schemes under the Act have 

45 
 
been notified a nd no funds could be released by the Central 
Government for the unorganized workers. The Committee desire 
that the State Government may be urged to constitute the Social 
Security Board immediately. The Committee also desire to be 
apprised of the efforts ma de by the Ministry in pursuing the 
State Government of Uttar Pradesh for constitution of Social 
Security Board and the response of the State Government thereto 
within three months of the presentation of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi,                          (HEMANAND BISWAL)     
23 August, 2012,                   CHAIRMAN,                                                                 
1Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)     STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

46 
 
ANNEXURE 
The pre-revised and revised norms for setting up of ESI hospitals 
Sl. 
No. 
Number  of beds Pre- revised Norms Revised Norms 
1. *50 bedded 
hospital 
25,000 IP family 
units 
------- 
 
2. 100 bedded 
hospital 
1,00,000 IP family 
units 
25,000 IP family 
units 
 
3. 150 bedded 
hospital 
1,50,000 IP family 
units 
1,00,000 IP 
family units 
 
4. 200 bedded 
hospital 
2,00,000 IP family 
units 
1,50,000 IP 
family units 
 
5. 250 bedded 
hospital 
2,50,000 IP family 
units 
2,00,000 IP 
family units 
 
6. 300 bedded 
hospital 
3,00,000 IP family 
units 
2,50,000 IP 
family units 
7. 350 bedded 
hospital 
------- 3,00,000 IP 
family units 
8. 400 bedded 
hospital 
4,00,000 IP family 
units 
3,50,000 IP 
family units 
9. 500 bedded 
hospital 
5,00,000 IP family 
units 
4,00,000 IP 
family units 
 
10. 600 bedded 
hospital 
6,00,000 IP family 
units 
5,00,000 IP 
family units 
 
 No 50 bedded hospitals will be set up by ESI Corporation."  
  

47 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
 
The Committee sat on 29 June, 2012 from 1 430 hrs. to 1 630 
hrs. in  the  Committee Room  'E', Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.     Shri Raj Babbar 
3.     Shri  Narahari Mahato 
4.     Shri Hari Manjhi 
5.     Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy    
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
6. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
7.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
8.  Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
9.  Shri Rajaram 
10. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

48 
 
WITNESSES 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT/  
 
Sl.No. Name of the Officer 
Designation 
1. Dr. Mrutyunjay Sarangi Secretary (L&E) 
2. Shri P.K. Padhy  Principal Labour & Employment Adviser 
3. Shri R.C. Mishra Central Provident Fund Commissioner 
4. Shri P.K. Pujari Additional Secretary, FA 
5. Dr. C.S. Kedar Director General, Employees’ State 
Insurance Corporation 
6. Dr. S.R. Chauhan Medical Commissioner 
7. Shri Anil Swarup Additional  Secretary (DGLW) 
8. Shri Sharda Prasad Joint Secretary (DGE&T) 
9. Shri K.M. Gupta Economic Adviser 
10. Shri V. Murali Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of Ministry of Labour and Employment  and other 
officials of the Ministry.  After the witnesses introduced themselves, 
the Commit tee took evidence of the representatives of Ministry of 
Labour on the subject `Welfare of Glass and Bangle workers in 
Firozabad'.  The Chairman also drew the attention of the Ministry 
towards the lack of basic amenities and the dilapidated condition of 
ESI dispensary in Firozabad.   

49 
 
3. The Secretary, while appreciating the proactive role of the 
Committee in taking up the cause of the Glass and Bangle workers of 
Firozabad, briefed the Committee on the steps taken by the Ministry 
with regard to the welfare of  Glass and Bangle workers under 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana etc.  The Secretary assured the 
Committee that `the ESIC is actively considering the issue of opening 
of an ESI hospital in Firozabad after the fresh mapping of the IPs is 
done in July, 2012 and the threshold limit of 25,000 IPs is met.'   
4. The Chairman and the Members raised issues concerning child 
labour in Firozabad; wide -spread prevalence of respiratory diseases 
particularly TB amongst the workers of Firozabad; non-inclusion of 
women workers in the muster rolls; inspection of the factories in 
Firozabad and benefits available for unorganized bangle workers.  
The representatives of the Ministry replied to some of the points and 
concerns raised. The Chairman also directed the m to furnish  
information on points which remained unanswered to the Secretariat 
within one week. 
 
 
 

50 
 
5. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing 
before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information 
desired by them. 
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

51 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
 
The Committee sat on 23 August, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 
hrs. in the  Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   2. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
   3. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
   4. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
   5. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure   
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
   6.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
   7.  Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
   8.  Dr. E.M.Sudarsana Natchiappan 
   9.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
   10.Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
   
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 

52 
 
 
 
 
2. XX     XX    XX 
3. XX     XX    XX 
4. XX     XX    XX  
5. XX     XX    XX 
6. XX     XX    XX 
 
7. Thereafter, the Hon'ble Chairman apprised the Members about 
the following  draft Reports to be considered for adoption:   
 (i) 'Welfare of Glass and Bangle workers of Firozabad - A  
  Case Study',  
    (ii)    XX   XX    XX 
     (iii)  XX   XX    XX 
8. The Committee took up the draft Reports one by one for 
consideration. After some discussions, the Committee  adopted all 
draft Reports without any modification.   
 
 
9. The Committee then authorized the Ch airman to finalise the 
above draft reports in the light of factual verification from the 
concerned Ministry and present the Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament. 
      

53 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 XX Do not pertain to this report. 
 
 
 
 