 
15 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2010-2011) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eleventh Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants for the 
year 2010-11] 
 
FIFTEENTH  REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
       March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 


2 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2010-2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eleventh Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants for the 
year 2010-11] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2011 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2011 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
            March, 2011/Phalguna,1932 (Saka) 
 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
       
     PAGE(S) 
       
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
   
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………..    
*CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
accepted by the Government…………………………. 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration………… 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
which  replies of the Government  are interim  
in nature    …………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.  
    
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh  Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2010-11) 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Shri  Raj Babbar 
4. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
       **5. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
7. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
8. Shri Hassan Khan 
9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
10. Shri P. Lingam 
11. Shri Hari Manjhi 
12. Shri P. Balram Naik 
13. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
14. Smt. Mausam Noor 
15. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
16. Dr. P.L. Punia 
17. Shri Ramkishun 
18. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
19. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
20. Shri Murarilal Singh 
    ***21. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
23. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
24. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
25. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
26. Shri Rajaram 
27. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
       *28. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose 
       *29. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
       *30. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
31. Vacant 
 

5 
 
 
______________________________________________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f 21st September, 2010 
** Change in nomination from Committee on Labour to 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas w.e.f  8th December, 
2010 
*** Nominated w.e.f  8th December, 2010 
  
   
 SECRETARIAT 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director  
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 4.    Shri Suresh  Kumar  - Senior Executive   
        Assistant 
  
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on  their 
behalf, present this Fifteenth Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Eleventh 
Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
on  Demands for Grants for the year 2010 -11 of the Ministry  of 
Textiles. 
 
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 22.4.2010.  The Ministry of Textiles furnished 
their replies indicating action taken on the recommendations 
contained in that Report on 11.8.2010.  The Report was considered 
and adopted by the Standing Committee on Labour at their sitting 
held on 09.12.2010. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed 
in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                          HEMANAND BISWAL, 
 9 December, 2010                                                       CHAIRMAN,                        
Agrahayana , 1932 (Saka)             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR. 
 
 
 

7 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Eleventh 
Report on Demands for Grants for the year 2010 -11 of the Ministry 
of Textiles. 
 
2.The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha, and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha, on  22.04.2010.  The Report  contained 22 
recommendations.  Replies of Government in respect of all the 
recommendations have been received and categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government --Paragraph Sl. No. 
1,2,3,4,5,6,7,14,18 and 21. (Total =10) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply  -   
NIL. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require  reiteration--Paragraph Sl. 
Nos. 8, 10,12, 15,16 and 20. (Total=6) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature --
Paragraph Sl. Nos. 9,11,13,17,19  and 22. (Total=6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
  
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect 
of the recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action 
taken notes in respect of recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V for which only interim replies have been given by 
the Government be furnished to them at the earliest and in any 
case not later than three months of the presentation of this 
Report.   
 
4.      The Committee will now deal with the action taken replies of 
the Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
A. Implementation of TUF Scheme in North-Eastern Region 
Recommendation( Sl. No.8, Para 3.41) 
 
5. The Committee had recommended that in order to popularize 
TUF Scheme in North -Eastern Region the Ministry should first 
check the continuous closure of powerloom units in th at part by 
expanding its infrastructure there by providing sufficient raw 
material, uninterrupted power supply and dissemination of  
technology to them. Further, a clear cut strategy be chalked out for 
spreading awareness about the Scheme in the region incl uding 
adequate number of seminars/workshops and exposure visits. 
Besides, efforts also be made to reach the maximum number of 
stakeholders and encourage them to take part in the exposure 
visits. The Committee further recommend ed that the current slabs 
under the Scheme be further relaxed till the time the Scheme gains 
momentum in North-Eastern region.  
 
 
6. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry stated as under:- 

9 
 
 
 `A proposal is under consideration to start a new Powerloom 
 Service Centre (PSC) to facilitate growth of the Powerloom 
 Sector in NER and popularizing powerloom  schemes and 
 TUFS. In association with the concerned State Governments 
 and  local textile Associations efforts will be made to 
 popularise the  various G overnment of India schemes 
 particularly, TUFS, powerloom  schemes.  Further it is also 
 proposed to conduct four  programmes/seminar/workshop 
 during the current year, one  each per quarter in different 
 areas of NER. Already one seminar / workshop has be en 
 conducted on 13.5.2010 at Guwahati.‟ 
 
 
7. The Committee find that in order to popularize TUF 
Scheme in North Eastern Region, Government propose to start 
a new powerloom service centre there to facilitate growth of 
powerloom sector. Further, four semina rs/workshops are  
proposed to be organized every year for the purpose.  The 
Committee consider these efforts far from adequate for 
effective implementation of TUF Scheme in North -Eastern 
Region. The Committee are of the view that merely conducting 
of these programmes and setting up of a Powerloom Service 
Centre will not yield the desired results unless the components 

10 
 
of the Scheme are made attractive for the small scale 
entrepreneurs of North Eastern Region.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier  recommendation and urge the 
Government to suitably amend /restructure the parameters of 
the TUF Scheme for North -Eastern Region so that it could 
make some headway there.  The Committee also stress the 
need for deciding  the venue of all the programmes/even ts in 
the very beginning of each year besides giving adequate 
publicity in the local press and electronic media  about such 
events and programmes.  
 
  

11 
 
 B. Fashion Hubs 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10,  Para - 3.50) 
 
8.  The Committee  while observing that implementation of the 
fashion hub scheme had been delayed due to several procedural 
wrangling had recommended that all the departments/agencies 
involved in the matter be asked to work in tandem and complete all 
the procedural formalities in a time bound ma nner. It was also  
urged upon the Government to identify land in other States also for 
setting up of fashion hubs and complete all the administrative, 
technical and other procedural formalities well in advance so that 
the scheme may come up simultaneously in other parts of the 
country which will facilitate local artisans, weavers and other 
skilled textile workers to showcase and market their products there. 
The States without such hubs may be accorded priority considering 
the utility and scope of such hubs in these States.  
 
 
9. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry stated as under:- 
`After concerted efforts of the Ministry of Textiles, DDA has 
identified 10 acres of land in Maidan Garhi for Fashion  Hub. 
DDA informed that the cost of land will be dec ided in 
consultation with Finance Division and the MOUD. Formal 
allotment letter would be issued only after completing the 
statutory process of change of land use by DDA.  
 
 
 
 

12 
 
 Core Advisory Group had been constituted under the 
chairmanship of Director General, NIFT to suggest the terms 
of reference, eligibility criteria for selection of a consultant.  
The Advisory Group has submitted its report.  
 Following the observations/reco mmendations made by 
 the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Labour in its 
 meeting held on 29.3.2010, terms of reference/eligibility 
 criteria for appointment of consultant are being finalized.  
 Ministry has also written to DDA to intimate the progress i n 
 the matter relating to allotment of land.‟ 
 
10. The Committee find that the proposed fashion hub in 
Maidan Garhi Delhi remains at conceptual stage as the 
statutory process of change of land use,  acquisition of land, 
finalization of terms of reference fo r consultants etc. would 
take considerably long time.  The inordinate delay in setting of 
the Fashion Hub in Delhi betray sheer lack of  coordination 
among the Ministry of Textiles, Ministry of Urban Development 
and Delhi Development Authority.   Surprisingly, the 
recommendation of the Committee regarding setting up of 
Fashion Hubs in other parts of the country finds no place in 
the action taken reply furnished by the Ministry. The 
Committee, therefore,  reiterate that the issue of identifying 

13 
 
land for setting up of fashion hubs in other parts of the country 
be taken up with all the State Governments at the earliest.  
C. Need to provide working capital to New Egerton    
 Woollen Mills, Dhariwal 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12  Para - 3.61) 
 
11. The Committee had urged the Ministry to take up the matter 
of providing working capital to Egerton Woollen Mills, Dhariwal, 
with the Ministry of Finance so that production activities in this 
viable unit, with the popular brand name of `Dhariwal Wool‟ be 
started at the earliest.  
 
12. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry have stated:- 
 
 `Revival proposal of BIC Ltd. includes both  the  sick units of 
 the Company ( Cawnpore Woollen Mills Branch, Kanpur  and 
 New  Egerton Woollen Mills Branch, Dhariwal) .  A provision 
 of Rs.44 crore has been included against additional  working 
 capital/contingency in this scheme. After getting the  approval 
 of BRPSE / Cabinet on the proposed  revival plan of  BIC Ltd., 
 the matter will be taken up with the Ministry of  Finance for 
 making necessary budget provision.  On availability  of 
 budget provision, the requisite  fund/ working capital would 
 be released to BIC Ltd. for the purpose.‟ 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
13. The Committee are disheartened to not e that in  spite of 
taking immediate and corrective action in pursuance of the 
Committee’s recommendation for providing the required working 
capital to new Egerton Woollen Mill s, Dhariwal, a  viable unit , to 
ensure continuity of production  activities there, the Government 
has treated this unit at par with other sick units of the company.  
In Committee’s view such an approach will only lead to closure of a 
viable unit like Egerton Woollen Mills. The Committee deplore such 
an inert approach on the part of the Government and reiterate that 
the Government extend  adequate budgetary support to the n ew 
Egerton Woollen Mills in the next budgetary grant.  
  

15 
 
 D. Powerloom Sector 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15,  Para - 3.85) 
 
14. The Committee, considering the weak financial capacities  of 
the powerloom sector entrepreneurs,  had recommended that 
instead of equating the modernization of sick powerloom sector with 
the huge mill sector where entrepreneurs are equipped with greater 
financial potential, an integrated scheme be specifically formulated 
for the powerloom unit holders so that they could come forward to 
timely modernize their units and are not forced to go for closure for 
want of required funds.  
 
15. In their action taken reply furnished to  the Committee, the 
Ministry stated as under:- 
`Ministry of Textiles, Government of  India  has formulated  an 
 Integrated scheme for Powerloom Sector Development since 
 2007-08 in addition to the  capital subsidy of 20% MMS/15% 
 MMS and 5% Interest reimbu rsement already in operation 
 under TUFS for  Modernization of Powerloom sector.  Taking 
 into consideration of  shortage of margin money , weak 
 financial capacity, the banks / financial institutions are 
 providing bridge loan against the own contribution s to be 
 brought  by the individual owners. Under  Integrated Scheme 
 for powerloom sector development  following activities/
 programmes are being conducted for  powerloom sector 
 development with Govt. assistance/fund- 
 
1. Marketing Development Programme - organizing buyer -seller 
meet, seminar/ workshops, awareness programmes, print 
publicity etc. 

16 
 
2. Exposure visits for powerloom weavers from low level of 
technology to higher  level of technology area for knowledge 
about production of fabrics and higher  rate of  production and 
diversification of the product. 
3. Powerloom  Cluster Development  
4. Development  and Up -gradation of  Skills (HRD) – Powerloom 
weavers/Entrepreneurs are  being provided training  in 
Poweloom service Centres on machine and equipments 
provided by the Government. 
5. Under the said scheme, Gov ernment is providing machines 
and equipments to powerloom service centres situated in 
different part of the Country for providing the services  to 
powerloom cluster.‟ 
 
16. The Committee are constrained to note tha t the 
Government out of  5.03 lakh powerloom units, only 2583 
units have availed the subsidy being provided under the 20% 
credit linked capital subsidy scheme (CLCSS) .  Obviously, the 
much acclaimed signature scheme of the Government for 
modernization of s ick powerloom sector  is ill structured to 
attain the intended objective .  The 5% interest reimbursement 
under Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) has also 
failed to serve as incentive to entrepreneurs of smaller 
financial capacity in powerloom sector .  The Committee 
strongly feel that putting the sick powerloom sector at par with 
the huge mill sector while formulating and implementing 
developmental schemes is totally unjustified and will only lead 

17 
 
to further deterioration of the powerloom sector.  The  
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
that an Integrated Scheme be formulated specifically for the 
promotion and modernization of powerloom sector.  The issues 
like, financial health, cost input, availability of raw material, 
affordability of power tariffs, improved technological needs, 
output of finished goods in the market etc. be taken into 
consideration while formulating such a  Scheme. 
  

18 
 
 E. Need to organise powerloom weavers  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16,  Para - 3.86) 
 
17. The Committee, had urged the Government to chalk out a well 
planned strategy to form Powerloom 
Cooperatives/Societies/Clusters in all the centralised zones of 
powerloom units in a time bound manner by educating and 
spreading awareness among the stakeholder s/entrepreneurs about 
the benefits of such group formations. Such a step will not only 
enable the Government to disseminate benefits of various 
developmental and welfare schemes in a cohesive and assured 
manner but will also help in ensuring sustainable an d inclusive 
growth of entire powerloom sector in the country.  
 
18. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry stated as under:- 
  
 `The Regional Offices and Powerloom services Centres are 
 conducting seminars/workshops all over t he country for 
 creating awareness about benefits of schemes and technology 
 among the powerloom entrepreneurs/units and advising the 
 entrepreneurs/powerloom units to be organized in a 
 group /  association/ co -operative societies to avail the 
 benefits of the  schemes.  In th ese efforts, the powerloom 
 entrepreneurs have  been organized in groups to take the 
 benefit of schemes and till date, 33 Group Work sheds  have 
 been approved under Group  Work-shed Scheme to set  up 
 the powerloom units in the Groups.‟ 
 
  
 

19 
 
19. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the 
efforts made by the Government to organize the decentralized 
powerloom weavers into cooperatives/ clusters/self -help 
groups have not paid the desired dividend as  merely 33 group 
work-sheds have been approved under the Group Work -shed 
Scheme.  The Committee strongly feel that there is  an urgent 
need to bring maximum number of powerloom weavers under 
cooperative fold so as to extend the benefits of Government 
schemes in a more effecti ve and coherent manner to them.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and impress upon the Government to review 
the implementation of Group Work -shed Scheme and fix 
realistic targets under it so as to accelerate the coverage of 
powerloom weavers under it.  
  

20 
 
 F. HANDLOOM WEAVERS’ COMPREHENSIVE WELFARE  SCHEME 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20,  Para - 3.122) 
 
20. The Committee had recommended that the critical illness 
cover be extended to handloom weavers and the ceiling of Rs.15,000 
per annum, per family also be enhanced to atleast Rs.50,000 
without any further delay.  
 
21. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry stated as under:- 
 `1. The proposal for covering Critical Illness was placed 
 before EFC on 5.7.2007 while considering the Handloom 
 Weavers' Comprehensive Welfare Scheme.  
  
 2. EFC opined that this could be covered under the new 
 scheme to be launched by LIC.  Accordingly, the present 
 Health Insurance Scheme as approved by CCEA, does not 
 contain any provision for covering Critical Illnesses as a stand 
 alone category.  However, Critical Illnesses are covered as a 
 part of the exi sting overall Health Insurance coverage of 
 Rs.15,000 per annum. 
 
 3. LIC vide their letter dated 5.3.2008 quoted the premium 
 for Critical Illness rider @ Rs.8/ - to Rs.10/ - per thousand.  
 Moreover the premium was to be fully paid by the Ministry for 
 all the weavers covered under the Health Insurance Scheme. 
 
  Since the above quoted premium was on the higher side, 
 the LIC was requested to reconsider their quotes vide this 
 office letter dated 26.3.2008 and offer a negotiated price.  
 

21 
 
1. LIC vide their l etter dated 6.5.2008 revised the 
quote and cited the rates for the Critical Illness rider 
premium @ Rs.4 per thousand for a maximum cover of 
Rs.30,000 with the caveat that in case of claim over 
premium, the loss will be made good by the Ministry.  
Such a caveat is contrary to insurance principles. 
 
2. The additional financial implication for providing 
Critical Illness cover of Rs.30,000 to the handloom 
weavers at the above cited rates will be as follows:- 
 
Year No. of 
weavers to 
be covered 
for 
Rs.30,000 
Amount 
required for 
premium @ 
Rs.10/- % 0 
@ Rs.300 per 
weaver 
 
Amount required 
for premium @ 
Rs.8/- % 0 @ 
Rs.240 per 
weaver  
2010-11 16 lakh Rs.48.00 cr Rs.38.40 cr 
2011-12 18 lakh Rs.54.00 cr Rs.43.20 cr 
Total 34 lakh Rs.102.00 cr Rs.81.60 cr 
 
1. Thus the additional financial implication for the 
premium quoted by the LIC was very high, keeping in 
mind that the total allocation for Health Insurance 
Scheme was only Rs.102 crore in 2008 -09 and Rs.115 
crore in 2009-10.  
 
 2. Meanwhile, the Standing Committee on Labour 
recommended that critical illness cover should be 
included in the existing Health Insurance Scheme only. 
 
3. Therefore, tentative estimates for Critical Illness 
cover upto Rs.50,000 to Rs.75,000 were called for f rom 
the insurance companies as follows:- 
 

22 
 
  Critical Illness cover of Rs.50,000/- per 
weaver 
  Critical Illness cover of Rs.75,000/- per 
weaver 
 Critical Illness cover of Rs.50,000/- per 
family  
 Critical Illness cover of Rs.75,000/- per 
family  
 
 4. The quotations received from the Insurance 
Companies also were on the much higher side and would 
have required large additional funds.  Therefore, addition 
of the Critical Illness cover in the present Health 
Insurance Scheme would require modifications and  
substantial funds.   
 
 5. Hence, the proposal for a new insurance product for 
covering the Critical Illness through a scheme of LIC is 
not found feasible due to the following reasons:- 
 
 
a) The funds required would be to the tune of Rs.81 
crore to Rs.102 crore.  It would not be feasible to provide 
this extra cost in the outlay allocated for the ongoing 
Health Insurance Schemes.  If the component of Critical 
Illness is to be included as part of the existing Health 
Insurance Scheme, then there will have to b e a trade off 
between the scope of insurance cover and the number of 
beneficiaries to be covered.  It may result in reducing the 
number of beneficiaries from the present level of about 
16 lakh beneficiaries to about 8 lakh beneficiaries only 
i.e. almost ha lf since Rs.81 crore to Rs.102 crore (out of 
total allocation of Rs.155 crore for Health Insurance 
Scheme) will have to be diverted for this addition.  
  

23 
 
 b) It may be mentioned here that these Critical 
Illnesses are already covered in the existing Health 
Insurance Scheme even though for a limited cover of 
Rs.15,000 only i.e. this facility is already available to the 
handloom weavers albeit for a limited value. 
 
 c) Moreover, the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
(RSBY) being implemented by the Ministry of Lab our for 
the BPL population of Unorganized Sector also covers 
these illnesses upto a value of Rs.30,000.  Since the BPL 
handloom weavers are already eligible for availing the 
benefits of that scheme under RSBY formulation of a new 
scheme for the same type o f medical cover would be 
duplication in so far as BPL weavers are concerned. 
 
  Under the circumstances, the approval is sought for 
 closing the matter of providing Critical Illness cover 
 through LIC.‟ 
 
22. The Committee are perturbed to find that instead  of 
making concerted efforts to provide critical illness cover to the 
handloom weavers, the Government has sought approval to 
close the scheme on untenable grounds including the paucity 
of funds. The Committee outright reject the plea advanced by 
the Minis try considering the gross inadequacy of the Health 
Insurance Scheme (HIS) and Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
(RSBY) in view of the low ceilings. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and impress upon the 

24 
 
Government to make adequate budgetary allocation under 
`Health Insurance Scheme’ and critical illness cover be 
extended to the hapless weavers of handloom sector without 
any further delay.  The Committee also reiterate that the 
ceiling of Rs.15,000 under Health Insurance Scheme be 
enhanced to at least Rs.50,000 per family.  
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.1, Para 1.3) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry have failed to 
furnish the action taken notes even after the lapse of 
prescribed period of three months from the date of 
presentation of Report. The Committee take an adverse note of 
this and desire that action taken notes on the Fourth Report of 
the Committee be furnished expeditiously. The reasons for the 
inordinate delay may also be furnished to the Committee for 
their consideration.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Action Taken Notes on the 4 th report of the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Labour were due to be sent on 17.03.2010,  
but the same could  be sent only on 22.04.2010 as the requisite 
information Action Taken Notes had to be obtained from different 
Divisions/Organizations under the Ministry. 
 
 The delay is regretted.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 
  

26 
 
 
The General Performance – Plan Expenditure 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No 2, Para 3.21) 
 
 
 The Committee note that an amount of Rs.4500 crore had 
been alloc ated to the Ministry for implementing plan schemes for 
the year 2009-10. However, only Rs.4210.94 crore could be utilized, 
leaving Rs. 289.06 crore as unspent. The major portion of the 
unspent amount is due to zero expenditure under signature 
schemes of the Ministry i.e. TUFS, SITP, TMC etc. in North -Eastern 
region. The reasons attributed by the Ministry for zero expenditure 
in North -Eastern region are, lack of demand, non receipt of 
adequate proposals, non -provision of matching grant and non -
submission of utilization certificates. These reasons were cited by 
the Ministry during 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 also. Apparently, the 
Ministry has failed to draw suitable lessons from the past trend of 
expenditure and the bottlenecks in the operation of the schemes. 
This al so reflects poorly on the will and determination of the 
Government to implement the schemes on a uniform pattern 
throughout the country. The Committee are particularly unhappy 
that despite their earlier reiteration no strenuous efforts have been 
made to promote the schemes in North -Eastern region. There is no 
tangible evidence to show whether the Ministry have put a single 
foot forward so far. On the contrary, the number of workshops, 
seminars/exposure visits under TUFS have been reduced in the 
year 2009 -10 despite availability of large number of powerlooms 
there. Under SITP also, not a single park has been set up in spite of 
distinct handicrafts and handloom products being manufactured 
there. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that apart 
from cond ucting adequate number of workshops/exposure visits, 
the Ministry should also relax the slabs fixed under SITP and TUFS 
for the beneficiaries of North-Eastern region in the remaining period 
of 11th Plan Period. Further, efforts should also be made to 
establish a few model textile parks in the region as part of the 
promotional measures for the schemes. The Committee further 
desire that efforts should also be made to popularize the schemes in 

27 
 
the region by advertising in the local print as well as electronic 
media leading to utilization of allocated funds.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The suggestions of the Hon‟ble Committee have been noted. 
Concerted efforts are being made to fully utilize the plan fund 
through close and regular monitoring of the performance.  Such 
monitoring  is necessary for identification of constraints, if any, and 
also timely introduction of corrective measures in implementation. 
 
 The Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme is not a region 
specific scheme. The benefits under the scheme can be availed by 
the eligible textile units across the country including North Eastern 
States.  The benefits available under the scheme are credit linked.  
The Entrepreneur has to submit his project proposal to the lending 
bank and get it approved. Once the prop osal is approved and the 
loan amount is released by the bank, the interest subsidy is 
reimbursed to the bank by the ministry. However, whether to go for 
a credit -linked technology upgradation programme or not is a 
decision to be taken by the entrepreneur h imself and the Ministry 
cannot force him to do so. The Ministry has already given wide 
publicity to the scheme and will continue to do so in the future 
also.    
  
  The Ministry organised exposure visits for powerloom workers 
of North Eastern region during  24.9.09 to 2.10.09. Twenty 
powerloom workers from Manipur and an  equal number from 
Guwahati visited the modern powerloom units at Bhiwandi, 
Ichalkaranji and Erode during the said period.  All out efforts were 
made by the Regional Office of the Textile Commissioner at Kolkata, 
the various Powerloom Service Centres (PSCs), and the Indian Jute 
Industries Research Association (IJIRA) to popularize the schemes 

28 
 
under TUFS and to disseminate information on Powerloom in all the 
North Eastern States. For this, a d etailed interaction with potential 
investors/entrepreneurs/ weavers, Govt. agencies and other textile 
related personnel was held at Guwahati.  In addition, the Ministry 
of Textiles wrote to Chief Secretaries of NER States requesting them 
to create a congen ial atmosphere in their States for the promotion 
and development of textile industries. The Ministry of Textiles shall 
definitely take further measures that are needed to popularize its 
schemes in the North East. The Ministry is also in the process of 
formulating new schemes, especially in the Handloom and 
Handicrafts sectors, exclusively for the North Eastern States.     
   
The Scheme for Integrated Textiles Parks is a demand driven 
scheme. The industry associations / group of entrepreneurs are the 
main pr omoters of SITP. The primary objective of the SITP is to 
facilitate world class infrastructure for setting up textile units. This 
scheme was initially approved in the 10 th Five Year Plan during 
which assistance was provided @40 per cent of the project cost  
subject to ceiling of Rs.40 crore in general.  
 
No proposal for North Eastern Region was received during the 
10th Five Year Plan. Therefore to attract projects in the 11 th Five 
Year Plan, it was decided that the Government of India (GOI) 
support would be provided @90% of the project cost subject to a 
ceiling of Rs. 40 crore for the first two projects in the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim and Jammu & Kashmir. 
 
 In the 11 th Five Year Plan , one proposal from M/s Assam 
Jute Park Developers Ltd. was received to develop a jute park in 
Darrang District of Assam, which was approved on 16.05.2008. 

29 
 
However, the Special Purpo se Vehicle (SPV) could not get the land 
registered in its name from the State Government even after a lapse 
of considerable time. The Ministry of Textiles had also taken up the 
issue with the Chief Secretary, Government of Assam who had then 
proposed an alternate site for the project, which was not acceptable 
to the SPV due to non -availability of raw materials and other 
locational constraints. It was also noted that the allotment of land 
for the project had been challenged in the court. As considerable 
time had elapsed, since the sanction and the SPV had still not 
obtained allotment of the land, the Project Approval Committee in 
its 15 th Meeting held on 02.06.2009 cancelled the approval of the 
project.  
 
Assistance under the Scheme for the North Eastern Regi on is 
already @90% and the Ministry is of the view that there is no need 
for further upward revision. The margin money of 10% (including 
cost of the land) by the SPV will ensure appropriate involvement 
towards successful implementation/operation of the pro ject. 
However, the Ministry would continue to make further efforts to 
encourage setting up of Textile Parks in the North Eastern States if 
the State Governments/entrepreneurs are ready to set up textile 
parks in the North Eastern States by making use of th e 90 per cent 
grant available under SITP. The Ministry would provide them all the 
necessary support and encouragement.  
 
 The Ministry shall comply with the Hon‟ble Committee‟s 
recommendation regarding popularisation of the schemes in the 
North Eastern States by advertising the schemes in the  local print 
and electronic media.        
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 

30 
 
Non-Plan  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3  Para - 3.22) 
 
 As regards the non -plan expenditure of the Ministry, the 
position is also far from promising. The Committee find that an 
amount of Rs.248.45 crore is lying unspent (as on 22.3.10) out of 
the total allocation of Rs.1412.42 crore with no time left for 
utilization of this amount. As per the reply of the Ministry, t hese 
funds will be utilized for providing loans to National Jute 
Manufacturers Corporation, Handicrafts, Handlooms, Textile 
Workers Rehabilitation Scheme etc. How and in what manner the 
Ministry released the remaining funds to these sectors/schemes 
during the fag end of Financial year 2009 -10, the Committee would 
like to be informed. The Committee, having regard to the need for 
uniform and sustainable growth of the textile industry, urge the 
Ministry to stop such practices where funds are released at the fa g 
end of the year. Extremely concerned about the poor planning in 
the Ministry, the Committee desire that a rational approach be 
adopted in estimating non -plan funds under various 
sectors/schemes and utmost care be taken for timely releasing of 
the funds. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry has a mechanism to monitor the expenditure on a 
weekly basis under the chairmanship of Secretary (Textiles). Non 
plan trend of expenditures  are discussed with the heads of the 
concerned divisions.  
          The proposal of Rs.140 crore loans to NJMC for its VRS 
package, had been approved itself by the cabinet in the 3 rd week of 
March, 2010.  
           For continuation of 10% special rebate scheme for another 3 
years i.e. 2009 -10 to 2011 -12, in the existing form and with the 
same parameters was sent to Ministry of Finance for consideration 

31 
 
and approval before sending the proposal to CCEA. Ministry of 
Finance did not agree to the proposal and the decision to entertain 
the committed liabilities of the 10% special rebate scheme, 
continued previously, was conveyed at a very late stage. Hence, the 
funds for the financial year 2009 -10 were released at the fag end of 
the financial year.     
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 
  

32 
 
Quarterly Expenditure 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4  Para - 3.23) 
 
 The Committee note that during the year 2009 -10, there has 
been an uneven expenditure during the four quarters of the year. 
The instructions of the Government clearly stipulate the spreading 
of expenditure evenly over the four quarters and bar undue 
utilization of funds, or the rush of expenditure, in the last quarter 
of the year. Non -receipt of bills during the first quarter, delays in 
approval of schemes, restrictions in advance payments etc. are the 
main reasons attributed by the Ministry for uneven expe nditure of 
plan funds. The Committee are not al all convinced with the 
reasons put forward by the Ministry and express their serious 
concern over such uneven pace of expenditure, particularly the 
March rush of expenditure which directly affects the proper and 
effective implementation of developmental and welfare schemes 
consequently hampering the growth of the entire sector. The 
Committee are astonished to note that despite monitoring the 
expenditure regularly on weekly basis in the meetings of senior 
officers of the Ministry chaired by the Secretary, the results are far 
from satisfactory. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
calibrated and more sustained efforts be made to timely settle all 
the procedural matters like approval of various schemes, receip t of 
bills etc. The Committee further desire that the monitoring 
mechanism needs to be more focused and result oriented so that 
aberrations and shortcomings do not recur.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In the first three quarters of 2009-10, the funds utilized under 
non plan was almost according to the monthly expenditure plan 
(MEP) against the total BE allocation of Rs.898 crore. However, in 
the last quarter, the excess of expenditure was due to the 
enhancement of total allocation (Rs.1412.42 crore) at RE sta ge 
which was received in the month of January, 2010 only.   
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 

33 
 
Utilization Certificates  
 
Recommenadation (Sl. No. 5  Para - 3.24) 
 
 The Committee are astonished to note that as many as 1513 
utilization certificates involving an amount of Rs.12729.57 lakhs 
are outstanding as on 31st December, 2009. It is shocking that 
some of the utilization certificates pertain to the year 1978 -79. 
Moreover, the number of pending utilization certificates has 
increased in the last three years. As there is no perceptible change 
in the receipt of pending utilization certificates in the recent years, 
the Committee strongly feel that it is now a high time that the 
Government devise suitable measures expeditiously to  liquidate all 
the pending utilization certificates in a time bound manner. The 
Committee desire that while sanctioning the grant, a suitable 
condition could be imposed for time bound submission of utilization 
certificates. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Efforts are being made to settle pending UCs. These efforts 
includes; directives to Field Originations. A circular has been issued 
to field organizations for expeditious settlement of all such cases. 
Further directions have been issued to take punitive act ion like 
black listing in fit cases. Besides internal check and balance 
systems have been introduced recently for careful selection of 
competent implementing agencies through an objective grading 
system which give emphasis on past track records, financial and 
managerial capability etc. further screening of proposal of 
shortlisted implementing agencies at Field Level, Regional Office 
Level and Hqrs. Level undertaken before sanction and release of 
funds.   
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 

34 
 
Sale of NTC land  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6  Para - 3.25) 
 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that as per audit 
para no. PA27 of 2009 -10 (Performance Audit), the C&AG observed 
that the land of NTC mills had been sold below registra tion/circle 
rates resulting in loss of opportunity to earn Rs.1043 crore in six 
cases. Further a loss of Rs.185.10 crore was also incurred due to 
irregularities in tender documents. The Committee find that on the 
one hand the mills of BIC Ltd. are lying cl osed for want of sufficient 
working capital and funds for their modernization despite being 
viable units, and on the other NTC has indulged in such goofups in 
dealing with public funds. The Committee outright reject the claim 
of the Ministry that the sale of NTC assets had been carried out in a 
transparent and professional manner. The representative of 
Ministry was unable to provide any clear reply. Taking note of the 
adverse audit findings and the inability of the Ministry to provide 
clear reply, the Commi ttee strongly recommend that an 
independent inquiry be conducted in the matter and appropriate 
action taken against the persons responsible for wrongful loss to 
the Government. The Committee, further recommend that, 
henceforth, the sale of surplus land and  other assets of textile mills 
be dealt with greater care and suitable decisions taken after 
independent and professional evaluation of the assets. The steps 
taken by the Ministry in furtherance of audit findings be intimated 
to the Committee within one mo nth of the presentation of this 
report to Parliament.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 (i) The Committees are deeply concerned to note that as per audit 
para no.PA27 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit), the C&AG observed 
that the land of NTC mills had been sold below registration / circle 
rates resulting in loss of opportunity to earn Rs.1043 crore in six 
cases. 

35 
 
As per C&AG observations, the loss of opportunity on account of 
selling below registration / circle rates is Rs.10.43 crores and not 
Rs.1043 crores in six cases of sale of property.   
 The Revival Scheme of NTC is a case of successful 
implementation of the Revival Scheme under the Sick Industries 
Companies Act (SICA).  The sale of assets has been carried out after 
due approval by a broad -based duly constituted  Asset Sales 
Committee [ASC] comprising of representatives from BIFR, 
Operating Agency (IDBI) the concerned State Govt. and Ministry of 
Textiles on the basis of clear guidelines.   
The six cases which have been pointed out by the audit have 
been dealt with by the Company in its reply to the COPU. 
According to the audit, there has been a loss of Rs.10.43 crores in 
the sale of six properties.  The six properties which are pointed out 
by Audit, as sold below the Registration/Circle Rates are :- 
1. Edward Mills 
2. Shree Bijoy Cotton Mills 
3. Jehangir Textile Mills 
4. Coimbatore Murugan Mills 
5. Krishnaveni Textile Mills 
6. Sri Rangavilas Mills 
Case wise details are as under :- 
(Rs. in crores) 
S. 
No 
Name of the 
Unit 
Valuation 
as per 
registratio
n fee 
Reserv
e price 
fixed 
No. of 
attempts 
made 
Amou
nt 
realiz
ed. 
1. Edward Mills 10.55 4.00 5 5.85 
2. Shree Bijoy 
Mills 
3.79 1.92 2 1.95 
3. Jehangir 26.83 25.00 1 25.00 

36 
 
Textile Mills 
4. Coimbatore 
Murugan 
Mills 
3.04 1.73 3 1.89 
5. Krishnaveni 
Textile Mills 
5.50 4.80 5 5.20 
6. Sri 
Rangavilas 
Mills 
8.61 3.33 4 8.00 
 
DETAILS 
1. Edward Mills 
 The applicable rates were collected from the Office of the Distt. 
Registrar Ajmer, whereby it was learnt that the rate for the developed 
residential area was Rs.135/ - per sq. ft. adjacent to the road, while it 
was Rs.130/- per sq. ft. away from the road.  Based on the above rates, 
the hundred percent value of 18.28 acres land came to Rs.10.55 crores 
(Reserve Price fixed at Rs.11 crores).  This road was for developed 
residential land, whereas the mill land was a large size undeveloped plot 
for „industrial us e‟.  The Rajasthan Govt. had permitted 75% waiver on 
land use change conversion fee to residential while no waiver was 
extended for conversion to commercial land use.   
 
In the event of developing this land, approx. 40% land area could have 
gone for conversion of roads, lighting, sewerage, etc. while developmental 
cost would have been incurred by the purchaser to the tune of Rs.30 to 
40 per sq. ft.  After revising the Registrar value, after incorporating the 
above two factors, then the value of land was wor ked out to Rs.10.55 
crores x 60% ( -) 18.28 acres x 4840 x 9 x Rs.30/ - per sq. ft. = Rs.6.33 
crores – Rs.2.39 crores = Rs.3.94 crores, say Rs.4 crores. 
 
The Company had released tenders four times for this mill land.  Judging 
from the previous responses, it  was felt that the reserve price aspect 
needs to be looked into so as to fix it at a more realistic level.  A tender 
(5th time) was released on 11.08.2007 and the tender was opened on 

37 
 
06.09.2007 and the reserve price was fixed at Rs.4 crores.  Against the 
reserve price of Rs.4 crores, Company got the highest bid of Rs.5.85 
crores. 
 
2. Shree Bijay Cotton Mills 
 
An advertisement for sale of 7.83 acres of surplus land of Shree Bijay 
Cotton Mills was released on 10.10.2002.  In response, 3 bids were 
received and the highest bid was for Rs.2.31 crores against the reserve 
price of Rs.2.08 crores.  75% land use change conversion fee waiver was 
extended by the Rajasthan Govt. vide letter dated 23.12.2002 in respect 
of the residential land use.  The ASC in its meetin g held on 02.01.2003 
took a decision for retendering of the land.  Subsequently, a fresh tender 
notice was released on 13.01.2003 carrying information on the 75% land 
use change conversion fee waiver granted by the Rajasthan Govt.  
Against the advertisemen t, 4 tenders were received and the highest bid 
was for Rs.1.91 crores against the reserve price of Rs.1.92 crores.  The 
highest bid being below the reserve price, all the 4 tendering parties were 
called to quote afresh.  The highest bidder had marginally r evised his bid 
to Rs.1.92 crores.  The Committee felt that there was no guarantee that a 
higher bid would be received by the Corporation if the land was 
retendered which apart from delay would entail advertisement cost for a 
third time.  Based on all the f acts, the Asset Sale Committee in its 
meeting held on 07.03.2003 had decided that the situation did not 
warrant a retendering and a final attempt at negotiation with the highest 
bidder could be made.  The land was disposed off at the finally negotiated 
price of Rs.1.95 crores. 
 
 
 
 
3.  Jehangir Textile Mills 
 The Government had decided to set up Indian Textile Plaza (ITP) at 
open land of Jehangir Textile Mills, Ahmedabad.  The activities proposed 
to be carried out at ITP include setting up of textile museum;  training 
centre; exhibition centre, etc. to meet certain social objectives.  In the 
sanctioned scheme, the then prevalent stamp duty Jantri rate of 
Rs.4000/- for total area of 65,963 sq. mtrs. was considered and hence 
Rs.26.39 crores was expected to be re alized in the scheme.  Of the total 

38 
 
area of 65,963 sq. mtrs., 12,723 sq. mtrs. was occupied by chawls, etc.  
Land admeasuring approx. 53,240 sq. mtrs. was only available (i.e., 
worth Rs.21.23 crores as per the then valuation) for development of ITP.  
 It w as decided to form SPV with NBCC as JV partner.  As per 
Clause 10.10.1 of Gujarat Development Control Regulations (GDCR), if 
the land of this mill is not to be utilized as textile mill, 20% of the land 
shall have to be surrendered to the Municipal Corporation of Ahmedabad 
for public purpose.  The work of valuation was assigned to three different 
valuers after deducting 20% of the area. The projected realization as per 
stamp duty Jantri rates made effective from 01.02.2007 for net area of 
42,592 sq. mtrs. (i.e., after deducting 20% of land, viz., 10,648 sq. mtrs. 
to be surrendered to Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation as per GDCR 
would be Rs.25 crores).  The Asset Sale Committee in its meeting held on 
01.03.2007 decided that valuation of 42,592 sq. mtrs., which comes to 
Rs.25 crores considering the latest stamp duty Jantri rates, being the 
highest, should be fixed as transfer price to SPV for setting up of ITP.  As 
NBCC is a PSU, the transaction was safe and no loss has been incurred 
by NTC. 
 
4.  Coimbatore Murugan Mills 
 Tender was released third time for sale of Parcel „A‟ land (15,861 sq. 
ft.) and Parcel „B‟ land (20,713 sq. ft.) of Coimbatore Murugan Mill on 
31.01.2004.  There were valid bids one each for the above two parcels.  
The quoted price for both the p arcels were less than the reserve price.  
The bidders were asked to improve their price within 10 days.  The 
bidder of Parcel „A‟ had submitted that the piece of land offered for sale is 
not situated on the main road and is at least 100 metres away from an y 
main road on all the four sides and the piece of land is surrounded on 
the east by Parcel „B‟; on the west by Weavers‟ Colony; on the north by „B‟ 
type houses; and on the south by private parties.  The piece of land is 
not located in the bungalow area li ke Narayana Guru Road and Dr. 
Alagesan Road, nor it is comparable to commercial NSR Road.  The 
guideline value of Govt. of Tamilnadu is not the market value and is very 
high.  The party expressed his inability to improve the offer. 
 
For Parcel „B‟ land, th e bidder had improved their offer from Rs.95 lakhs 
to Rs.101 lakhs and then to Rs.104 lakhs.  The final offer for both the 
parcels – for Parcel „A‟ = Rs.84,59,305.70; and for Parcel „B‟ – 
Rs.1,04,00,000/- as against the Reserve price of Rs.74.45 lakhs and 

39 
 
Rs.97.22 lakhs for Parcel „A‟ and „B‟ respectively, was approved by the 
ASC after careful consideration. 
 
5.  Kishnaveni Textile Mills 
 
For the fifth time, the tenders for 4.52 acres of land were opened on 
11.10.2004 and the highest quote was for Rs.4.95 crores from M/s. 
Elgitread (India) Ltd.  The bidder had agreed to improve the offer further 
to Rs.5.20 crores from Rs.4.95 crores.   
 
In several judgements of the High Court about 20% is allowed towards 
land to be set apart for common purpose, a study of certain layouts of 
housing boards had shown that a common requirements would be in the 
region of 30%.  If 30% of the total area was requir ed for common 
purposes and, therefore, only 70% was available for sale as net useable 
area. 
The Trichy Road on which this land is located is comparatively of less 
commercial/residential value than the Avinashi Road on which the Sri 
Rangavilas Mill land is located. 
 
Taking all these into consideration and that the value for the net useable 
area of 70% of land at the rate fixed by the Distt. Collector was 
Rs.481.01 lakhs could be regarded as the best reserve price and that the 
DRS value was Rs.508.50 lakhs an d that the reserve price earlier fixed 
was Rs.480.26 lakhs, the Asset Sale Committee in its meeting held on 
21.05.2005 approved the highest improved bid of Rs.5.20 crores for the 
total land area of 4 acres and 22651 sq. ft. (1,96,891 sq. ft.) on „as is 
where is‟ condition. 
 
6. Sri Rangavilas Mills 
 
In several judgements of the High Court, about 20% is allowed towards 
land to be set apart for common purpose, a study of certain layouts of 
housing boards as shown that a common requirements would be in the 
region of 30%.  It means, only 70% was available for sale as net useable 
area. 
 
The land was about 10 feet below the main road level and the soil was 
black cotton soil which involved extra construction cost.  Sewage/waste 

40 
 
water flowing all along the western boundary of the land and a cremation 
ground just opposite to the land.  The original reserve price of the land 
was Rs.333.03 lakhs and the DRS value was Rs.296.61 lakhs.  The rate 
notified by the Disttt. Collector was for small piece of developed land for 
residential purpose where the land before NTC was for „industrial use‟. 
 
The value for the net useable area of 70% of land at the rate fixed by the 
Distt. Collector was Rs.753.71 lakhs which was more than the stamp 
duty rate of Rs.567.44 lakhs. 
 
For the 4 th time, the tender was opened on 11.10.2004 for 3.46 acres of 
land.  The highest bid was for Rs.5,75,51,000/ - from M/s. E -City 
Entertainment Pvt. Ltd.  The bidder was called for negotiation for 
improving the offer.  The bidder made a final offer of Rs.8 cror es.  The 
ASC considered and regarded the final offer as the best possible price for 
the entire land for sale on „as is where is‟ condition. 
 
The Asset Sale Committee in its meeting held on 21.05.2005 felt that if a 
property could not be disposed of even af ter four attempts, it would be 
difficult to sell the same and the offer received was the best price for the 
land at the present market trend and approved the highest improved bid 
of Rs.8 crores for the land area of 3.46 acres. 
II. „Further a loss of Rs.185.10 crores was also incurred due to the 
irregularities in the tender document.‟   
 
The audit observation was in respect of the following three 
properties and the position is explained below each item:- 
1.  Mumbai Textile Mills, Mumbai  -  Rs.18.79 crores 
 Marwari Chowka chawls consisting of 0.32 acres is a chawl 
area under DCR.58.  This chawl is to be redeveloped by NTC for 
accommodation of the existing employees staying there.  By 
mistake, NTC while releasing the tender included this area also for 
sale.  The bidders quoted for the entire area that was offered for sale 
and the Company got the offer for the entire area including the 
Marwari Chowka chawl.  The only mistake that happened in this 

41 
 
case is that NTC has included a property which was not meant for 
sale.   
 It is accepted by NTC that due to mistake, the layout map 
forming part of tender document did not have the mention of CS No. 
4/464 belonging to Marwari Chowka chawls whereas it was part 
and parcel of Mumbai Textile Mill and subject to the sale through 
this tender.  Factual position in this regard is given in succeeding 
paras. 
 The property card of Mumbai Textile Mill land was bearing CS 
No. 464 and 4/464 and both the numbers were quoted in tender 
documents and sale deed.  Accordingly, the area of 67,293 .17 sq. 
mtrs. along with entire FSI of 87571.84 sq. mtrs. (including land 
and FSI of Marwari Chowka) was mentioned in the tender 
document and sale deed and possession of entire land of 67,293.17 
sq. mtrs. bearing CS No. 464 and 4/464 was handed over to M/s . 
Jwala Real Estate Pvt. Ltd. as per Letter of Possession. 
 It is not a case of handing over some portion of the property 
which was not included in the tender and for which no sale 
consideration was received. 
2.  Apollo Textile Mills, Mumbai  -  Rs.165.80 crores 
 Clause 1.3 of the tender document issued by NTC read as 
under:- 
 “The rear part of the mill stands closed by order No. L -
51016/5-121/2004-IR(PG) dated 16.03.2004 of the Deputy 
Director, Ministry of Labour, Government of India, under Section 
25(O) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.  The sub -division of the 
land shall be got demarcated by the DILR in presence of both the 
parties (as per condition No. 21 of MCGM).  At present, the mill is 
divided into two parts and the western part adjacent to Jivra j 
Boricha Marg is under sale.  An access could be made available  
through outside land of Sitaram Mills belonging to NTC (MN) Ltd. to 
Jivraj Boricha Marg.  All the machineries in the surplus area of the 

42 
 
mills are in process of sale/disposal other than the r etained 
machineries which are being shifted to sister units shortly, the 
surplus employees have opted for MVRS.” 
 At the time of issue of tender and finalization of sale, no other 
definite information was available with NTC with regard to the 
access road.  After sale of land of 5 mills and during the meeting 
with Hon‟ble Chief Minister of Maharashtra and other officials, it 
was decided that NTC should appoint Architects/City Planner to 
carry out Traffic Impact Study of Road Network and Studies on Civil 
Infrastructure of all the mills and submit the same to State Govt. 
for implementation till the time no fresh permissions for sale of mill 
land shall be released.  Since this was a lateral development, it 
cannot be treated as „non -disclosure of vital informatio n‟ in the 
tender.  According to DC Regulations, NTC is under statutory 
obligation to construct the road as per norms and specifications 
and thus it handed over the same to MCGM for public purpose.  It 
may, therefore, be seen that there was no malafide inte ntion nor 
any actual loss to the company.  
 
3.  Chalisgaon Textile Mills, Chalisgaon  -  Rs.51 lakh 
 In the tender issued by NTC, the zone was indicated as 
residential.  However, the Govt./local Municipal Authorities were 
reluctant to grant approvals for c hange of zone.  The residential 
rates are always higher than the industrial rate by around 30% to 
40% whereas the sale is „as is where is‟ basis, i.e. industrial land.   
The party had to pay the fee for the change of zone from industrial 
to residential.  T he audit had considered the waiver of interest on 
the delay.  If we consider the cost of conversion and the rate 
obtained for residential as against industrial, the company would 
have gained more than the waiver of interest. The non -indication of 
proper zone in the tender document had not resulted in any loss.  

43 
 
III. The Standing Committee on Labour outright reject the claim of 
the Ministry that the sale of NTC assets had been carried out in a 
transparent and professional manner. 
All the sale of properties w ere carried out in a transparent and 
professional manner with commercial prudence, which is explained 
below in brief:- 
a) As per BIFR guidelines, a broad -based Asset Sale Committee 
has been constituted with Chairman of NTC as Chairman and 
regional representat ives from NTC; one nominee each from 
Ministry of Textiles; BIFR; Operating Agency (IDBI); and 
respective State Governments, as members.  The members of 
the Committee are all very senior officers. The entire sale of 
assets was carried out by the Asset Sale Committee on the 
basis of laid down procedure. 
b) All decisions are taken by ASC as per the guidelines issued by 
BIFR/ MOT from time to time and also after considering the 
market demand of the property in the best interest of the 
Company. 
c) Tender was published  in three leading newspapers, out of 
which, one is in the vernacular language of the property where 
it is situated. 
d) The reserve price is fixed after valuation by three independent 
Govt. approved valuers and comparing with the Collector‟s 
guidelines/ registration rates.  In all cases, except in six cases, 
ASC considered the highest amongst the three valuers‟ 
valuation and Collector‟s guideline rates as reserve price. 
e) In few cases, response was poor, even after repeated attempts.  
When the market value was less than the circular/registration 
rate, ASC, after due deliberations, fixed the reserve price based 
on the market value instead of the registration rate, which 
were found to be not realistic, on a case to case basis. 
f) The tenders are opened at the time and place in the presence 
of the bidders by the tender opening committee. 
g) After opening the tender a comparative statement prepared 
and evaluated by the ASC and if the bid is more than the 
reserve price, the bid is accepted after due deliberations by the 
ASC. 

44 
 
h) Invariably, the ASC decided the sale with commercial 
prudence and in the best interest of the Corporation in the 
absence of any other better option. 
 
(iv)  Taking note of the adverse audit findings and the inability of the 
Ministry to provide clear reply, the Committee strongly recommended 
that an independent inquiry be conducted in the matter and 
appropriate action taken against the persons responsible for wrongful 
loss to the Government. 
 
The sale of assets by NTC has been done after approval by a 
duly co nstituted broad based Asset Sale Committee comprising of 
the representatives of BIFR, the State Government, the 
Implementing Agency, etc.   As per the guidelines dated 24.8.09 
issued by the BIFR, the Board only can intervene in the matters 
considered by su ch ASCs.  In a recent order dated 19.2.2010, the 
BIFR has gone to the extent of mentioning that “the Ministry has no 
role in the matter, as the scheme has been sanctioned by BIFR, and 
its implementation for revival is under direct supervision of BIFR.  
NTC approached Ministry as per its convenience.  The Bench also 
noted that, in violation of tender conditions / BIFR‟s ASC guidelines, 
the Ministry has intervened in the matter.” 
 
 In view of the above facts, as the ASC comprised of outside 
Members including BIFR nominee, it may not be proper for the 
Ministry of Textiles to conduct any enquiry in the matter.  In our 
opinion, if such enquiry has to be conducted, it may be appropriate 
to have such enquiry conducted by the BIFR. 
 
(v)  The Committee, further recommend that, henceforth, the sale of 
surplus land and other assets of textile mills be dealt with greater 

45 
 
care and suitable decisions taken after independent and professional 
evaluation of the assets. 
 
 With a view to further impr oving / refining the existing 
procedure, BIFR had been recently approached that Financial 
Adviser, Ministry of Textiles may also be made a member of the 
ASC.  The BIFR vide order dated 18.5.2010, has however directed 
that “since the ASC already has 6 membe rs including one 
representative nominated by Ministry of Textiles, another 
representative cannot be included in the ASC.”  BIFR was also 
approached to allow NTC to follow some extra precautions [as 
indicated under Col.4 of Appendix – I] to further streamline the sale 
procedure.  However, BIFR vide order dated 2.6.2010, has ordered 
that the guidelines for ASC are approved by the Board and are 
applicable to all types of cases under purview of BIFR.  It will, 
however, be ensured that all future sale of surplus  land and assets 
of the company will be done strictly in accordance with the BIFR 
guidelines dated 24.8.2009 as amended from time to time by the 
Board. 
It is important to mention that the Company was 
implementing a time -bound revival plan as per BIFR appro val, the 
source of funding of which was sale of surplus land / assets 
through an Asset Sale Committee.  Due to lack of past experience 
and non -availability of proper institutional support to undertake 
such a special nature of work, minor procedural short -comings / 
lacunae and systematic inadequacies have taken place as pointed 
out by the audit.  The Ministry of Textiles has been closely following 
up and monitoring the revival plan.  As far as the Ministry is aware, 
no corruption or malafides were intended o r involved in such 
transactions; nor any actual loss has been caused to the Company.  
It is necessary to mention here that as a result of implementation of 
the revival plan, the Company which was perennially running in 

46 
 
loss has been able to achieve satisfa ctory turn-around.  NTC which 
was sustaining on Government budgetary support [Rs.385 crore in 
the year 2001 -02]  has been able to bring down such Government 
budgetary support to Rs.”0” from 2009-10 onwards. 
On the basis of the experience gained over the pe riod and 
taking advice from various audit observations, the Company has 
further streamlined such sales mechanism and improved upon the 
systems and procedures, to the extent possible and permitted by 
the BIFR. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. D ated 
11/08/2010  ) 
TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION FUND SCHEME 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7  Para - 3.40) 
 
 The Committee find that there are regional imbalances in 
availing the benefits under TUFS. While there has been 
overwhelming response from the States of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu, 
performance in the States of Maharashtra, Punjab and Rajasthan is 
moderate. Oth er States viz., Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Kerala, 
Himachal Pradesh, Orissa, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand performed 
poorly. Bihar, Sikkim, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep 
do not figure in the list at all. Development of textile sector, even if 
it is not on an equal footing, should be encouraged in States where 
development is inadequate or nil at present. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to take remedial steps in this regard, 
including proper advertisement of the Scheme to create awareness 
among the stakeholders, so as to ensure proper and equal 
development to the extent possible by disbursing the benefits 
available under TUFS, among all States.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 TUFS is demand driven. The design of the scheme is non -
discriminatory and all inclusive. The response has been good from 

47 
 
states like Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Punjab and 
Rajasthan which hav e textile clusters. Since most of the textile 
units are located in these states,  the performance of TUFS is 
satisfactory there. R egarding other states, the scheme in spite of 
being investor friendly has not been able to attract investment as 
they have fewer textile units.  All possible efforts will be made to 
popularise TUFS in these States in association with the concerned 
State Governments / local textile Associations. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FASHION TECHNOLOGY (NIFT) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14  Para - 3.72) 
 
 The Committee note that several professional courses are 
being run by NIFT to award undergraduate and post graduate 
degrees to students. According to the Ministry, though interactions 
with the industry/designers are being organized regularly to get 
feedback about the outcome/utility of these courses, however, no 
specific study has ever been conducted insofar as the 
achievements/relevancy of these courses are concerned. The 
Committee are of the view that keeping in view the ever changing 
fashion trends globa lly, it is very much imperative to keep these 
courses updated, contemporary and relevant. They, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should devise a suitable 
methodology to evaluate all the courses run by NIFT by experts of 
the Industry at regular intervals. Based on such appraisal it should 
be ensured that the new trends/developments taking place in the 
fashion arena world wide, are suitably and timely blended in the 
courses of NIFT so as to rise to the expectations of the global 
fashion industry. The Committee further recommend that NIFT 
should start doctoral and post doctoral courses/degrees at the 
earliest for the purpose of creating professional faculty as well as 
experts in the field of fashion technology.  

48 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  NIFT Act, 200 6 provides for laying down courses leading to 
graduate and postgraduate degrees, doctoral and post -doctoral 
courses and research in the area of fashion technology as one of 
NIFT‟s functions. Interactions with industry / designers etc. are 
being organized regularly to get feedback about the utility of various 
activities of NIFT including outcome and utility of the courses 
offered by NIFT. In the year 2009, industry interactions have been 
organized at seven places namely: Mumbai, Gandhinagar, 
Hyderabad, Banga lore, Tirupur, Chennai and New Delhi. On the 
basis of suggestions received from the industry during the above 
mentioned interactions, new curriculum of NIFT is being drafted 
which will be implemented from the ensuing academic session. 
NIFT Curriculum Revie w Conclave was held in NIFT Shillong, 
Meghalaya from 7 -9 January, 2010 and from 26 -28th March, 2010 
with the purpose of reviewing and updating the course curriculum 
to make NIFT programmes more relevant and significant to the need 
of the Indian Industry.   
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 
  

49 
 
SILK SECTOR 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18  Para - 3.101) 
 The Committee also observe that due to shortage of raw silk 
production in the country, the quantity of imports is increasing year 
after year. Though the total raw silk production is also growing 
every year but not in proportion to the increase in domestic 
demand. More so, the funds allocated to silk sector are too meagre 
and the targets fixed are unrealistic with regard to the scope and 
need of silk/silk products in the country. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Government to devise a well planned strategy  to expand 
the area under silk production in the country with the pace it 
requires. New areas should also be ventured into for the purpose 
and effective awareness programmes be launched to motivate 
people for silk farming. Considering the imperative need f or 
increasing silk production, new areas and varieties of silk need 
exploration including the oak silk which can be produced in large 
quantities in the hills of Himachal and Uttrakhand. The Committee 
further recommend that the targets under various develop mental 
schemes for various types of silk be revised and fixed State -wise 
and required funds made available accordingly. The schemes or 
proposals so worked out may be furnished to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The Ministry is already seized wi th the issues raised by the 
Committee. Further, against the demand of Rs.224.58 crores projected 
by the Central Silk Board for implementationp of Catalytic Development 
Programme during 2010 -11 in the annual plan proposals, the Ministry 
has allocated an enh anced provision of Rs.275.00 crores.  Tentative 
State-wise allocation worked out based on the performance of the States 
during previous years has been communicated by the Central Silk Board 
to States in advance during February 2010, to facilitate the State s to 
formulate the project proposals and to keep provision of their matching 
share in their annual budget as well for obtaining the approval of State‟s 
Project Monitoring Committee in time.   (Ministry of Textiles O.M. 
No.2(4)/2010-Parl. Dated 11/08/2010  ) 

50 
 
Mahatama Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21  Para - 3.123) 
 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that the coverage under 
MGBBY is very low considering the total population of weavers in 
the country. A total number of 4,66,484 weavers have been covered 
during 2007 -08, 5,75,909 in 2008 -09 and 4,10,417 in 2009 -10 
(upto 31.12.2009) where as the estimated number of weavers in the 
country is above 1 crore. More so, this coverage also includes 
renewal cases in the subsequent years. The Commit tee also note 
that coverage has been extended to the weavers in 19 States only. 
When asked about the action plan to cover weavers of remaining 
States, the Ministry merely stated that additional funds would be 
required for the purpose. The Committee recomme nd that the 
matter should be taken up with the Ministry of Finance vigorously 
for allocation of additional funds under the Scheme. Thereafter, 
special drives should be launched to identify the weavers and cover 
them under the Scheme in all those States whi ch remain 
uncovered. The Committee also recommend that immediate steps 
be taken to settle all the 109 claims pending under the Scheme and 
a proper mechanism be devised to make the process of claim 
settlement quick and hassle free in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  
 During 200910, 510492 weavers have been enrolled under 
MGBBY. All pending claims for the period 1.4.2009 to 31.3.2010 
(2009-10), all the claims whether Natural Death or Accidental 
Death are settled.  LIC‟s P& GS Units have liaison with District 
Administration dealing with Bunkar Scheme (MGBBY).  
Distribution of pamphlets is also done through District 
Administration.  LIC‟s liaison officers for MGBBY are meeting nodal 
agencies.  Apart from these activities, the month of October is 
celebrated as Social Security Month by LIC throughout India 
implementing various programs such as Radio talk, TV 

51 
 
appearances, distribution of pamphlets in vernacular language in 
different places like villages fairs/ festivals, exhibitions etc.  Some of 
LICs‟ Units have also participated in the exhibitions held by 
Handloom Department to extend the coverage under MGBBY. LIC 
has been advised to take steps to enhance coverage in all the States 
especially in NER Region.    
 
(Ministry of Texti les O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 
 
  

52 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDTIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
 
 
 
 
        NIL 
 
 
 
  

53 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION FUND SCHEME 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8  Para - 3.41) 
 The Committee note that TUF Scheme which has picked up in 
the rest of the country though unevenly, is virtually a non-starter in 
the North-Eastern States. During the entire 10th Plan period and in 
the first three years of the 11th Plan, not a single rupee has been 
spent under TUFS in that part of the country despite availability of 
a lar ge number of powerloom and handloom units there. The 
Committee find that the Ministry have organized a limited number 
of seminars/workshops in North -Eastern region since 2006 -07 and 
the frequency has declined in the successive years. It is also 
surprising that only three exposure visits have been conducted 
involving only 75 beneficiaries from the entire North -Eastern region 
till 2009-10. Obviously, not much can be achieved with such feeble 
efforts to implement TUFS in North-Eastern region. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should first check 
the continuous closure of powerloom units in the region by 
expanding its infrastructure there by providing sufficient raw 
material, uninterrupted power supply and dissemination of 
technology to them. Further, a clear cut strategy be chalked out for 
spreading awareness about the Scheme in the region including 
adequate number of seminars/workshops and exposure visits. The 
periodicity and venue of all such events should be fixed in the very 
beginning of each year and adequate publicity be given in the local 
press and electronic media. Besides, efforts also need to be made to 
reach the maximum number of stakeholders and encourage them to 
take part in the exposure visits. The Committee further recom mend 
that the current slabs under the Scheme be further relaxed till the 
time the Scheme gains momentum in North-Eastern region.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 

54 
 
 A proposal is under consideration to start a new Powerloom 
Service Centre (PSC) to facilitate growt h of the Powerloom Sector in 
NER and popularizing powerloom  schemes and TUFS. In 
association with the concerned State Governments / local textile 
Associations efforts will be made to popularise the various Govt. of 
India schemes particularly, TUFS, powerl oom schemes.  Further it 
is also proposed to conduct four programmes /seminar/workshop 
during the current year, one each per quarter in different areas of 
NER. Already one seminar / workshop has been conducted on 
13.5.2010 at Guwahati. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 
FASHION HUBS 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10  Para - 3.50) 
 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that the fashion hub 
scheme which was proposed to be implemented in the year 2007 -
08, is still in conceptual st age. The proposal for allotment of land 
for setting up the of fashion hub is still shuttling between various 
Government departments and the Ministry are not even in a 
position to commit any time period for the acquisition of the land. It 
is, therefore, rig htly quite premature for the Ministry to venture a 
guess as to when the fashion hub would become a reality. Further, 
the issues like framing terms of reference, eligibility criteria etc. for 
appointing consultants, which should have and could have been 
settled in the first year itself of the launching of the scheme, are still 
under process of formulation. The Committee desire that the 
examination of the report of Core Advisory Group be completed 
urgently. Though creation of `Fashion Hub‟ is a laudable concept as 
it will help in generation of employment opportunities besides 
displaying the skills and talents of Indian crafts persons, 

55 
 
unfortunately it is being delayed due to poor planning, lack of fore 
thinking and coordinated efforts on the part of the Government. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that all the 
departments/agencies involved in thematter be asked to work in 
tandem and complete all the procedural formalities in a time bound 
manner. The Committee desire that the proposed fashion hub in 
Delhi be set up at the earliest so that it starts functioning at least 
by the end of current financial year. The Committee also urge upon 
the Government to identify land in other States also for setting up 
of fashion hubs and complete all the administrativ e, technical and 
other procedural formalities well in advance so that the scheme 
may come up simultaneously in other parts of the country which 
will facilitate local artisans, weavers and other skilled textile 
workers to showcase and market their products there. The States 
without such hubs may be accorded priority considering the utility 
and scope of such hubs in these States.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Fashion Hub is one of the new initiatives emanating from the 
Union Budget of 2007 -08. The scheme envisa ges setting up of 
Fashion Hub in the country to serve as single stop fashion business 
point, developing production and design studios for commercial 
purposes including accessories required in Textiles 
 
A concept paper was prepared and submitted by the National 
Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT) and by the Export Promotion 
Council of Handicrafts (EPCH). Following decisions were taken after 
a meeting by Secretary (T) with JS and DG, NIFT. 
 
(i)  To send a proposal for allotment of land to the Urban 
Development Ministry; 

56 
 
(ii)  To hire a consultant to make a study on the feasibility of 
the project.  
 
Only a token money of Rs.1.00 cr. has been allocated during 
the last three years i.e. 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-2011 
 
After concerted efforts of the  Ministry of Textiles, DDA has 
identified 10 acres of land in Maidan Garhi for Fashion Hub. DDA 
informed that the cost of land will be decided in consultation with 
Finance Division and the MOUD. Formal allotment letter would be 
issued only after completing the statutory process of change of land 
use by DDA.  
 
Core Advisory Group had been constituted under the 
chairmanship of Director General, NIFT to suggest the terms of 
reference, eligibility criteria for selection of a consultant.  The 
Advisory Group has submitted its report.  
 
Following the observations/recommendations made by the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Labour in its meeting held 
on 29.3.2010, terms of reference/eligibility criteria for appointment 
of consultant are being finalized.  Ministry  has also written to DDA 
to intimate the progress in the matter relating to allotment of land.   
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 
  

57 
 
BRITISH INDIA CORPORATION (BIC) MILLS 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12  Para - 3.61) 
 
 The Committee also urge the Ministry to take up the matter of 
providing working capital to Egerton Woollen Mills, Dhariwal, with 
the Ministry of Finance so that production activities in this viable 
unit, with the popular brand name of `Dhariwal Wool‟ start  at the 
earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Revival proposal of BIC Ltd. as mentioned above includes both 
the  sick units of BIC Ltd.. (  Cawnpore Woollen Mills Branch, Kanpur  
and New  Egerton Woollen Mills Branch, Dhariwal) . A provision of 
Rs.44 crore has been included against additional working 
capital/contingency in this scheme. After getting the approval of BRPSE 
/ Cabinet on the proposed  revival plan of BIC Ltd., the matter will be 
taken up with the Ministry of Finance for making necessary bu dget 
provision.  On availability of budget provision, the requisite  fund/ 
working capital would be released to BIC Ltd. for the purpose. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 

58 
 
POWERLOOM SECTOR 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15  Para - 3.85) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that powerloom sector 
has not received due attention of the Government, even after 
contributing 62% of the total cloth production of the country and 
providing employment to about 55.95 lakh persons. The 
Government introduced 20% credit linked capital subsidy Scheme 
(CLCSS) in November, 2003 under which only 2583 powerloom 
units out of 5.03 lakh units in the country have availed the subsidy 
so far. The Committee understand that the entrepreneurs working 
in powe rloom sector are not coming forward to take benefits of 
TUFS and CLCSS mainly due to shortage of margin money and 
weak financial capacities to avail loans from the Banks/lending 
agencies. Modernization of powerloom sector is very essential for 
achieving th e desired growth rate for textile sector so as to be 
competitive internationally, particularly to defeat import penetration 
due to globalization. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
instead of equating the modernization of sick powerloom sector with 
the huge mill sector where entrepreneurs are equipped with greater 
financial potential, an integrated scheme should be specifically 
formulated for the powerloom unit holders so that they could come 
forward to timely modernize their units and are not forced to go for 
closure for want of required funds.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Textiles, Govt. of  India  has formulated  an 
Integrated scheme for Powerloom Sector Development since 2007 -
08 in addition to the  capital subsidy of 20% MMS/15% MMS and 
5% Interest reimbursement already in operation under TUFS for  
Modernisation of Powerloom sector.  Taking into consideration of  
shortage of margin money , weak financial capacity, the banks / 
financial institutions is providing bridge loan against the own 
contributions to be brought  by the individual owners. Under   

59 
 
Integrated Scheme for powerloom sector development following 
activities/programmes are being conducted for powerloom sector 
development with Govt. assistance/fund- 
 
6. Marketing Development Programme - organizing buyer -seller 
meet, seminar/ workshops, awareness program mes, print 
publicity etc. 
7. Exposure visits for powerloom weavers from low level of 
technology to higher  level of technology area for knowledge 
about production of fabrics and higher  rate of production and 
diversification of the product. 
8. Powerloom  Cluster Development  
9. Development  and Up gradation of  Skills (HRD) – Powerloom 
weavers/Entrepreneurs are  being provided training  in 
Poweloom service Centres on machine and equipments 
provided by the Govt. 
10. Under the said secheme, Govt. is providing machines and 
equipments to powerloom  service centres situated in different 
part of the Country for providing the services  to powerloom 
cluster. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 
  

60 
 
POWERLOOM SECTOR 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16  Para - 3.86) 
 
 The Committee observe that there are only 70809 powerlooms 
in the country in organized sector and 2185511 in decentralized 
sector. The Committee feel that the assistance under Government 
Schemes can be better channelized and utilized through 
Cooperatives/Clusters/ Self help Groups vis-à-vis targeting the 
individual powerloom units. For the purpose, powerloom sector 
needs to be organized by bringing maximum number of powerloom 
units under Cooperative/Cluster fold. The Committee find that 
nothing conc rete has so far been done in this regard. The 
Committee, therefore urge the Government to chalk out a well 
planned strategy to form Powerloom 
Cooperatives/Societies/Clusters in all the centralised zones of 
powerloom units in a time bound manner by educatin g and 
spreading awareness among the stakeholders/entrepreneurs about 
the benefits of such group formations. Such a step will not only 
enable the Government to disseminate benefits of various 
developmental and welfare schemes in a cohesive and assured way 
but will also help in ensuring sustainable and inclusive growth of 
entire powerloom sector in the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Regional Offices and Powerloom services Centres are 
conducting seminars/workshops all over the country for creating 
awareness about benefits of schmes and technology among the 
powerloom entrepreneurs/units and advising ythe 
entrepreneurs/powerloom units to be organized in a group / 
association/ co -operative societies to avail the benefits of the 
schmes.  In this efforts , the powerloom entrepreneurs have been 
organized in groups to take the benefit of schmes and till date, 33 
Group Work sheds have been approved under Group work shed 
Scheme to set up the powerloom units in the Groups. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/201 0-Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 

61 
 
HANDLOOM WEAVERS’ COMPREHENSIVE WELFARE SCHEME 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20  Para - 3.122) 
 
The Committee feel that the cap of Rs.15,000 per annum, per 
family under health insurance scheme to provide healthcare 
facilities to weavers is rather too meagre. Moreover, critical illnesses 
are not covered under it. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that in view of the rising cost of medical tests, medicines etc. the 
ceiling under the scheme should be raised to at least Rs.50,000/ - 
per a nnum per family. Further, the Committee do not accept 
contention of the Government that critical illnesses will be covered 
under a separate scheme proposed to be launched by the LIC. The 
Committee are of the considered view that all the healthcare 
facilities should be provided under one umbrella scheme to the 
weavers keeping in view their lesser educational qualification. They, 
therefore, further recommend that either both, the general health 
care as well as the critical illness cover, be given under HIS or  
general health care facilities also be included in the new scheme of 
LIC. The Committee also impress upon the Government that the 
decision in the matter be taken at the earliest and a complete 
healthcare package be extended to weavers from the second quarter 
of the current financial year i.e. 2010-11. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The proposal for covering Critical Illness was placed before 
EFC on 5.7.2007 while considering the Handloom Weavers' 
Comprehensive Welfare Scheme.  
  
2. EFC opined that this could be covered under the new scheme 
to be launched by LIC.  Accordingly, the present Health 
Insurance Scheme as approved by CCEA, does not contain any 
provision for covering Critical Illnesses as a stand alone 
category.  However, Cri tical Illnesses are covered as a part of 

62 
 
the existing overall Health Insurance coverage of Rs.15,000 
per annum. 
 
3. LIC vide their letter dated 5.3.2008 quoted the premium for 
Critical Illness rider @ Rs.8/ - to Rs.10/ - per thousand.  
Moreover the premium was to be fully paid by the Ministry for 
all the weavers covered under the Health Insurance Scheme. 
 
4. Since the above quoted premium was on the higher side, the 
LIC was requested to reconsider their quotes vide this office 
letter dated 26.3.2008 and offer a negotiated price.  
5. LIC vide their letter dated 6.5.2008 revised the quote and cited 
the rates for the Critical Illness rider premium @ Rs.4 per 
thousand for a maximum cover of Rs.30,000 with the caveat 
that in case of claim over premium, the loss will b e made good 
by the Ministry.  Such a caveat is contrary to insurance 
principles. 
 
6. The additional financial implication for providing Critical 
Illness cover of Rs.30,000 to the handloom weavers at the 
above cited rates will be as follows:- 
 
Year No. of 
weavers to 
be covered 
for 
Rs.30,000 
Amount required 
for premium @ 
Rs.10/- % 0 @ 
Rs.300 per 
weaver 
 
Amount required 
for premium @ 
Rs.8/- % 0 @ 
Rs.240 per 
weaver  
2010-
11 
16 lakh Rs.48.00 cr Rs.38.40 cr 
2011-
12 
18 lakh Rs.54.00 cr Rs.43.20 cr 
Total 34 lakh Rs.102.00 cr Rs.81.60 cr 
 

63 
 
 
 
7. Thus the additional financial implication for the premium 
quoted by the LIC was very high, keeping in mind that the 
total allocation for Health Insurance Scheme was only Rs.102 
crore in 2008-09 and Rs.115 crore in 2009-10.  
 
8. Meanwhile, the Standing Committee on Labour vide their 
recommendations at Sl. No.12 (Para 3.8) recommended that 
Critical Illness cover should be included in the existing Health 
Insurance Scheme only. 
 
9. Therefore, tentative estimates for Critical Ill ness cover upto 
Rs.50,000 to Rs.75,000 were called for from the insurance 
companies as follows:- 
 
  Critical Illness cover of Rs.50,000/- per 
weaver 
  Critical Illness cover of Rs.75,000/- per 
weaver 
 Critical Illness cover of Rs.50,000/- per 
family  
 Critical Illness cover of Rs.75,000/- per 
family  
10. The quotations received from the Insurance Companies also 
were on the much higher side and would have required large 
additional funds.  Therefore, addition of the Critical Illness cover 
in the present Health Insurance Scheme would require 
modifications and substantial funds.   
 
11.  Hence, the proposal for a new insurance product for covering 
the Critical Illness through a scheme of LIC is not found feasible 
due to the following reasons:- 
 

64 
 
 
a) The funds re quired would be to the tune of Rs.81 crore to 
Rs.102 crore.  It would not be feasible to provide this extra 
cost in the outlay allocated for the ongoing Health Insurance 
Schemes.  If the component of Critical Illness is to be included 
as part of the existi ng Health Insurance Scheme, then there 
will have to be a trade off between the scope of insurance cover 
and the number of beneficiaries to be covered.  It may result in 
reducing the number of beneficiaries from the present level of 
about 16 lakh beneficiar ies to about 8 lakh beneficiaries only 
i.e. almost half since Rs.81 crore to Rs.102 crore (out of total 
allocation of Rs.155 crore for Health Insurance Scheme) will 
have to be diverted for this addition.  
  
b) It may be mentioned here that these Critical Illn esses are 
already covered in the existing Health Insurance Scheme even 
though for a limited cover of Rs.15,000 only i.e. this facility is 
already available to the handloom weavers albeit for a limited 
value. 
 
c) Moreover, the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) being 
implemented by the Ministry of Labour for the BPL population 
of Unorganized Sector also covers these illnesses upto a value 
of Rs.30,000.  Since the BPL handloom weavers are already 
eligible for availing the benefits of that scheme under RSBY 
formulation of a new scheme for the same type of medical 
cover would be duplication in so far as BPL weavers are 
concerned. 
 
Under the circumstances, the approval is sought for closing 
the matter of providing Critical Illness cover through LIC. 
(Ministry o f Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 

65 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9  Para - 3.42) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that backlogs have 
become a sad feature of the TUF Scheme in the recent years. This is 
stated to be mainly due to the delay in processing of claims by 
lending agencies and the office of Textile Commissioner resulting i n 
spill over of claims to the next year and mismatching of funds. The 
Committee find that as on date claims received upto June, 2009 
and partially upto September, 2009 have been settled. The 
Committee hardly need to emphasize that the flagship Scheme 
aiming to help the Indian Textile Industry in modernization of 
machinery and upgradation of technology, calls for hassle free and 
speedy implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Office of Textile Commissioner should obtain the data from the 
Banks/lending agencies on quarterly basis and the eligible claims 
be settled within a stipulated time frame but generally not 
exceeding 15 days of the receipt. The Committee also recommend 
that meticulous analysis be made of the requirement of funds under 
the Scheme every year and sufficient funds be allocated so that the 
Scheme does not become a laggard.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

66 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The Textile Commissioner office is continuously pursuing with 
the lending agencies to submit the quarterly data so that eligible 
claims are settled at earliest. The Ministry of Finance has also been 
approached for additional allocation of funds to ensure sufficient 
fund availability for the Scheme. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 
  

67 
 
BRITISH INDIA CORPORATION (BIC) MILLS 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11  Para - 3.60) 
  
 The Committee are concerned to note that the work of 
modernization/revival of BIC mills is unduly being delayed by 
involving a series of departments/agencies in the matter. BIFR has 
approved the viability of the company and has recommended for its 
rehabilitation/modernization twice, in 2002 and subsequently in 
2008. After failing to revive the company as per the decision of 
BIFR, the Government have obtained a techno -economic viability 
Report from Wool Research Organization which has recommended 
an amount of Rs.313.91 crore for its revival. Now, the Government 
propose to refer the company to BRPSE which will, undoubtedly 
further delay the matter. Accordingly to the Ministry, f urther steps 
for revival of the company will be taken depending upon the 
recommendations of BRPSE. The Committee feel that all efforts, 
made so far by the Government, have proved futile in getting the 
leasehold land of BIC mills into freehold from the State Government 
of Uttar Pradesh. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
sustained efforts be made to end this deadlock at the earliest so 
that BIC mills which are lying closed since long in spite of having 
enormous potential, may be reopened without further delay.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Revival Plan of the company was submitted for Cabinet 
approval in the month of February,2009. The Cabinet Secretariat vide 
letter dated 03.03.2009, returned the Note and directed that revival 
proposal of BIC Ltd. re quired to be placed before BRPSE in the first 
instance. In pursuance of the above, the revival proposal of BIC Ltd. at 
an estimated cost of Rs. 313.9 crore  has now been prepared by the 
company based on Techno -Economic Viability (TEV) report of WRA & 
IFCI,   and submitted to BRPSE on 13.05.2010.Further action will be 
taken depending upon recommendation/advice of BRPSE. As regards 
grant of permission of State Government   of UP for sale/ conversion of 
BIC‟s land, the Ministry of Textiles has been regularly p ursuing the 

68 
 
matter with the State Government. As desired by UP State Govt., BIC 
submitted   separate proposals for each land to the concerned State 
Government Agency, so that a decision could be taken by the State 
Government.  However, requisite approvals/ permissions have not been 
received. The matter is being regularly followed up. The latest reminders 
have included follow up at the level of Chief Minister through D.O. letter 
dated 6 th January 2010 from the Minister of Textiles,. Secretary 
(Textiles) has also written to the Chief Secretary, Govt. of UP on 17 th 
February 2010 , 12th  April 2010  and 25th May,.2010. However, there is 
no response so far.          
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010-Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 
  

69 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FASHION TECHNOLOGY (NIFT) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13  Para - 3.71) 
 The Committee take note of the fact that NIFT has been quite 
successful in attaining its objective. Evidently, its courses a re 
becoming increasingly popular as the demand of the students for 
joining the Institute is growing year after year. In order to meet the 
growing demands of the students from across the country, NIFT is 
opening two more centres at Bhubaneshwar and Jodhpur in the 
academic year 2010 -11. Besides, consultation is under various 
stages with concerned States Governments for setting up eight more 
centres. Undoubtedly, this is a commendable step. However, the 
desired progress is not being achieved due to one or the other 
reason in all the proposed centres. All the eight projects are plagued 
by one or the other problem and are not progressing on the 
expected lines. The Committee, therefore,impress upon the 
Government to take up the matter with the concerned State 
Governments at the highest level so that all the tangles are resolved 
at the earliest and the proposed centres come up within a 
stipulated timeframe. The Committee further recommend that 
considering the need for such professional courses world -wide and 
their h uge scope for employment generation, the Government 
should immediately prepare an action plan to open at least one 
NIFT centre in each State/UT. Priority may be accorded to States 
which are without such centres and where heavy industry cannot 
flourish due to topographical constraints. Such a step will go a long 
way in meeting the demand of professionals of the field of fashion 
technology in country‟s growing textile sector.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
(i) As per the expansion plan NIFT has recently opened six new 
Centres in India at Rae Bareli (in 2007), Patna, Bhopal, Kannur, 
Shillong          (in 2008) and Kangra (in 2009) besides the existing 
07 old Centres. 
 

70 
 
(ii) The Bhubneshwar & Jodhpur Centre shall start functioning 
from this academic year 2010-2011. 
 
 
(iii) Further, it is intimated that the new Centres are being set up 
only with the support from State Government or other 
agencies, as NIFT does not have financial resources for 
opening of new NIFT Centres. The States which have shown 
interest in setting up of N IFT Centres have already been 
addressed intimating the estimated fund and land requirement 
for opening of new NIFT Centres and further action shall be 
taken as soon as response is received from those States. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. D ated 
11/08/2010  ) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17 Para - 3.100) 
 
 The Committee observe that there have been remarkable 
variations in financial and physical targets in sericulture sector 
during the last three years. The budget allocated to the sector has 
been fully utilized every year but the targets set for various 
developmental activities remained unachieved to a large extent. 
According to the explanation obtained from the Ministry, the 
physical progress was possible only after release and utilization of 
the amount by agencies implementing various schemes. The 
Committee outright reject reply of the Ministry since coordinating 
physical and financial targets is an important component of the 
planning process. When budget is estimated for a particular 
activity/scheme, it is very much imperative to complete the given 
task, if funds allocated for the purpose are to be utilized fully. The 
Committee, therefore strongly recommend that the Ministry should 
review and rectify the inaccuracies which have crept in, in the 

71 
 
implementation of the schemes pertaining to silk sector under 
which physical targets remained unachieved. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
CATALYTIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES [CDP]  : 
The component wise physical and financial targets for each annual plan 
were finalized based on the requirements of the States. Implementation 
of the components under CDP is carried out with Central, State and 
Beneficiary shares. Even though Central share h as been released to the 
concerned State; achievement of the physical target depends on the 
timely availability of State and Beneficiary contributions.  Central Silk 
Board is releasing funds to States in phased manner, based on the 
availability of the funds  from Government of India.  While the physical 
targets of the concerned State remain same, achievement of physical 
target depends on availability of the funds from Government.  For certain 
components, the physical and financial targets have been revised ba sed 
on the fund resources and demand from the States/ Stake holders.  
 
Generally, the targets are being fixed based on the General sharing 
pattern of assistance.  The Government of India has extended Special 
Status to certain States including North -Eastern States to avail higher 
Central Subsidy (sharing pattern of 80:10:10 by CSB, State & 
beneficiary), as per which expenditure will be more but physical 
achievement does not increase, as in the case of General Category States. 
Which is one of the major reason s for variance in Physical targets and 
corresponding achievement.   
 
The targets have been fixed based on the Government of India‟s approved 
unit costs.  While implementing the components under Catalytic 
Development Programme, some States do follow their o wn unit cost 
(however not exceeding the approved unit cost), keeping in view of the 
topographical conditions of the implementing area in the State.  
 
 
 

72 
 
Sometimes, the identified beneficiaries / stake holders may not avail the 
entire package of their propos al, which leads to re -appropriation of 
sanctioned funds to other components, where demands are justified by 
State / Stake Holders, resulting in variance in Physical targets and 
corresponding achievement. The procedural delay with State 
Governments in relea se of their share causes undue delay in achieving 
the target.  This is another major reason for variance in Physical targets 
and corresponding achievement.  
However, the progress achieved and release of funds to States are 
reviewed periodically by the Apex Monitoring Committee having members 
from Planning Commission, Ministry of Textiles, and subject matter 
specialists.   
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 

73 
 
HANDLOOM WEAVERS’ COMPREHENSIVE WELFARE SCHEME 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19  Para - 3.121) 
 
 The Committee are disheartened to note that as many as 
1,04,224 claim cases covering the time period from 2007 -08 to 
2009-10 are pending for settlement under the Health Insurance 
Scheme (HIS). The time period fixed for settling claims under the 
Scheme is 15 days. The Committee take a very serious view of such 
a perfunctory approach of the Government towards the welfare 
issues of needy weavers who belong to the disadvantaged strata of 
the society. It hardly needs reiteration that the very purpose of 
providing health insurance is frustrated if the claims are not settled 
in time. They therefore, recommend that immediate and urgent 
steps be taken to settle all the 1,04,224 pending claims within two 
months. Henceforth, every claim case  received under the Scheme 
should invariably be settled within the stipulated time frame so that 
the Scheme does not lose its sheen and the weavers get the 
intended benefits well in time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 
 As of May 31 st,  2010 ICICI have settle d 23.61 lakh & 30.40 
lakh number of claims under Year -3 (2007-08) and Year -4 (2008-
09) respectively. As per report furnished by ICICI Lombard, for 
policy-3(2007-08) no claim is pending  for settlement.  For policy -4 
(2008-09) and 173815  are pending.  Out o f these claims (173815), 
169362 are cashless claims where the weavers have availed 
cashless benefits and the outstanding is either to the hospital/ 
nursing home/OPD clinics. The reimbursement claims for 4453 are 
pending because ICICI have not received the supporting documents 
from beneficiaries or possibly have been recently received and are in 
the process of settlement.   Reimbursement claims keep on coming 
even after 1 year of the expiry of the health cards and most of them 
are pending due to want of docu ments or have been recently 
received by ICICI which are in the process of settlement.  In most of 

74 
 
the cases ICICI do not received documents in full.  The same leads 
to delay in settlement of claims.   
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010 -Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

75 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22  Para  3.124) 
 
 The Committee are distressed to note that despite repeatedly 
stressing the need to raise the upper age limit from 58 to 70 years 
for coverage under MBBBY, the Government are not at all taking up 
the issue with the seriousness it deserves. The Government si mply 
stated that the matter was under active consideration. The 
Committee deprecate such a languid approach of the Government 
in deciding issues meant for the welfare of hapless weavers. The 
Committee reiterate that insurance coverage to weavers upto the 
age of 70 years be extended expeditiously.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 
 The matter regarding raising the upper age limit under the 
MGBBY from 59 to 70 years has been taken up with LIC.   The 
matter was taken up with the Ministry of Finance (Financial 
Services) and the Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC).   The 
LIC had initially quoted a very high premium.  After continuous 
negotiation for reduction of the premium, the LIC had given options 
for extension of age limit from 59 to 70 years under MGBBY.  Out of 
the options given by LIC, the best option proposed to EFC is as 
follows:  
 
            For coverage of all weavers in the age group 18 to 70 years, 
the premium will be Rs. 450/- p.a. (GOI share –Rs. 270/-, Weaver‟s 
share –Rs.80/- and LICs share Rs.1 00/-).  Out of this amount 
Rs.100/- will be borne by the LIC, out of Social Security Fund.   
 

76 
 
 
Age limit Annual Premium 
per weaver 
No. of 
benefi-
ciaries (in 
lakh) 
GOI 
Share 
per 
weaver 
per 
annum 
Financial 
implication 
Age 
group 18-
70 years 
Total Premium     -  
Rs.450/- 
GOI Share            
- Rs. 270/- 
Weaver‟s share    -  
Rs. 80/- 
LIC‟s share          - 
Rs. 100/- 
25.20 Rs.270/- Rs.68.04 
Cr. 
 
 
 The matter is under consideration of EFC and Planning 
Commission as on date. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2(4)/2010-Parl. Dated 
11/08/2010  ) 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                   
        HEMANAND BISWAL, 
 9 December, 2010                                                      CHAIRMAN,                          
Agrahayana , 1932 (Saka)       STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 

77 
 

78 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2010.  
 
The Committee met from 1430 hrs. to 1530 hrs in Room No. 116, 
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt 
draft Action Taken Report  on recommendations/observations contained 
in their Eleventh  Report on Demands for Grants for the  year 2010-11 of  
Ministry of Textiles.  
PRESENT 
    Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri K. Murugesan Anandan 
3. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4. Shri Hassan Khan 
5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6. Shri P. Lingam 
7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
9. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
10. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
11. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 12. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  
          
SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
  3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
  

79 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Dr. Virendra Kumar  on 
his nomination by the Speaker, Lok Sabha to the Labour Committee 
for the year 2010-11. 
 
 
3. Thereafter, Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them 
about the draft Action Taken Report  on recommendations/observations 
contained in their Eleventh Report on Demands for Grants for the year 
2010-11 of  Ministry of Textiles.  
 
4.  The Committee too k up the draft Report for consideration.  
After detailed deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report 
without any modification.   
 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
Report and to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

80 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS  OF  ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT  ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH REPORT OF  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
         Total 
 Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations      22 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have 10         45.46  
 been accepted by Government 
 (Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,14,18 and 21)        
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the NIL             NIL   
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government‟s  replies-NIL        
      
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of 6           27.27 
 which  Government‟s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration-( Sl. Nos. 8, 10,12, 15,16 and 20)            
   
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect   6            27.27   
 Of which final replies of Government are of  
 interim in nature  - (Sl. Nos. 9,11,13,17,19  and 22)  
                                        ------- 
                                       100% 
                                            ------- 
  
 
 
 
 