40 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
      MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
THE CHILD LABOUR (PROHIBITION AND 
REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2012 
 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
December,  2013/Agrahayana , 1935 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
  
THE CHILD LABOUR (PROHIBITION AND 
REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2012 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha  on  13th December, 2013 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December,  2013/Agrahayana , 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                   PAGE(s)  
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv)  
REPORT        (v) 
Chapter-I  Introductory 
 Chapter-II Clause by Clause Analysis of the Child  
    Labour (Prohibition & Regulation)    
    Amendment, Bill, 2012 
 
Chapter-III Rescue & Rehabilitation of Child Labour 
Chapter IV Observation & Recommendation 
  
APPENDICES 
 
  I. The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation)    
  Amendment Bill, 2012  
 
 (II) Minutes of the sittings of the Committee.    
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
  

4 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Fortieth Report on  `The Child Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2012’  of the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment.   
 
2. The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation)  Amendment 
Bill, 2012  was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012 
and referred to the Committee by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in 
consultation with the Chair man, Rajya Sabha for examination and 
report within three months from the date of publication of the 
reference of the Bill in Bulletin Part - II of Lok Sabha dated 12th 
December, 2012.    
 
3. In the process of examination of the Bill, the Committee 
invited t he representatives of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment on 7th February, 2013  and heard their views. The 
Committee also sought written information on various aspects of 
the Bill from the Ministry.   
 
4. The Committee further invited the views/suggestions on the 
Bill from individuals/experts/institutions interested in the Bill 
through a Press Communiqué. 
 
5. The Committee invited the representatives of NGOs/ Experts/ 
Statutory bodies to hear their views/suggestions on the proposed 
amendments in 'The child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) 
Amendment Bill, 2012'.  
 
6. The Committee also undertook an on -the-spot study visit to 
Vishakhapatnam, Hyderabad and Mumbai from 27 -29 July, 2013     
to hear the views of various NGOs/Experts/Institutions on the 
amendments proposed in the Bill. 
 
7. The Committee further took oral evidence of the officials of the 
Ministries of Women & Child Development and Human Resource 
Development  along with the Ministry of Labour and Employment  

6 
 
on 1 8th November, 20 13 on the proposed amendments by the 
Government.  
 
8. The Committee considered and adopted their draft Report on 
the Bill at their sitting held on 11th  December, 2013.  
 
9. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
representatives of Ministry of Lab our and Employment, Women & 
Child Development, Human Resource Development and 
representatives of NGOs/Experts/Statutory Bodies  for tendering 
evidence before the Committee and furnishing written 
inputs/suggestions on the amending Bill. 
 
10. For facilitation of reference and convenience, the observations 
and recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold 
in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
12  December, 2013                                                       CHAIRMAN,  
21 Agrahayana ,1935 (Saka)    STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

7 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2013-14) 
 SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN - CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Ashok Argal  
3.  Shri Ismail Hussain  
4.  Dr. Manda Jagannath  
5.  Dr. Virendra Kumar  
6.  Shri Nara Hari Mahato  
7.  Shri Hari Manjhi  
8.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel  
9.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy  
10.  Smt. J. Shantha  
11.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh [Lalan]  
12.  Shri Ratan Singh  
13.  Shri Dinu Solanki  
14.  Shri Makansingh Solanki  
15.  Shri K. Sugumar  
16.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai  
17.  Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware  
18.  Shri Om Prakash Yadav  
19.  Vacant  
20.  Vacant  
21.  Vacant  
              
             Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Smt. T. Ratna Bai  
23.  Shri D. Bandyopadhyay  
24.  Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot  
25.  Shri P. Kannan  
26.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan  
27.  Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati  
28.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
29.  Shri Rajaram  
30.  Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
31.  Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh  
 
 
 
 

8 
 
 
                     SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy - Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Introductory 
 
 
 The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 provides for 
prohibition of the engagement of children in certain employments and for 
regulating the conditions of work of children in certain other employments. 
 
1.2 Ministry of Human Resources and Deve lopment has enacted RTE Act 
2009.  Under RTE Act, a child means male or female child of the age of six to 
fourteen years. It envisages that it shall be the duty of the State to ensure free 
and compulsory education to all children below the age of 14 years.   The 
objective of the amendment of the Child Labour Act is also to ensure that all 
children between six to fourteen years are in schools rather than at 
workplaces. 
1.3 Besides, India is a founder Member of International Labour Organization 
(ILO).  ILO has  passed Convention 138 and Convention 182. Conventions 138 
provides that the minimum age for admission to employment or work shall not 
be less than the age of completion of compulsory schooling . Convention 182 
provides employment of all the children below 18 years should be prohibited in 
worst forms of Child Labour. However, the main problem preventing 
Government of India from ratifying Convention 182 is that the Convention 
provides for prohibition of employment of children below 18 years in hazardous 
occupations & processes, whereas in India as per Child Labour (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Act, 1986 persons above 14 years can work in hazardous 
occupations and processes.  
1.4 Through the Child Labour(Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment  
Bill,2012  it is proposed to prohibit employment of children below the age of 14 
years in all occupations and processes to facilitate their enrolment in schools 
in view of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 
and to prohibit em ployment of adolescents (persons who have completed 
fourteenth year of age but have not completed eighteenth year) in hazardous 
occupations and processes and to regulate the conditions of service of 
adolescents in line with the ILO Convention 138 and Conve ntion 182, 
respectively. 
 
1.5 The salient features of the Bill are as follows— 
 
(i)  the amendment of the long title of the said Act in view of the 
proposed  provision to prohibit employment of children below fourteen 
years in all  occupations and processe s and the proposed provision to 

10 
 
prohibit employment of adolescents (persons who have completed 
fourteenth  year of age but have not completed eighteenth year) in 
hazardous  occupations and  processes set forth in the proposed 
Schedule; 
 
(ii)  the amendment of the short title of the said Act in view of the 
insertion of the proposed new definition of “adolescent” whose 
employment in  hazardous occupations and processes is also proposed 
to be prohibited; 
 
 (iii) the insertion of a new definition o f “adolescent” that means a 
 person who has completed his fourteenth year of age but not completed 
 his eighteenth year in section 2 of the said Act; 
 
(iv) the amendment of the definition of “child” to provide that child 
means a person who has not complete d his fourteenth year of age or 
such age as may  be specified in the Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Education Act, 2009, whichever is more; 
 
(v)  the amendment of section 3 of the said Act to prohibit employment 
of children in all occupations and processes except where the child helps 
his  family after his school hours or helps his family in fields, home -
based work, forest gathering or attends technical institutions during 
vacations for the purpose of learning, but does not include  any  help 
or a ttending technical institutions where there is subordinate 
relationship of labour or work which are outsourced and carried out in 
home; 
 
(vi)  the insertion of a new section 3A to prohibit employment of 
adolescents in any hazardous occupations and processes specified in the 
proposed Schedule; 
 
(vii)  the amendment of section 4 of the said Act to empower the Central 
Government to add or omit any hazardous occupations and processes 
from  the Schedule to the proposed legislation; 
 
(viii)  the omission of Part III of the said Act in view of the prohibition of 
employment of children below fourteen years of age in all occupations 
and  processes; 
 
(ix) the amendment of sub -section ( 1) of section 14 to enhance the 
punishment from imprisonment for a term whic h shall not be less than 
three  months but which may extend to one year or with fine which shall 
not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty 
thousand  rupees, to imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than six months  but which may extend to two years, or with fine  which 

11 
 
shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees but which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees, or with both, for employment or  permitting any 
children to work in any occupations or processes in contravention  of 
section 3. However, the parents or guardians of such children shall not 
be liable for such punishment unless they  permit such children for 
commercial purposes; 
 
(x)  the insertion of new sub -section ( 1A) in section 14 to provide 
punishment of imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to two years, or with fine which shall not 
be less than twenty thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees, or with both for employment or permitting to work any  
adolescent in any hazardous occupations or processes. However,  the 
parents or guardians of such adolescents shall not be liable for 
punishment unless they permit such adolescents to work in 
contravention of the provisions of section 3A; 
 
(xi) the amendme nt of sub -section ( 2) of section 14, which provides 
punishment for the convicted offender who commits a like offence 
afterwards, to enhance the minimum punishment existing therein from 
six  months to one year and maximum punishment from two years to 
three years; 
 
(xii) the insertion of a new section 14A to provide that the offences 
under the proposed legislation shall be cognizable notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 
 
(xiii) the omission of the provisions of clauses ( a), (b)  and (c) of sub-
section (3)  of section 14 of the Act in view of the prohibition of the 
employment of children below fourteen years in all occupations and 
processes; 
 
(xiv) the insertion of new section 17A to empower the appropriate 
Government to confer such powers and impose such duties on a District 
Magistrate as may be necessary, to ensure that the provisions of  the 
proposed legislation are properly carried out and to empower the District 
Magistrate to specify the officer , subordinate to him , who shall exercise 
all or any of the powers , and perform all or any of the duties , so 
conferred or imposed and the  local limits within which such powers or 
duties shall be carried out by the officer in accordance with the rules 
made by the appropriate Government; 
 
(xv) the insertion of new section 17B which empowers the appropriate 
Government to make periodic inspection or cause such inspection to be 
made, of the places at which the employment of the children is 
prohibited  and the hazardous occupations or processes are carried out, 

12 
 
at such intervals as it thinks fit , and monitor the issues , relating to the 
provisions of the Act; and 
 
 
(xvi) the substitution of the existing Schedule to the Act by new 
Schedule in view of the prohibition of children in all  occupations and 
processes and regulation of employment of adolescents in hazardous 
occupations and processes. 
 

13 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
 
 CLAUSE BY CLAUSE ANALYSIS OF THE CHILD LABOUR 
(PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2012'  
 
 
I. Amendment of long title. 
 
 
2.1 In the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), for the long title, the following shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
 “An Act to prohibit the engagement of children in all occupations and to 
 prohibit the engagement of adolescents in hazardous occupations and 
 processes and the matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.” 
 
 
2.2 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 
 “The Child Labour (Prohibition &  Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2012 
 proposes to amend the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act 
 1986, which inter-alia proposes to amend the “long title” of the Act  so as 
 to prohibit employment  of child in all occupations and Processes and 
 also prohibit the  employment of adolescent in  the scheduled 
 occupations and regulate the  condition of their  working in other 
 occupations.’” 
 
II. Amendment of short title. 
 
 
2.3 In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), for the words, 
brackets and figures “the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986”, 
the words, brackets and figures “the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition 
and Regulation) Act, 1986” shall be substituted. 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
2.4 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amen dment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 
 “The Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2012 
 proposes to amend the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act 
 1986 inter alia, to prohibit employment of child and also prohibit  the  
 employment of adolescent  in scheduled occupations  and regulate the 
 condition of their working in other occupations.” 
 
2.5 As regards no provisions as to regulation of child/adolescent labour in 
the Act, the Ministry in their written replies stated: 
 
 “…With regard to Regulation, while it is true that Part III of the Principal 
 Act is proposed to be deleted because all child labour will be prohibited 
 as per the Amendment Bill, but Rule making power under Section  18 of 
 the Principal Act Section 18 stays…” 
 
2.6 On being asked about the prescribed authority in cases of disputes as to 
the age after the omission of part III, the Ministry replied: 
 
 “Provisions for determining the age of the child are there in Sec 7A of the 
 Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 and sec 104 
 of the Factories Act, 1948. Hence no separate provision has been  made 
 in the current Amendment Bill.” 
 
2.7 One of the major concerns is the welfare of children working in Audio 
Visual entertainment industry, w hen asked about the  specific steps taken to 
save these children from exploitation both at the hand s of their parents and 
industry, the Ministry replied: 
“The basic purpose of the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation Act, 
 1986, is to safeguard the childhoo d of every child in our country and to 
 see that each and every child goes to school. In the Amendment  Bill it 
 has been clearly  brought out that there would be no bar on 
 children helping their families after  school hours and in vacations, in 
 fields, home-based work (other than for commercial purposes), forest 
 gathering and also learning skills in schools and technical  institutions. 
 As such a s long as child works after school hour s or during his/her 
 vacation in the job which is not detrimental to h is /her 
 physical/mental health or the work which is done purely for non -
 commercial  purpose, t here is no ban on his/her work… any child 
 employed in a subordinate relationship of labour or work which are 

15 
 
 outsourced and carried  out in home , would be in contravention of the 
 Act, and this would include children in the audio visual industry.” 
 
III. Amendment of section 2. 
 
2.8 In section 2 of the principal Act,— 
 
 (a) clause (i) shall be renumbered as clause ( ia) thereof and before clause 
 (ia) as so renumbered, the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
  ‘(i) “adolescent” means a person who has completed his fourteenth  
  year of age but has not completed his eighteenth year;’; 
 
 (b) for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
  ‘(ii) “child” means a person who has not completed his fourteenth  
  year  of age or such age as may be specified in the Right of   
  Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, whichever  
  is more;’. 
 
2.9 The Ministry in  their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
  
 “New definition of “adolescent” (between age group of 14 to 18) has been 
 included to prohibit the employment of adolescent in scheduled 
 occupations and  regulate the condition of their working in other 
 occupations. The Child as defined in the Act remains the same. 
 However, it is proposed to align the  Child  Labour (Prohibition& 
 Regulation) Act with the Right to Free and  Compulsory Education Act, 
 2009 by linking the age of the prohibition for employment with  the 
 age under Right to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, 
 whichever is more. Thus, in future, if the age of the Child as  defined 
 under RTE increases, the age of entry to employment would  
 automatically increase.”   
 
2.10 Since various labour laws differ in regard to the prescribed age of child 
and adolescent, the Ministry was asked about the rationale for continuing with 
such difference and their views on aligning all the labour Acts so that there is 
no confusion regarding the age of the chil d for the implementing agencies, the 
Ministry replied as follows:- 
 
 “The proposal to link the age of child with age defined in Right to 
 Education  Act is in conformity with ILO Convention 138.  The logic 

16 
 
 behind this would be that if the child is prohibited from working till 18 
 years and the State is unable to provide him education till 18 years,   
 what would the child be doing from 15 years of age to 18 years of  age?  
 If we have to prohibit children below 18 years from working in any 
 occupation, the age of compulsory education has to be increased  from 
 14 years to 18 years which will require an  amendment in Right to 
 Education Act, 2009.  Keep ing this in view the Ministry has proposed 
 for linking the age of entry to employment with the age of compulsory 
 free education under Right to Education Act, 2009.  Thus, in 
 future, if  age of compulsory free education under Right to Education Act, 
 2009 increases, the age of entry to employment would automatically 
 increase.” 
2.11 The issue of persons in the age group of 14 years to 18 years has also 
been addressed in the proposed amendment.  The proposed Amendment Bill 
proposes to prohibit employment of “adolescents” (14 years to 18 years) in 
hazardous occupations.   
2.12 Article 24 of the Constitution provides that no child below the age of 14 
years shall be employed in work in any factory or  mine or engaged in any other 
hazardous employment. The framers of the Indian Constitution have carefully 
selected 14 years of age while making these provisions. The age of 14 years has 
perhaps been kept keeping in mind the socio -economic conditions of the 
country.  Provisions are there for prohibiting the employment of children below 
14 years in the Factories Act, 1948, Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, Motor 
Transport Act, 1961, Beedi and Cigar Workers Act, 1966, Minimum Wages Act, 
1948, Plantation Act, 1951, etc.  Even ILO Convention  138 permits that the 
minimum age for employment to be 14 years under certain defined 
circumstances. Keeping in view of the above facts and the socio economic 
condition of our country, even under Right of Children to Free  and 
Compulsory Education Act, 2009, a child has been defined as male or female 
child of the age of six to fourteen years. Further, with free education under RTE 
upto 14 years, if the age for employment of child is increased under Child 
Labour Act, then on one hand  the child from a poor family may not be in a 
position to pursue his or her education further due to financial constraint and 
on the other hand cannot work due to ban under Child Labour Act. This may 
create serious social/law and order problem. 
 

17 
 
2.13 The S ecretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development during 
evidence held on 18th November, 2013 stated: 
 “The Ministry of Women and Child Development has a different age for 
 the  nomenclature of ‘child’. According to the National Plan of Action for 
 Children 2005 and the National Charter of Children 2003, Ministry 
 has adopted a new National Policy for Children, 2013 to bring it in  tune 
 with the UN Child Rights Commission and according to this  new policy 
 a child is defined as a person  below 18 years of age. Again  in the 
 Juvenile Justice Act, the definition of juvenile of child is ‘a person who 
 has not completed 18 years of age’. 
  In the Domestic Violence Act 2005, again we have the age as 18 
 years. The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 2006 specifies the minimum 
 age for marriage of girls as 18 years and for boys as 21 years. In the 
 Immoral Traffic  (Prevention) Act, the age is given as 16 years and in 
 Protection of Children  from Sexual Off ences Act 2012, the age is given 
 as 18 years … In the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act 
 2012, it is 18 years. So, our first issue which we wish to flag before the 
 hon. Committee is that we have different age for definition of child in 
 the WCD.”  
 
2.14 The Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy with this 
regard deposed before the Committee on 18th November, 2013 as under: 
 “The Department of School Education and Literacy in the Ministry of 
 HRD has supported the proposals for  amendment in the Act given by 
 the Ministry of Labour. In the RTE Act, the definition of child is in 
 context of the Right to Education and the duty on the Government for 
 that education. Therefore, the  definition itself has been made contextual 
 than the preliminary portions  stating that the child is defined as 6 to 14 
 years of age. When the child is defined as 6 to 14 years of age and  that 
 is the Right of child to get the  education, there is also a provision  which 
 states that a child even though he  or she may have crossed 14 years of 
 age, but has not done eight years of this statutory elementary schooling, 
 that child shall be admitted to an appropriate school with provisions 
 for special training for that child to do that part.  This is the overall 
 context of it. Within that context, we have  supported all the  provisions 
 out here, especially the provision to prohibit employment of all 
 children in all occupations and processes… The ideal  situation would 

18 
 
 have  been that in the proposed draft which is there in the Bill at Clause 
 3 at the portion where adolescent is there to put in ‘would have 
 completed class 8’.  That would have been legally and absolutely perfect.”   
 
2.15 In the above context, the Secretary, Ministry of Labo ur and Employment 
stated during the evidence held on 18th November, 2013 as under: 
 
 “We have gone through a consultative process wherein 14 was agreed 
 upon. That is why, we have provided 14 in this. For hazardous, article 3 
 is there where it says that the minimum age should not be 18 but there 
 are exceptions where it can be even 16. We are not taking that option 
 because hazardous we do believe should be restricted to 18. There was 
 another question on the definition of haza rdous. What will be treated as 
 hazardous?  They were never written. I would like to mention that the Act 
 provides in  section 5 about the Child Labour Technical Advisory 
 Committee. We understand that new services are evolving; new types 
 of employment a re evolving. These have to be dynamic. It will not be 
 possible to put it in the Act.  What we have here is that the Central 
 Government may, by notification in the official Gazette constitute an 
 advisory committee to be called as Child Labour  Technical Advisory 
 Committee to advise the Central Government for the  purpose of 
 addition of occupations and processes to the schedule. And the 
 Schedule is where they are talking of hazardous processes. So, the 
 hazardous  processes would be a sort of dynamic definition.” 
 
 
(IV) Substitution of new Section for Section 3.  
 
 Prohibition of employment of children in any occupation and process 
 
 
2.16 For S ection 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
 “3. No child shall be employed or permitted to work in any occupation or 
 process: 
 
  Provided that nothing in this section shall apply where the child 
 helps  his family after his school hours or helps his family in fields, 
 home-based work, forest gathering or attends technical institutions 
 during vacations for the purpose of learning, but does not include  any 
 help or attending technical institutions where there is  subordinate 
 relationship of labour or work which are out sourced and carried out in 
 home.”. 

19 
 
 
2.17 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “The objective of the amendment is to primarily prohibit commercial 
 exploitation of children as Child Labour.  There would be no bar on 
 children helping their families after school hours and in vacations, in 
 fields, home -based work (other than for commercial purposes), forest  
 gathering and also learning skills in schools and technical institutions.” 
 
2.18 When asked h ow a situation where the parents claim that the child is 
learning the family’s traditional trade and not helping them in their work in the 
technical sense of term their views  could be explained and decided on the 
suggestion that there is no need for any provision allowing children to help 
their parents since children would anyhow work with their parents given the 
social fabric of the country, the Ministry replied as under:- 
 “In the Amendment Bill it has been proposed that there would be no bar 
 on children helping their families after school hours and in vacations, in 
 fields, home -based work (other than for commercial purposes), forest 
 gathering and also learning skills in schools and technical  institutions.  
 The view of the Ministry is that as long as there is no “subordinate 
 relationship of labour or work which are out sourced and carried out in 
 home”, this exception may be  allowed...It cannot be denied that a large 
 percentage of India’s population is working in agriculture sector and 
 most of the children in agriculture are working with their families on 
 family farms. Issue of prohibiting the children from working on their 
 farms would, therefore, be a complex and del icate issue. Further there 
 are many artisan families where traditional family skills are passed on 
 from older generation to their progeny in their early age, and  this helps 
 them in their overall development and earning livelihood later in their 
 lives. These traditional skills need to be preserved and children can grow 
 up learning them as long as it is not detrimental to their physical and 
 mental health and does not interfere with their schooling …the structure 
 and intrinsic values in a Indian family is different from many other 
 countries. We believe in  sharing of work and responsibility within the 
 family. Therefore as long as there is no “subordinate relationship of 
 labour or work which is out sourced and carried out in home”, this 
 exception should be allowed without hurting the family values of many 
 Indians.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
(V) Insertion of new section 3A. 
 
 Prohibition of employment of adolescents in certain hazardous 
occupations and processes. 
 
 
2.19 After Section 3 of the principal Act, the following Section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
 
 “3A. No adolescent shall be employed or permitted to work in any of the 
 hazardous occupations or processes set forth in the Schedule.”. 
 
 
2.20 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “This is a new provision included to prohibit employment of adolescent s 
 in the age group of 14 to 18 years  in hazardous occupation s and 
 processes and accordingly, the schedule under the Act has been 
 reclassified.” 
 
 
2.21 On being asked about the suggestion  that the hazardous processes as 
proposed in the amendment bill should be in addition to the occupations given 
in the schedule in the Child Labo ur (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 , the 
Ministry replied as under: 
 “Under Section 5 of the existing Act, there is a provision for addition of 
 any  new occupations or processes in the Schedule of prohibitory list of 
 occupations and processes with th e approval of Technical Advisory 
 Committee. The provisions of the present Amendment Bill regarding 
 schedule of hazardous occupations and processes have been framed, 
 wherein the employment of children/adolescents upto the age of 18 
 years has been prohib ited with a view to harmonize them with the 
 Factories Act.” 
 
(VI) Amendment of section 4. 
 
 
2.22 In section 4 of the Principal Act, for the words “add any occupation or 
process to the Schedule”, the words “add to, or, omit from, the Schedule any 
hazardous occupation or process” shall be substituted. 
 

21 
 
2.23 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 
 “In section 4  in the Principal Act there is a provision for addition to the 
 schedule any occupation or process with the consultation of Technical 
 Advisory committee. However provision for omission of any occupation or 
 process from the schedule in the Act does not exists. This provision is 
 now  being added in the Section 4 of th e Act. For omission of any 
 occupation or process from the schedule of the Act, amendment in  the 
 Act has to be initiated, which is a lengthy process.”   
 
 
(VII) Omission of Part III. 
 
 
2.24 Part III of the principal Act shall be omitted.   The Ministry in  their 
explanatory note to the amendment stated as follows:- 
 
  
 “Part III of the Principal Act is regarding regulation of conditions of work 
 of children.” 
 
 
2.25 On being asked about the reasons for omission of Part III of the Act and 
the prescribed authority in cas es of disputes as to the age and applicability of 
the same part for regulating the conditions  of the work of the adolescents, the 
Ministry replied as under: 
 
 “Part III of the present Act covers the Regulations of conditions of work of 
 children. Since in the present amendment proposal, employment of 
 children upto 14 years has been completely prohibited and also 
 engagement of children upto the age of 18 years i.e. adolescents in 
 Hazardous occupations  and processes has also been banned, so part III 
 of the Act which relates to regulation of conditions of work of 
 children has been deleted. However,  provision exists in Section 18 of the 
 existing Act for making rules by the  Appropriate Government by official 
 Gazette Notifications and the rules would  be framed once the 
 Amendment Bill is approved.”  
 
 
 

22 
 
(VIII) Amendment of section 14. 
 
 
2.26 In section 14 of the principal Act,— 
 
(a) for sub -section ( 1), the following sub -sections shall be substituted, 
 namely:— 
 
  “(1) Whoever employs any child or permits any child to work in  
  contravention of the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable  
  with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six  
  months but which may extend to two years’ or with fine which  
  shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees but which may  
  extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both: 
 
 Provided that the parents or guardians of such children shall 
 not be punished unless they permit such child for commercial 
 purposes in contravention of the provisions of section 3. 
 
2.27 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “As per the Principal Act employment of a child in hazardous occupation 
 was  punishable with imprisonment for a term not les s than three 
 months or  extend to one year or with fine which shall not be less than 
 ten thousand rupees extended upto twenty thousand rupees or both. 
 The provision for fine in the amendment proposal has been increased 
 to imprisonment for a term not less than six months or extend to two 
 year or with fine which shall not be  less than twenty thousand rupees 
 extended upto fifty thousand rupees or both.’ 
 
2.28 (IA) Whoever employs any adolescent or permits any adolescent to work 
 in contravention of the provisions of section 3A shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 
which may extend to two years or with fine which shall not be less than 
twenty thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, 
or with both: 
 
Provided that the parents or guardians of such adolescent shall 
 not be punished unless they permit such adolescent to work in 
 contravention of the provisions of section 3A.”; 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
 
2.29 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 
“The provision for punishment of offenders for employment of Adolescent 
in hazardous occupation has also been proposed similar to the provision 
proposed for Child Labour.  
 
Parent or guardians of such children were not to be punished 
unless they permit engagement of their child for commercial purposes in  
contravention of provisions of Section 3.”   
 
2.30 (b) in sub-section (2),— 
 
(i) for the word and figure “section 3”, the words, figures and letter, 
“section3 and section 3A” shall be substituted; 
 
 (ii) for the words “six months but which may extend to two years”, the 
 words “one year but which may extend to three years” shall be   
 substituted; 
 
2.31 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 
 “For repeated offenders  the amendment proposal has increased the 
 punishment to  imprisonment for a term of one year  but which may 
 extend to three years.” 
 
 
2.32 (c) clauses ( a), ( b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 3) shall be omitted.   The 
Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as follows:- 
 
 “Clause 9(a) (b) & (c) are the regulatory clauses covered under Part III  of 
 the  Principal Act, which has been proposed to be omitted in the 
 amendment bill.”  
 
2.33 When asked about the  views on the proposal that parents should not be 
punished if they permit their children to work, the Ministry replied: 
 “Poverty and child labour are inter-related. The proposal to amend the  
 Child  Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 was drafted keeping 
 in view the  socio-economic conditions of the country and it is evident 
 that poverty is one of the prominent and  perennial causes  of the 

24 
 
 continuous problem of child labour.  While framing the provision of the 
 existing Act, it was kept in mind that a substantial proportion of the 
 population is below poverty line or just above poverty line. One of the 
 major problem the enforcement agencies  are facing while 
 implementing the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act,  1986 
 is due to the provision in para 2 of Section 3  of the existing Act. As per 
 para 1 of section 3 of the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation)Act, 
 employment of Chi ldren upto the age of 14 is prohibited  in the 
 occupations and processes set forth in  Part A and part B of the 
 Schedule. However, para 2 of Section 3 of the Act says that:  
 “nothing in this Section shall apply to any workshop wherein any  
  process is carried on by the occupier with the aid of his family or to 
  any school established by, or receiving assistance or recognition  
  from  Government”   
 Due to the above provision, many of the children employed by their 
 parents, guardians/psuedo guardians in the work outsourced from home 
 were not coming within the purview of the Child Labour (Prohibition and 
 Regulation) Act, 1986. Now, when, in the Amendment Bill complete ban 
 has  been proposed for employment of children up to the age of 14, a ny 
 relaxation  to the perpetrator/offender of the Act would again amount to 
 dilution of the  provisions in the proposed Amendment Bill. The issue 
 was also discussed in  the Central Monitoring Committee meeting held 
 on 11th January, 2012  wherein most of the members from the State 
 Governments and NGOs were of  the view that the parents and 
 guardians of the child labour needs to be  punished. The Ministry of 
 WCD was also of the view that the  parents/guardians of the children 
 need to be punished as in most of the  cases, the perpetrators are 
 either parents or near relatives. In most of the  cases it is the 
 parents/guardians, who due to poverty put/force their child for 
 labour. As such in the Amendment Bill the provision for punishment to 
 the  offending parents/ guardians has been suggested as a deterrent 
 against sending their wards to work for commercial gain.” 
2.34 Asked further the basis of the above reply and the options the parents 
have, the Ministry stated: 
 “Poverty is one of th e major reasons for children being put to work from 
 an early age, but it is not the only one. Lack of social protection, lack 
 of universal elementary schooling facilities, lack of basic community 

25 
 
 health services, lack of awareness and advocacy are some of the other 
 contributory reasons compelling the push of children into work by the 
 parents.  
  In recent years, there have been a number of initiatives from the 
 Government to address these issues.  The National Rural Employment 
 Guarantee Act (NREGA) 2005 was enacted to reinforce the commitment 
 towards livelihood security in rural areas. The significance of NREGA lies 
 in  the fact that it creates a right -based framework for wage 
 employment programmes and makes the Government legally accountable 
 for providing employment to those who ask for it.  National Rural 
 Health Mission (NRHM)  seeks to provide accessible, affordable and 
 quality universal health care,  which would include all aspects of a 
 clearly defined set of healthcar e entitlements including preventive, 
 primary and secondary health services . The RTE Act provides for the 
 right of children to free and compulsory education till  completion of 
 elementary education in a neighbourhood school. The Food  Security Bill 
 seeks to provide for food and nutritional security in human life  cycle 
 approach, by ensuring access to adequate quantity of quality food at 
 affordable prices to people to live a life with dignity. Social security is also 
 provided through a large number  of initiatives such as the Rashtriya 
 Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY), Aam Aadmi Bima Yojana (AABY), Janani 
 Suraksha Yojana (JSY), Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme 
 (IGNOAPS) etc. 
   
  All these initiatives are designed to reduce the ‘compulsion ’ of the 
 parents to put their children to work. However this needs to be backed 
 by legislation also. The Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act 
 provides the necessary legislative framework for this.  
  With regard to the culpability of the parents and guardians of child 
 labour, the Government is of the opinion that it cannot be ignored as 
 they are  the main beneficiaries of the income generated by the 
 children and unless they are made culpable, they can collaborate  with 
 the employers and defeat the whole purpose of the amendments, 
 especially in the context of the RTE  Act.” 
 
 

26 
 
(IX) Insertion of new section 14A. 
 
 Offences to be cognizable. 
 
2.35 After section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
 
 “14A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
 Procedure,  1973, every offence punishable under this Act shall be 
 cognizable.” 
 
 
2.36 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 
 “The Act has been given more teeth.For better implementation of the Act 
 as well for eradication of the menace of child labour it is proposed that 
 the offence under this Act has been proposed to be made cognizable.”   
 
 
2.37 On being asked about any dedicated agency where the common man can 
report incidence of child labour, the Ministry replied as under:- 
“In the Amendment Bill, the offence under the Child Labour (Prohibition 
 &  Regulation) Act, 1986 has been made cognizable and as such an 
 FIR/complaint can be lodged in any Police Station against incidence of 
 child  labour.” 
 
(X) Insertion of new sections 17A and 17B. 
 
 District Magistrate to implement the provisions. 
 
 
2.38 After section 17, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 “17A. The appropriate Government may, confer such powers and impose 
 such duties on a District Magistrate as may be necessary, to ensure that 
 the  provisions of this Act are properly carried out and the District 
 Magistrate  may  specify the officer,  subordinate to him, who shall 
 exercise all or any of the powers, and perform all or any of the duties, so 

27 
 
 conferred or imposed and the local limits within which such powers 
 or duties shall be carried out by the officer as may be prescribed. 
 
  
2.39 When asked about the Committee’s  concern over the proposal to confer 
powers and impose duties on District Magistrate to implement the provisions of 
the Act as the office of the DM is already over burdened, the Ministry stated:  
 
 “District Magistrate is th e administrative head of a district and performs 
 many functions in pursuance of executive instructions of the 
 Government. By  introducing this provision, the Government is making 
 the role statutory, which actually enhances the accountability of  the 
 District Magistrate. It would also supplement the enforcement 
 machinery as the District Magistrate can specify any of his subordinate 
 officers to exercise all or any of the powers and  perform all or any of the 
 duties, conferred on him by the appropriate Government…The 
 proposed Amendment Bill in no way diluted the  responsibility of the 
 Labour Department from enforcement of the provisions of  the Child 
 Labour Act. The labour enforcement authorities will continue to  carry 
 out the enforcement and inspection as being done earlier. However, as 
 the labour enforcement officials  are inadequate in number to implement 
 the  Act properly in its true spirit so to fill up this gap, in the proposed 
 Amendment Bill it has been propose d that the appropriate Government 
 may,  confer such powers and impose such duties on a District 
 Magistrate as may be necessary, to ensure that the provisions of  this 
 Act are properly carried out and the District Magistrate may  specify the 
 officer, subordinate to him, who shall exercise all or any of the powers, 
 and perform all or any of the duties, so conferred or  imposed and the 
 local limits within which such powers or duties  shall  be  carried out 
 by the officer as may be prescribed. This propo sal to confer powers on 
 District Magistrate is in addition to enforcement of this law  by  the 
 Labour Department officials and would thus strengthen the 
 enforcement machinery.”  
2.40 On the issue of inability of District Magistrate to implement the sche me 
properly, the Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment during the 
evidence stated: 
 
 “You have asked about the District Magistrate. Under NCLP project, 
 there are societies which are headed by the District Magistrate. So, the 
 District Magistrate traditionally has already been the person  responsible 
 for child labour. I think, child labour is one of the red tag or whatever we 

28 
 
 call it. I think the child labour is something that should be exceptionably 
 applied to the District M agistrate…When we are reviewing this NCLP 
 we will indeed look at what sort of Committees which will represent …”  
 
 
2.41. The Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of 
Human Resource Development during the evidence stated: 
 
 “...the Chair had incidentally referred to the vigilance and monitoring 
 committees. We have exactly the same vigilance and monitoring 
 committees  chaired by the senior-most MP in the district, on the lines of 
 the R&D Ministry.”  
 
 
Inspection and monitoring 
 
2.42 17B. The appropriate Government shall, make or cause to be made 
 periodic inspection of the places at which the employment of children is 
 prohibited and  hazardous occupations or processes are carried out at 
 such intervals as it thinks  fit, and monitor the issues, relating to the 
 provisions of this Act.”. 
 
 
2.43 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 
 “The Principal Act had provisions for appointment of Inspectors for the 
 purposes of securing comp liance of the Act and any Inspector so 
 appointed  was deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of 
 IPC, 1860.  Presently, labour departments were involved in the 
 enforcement of the Child Labour Act. Since the labour inspectors  have 
 a limited jurisdiction for effective implementation of the Act,  involvement 
 of District administrative machinery is important. The  same has been 
 covered under the present amendment proposal.” 
   
 
(XI) Amendment of section 18 
 
 
2.44 In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), for clauses ( b), (c) 
and (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
“(b) the powers to be exercised and the duties to be performed by the 
officer specified and the local limits within which such powers or duties 
shall be carried out under section 17A.” 

29 
 
 
 
2.45. The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 `Section (2) (b), (c) & (d) of section 18 of the Act  is about the regulation of 
 working condition for  employment of children. 
  a)Since in the amendment propos es complete ban on the 
 employment of children upto 14 years of age so no regulation for the 
 children would be required and Part III the Principal act has  accordingly 
 been deleted in  amendment proposal.  
  b) Since the responsibility for  implementation of the Act   has now 
 been  conferred to the District Magistrate so the powers to be exercised 
 and the duties to be performed by the officer specified and the local 
 limits within which such powers or duties shall be carried  out would be 
 as per  section 17  A of the proposed amendment.” 
 
2.46 In the Principal Act, for the Schedule, the following Schedule shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
‘THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 3A) 
(1) Mines. 
(2) Inflammable substances or explosives. 
(3) Hazardous process. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Schedule, “hazardous process” has 
 the meaning assigned to it in clause (cb) of the Factories Act, 1948.’. 
 
2.47 The Ministry in their explanatory note to the amendment stated as 
follows:- 
 
 “The exi sting schedule under section 3 of the Act contains 18 
 occupations under Part A and 65 processes under Part B, where children 

30 
 
 are prohibited to  work. However in the amendment proposed 
 employment of Children have  been  banned completely and employment 
 of adolescents has been prohibited  in hazardous occupations & 
 processes. Accordingly, a reclassified schedule  has been drawn  up, 
 where adolescents would be prohibited to work.”    
  
  

31 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
Rescue & Rehabilitation of Child Labour 
 
3.1 When asked why commercial purposes should not be defined to include 
beggary, hiring the child for beggary, using the child as beggars even by 
parents, trafficking etc, the Ministry replied as follows: 
  “Offence of child trafficking is not specifically men tioned here because 
 sec 370 of the recently amended IPC deals with it explicitly and there 
 is no need to  replicate the provisions in this Act. 
 'A child beggar is a child in need of care and protection. Employment of a 
 child below 18 years of age for begging is made punishable under the 
 Section 24 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Act, 2000  and 
 protection to the said child has been made available under the same 
 Act. Hence no separate provision has been ma de for anti -begging in 
 the Amendment Bill" 
 
3.2 On being asked the views of the Ministry on the suggestion that the word 
‘regulation’ should be replaced by ‘rehabilitation’, the Ministry stated as under: 
 “Ministry of Women and Child Development under the  Government of 
 India  (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 has been given the 
 responsibility for  enforcement of The Juvenile Justice (Care and 
 Protection of Children) Act, 2000. The Act consolidates and amends 
 the law relating to juveniles in conflict  with law, and children in need 
 of care and protection, by providing for proper care, protection and 
 treatment by catering to their development needs, and by adopting a 
 child-friendly approach in the adjudication and disposition  of matters 
 in the best  interest of children and for their ultimate rehabilitation 
 through various institutions established under this enactment. It has a 
 separate chapter on rehabilitation and social reintegration (Chapter IV). 
 Hence duplication of th ose provisions in the Am endment Bill is not 
 required.” 
 

32 
 
 
3.3 When asked why the Ministry has not dealt with the issue of child 
trafficking in this Bill, the Ministry replied: 
 “As per the Government of India Allocation of Business Rules, the subject 
 matter relating to trafficki ng falls within the domain of Ministry of 
 Women and Child Development and the matter relating to criminal 
 offences against  women and children is being looked after by Ministry 
 of Home Affairs.  To this effect, a Convention on United Nations 
 Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (UNTOC) has been 
 ratified by Government of India in March,  2011.  Further, to tackle the 
 menace of Human Trafficking, Ministry of Home  Affairs has set up Anti 
 Trafficking Nodal Cell which has interface with other  Ministries and 
 National Crime Record Bureau in collation and dissemination of 
 information.”   
3.4 Asked about street and orphaned children, the  Ministry of Labour and 
Employment replied that they are covered under Ministry of WCD.   It is the 
view of the Government that the children who beg on their own on the streets, 
therefore, they are not child labour but it is known that they are made to beg .  
Asked as to why the Ministries keep passing the buck, the Ministry stated: 
 “As submitted in an earlier reply, the business of the Government  of 
 India is transacted in the Ministries, Departments, Secretariats and 
 Offices specified in the First Schedule of the Government of India 
 (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. The distribution of subjects 
 among the departments is specified in the Second Schedule to these 
 rules. Each Ministry is accordingly  discharging the mandate given to it.”   
 
3.5 On being asked th e steps the Ministry are t aking for rehabilitation of 
rescued children ‘statutorily’, the Ministry replied is as under:- 
 “With the passage of Right to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 
 (RTE)  the rehabilitation of child into the fold of education has been made 
 mandatory  and is being implemented by the Ministry of Human 
 Resource Development.  This Act provides for free education upto  the 
 age of 14 years, free books and mid-day meals.”   
 

33 
 
3.6 When asked that the siblings of the rescued street children/orphaned 
children should also be rehabilitated alongwith the rescued children, the 
Ministry replied that: 
 “The Ministry of Labour & Employment is implementing the National 
 Child  Labour Project wherein children in the age group of 9 to 14 years, 
 withdrawn  from hazardous occupations and processes, are 
 mainstreamed to formal schools. The rehabilitation of the siblings  of the 
 street and orphaned children  is being looked after by Ministry of 
 Women and Child Development through  their Integrated Child 
 Protection Scheme (ICPS).” 
 
3.7 As regards non ratification of ILO Co nventions 138 & 182, the Ministry 
stated: 
 “Government of India follows the policy of ratifying the ILO Convention 
 only  when the existing laws and practices are in full conformity with the 
 provisions  of the said convention. ILO Convention No.138 inter -alia 
 prescribes that there  should be a minimum age of entry to 
 employment which should not be less  than age of compulsory 
 education or 15 years (relaxable to 14 years).  It also  requires that all 
 children below 18 years should be prohibited in hazar dous 
 occupations.  ILO Convention 182 inter -alia, mentions the minimum age 
 for  working in hazardous occupations as 18 years.  Since both these 
 provisions  were not incorporated in our Child Labour (Prohibition and 
 Regulation) Act  earlier, we could no t ratify these Conventions.  
 However, with the proposed  Amendments, we would be in a position to 
 ratify these Conventions.” 
 
3.8 On the issue of effective provisions for rehabilitation of rescued child 
labour, the Ministry stated as follows:  
 “The Ministry of Labour & Employment is implementing National Child 
 Labour Project Scheme for the rehabilitation of children withdrawn from 
 hazardous occupation and processes. Under the Scheme children are 
 provided with bridge education, mid day meal, vo cational training, 
 stipend  and health check - ups and after completion of bridge 
 education children are  mainstreamed into the formal education system. 

34 
 
 The Scheme is being revised to work out better convergence with 
 Ministry of HRD, WCD, Home and Rural  Development for a more 
 effective rehabilitation of child labour.  The revision includes  alignment 
 of NCLP Scheme with the Right to Education Act, 2009.”   
  
3.9 When asked about the involvement of so many Ministries in the process 
of rescue and rehabilitation of child labour, the Ministry replied that: 
 “The business of the Government of India is transacted in the Ministries, 
 Departments, Secretariats and Offices specified in the First Schedule of 
 the  Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. The 
 distribution of subjects among the departments is specified in the 
 Second Schedule to these rules. Each Ministry is accordingly 
 discharging the mandate given to it.”  
  
3.10 The Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment during the evidence 
stated that:  
 “According to business rules, this subject is dealt with by them. We do 
 not have a scheme for night shelters. We look at them in the context of 
 labour. Our mandate is related to labour. It is not the question of 
 passing the buck. That is why we are working very closely with the 
 Ministry of HRD. We would perhaps in this Committee that we have, 
 we will have them also so that there  is complementarity... I think all the 
 three Ministries need to work together. In  the Committee that we have, 
 we will induct the Ministry of WCD also. It is important that we work 
 in conjunction with each other. So, I take your point.” 
 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
4.1 The Committee note that the short title of the Act is proposed to be 
amended as ‘The Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986’ in view of the insertion of the proposed new 
definition of ‘adolescent’ but the Committee find that no provision has 
been made for the regulation of conditions of work of adolescents in the 
amended Act. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the 
rules would be framed in this regard once the Amendment Bill is 
approved. According to the Statem ent of Objects and Reasons appended 
to the Amendment Bill, one of the objectives of the Bill is to ‘… prohibit 
employment of adolescents in hazardous occupations and processes and 
to regulate the conditions of services of adolescents…’, therefore, the 
Committee are of the opinion that regulation of the conditions of work of 
the adolescents including the criteria for their wages and settlement of 
disputes with regard to age of the child be made part of the Principal Act 
to reflect the intention of the Act an d to minimize their exploitation. 
Even the Factories Act with which the Ministry has attempted to 
harmonise some of the provisions of the Act has a chapter dedicated to 
the ‘employment of the young persons’ in the principal Act. The 
Committee, therefore, r ecommend that the regulation of the working 
conditions of adolescents may be made part of the principal Act. The 

36 
 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that prohibition of 
employment of children in a subordinate relationship of work and labour 
includes those working in the Audio Visual entertainment industry.  The 
Committee are also of the view that a lot of children/adolescents are 
working in Audio -Visual entertainment industry now -a-days and there 
have been cases where the children have not been ab le to bear the 
physical and mental trauma associated with rigorous routine. The 
Committee desire that appropriate rules may also be made for 
prohibition/regulation for children/adolescents working in Audio -Visual 
entertainment industry. 
 
4.2 The Committee note that it is proposed to amend the definition of 
‘child’ to provide that `child’ means a person who has not completed his 
fourteenth year of age or such age as may be specified in the Right of 
Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009(RTE Act,  2009), 
whichever is more, and that a definition clause is proposed to be inserted 
which provides that ‘adolescent’ means a person who has completed his 
fourteenth year of age but has not completed his eighteenth year. The 
Committee observe that as per Sec tion 3(1) of the RTE Act, 2009, every 
child of the age of 6 -14 years shall have a right to free and compulsory 
education till the completion of elementary education and as per proviso 
to Section 4, a child admitted to elementary education shall be entitled to 

37 
 
free education till completion of the elementary education even after 
fourteen years. The Committee also note from the submission made by 
the Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy during the 
evidence that the ideal situation would have  been to add ‘would have 
completed class 8’ in the definition of adolescent. Paragraph 3 of Article 2 
of ILO Convention 138 ‘Minimum Age Convention, 1973’ also states that 
the minimum age for admission to employment or work shall not be less 
than the age o f completion of compulsory schooling. The Committee are 
of the view that while aligning with the RTE Act, the Ministry has missed 
the spirit of the RTE Act. The focus of RTE act is to provide elementary 
education to all which should have been the criteria for determining a 
‘adolescent’ in the present Bill too. The Committee are of the opinion 
that all children below 14 years should be in school and those who are 
above 14 and have missed school due to any reason should at least 
complete elementary education before being allowed to be employed in 
any occupation.   
 
 The Committee were concerned to note that various Acts have 
prescribed different age to define a ‘child’. The Committee note from the 
reply of Ministry of Labour & Employment that rehabilitation an d social 
integration of children has been provided under The Juvenile Justice 
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 which is in the domain of 

38 
 
Ministry of Women and Child Development. During evidence the 
Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Developm ent put forth the issue 
of having different age for definition of child in the Acts and policies 
being implemented by the Ministry of Women and Child Development, 
most notably, new National Policy for Children, 2013 where the age is 
given as 18 years. The Committee recommend that the proposed 
definitions be reviewed in view of the submission made by the Secretary, 
Department of School Education and Literacy and Secretary, Ministry of 
Women and Child Development by involving them in the consultation 
process. 
 
4.3 The Committee note that it is proposed to substitute Section 3 of 
the principal Act to provide that no child shall be employed in any 
occupation but he/she can help his/her family after school hours or help 
in fields, home -based work, forest gatherin g or attend technical 
institutions during vacations. A child, however, cannot help where there 
is subordinate relationship of labour or work s which are outsourced and 
carried out in home. The Committee are not able to understand as to how 
the Ministry prop oses to keep a check on children working in their 
homes. The Ministry is itself providing loopholes by inserting this proviso 
since it would be very difficult to make out whether children are merely 
helping their parents or are working to supplement the fa mily income.    

39 
 
Further, allowing children to work after school is detrimental to their 
health as rest and recreation is important for fullest physical and mental 
development in the formative years  besides adversely affecting their 
studies. The Committee f eel that the schools where these children study 
should conduct sessions for their parents and tell them about the needs of 
the children. The Committee are of the view that there is no need to 
insert a provision to expressly allow some obvious things, in the Indian 
context, such as children helping their parents in domestic chores. The 
Committee recommend that this proviso may be deleted and the amended 
section be reframed to prohibit employment in all occupations where 
there is subordinate relationship of work and labour. 
 
4.4 The Committee note that Section 3A is proposed to be inserted to 
prohibit employment of adolescents in any hazardous occupations and 
processes specified in the proposed schedule. In the schedule, it has been 
provided that ‘hazardous pr ocesses’ has the same meaning as assigned to 
it in the Factories Act. The hazardous processes given in Factories Act 
include those processes which may impair the health of the persons 
engaged or which may pollute the general environment. According to 
paragraph 1 of Article 3 of ILO Convention 138 i.e.’ Minimum Age 
Convention, 1973’ ‘The minimum age for admission to any type of 
employment or work which by its nature or the circumstances in which it 

40 
 
is carried out is likely to jeopardise the health, safety or  morals of young 
person shall not be less than 18 years’ The Committee feel that the 
Ministry have not made any efforts to identify hazardous occupations and 
have haphazardly copied from the Factories Act. The Committee observe 
that adolescents might be em ployed in industries which are apparently 
non-hazardous or works that are carried out at homes and thus not 
covered under the above schedule. For example, working as domestic 
helps does not fall under the category of hazardous occupations but in the 
case of adolescents it c ould turn out to be both hazardous and traumatic 
due to the treatment meted out to them by their employers. The 
exploitation and cruelty, in some cases, of the employers can affect 
health, safety and morals of the adolescents albeit worki ng in a non -
hazardous occupation. The Ministry has altogether ignored the provision 
of the ILO Convention 138 that such occupations should also include 
those which can jeopardize the safety and morals of young persons.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the meaning of hazardous 
processes be reviewed and widened to include all those processes that 
may jeopardize health, safety and morals of the adolescents. 
 
4.5 The  Committee note that it is proposed to amend section 14(1) to 
enhance punishment for e mployment or permitting any children to work 
in any occupations or processes and  that  parents and guardians of such 

41 
 
children shall not be liable for punishment unless they permit such 
children for commercial purposes. The Committee are of the view that 
reasons for entry of children into employment include poverty, neglect, 
social and economic exploitation, trafficking, lack of schools and 
loss/incapacity of parents. All of these reasons indicate that children are 
forced to work due to various reasons with  or without the consent of 
parents. The Committee are apprehensive of the scenario where parents 
are undergoing imprisonment for their act of permission and poor 
children are left alone to fend for themselves or poor parents resorting to 
unfair means to ar range rupees twenty thousand to be paid as fine. The 
Committee are of the view that in such cases the law should instead of 
punishing poor parents take a lenient view  so that children do not have 
to work to fulfill the ir basic needs. The Supreme Court in its judgment in 
the case of M.C. Mehta had observed that providing an alternative source 
of income to the family is a pre requisite for the eradication of child 
labour and that employment should be provided to an adult in the family 
in lieu of a child work ing in a factory or mine or any other hazardous 
work. The Committee note from the reply of Ministry of Labour and 
Employment that a number of initiatives have been undertaken/schemes 
introduced by the Government to reduce the compulsion of the parents to 
put their children to work. The Committee are of the view that benefits of 
these initiatives/schemes have not percolated adequately. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the proviso be amended and 

42 
 
lenient view may be taken in case of poor parents and th ose parents who 
have not been able to take benefits of any of the schemes. Repeated 
offenders may, however, be punished for allowing their children to work. 
The Committee are also of the opinion that the fine may be collected from 
the errant employers in a ll cases to be used for the rehabilitation of the 
rescued children in a fund christened as `The Child Welfare Fund’. 
 
4.6 The Committee also note that further in cases where adolescents 
are employed in hazardous occupations, the punishment is proposed to be 
enhanced and the parents and guardians shall also be punished if they 
permit such adolescents to work in such occupations. The Committee feel 
that although the parents might have given permission to let their 
children to work in such occupations it is no t necessary that the poor 
uneducated parents are in the know that these are hazardous occupations 
where adolescents are not supposed to work. The Committee are of the 
view that making employers liable is sufficient and there is a need for 
raising awareness  about the hazardous occupations and their effects on 
adolescents. This can be done by providing elementary education to such 
parents out of `The Child Welfare Fund’.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that the employers who exploit the adolescents and do n ot treat 
them properly should also be covered under the punishment clause. 
 

43 
 
4.7 The Committee note that a new section is proposed to be inserted 
to confer powers and impose duties on the District Magistrate to ensure 
that the provisions of the Act are prop erly carried out. The Committee 
find that District Magistrate is already overseeing the implementation of 
National Child Labour Project (NCLP) and this machinery has not yielded 
much which is evident from the Ministry’s own submission. The 
Committee feel t hat District Magistrate is already overburdened and 
hence he may not be able to spare adequate time to deal with the issues 
relating to child labour. The Committee feel that since Ministry of Labour 
and Employment does not have any effective mechanism to s upervise the 
implementation of the provisions of the Act, the proposal to confer power 
and duties on the District Magistrate might not yield the desired results. 
The Committee find that the Bill is also silent in this regard.  The 
Committee, therefore, rec ommend that Vigilance and Monitoring 
Committees headed by local MP’s may be constituted to review the 
implementation of not only The Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) 
Act but also, all the Labour Acts in the area every three months. 
 
4.8 The Committee note that Section 17B is proposed to be inserted to 
empower the appropriate Government to make periodic inspection of the 
places at which the employment of children is prohibited and the 
hazardous occupation or processes are carried out. The Committee are of 

44 
 
the view that since the employment of children is prohibited at all places 
as per the Amendment Bill, the instant provision should cover any place 
where employment of children is suspected and in case of adolescents, 
the appropriate Govern ment may be empowered to make periodic 
inspection of the places at which the employment of adolescents is 
prohibited and the hazardous occupation or processes are carried out. The 
Committee feel that the Act should also provide for rehabilitation of 
children and adolescents rescued after such inspection or on any 
complaint filed under Section 16 of the Act. 
 
4.9 The Committee note that trafficking of children from remote areas 
is done to put them in menial jobs which may include working as 
domestic helps, begging, prostitution and drug peddling. The Committee 
note from the reply of the Ministry of Labour & Employm ent that matters 
relating to trafficking and also the street children fall under the 
jurisdiction of Ministry and Women and Child Development and the 
matters relating to criminal offences against children are looked after by 
Ministry of Home Affairs. The C ommittee deplore the causal manner in 
which Ministry of Labour & Employment has replied on a sensitive issue. 
The Committee observe that the number of child beggars at the traffic 
signals, number of children selling small things like flowers, number of rag 
pickers and the number of children working as domestic helps has not 

45 
 
decreased whichever Ministry is looking after the issues involved. Since 
these children are working, they are definitely child labour and need to be 
stopped and put in schools immediatel y.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that all the Ministries involved bring about a comprehensive 
strategy to fight this menace and save the poor children from 
exploitation. 
 
4.10 The Committee find that there is no provision for rescue and 
rehabilitation of children in the present Amendment Bill. The Committee 
note from the reply of the Ministry of Labour and Employment that 
rehabilitation of child into the fold of education is being implemented by 
the Ministry of Human Resource Development. The Ministr y has also 
stated that since the National Child Labour Project hitherto an 
instrument for rehabilitation is not aligned with the RTE Act so it is being 
revamped. The Committee, however, feel that the Act itself should be 
comprehensive to cover all the aspe cts viz. identifying child labour or 
adolescents in hazardous occupations, rescuing them, rehabilitating and 
retaining them in schools till the completion of elementary education. 
The Committee are not sure whether the amendments would yield desired 
results since various Ministries are involved looking after different 
aspects and coordination between different departments is negligible or 
absent and passing the buck by each is a major excuse. The Committee 

46 
 
recommend that instead of having a fragmented appro ach on the issue, 
the Government should bring a New Child Labour Policy and the 
machinery to implement laws, policies and projects should be specified 
therein. 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
11th  December, 2013                                               CHAIRMAN,  
20 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)    STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

47 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 Bill No. LXII of 2012 
 
THE CHILD LABOUR (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2012 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
further to amend the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -third Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
 
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Child Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2012. 
 
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
Short title and commencement. 
 
 
2. In the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 (hereinafter 
referred to as  the principal Act), for the long title, the following shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
 “An Act to prohibit the engagement of children in all occupations and 
to  prohibit the engagement of adolescents in hazardous occupations 
and  processes and the  matters c onnected therewith or incidental 
thereto.”. 
 
 
 

48 
 
Amendment of long title. 
 
 
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), for the words, 
brackets and 
figures “the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986”, the 
words, brackets and  figures “the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition 
and Regulation) Act, 1986” shall be substituted. 
 
Amendment of short title. 
 
4. In section 2 of the principal Act,— 
(a) clause (i) shall be renumbered as clause ( ia) thereof and before clause 
(ia) as 
so renumbered, the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
‘(i) “adolescent” means a person who has completed his fourteenth year 
of age but has not completed his eighteenth year;’; 
(b) for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
‘(ii) “child” means a person who has not completed his fourteenth year of 
age or such age as may be specified in the Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Education Act, 2009, whichever is more;’. 
 
Amendment of section 2. 
 
 
5. For section 3 of the principal A ct, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
 “3. No child shall be employed or permitted to work in any occupation 
or  process: 
  Provided that nothing in this section shall apply where the child 
helps  his family  after his school hours or he lps his family in fields, 
home-based  work, forest gathering  or attends technical institutions 
during vacations for  the purpose of learning, but does  not include any 
help or attending technical  institutions where there is subordinate  
relationship of labour or work which  are outsourced and carried out in 
home.”. 
 
 Substitution of new section for section 3. Prohibition of employment 
of children in any occupation and process 

49 
 
6. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
 
 “3A. No adolescent shall be employed or permitted to work in any of 
the  hazardous occupations or processes set forth in the Schedule.”. 
 
 
Insertion of new section 3A. 
 
Prohibition of employment of adolescents in certain hazardous occupations 
and processes. 
 
 
7. In section 4 of the principal Act, for the words “add any occupation or 
process to the  Schedule”, the words “add to, or, omit from, the Schedule 
any hazardous occupation or process” shall be substituted. 
 
Amendment of section 4. 
 
 
8. Part III of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
 
Omission of Part III. 
 
9. In section 14 of the principal Act,— 
 
(a) for sub -section ( 1), the following sub -sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
 
 “(1) Whoever employs any child or permits any child to work in 
 contravention of the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with 
 imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 
 which may extend to two years’ or with fine which shall not be less 
 than twenty thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand 
 rupees, or with both: 
 
  Provided that the parents or guardians of such children shall 
 not be  punished unless they permit such child for commercial 
 purposes in contravention of the provisions of section 3. 
 

50 
 
 (IA) Whoever employs any adolescent or permits any adolescent to 
 work  in contravention of the provisions of section 3A shall be 
 punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
 six months but which  may extend to two years or with fine which 
 shall not be less than twenty  thousand rupees but which may extend 
 to fifty thousand rupees, or with both: 
 
 
  Provided that the parents or guardians of such adolescent shall 
 not be  punished unless they permit such adolescent to work in 
 contravention of the provisions of section 3A.”; 
 
 (b) in sub-section (2),— 
 
 (i) for the word and figure “section 3”, the words, figures and letter, 
 “section 3 or section 3A” shall be substituted; 
 
 (ii) for the words “six months but which may extend to two years”, the 
 words “one year but which may extend to three years” shall be 
 substituted; 
 
 (c) clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
 
Amendment of section 14. 
 
10. After section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, 
namely:— 
 
 “14A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
 Procedure, 1973, every offence punishable under this Act shall be 
 cognizable.”. 
 
Insertion of new section 14A. 
 
Offences to be cognizable. 
 
11. After section 17, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 

51 
 
 “17A. The appropriate Government may, confer such powers and 
 impose such duties on a District Magistrate as may be necessary, to 
 ensure that the provisions of this Act are properly carried out and the 
 District Magistrate may  specify the officer, subordinate to him, who 
 shall exercise all or any of the powers,  and perform all or any of the 
 duties, so conferred or imposed and the local limits  within which 
 such powers or duties shall be carried out by the officer as may  be 
 prescribed. 
 
Insertion of new sections 17A and 17B. 
 
District Magistrate to implement the provisions. 
 
 
17B. The appropriate Government shall, make or cause to be made 
periodic inspection of the places at which the employment of chil dren is 
prohibited and hazardous occupations or processes are carried out at such 
intervals as it thinks fit, and monitor the issues, relating to the provisions of 
this Act.”. 
 
Inspection and monitoring 
 
12. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), for clauses ( b), (c) 
and (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
 “(b) the powers to be exercised and the duties to be performed by the 
officer 
 specified and the local limits within which such powers or duties shall 
be  carried out under section 17A.”. 
 
Amendment of section 18 
 
 
13. In the principal Act, for the Schedule, the following Schedule shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
‘THE SCHEDULE 
 
(See section 3A) 
     (1) Mines. 

52 
 
  (2) Inflammable substances or explosives. 
                                          (3) Hazardous process. 
 
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this Schedule, “hazardous process” 
has  the meaning assigned to it in clause (cb) of the Factories Act, 1948.’. 
 
 
Substitution of new Schedule for the Schedule 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
 The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 provides for 
prohibition of the engagement of children in certain employments and for 
regulating the conditions of work of children in certain other employments. 
 
2. Section 3 of the said Act, inter alia, provides that employment of children 
below the age of fourteen years is prohibited in any of the occupations or 
processes specified in the  Schedule to the said Act. Section 6 of the said 
Act provides that the provisions of Part III of  the Act (which relates with the 
regulation of conditions of work of children) shall apply to an  establishment 
or a class of establishments in which none of the occupations referred to in  
section 3 is carried on. 
 
3. It is propo sed to prohibit employment of children in all occupations and 
processes to facilitate their enrolment in schools in view of the Right of 
Children to Free and Compulsory  Education Act, 2009 and to prohibit 
employment of adolescents (persons who have  completed fourteenth year 
of age but have not completed eighteenth year) in hazardous  occupations 
and processes and to regulate the conditions of service of adolescents in 
line with the ILO Convention 138 and Convention 182, respectively. 
 
4. The provisions of the Bill, inter alia, provide for— 
 
 (i) the amendment of the long title of the said Act in view of the 
 proposed provision to prohibit employment of children below fourteen 
 years in all  occupations and processes and the proposed provision to 
 prohibit employment of adolescents  (persons who have completed 
 fourteenth year of age but have not completed eighteenth year)  in 
 hazardous occupations and processes set forth in the proposed 
 Schedule; 

53 
 
 
 (ii) the amendment of the short title of the said Act in view of the 
 insertion of the  proposed new definition of “adolescent” whose 
 employment in  hazardous occupations  and processes is also 
 proposed to be prohibited; 
 
 (iii) the insertion of a new definit ion of “adolescent” that means a 
 person who  has completed his fourteenth year of age but not 
 completed his eighteenth year in section 2 of the said Act; 
 
 
 (iv) the amendment of the definition of “child” to provide that child 
 means a person who has not completed his fourteenth year of age or 
 such age as may be  specified in the Right of Children to Free and 
 Compulsory Education Act,  2009, whichever is more; 
 
 (v) the amendment of section 3 of the said Act to prohibit employment 
 of  children in all occ upations and processes except where the 
 child helps his  family after his  school hours or helps his family in 
 fields, home-based work,  forest gathering or attends  technical 
 institutions during vacations for the  purpose of learning, but 
 does not include any help or attending technical  institutions 
 where there is subordinate relationship of labour or work which  are 
 outsourced and carried out in home; 
 
 (vi) the insertion of a new section 3A to prohibit employment of 
 adolescents in  any hazardou s occupations and processes 
 specified in the proposed Schedule; 
 
 (vii) the amendment of section 4 of the said Act to empower the 
 Central Government to add or omit any hazardous occupations and 
 processes from  the Schedule to the proposed legislation; 
 
 (viii) the omission of Part III of the said Act in view of the prohibition 
 of employment of children below fourteen years of age in all 
 occupations and  processes; 
 
 (ix) the amendment of sub -section (1) of section 14 to enhance the 
 punishment from imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
 three  months but which may  extend to one year or with fine which 

54 
 
 shall not be  less than ten thousand rupees but  which may 
 extend to twenty thousand  rupees, to imprisonment for a term 
 which shall not be less than six months  but which may extend to two 
 years, or with fine which shall  not be less than twenty thousand 
 rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or  with both, 
 for employment or permitting any children to work in any
 occupations or processes in contravention of section 3. However, the 
 parents  or guardians of such children shall not be liable for such 
 punishment unless  they permit  such children for commercial 
 purposes; 
 
  
 (x) the insertion of new sub -section ( 1A) in se ction 14 to provide 
 punishment of imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
 six months but  which may extend  to two years, or with fine which 
 shall not be less than  twenty thousand rupees but which may extend 
 to fifty thousand rupees, or  with both for employment or permitting  
 to work any adolescent in any hazardous occupations or  processes. 
 However, the parents or guardians of  such  adolescents shall not 
 be liable for punishment unless they permit  such  adolescents to 
 work in contravention of the provisions of  section 3A; 
 
 (xi) the amendment of sub -section (2) of section 14, which provides 
 punishment for the convicted offender who commits a like offence 
 afterwards, to enhance the  minimum punishment existing therein 
 from six months to one year and maximum  punishment from two 
 years to three years; 
 
 (xii) the insertion of a new section 14A to provide that the offences 
 under the proposed legislation shall be cognizable notwithstanding 
 anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 
 
 (xiii) the omission of the provisions of clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -
 section (3)  of section 14 of the Act in view of the prohibition of the 
 employment of  children below fourteen years in all occupations and 
 processes; 
 
 (xiv) the insertion of new section 17A to empower the appropriate 
 Government to confer such powers and impose such duties on a 
 District  Magistrate as may be  necessary to ensure that the 

55 
 
 provisions of the proposed  legislation are properly carried  out and 
 to empower the District Magistrate to  specify the officer 
 subordinate to him who shall exercise all or any of the  powers 
 and perform all or any of the duties so  conferred or imposed and the 
 local limits within which such powers or duties shal l be carried out by 
 the  officer in accordance with the rules made by the appropriate  
 Government; 
 
 (xv) the insertion of new section 17B which empowers the appropriate 
 Government to make periodic inspection or cause such inspection to 
 be  made, of the places at which the employment of the children is 
 prohibited  and the hazardous occupation or process are carried out, 
 at such intervals as  it thinks fit and monitor the  issues relating to 
 the provisions of the Act; and 
 
 (xvi) the substitution of the  existing Schedule to the Act by new 
 Schedule in view of the prohibition of children in all occupations and 
 processes and  regulation of  employment of adolescents in 
 hazardous occupations and  processes. 
 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
The 21st November, 2012. 
  

56 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CHILD LABOUR (PROHIBITION AND 
REGULATION) ACT, 1986 
 
(61 OF 1986) 
 
*   *    *    *    * 
 
An Act to prohibit the engagement of children in certain employments and 
to regulate the conditions of work of children in certain other employments. 
 
*   *    *    *    * 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Act, 1986. 
 
  
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 
  *   *     *    * 
 
(ii) “child” means a person who has not completed his fourteenth year of 
age; 
 
*   *    *   *     * 
PART II 
PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CHILDREN IN CERTAIN 
OCCUPATIONS AND PROCESSES 
 
3. No child shall be employed or permitted to work in any of the occupations 
set forth in Part A of the Schedule or in any workshop wherein any of the 
processes set forth in Part B of the Schedule is carried on: 
 
  Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any 
workshop  wherein any process is carried on by the occupier with the aid 
of his family  or to any school established by, or receiving assistance or 
recognition from,  Government. 

57 
 
 
4. The Central Government, after giving by notification in the Official 
Gazette, not less than three months’ notice of its intention so to do, may, by 
like notification, add any  occupation or process to the Schedule and 
thereupon the Schedule shall be deemed to have  been amended 
accordingly. 
  
  *    *    *     * 
 
PART III 
REGULATION OF CONDITIONS OF WORK OF CHILDREN 
 
6. The provisions of this Part shall apply to an establishment or a class of 
establishments  in which none of the occupations or processes referred to 
in section 3 is carried on. 
 
7. (1) No child shall be required or permitted to work in any establishment in 
excess of  such number of hours as may be prescribed for such 
establishment or class of establishments. 
 
 (2) The period of work on each day shall be so fixed that no period 
shall exceed three  hours and that no child shall  work for more than three 
hours before he has had an interval for rest for at least one hour. 
 
 (3) The period of work of a child shall be so arranged that inclusive of 
his interval for rest, under sub-section (2), it shall not be spread over more 
than six hours, including the time spent in waiting for work on any day. 
 
 (4) No child shall be permitted or required to work between 7 p.m. 
and 8 a.m. 
 (5) No child shall be required or permitted to work overtime. 
 
  (6) No child shall be required or permitted t o work in any 
establishment on  any day on  which he has already been working in 
another establishment. 
 
8. Every child employed in an establishment shall be allowed in each week, 
a holiday of one whole day, which day shall be specified by the occupier in 
a notice permanently exhibited in a conspicuous place in the establishment 

58 
 
and the day so specified shall not be altered by  the occupier more than 
once in three months. 
 
 
9.  (1) Every occupier in relation to an establishment in which a child was 
employed o r permitted to work immediately before the date of 
commencement of this Act in relation to  such establishment shall, within a 
period of thirty days from such commencement, send to  the Inspector 
within whose local limits the establishment is situated, a wri tten notice 
containing the following particulars, namely:— 
 
 (a) the name and situation of the establishment; 
 (b) the name of the person in actual management of the 
establishment; 
 (c) the address to which communications relating to the establishment 
 should be sent; and 
 (d) the nature of the occupation or process carried on in the 
establishment. 
 
 (2) Every occupier, in relation to an establishment, who employs, or 
permits to work,  any child after the date of commencement of this Act in 
relation to such establishment, shall, within a period of thirty days from the 
date of such employment, send to the Inspector within  whose local limits 
the establishment is situated, a written notice containing the particulars as  
are mentioned in sub-section (1). 
 
Explanation.— For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), “date of 
commencement of this Act, in relation to an establishment” means the date 
of bringing into force of this Act in relation to such establishment. 
 
(3) Nothing in sections 7, 8 and 9 shall a pply to any establishment wherein 
any process is carried on by the occupier with the aid of his family or to any 
school established by, or  receiving assistance or recognition from, 
Government. 
 
10. If any question arises between an Inspector and an occupie r as to the 
age of any 
child who is employed or is permitted to work by him in an establishment, 
the question shall, in the absence of a certificate as to the age of such child 

59 
 
granted by the prescribed medical  authority, be referred by the Inspector 
for decision to the prescribed medical authority. 
 
11. There shall be maintained by every occupier in respect of children 
employed or 
permitted to work in any establishment, a register to be available for 
inspection by an Inspector  at all times during working h ours or when work 
is being carried on in any such establishment, showing— 
 
 
(a) the name and date of birth of every child so employed or permitted to 
work; 
(b) hours and periods of work of any such child and the intervals of rest to 
which 
he is entitled; 
(c) the nature of work of any such child; and 
(d) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
 
12. Every railway administration, every port authority and every occupier 
shall cause to be displayed in a conspicuous and accessible place at every 
station on its railway or within the limits of a port or at the place of work, as 
the case may be, a notice in the local  language and in the English 
language containing an abstract of sections 3 and 14. 
 
13.  (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for the health and safety of the children employed or 
permitted to work in any establishment or class of establishments. 
 
  (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the 
said rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) cleanliness in the place of work and its freedom from nuisance; 
(b) disposal of wastes and effluents; 
(c) ventilation and temperature; 
(d) dust and fume; 
(e) artificial humidification; 
(f) lighting; 
(g) drinking water; 
(h) latrine and urinals; 
(i) spittoons; 

60 
 
(j) fencing of machinery; 
(k) work at or near machinery in motion; 
(l) employment of children on dangerous machines; 
(m) instructions, training and supervision in relation to employment of 
children 
on dangerous machines; 
(n) device for cutting off power; 
(o) self-acting machines; 
(p) easing of new machinery; 
(q) floor, stairs and means of access; 
(r) pits, sumps, openings in floors, etc.; 
(s) excessive weights; 
(t) protection of eyes; 
(u) explosive or inflammable dust, gas, etc.; 
(v) precautions in case of fire; 
(w) maintenance of buildings; and 
(x) safety of buildings and machinery. 
 
  

61 
 
PART IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
14.  (1) Whoever employs any child or permits any child to work in 
contravention of  the provisions of  section 3 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not  be less than three months but 
which may extend to one year or with fine which shall not be  less than ten 
thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty thousand rupees or with  
both. 
 
 (2) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under section 3, 
commits a like  offence afterwards, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be  less than six months but which 
may extend to two years. 
 
 (3) Whoever— 
  
 (a) fails to give notice as required by section 9; or 
 (b) fails to maintain a register as required by section 11 or makes any 
false  entry in any such register; or 
 (c) fails to display a notice containing an abstract of section 3 and this 
 section as required by section 12; or 
 
 *   *   *    *    * 
Penalties. 
 
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to one 
month or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both. 
 *   *   *    *    * 
 
18.  (1) *   *   *   *   * 
 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such  rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:— 
  
 *   *   *   *   * 
 
(b) number of hours for which a child may be required or permitted to work 
under sub-section (1) of section 7; 

62 
 
(c) grant of certificates of age in respect of young persons in employment or 
seeking employment, the medical authorities which may issue such 
certificate, the 
form of such certificate, the charges which may be made thereunder  and 
the manner in which such certificate may be issued: 
 
  Provided that no charge shall be made for the issue of any such 
 certificate if the application is accompanied by evidence of age 
deemed  satisfactory by the authority concerned; 
 
(d) the other particulars which a register maintained under section 11 
should 
contain. 
 
  *   *   *   *   * 
 
  

63 
 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
PART A 
Occupations 
 
Any occupation connected with— 
 
(1) Transport of passengers, goods or mails by railway; 
(2) Cinder picking, clearing of an ash pit or building operation in the railway 
premises; 
(3) Work in a catering establishment at a railway station, involving the 
movement of  a vendor or any other employee of the establishment from 
one platform to another or into or out of a moving train; 
(4) Work relating to the construction of a railway station or with any other 
work 
where such work is done in close proximity to or between the railway lines; 
(5) A port authority within the limits of any port; 
(6) Work relating to selling of crackers and fireworks in shops with 
temporary 
licences; 
(7) Abattoirs/slaughter Houses; 
(8) Automobile workshop and garages; 
(9) Foundries; 
(10) Handling of toxic or inflammable substances or explosives; 
(11) Handloom and powerloom industry; 
(12) Mines (underground and underwater) and collieries; 
(13) Plastic units and fibreglass workshops; 
(14) Employment of children as domestic workers or servants; 
(15) Employment of children in dhabas (road side eateries), restaurants, 
hotels, motels, tea shops, resorts, spas or other recreational centres; 
(16) Diving. 
 
 
  

64 
 
PART B 
Processes 
 
(1) Bidi-making. 
(2) Carpet-weaving including preparatory and incidental process thereof. 
(3) Cement manufacture, including bagging of cement. 
(4) Cloth printing, dyeing and weaving including processes, preparatory and 
incidental thereto. 
(5) Manufacture of matches, explosives and fire-works. 
(6) Mica-cutting and splitting. 
(7) Shellac manufacture. 
(8) Soap manufacture. 
(9) Tanning. 
(10) Wool-cleaning. 
(11) Building and construction i ndustry including processing and polishing 
of granite stones. 
(12) Manufacture of slate pencils (including packing). 
(13) Manufacture of products from agate. 
(14) Manufacturing processes using toxic metals and substances such as 
lead, mercury, manganese, chromium, cadmium, benzene, pesticides and 
asbestos. 
(15) 'Hazardous process' as defined in section 2 (cb) and 'dangerous 
operation' as 
notified in rules under section 87 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948). 
(16) Printing as defined in section 2(k) (iv)  of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 
1948). 
(17) Cashew and cashewnut descaling and processing. 
(18) Soldering processes in electronics industries. 
(19) ‘Aggarbatti' manufacturing. 
(20) Automobile repairs and maintenance including processes incidental 
thereto, 
namely, welding, lathe work, dent beating and painting. 
(21) Brick kilns and roof titles units. 
(22) Cotton ginning and processing and production of hosiery goods. 
(23) Detergent manufacturing. 
(24) Fabrication workshops (ferrous and non-ferrous). 
(25) Gem cutting and polishing. 
(26) Handling of chromite and managanese ores. 
(27) Jute textile manufacture and coir making. 
(28) Lime kilns and manufacture of lime. 

65 
 
(29) Lock making. 
(30) Manufacturing processes having exposure to lead such as primary and 
secondary smelting, welding and cutting of lead -painted metal 
constructions, welding of galvanized or  zinc silicate, polyvinyl chloride, 
mixing (by hand) of crystal glass mass, sanding or scrapping  of lead paint, 
burning of lead in enamelling workshops, le ad mining, plumbing, cable 
making, wire patenting, lead casting, type founding in printing shops. Store 
type setting, assembling of cars, shot making and lead glass blowing. 
(31) Manufacture of cement pipes, cement products and other related work. 
(32) Man ufacturing of glass, glassware including bangles, flourescent 
tubes, bulbs 
and other similar glass products. 
(33) Manufacture of dyes and dye stuff. 
(34) Manufacturing or handling of pesticides and insecticides. 
(35) Manufacturing or processing and handlin g of corrosive and toxic 
substances, 
metal cleaning and photo engraving and soldering processes in electronic 
industry. 
(36) Manufacturing of burning coal and coal briquettes. 
(37) Manufacturing of sports goods involving exposure to synthetic 
materials, 
chemicals and leather. 
(38) Moulding and processing of fibreglass and plastic. 
(39) Oil expelling and refinery. 
(40) Paper making. 
(41) Potteries and ceramic industry. 
(42) Polishing, moulding, cutting, welding and manufacture of brass goods 
in all 
forms. 
(43) Process in agriculture where tractors, threshing and harvesting 
machines are 
used and chaff cutting. 
(44) Saw mill—all processes. 
(45) Sericulture processing. 
(46) Skinning, dyeing and processes for manufacturing of leather and 
leather products. 
(47) Stone breaking and stone crushing. 
(48) Tobacco processing including manufacturing of tobacco, tobacco paste 
and 
handling of tobacco in any form. 

66 
 
(49) Tyre making, repairing, re-treading and graphite benefication. 
(50) Utensils making, polishing and metal buffing. 
(51) 'Zari' making (all processes). 
(52) Electroplating. 
(53) Graphite powdering and incidental processing. 
(54) Grinding of glazing of metals. 
(55) Diamond cutting and polishing. 
(56) Extraction of slate from mines. 
(57) Rag picking and scavenging. 
(58) Processes involving exposure to excessive heat ( e.g. working near 
furnace) and cold. 
(59) Mechanised fishing. 
(60) Food processing. 
(61) Beverage industry. 
(62) Timber handling and loading. 
(63) Mechanical Lumbering. 
(64) Warehousing. 
(65) Processes involving exposure to free silica such as slate, pencil 
industry, stone 
grinding, slate stone mining, stone quarries, agate industry. 
 
  

67 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
 
 
 
further to amend the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986. 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Mallikarjun Kharge, Minister of Labour and Employment.) 
 
GMGIPMRND—3567RS(S3)—27-11-2012. 
  

68 
 
           ANNEXURE-II 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 7th February, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 
1634 hrs. in Committee Room `C', Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
   MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
3. Shri Narahari Mahato 
4. Shri Hari Manjhi 
5. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
6. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
7. Shri K. Sugumar 
8. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
10. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
11. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
12. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 13. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 14. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 

69 
 
          1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary  
 2.  Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
  
Witnesses 
Representatives of Ministry of Labour and Employment     
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer   Designation 
1. Dr. Mrutyunjay Sarangi Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Swarup Additional Secretary 
3. Shri A.C. Pandey Joint Secretary (CL) 
 
4. Shri P.K. Padhi  PLEA 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other 
officials of the Ministry of Labour and Employment and invited their 
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 (1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker.   
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment briefed the 
Committee on the amendments proposed in ` The Child Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2012' through a power 
point presentation. 
4. The Members, thereafter, raised several issues and also sought 
clarifications on the following matters:-  

70 
 
 (i) Steps taken by the Ministry to rehabilitate and for   
  education of rescued, orphaned, abducted and lost   
  children; 
 (ii) Strengthening of penalty provisions in case of violation of 
  the Act; 
 (iii) Provision for Inspection Committee to oversee the   
  implementation and fix responsibility under the Act; 
 (iv) Reasons for long delay in bringing amendments in the  
  Act  to align with ILO Convention 138 (1973) and ILO  
  Convention 182 (1999); 
 (v) Rationale of aligning provision regarding age of a child  
  with the provision of `The Right of Children to Free and  
  Compulsory Education Act' or Right to Education Act  
  (RTE) and not the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection  
  of  Children) Act, 2000; 
 (vi) Likely misuse and exploitation of children due to the  
  provision allowing children to work  after school hours  
  and during vacations in `home based' work; 
 (vii) Need for distinction between male and female child   
  in assessing `hazardous occupation' under the Act; 
 (viii) Number of prosecutions launched and convictions   
  under the Act till date including action against Agencies  
  supplying domestic help or for other work areas; 

71 
 
 (ix) Making District Magistrate responsible for    
  implementation of the Act (without any accountability); 
 (x) Categorization of children above 14 years as    
  `adolescents';  and 
 (xi) Difference in figures of various agencies in regard to the  
  number of children engaged in child labour.   
 
5. The Chairman directed the Secretary to send written replies to 
the unanswered queries of the members to the Secretariat. The 
Secretary assured to furnish the requisite information as desired. 
6. The Chairman then thanked the Secretary and other officials 
for giving valuable info rmation to the Committee and responding to 
the queries of the Members.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record] 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

72 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 29th May, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1720   
hrs. in Committee Room `E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
   MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ismail Hussain 
3. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4. Shri Narahari Mahato 
5. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
6. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
7. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
8. Shri K. Sugumar 
9. Shri Ashok Argal 
10. Smt. J. Shantha 
11. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
13. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
15. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
16. Shri Rajaram 
 17. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 18. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 

73 
 
 
 
2.  XX    XX    XX 
3.  XX    XX    XX 
4.  XX    XX    XX 
5.  XX    XX    XX 
6.  XX    XX    XX 
7.  XX    XX    XX 
8.  XX    XX    XX 
9.  XX    XX    XX   
Part-II 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer Organisation 
 
1. Shri Kailash Satyarthi 
 
 
Global March, Bachpan 
Bachao Andolan 
 
2. Shri Bhuwan Ribhu -do- 
 
3. Shri Saifur Rahman, AGM 
 
Child Rights and You (CRY) 
 
4. Shri Pankan Mehta, AGM -do- 
 
5. Ms. Bharti Ali, Co-Director HAQ, Centre for Child Rights 
 
 
10. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
NGOs to the sitting of the Committee convened to hear their views 
on `The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 

74 
 
2012’ and invited their attention to the provisions contained in  
Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker.  The Chairman, 
thereafter, sought their views on the various provisions of  `The 
Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2012’ in 
the first instance. 
 
11. The representatives of the NGOs  deposing before the 
Committee expressed their views and gave their suggestions on 
various provisions of the Bill.  Some of the major views expressed by 
them related to the following provisions:-  
 
(i) Difficulties faced due to the present laws in rehabilitation 
of children after their release. 
(ii) Definition of child labour and definition of hazardous 
occupation 
(iii) Child worker upto 14 years of age has been defined as 
illegal but there is no provision for rescue and 
rehabilitation. 
(iv) Penalty provision which is being proposed to Rs.50,000 is 
not appropriate and should be Rupees one lakh with 
imprisonment of 3-7 years. 
(v) Due to lacunae in laws only 10 percent cases have been 
prosecuted and out of that not even one percent 
convicted. 
(vi) Special courts for trial of such cases to speed up process. 

75 
 
(vii) Mental and physical pressure on child artists in 
entertainment industry. 
(viii) Rising cases of domestic helps which is leading to human 
trafficking. 
 
12. The queries raised by members pertaining to the Bill were also 
responded to by the representatives of NGOs. 
 
13. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of NGOs for 
giving valuable suggestions on the Bill. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record] 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----XX  Matter do not pertain to this report. 
 
  

76 
 
   Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 18th November, 2013 from 1 100 hrs. to 
1300 hrs. in Room No.G-074, Parliament Library Building , New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Dr. Manda Jagannath – In the Chair 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri Narahari Mahato 
3.      Shri Hari Manjhi 
4.      Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
5.      Smt. J. Shantha 
6.    Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
7.      Shri K. Sugumar 
8.     Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
 
   Rajya Sabha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
9. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
10. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
11. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
12. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
13. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
         
 
 
 

77 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri A.K Singh   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
SL. 
NO. 
NAME OF THE OFFICER ORGANISATION 
 
1. Smt. Gauri Kumar 
 
Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Khachi Joint Secretary (CL) 
3. Shri A.C. Pandey Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Chanan Ram Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE 
DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION AND LITERACY) 
 
SL. 
NO. 
NAME OF THE OFFICER ORGANISATION 
 
1. Shri R. Bhattarcharya 
 
Secretary 
2. 
 
Shri Nagesh Singh Economic Advisor 
3. Shri Kalyan Hazra Consultant 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD 
DEVELOPMENT 
SL. 
NO. 
NAME OF THE OFFICER ORGANISATION 
 
1.  Ms. Nita Chowdhury  
 
Secretary 
2. Dr. Vivek Joshi 
 
Joint Secretary 
 

78 
 
 
2.   At the outset, the Committee Secretariat informed the Members 
that due to certain preoccupation, the Chairman would not be able 
to attend the sitting.  The Committee, therefore, chose Dr. Manda 
Jagannath, MP to act as Chairman for the sitting under the 
provision of Rule 258 (3) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha.  
3.  XX    XX   XX 
(At about 1115 hrs. the witnesses took their seats in the Committee 
Room) 
4. The acting Chairman then welcomed the Secretar ies of 
Ministries of Labour and Employment, Hu man Resource 
Development and Women and Child Development and other officials 
of the concerned Ministries to the sitting and invited their attention 
to the provisions contained in Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by 
the Speaker.  
5. After introductions, t he Secretary, Ministry of Labour & 
Employment briefed the Committee on the amendments proposed 

79 
 
in `The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 
2012’. 
6. The Members, thereafter, raised several issues and also sought 
clarifications on the following:- 
(i) Coordination between concerned Ministries and 
Departments while formulating the proposed amendments. 
(ii) Rehabilitation of poor parents who depend on the child for 
income. 
(iii) Ambiguity in the definition of a `child’ and `adolescent’. 
(iv) Defining `hazardous occupation’ in the context of child 
labour. 
(v) Problems and achievements of Integrated Child 
Development Services (ICDS) Scheme and revamping of the 
Scheme. 
(vi) Review of National Child Labour Project. 
(vii) Constitution of Vigilance and Monitoring Committees. 
(viii) Measures to reduce dropout rate of children. 
(ix) Definition of `commercial purposes’. 
(x) Welfare of street children and orphans. 
 

80 
 
7. The acting Chairman then directed the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labo ur & Employment to send   written replies to the 
Supplementary List of Points and unanswered queries of the 
Members to the Secretariat within ten days. 
 
8. The acting Chairman then thanked the Secretaries and other 
officials of Ministries of Labour & Emplo yment, Human Resource 
Development and Women and Child Development for giving valuable 
information to the Committee and responding to the queries of the 
Members. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record] 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
XX  Matter do not pertain to this report. 
  

81 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 11 th December, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in Committee Room `C’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
   Shri Dara Singh Chauhan - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri Ashok Argal 
3.      Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4.    Shri Hari Manjhi 
5.      Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
6.      Smt. J. Shantha 
7.    Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
 
   Rajya Sabha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
8. Shri D. Bandoyapadhyay 
9. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
10. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
11. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri A.K Singh   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

82 
 
2.   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and 
apprised them about the Draft Report on `The Child Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2012'  to be 
considered and adopted. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report 
without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the 
report to both Houses of Parliament. 
 
5.    XX    XX    XX 
 
6.    XX    XX    XX 
7.   XX    XX    XX 
    
  8.   XX    XX    XX 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
XX    Matter do not pertain to this report. 