 
24 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on 'Development of Jute Sector] 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
       March, 2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


2 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on 'Development of jute Sector] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.03.2012  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.03.2012  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
            March, 2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
       
     PAGE(S) 
       
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
   
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………..  
  
*CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
accepted by the Government…………………………. 
*CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
*CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration………… 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
which  replies of the Government  are interim  
in nature    …………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.  
    
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth  
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
  

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
2. Shri Raj Babbar 
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
        **5. Shri Pakauri Lal 
6. Shri Narahari Mahato 
         7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Ms. Mausam Noor 
10. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
14. Ms. J. Shantha 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
*16. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
     21. Vacant 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
25. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        28. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
        29. Shri Rajaram 
        30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri G. N. Ratanpuri 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*    Nominated w.e.f 25th November, 2011. 
**   Change in nomination from Committee on Labour to Committee     
on Coal and Steel w.e.f  3rd January, 2012. 
 
 
 

5 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri B.S. Dahiya    - Director  
 3.    Shri Arvind Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
 4.    Shri Ashikho Alemo  - Executive Assistant   
         
  
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having 
been authorised  by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Twenty -Fourth Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on 'Developme nt of Jute Sector' of the Ministry of 
Textiles. 
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.03.2011.  The Ministry of Textiles 
furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in tha t Report on 05.08.2011.  The 
Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Labour at their sitting held on   16.01.2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed 
in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
New Delhi:                                       HEMANAND BISWAL, 
21st March, 2012                                                                          CHAIRMAN,                        
 1 Chaitra , 1934 (Saka)                             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR. 
 

7 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Development of Jute 
Sector' pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha, and laid 
in Rajya Sabha, on 08.03.2011.  It contained 14 
recommendations.  The replies of Government in respect of all 
the recommendations have been received and categorized as 
under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which  Total-07 
have been accepted by the Government  Chapter-II 
Paragraph Sl.Nos. 2.23, 3.26, 3.27, 3.28,  
3.29, 3.30 and 3.31. 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the  Total- NIL 
Committee do not desire to pursue    Chapter-III 
in view of the Government's reply. 
Paragraph Sl.No. NIL 
            
 

8 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect    Total-03 
 of which replies of Government have not been     Chapter-
IV 
 accepted by the Committee and which require  
 reiteration. 
Paragraph Sl.Nos. 2.24, 2.25 and 3.32. 
           
           
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect      Total-04 
of which replies of the Government are interim     Chapter-V 
in nature. 
Paragraph Sl.Nos.  1.21, 1.22, 2.22 and 2.26. 
                   
                
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes in 
respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter I and 
final action taken notes in respect of recommendations 
contained in Chapter -V for which only interim replies have 
been given by the Government may be furnished to t hem at 
the earliest and in any case not later than 3 months of the 
presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken replies of 
the Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 

9 
 
 
A. Crop Insurance for Jute Growing Farmers  
 
(Recommendation at Para No.1.21) 
 
 
5.  The Committee had found that the National Agricultural 
Insurance Scheme (NAIS) launched by Government of India and 
implemented through the State Government of West Bengal for 
providing crop insurance coverage to the jute growing farmers 
was limited to cert ain blocks, selected by the State Government. 
The total number of beneficiaries during the years 2007, 2008 
and 2009 were 3213, 2636 and 6645 respectively in West Bengal 
whereas there were more than 40 lakh jute growing farmers in 
the country. The jute far mers of other States were not provided 
any crop insurance coverage. The Committee had, therefore, 
recommended that the NAIS be extended to all Jute growing 
areas or a new central insurance scheme be launched at the 
earliest to cover jute growing farmers in  all the jute growing 
States. The Committee had also desired that the modalities of 
such a Scheme be finalized and implemented well before the next 
sowing season of the jute crop.  
 
6. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 
 
'The matter is pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture.  However, 
the Directorate of Jute Development, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Government of India has already taken up the matter with the 

10 
 
jute growing States for providing crop in surance coverage to 
the jute growing farmers under the NAIS. 
The suggestion of the Standing Committee on Labour would be 
communicated to the concerned authorities.'' 
 
 
7. The Committee are concerned to note that although the  
Directorate of Jute Developmen t, Ministry of Agriculture has 
reportedly taken up the matter of providing crop insurance 
coverage to the jute growing farmers under the National 
Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) in all the jute growing 
States but  the Ministry of Textiles obviously fai led even to 
forward and follow up, the recommendation with the Ministry 
of Agriculture.  The Committee are quite apprehensive that the 
poor jute growing farmers would not risk investing money on a 
crop prone to natural calamities and diseases which may cau se 
a serious setback to the jute production.  Mindful of the great 
potential of a natural fibre like jute and its multiple uses and 
the enormous benefits that can accrue to the poor cultivators, 
the nation and the ecology in the long run, the Committee, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the 
Ministry of Textiles take up the matter of providing crop 
insurance coverage to all jute growing areas in the country at 
the appropriate level of the Government with a sense of 
urgency and the Commit tee be apprised of the initiative taken 
and the outcome thereof without delay. 
 

11 
 
Provision of Safety Equipments to the Workers 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 2.22) 
 
8. In the course of their study visit to some private jute mills 
in Kolkata, the Committee were shocked to see hazardous and 
stifling working conditions of the workers and were astounded to 
observe that in such extremely hazardous condition not a single 
worker was using any safety equipment viz., helmet, mask, 
handgloves, safety jackets etc. The workers even informed the 
Committee that they `have not been provided any safety 
equipments by the mill management’.  
 
 The Committee had found that the jute mill owne rs were 
blatantly violating the statutory norms on safety and health of 
the workers due to inaction on the part of the Regional Labour 
Commissioners and apathetic attitude of the Government.  
 The Committee had, therefore, recommended that periodic 
inspections be carried out by the Regional Labour 
Commissioners of the States and prepare fact finding report and 
submit the same to the Chief Labour Commissioner. 
 
9. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment stated as follows: 
 
'It is submitted that the State Government is the 
appropriate Government for the Jute Mills to ensure safety 

12 
 
and health of workers.  Moreover, the Factories Act, 1948 is 
being enforced by the Chief Inspector of Factories/Directorate 
of the State Governments.   
 
 Accordingly, we have written to seven State 
Governments where production of jute is concentrated to 
instruct Chief Inspector of Factories, who is an officer of the 
State Government, to inspect each jute mill withi n a month 
and prevent any violations and also ensure proper use of 
safety norms by the workers.   They have also been advised 
that in case any technical assistance is required then the O/o 
the Director General of Factory Advice Service and Labour 
Institutions (DG FASLI), Mumbai may be contacted.  A copy of 
our letter dated 11.07.2011 is enclosed.' 
 
10. In their report presented to Parliament on 8 th March, 
2011, the Committee had recommended that periodic 
inspections be carried out by the Regional Labour 
Commissioners of the States and a fact finding report be 
submitted to the Chief Labour Commissioner. The Committee 
note that the Ministry of Labour and Employment has issued 
advisory to seven jute producing States on 11 th July, 2011 
requesting the State Gover nments to instruct the Chief 
Inspector of Factories, (an officer of the State Government), to 
inspect each jute mill within a month and prevent any 
violations and also ensure proper use of safety norms by the 

13 
 
workers.  Taking note of the pathetic working c onditions of 
jute mill workers and the vital aspect of their security, just 
and humane conditions of work mandated by the Constitution, 
the Committee strongly urge that the matter be vigorously 
pursued by the Ministry of Labour & Employment and Ministry 
of Textiles with the State Governments till the material 
objectives are realized.  The Union Government cannot escape 
responsibility by invoking the plea of State subject as huge 
sums are released by the Union Government to the States.  If 
necessary, the non -cooperative attitude of the defaulter State 
governments could also be brought to the notice of concerned 
Chief Ministers and also the Planning Commission of India.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the prophylactic 
and punitive measures initiated by the Government of India to 
ameliorate the working conditions of jute Mill workers within 
three months of the presentation of this Report to Parliament.  
The Committee are of the view that merely instructing the 
State Governments to inspect jute mills to ensure that safety 
norms are being adhered to by the jute mill owners may not 
yield the desired results and therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry of Textiles in coordination with Ministry of Labour 
and Employment obtain regular quarterly reports with d etails 
of inspections made, number of violations of safety norms by 
jute mills in each State, nature of violation and action taken 
against those found violating safety norms by the State 
Governments and necessary corrective measures taken to 

14 
 
ensure safety of workers.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by the respective State 
Governments in this regard. 
 
 
Need to provide space for Construction of Dwelling 
units for workers 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 2.24) 
 
11. The Committee had observed that though several 
developmental schemes for jute sector had been launched by the 
Government, the issue of dwelling space for jute mill workers was 
not being addressed.  The workers continued to live in shifts due 
to space constraint and were forced to live in pitiable unhygienic 
conditions without basic amenities. The Committee had, 
therefore, strongly recommended that specific guidelines be 
issued to each mill owner/management asking them to provide 
space for construction of dw elling units for their workers out of 
the surplus land available with the mills. To help the mill owners 
in their endeavour to do so, the Committee had desired that a 
well devised central scheme could be launched with a suitable 
component of financial assi stance to the mill owners who 
undertake construction of dwelling units for the workforce.  
 

15 
 
12. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry stated: 
 "Matter is pertaining to Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
 However, under the National Jute Board Act, part of the 
 Board’s  charter is to provide for the welfare of workers in 
 jute-producing  units. To  this end, the Ministry of Textiles 
 seeks to formulate  relevant schemes for the welfare of 
 workers both in jute mills and in small units producing JDPs. 
 
  In the first phase, National Jute Board (NJB) started 
 implementation of the following schemes:  
  (a) To improve the sanitation, health facilities and   
   working conditions in the mill sector; and  
  (b) To provide incentives to the small and medium JDP  
   units for compliance with prescribed working   
   conditions."  
 
13. The Committee decry the reply of the Ministry of Textiles 
as instead of taking follow -up action, there is a definite but 
deplorable at tempt to escape responsibility.  At least, the 
matter should have been taken in right earnest with the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment. Further, the Committee 
would like to know the action taken on their specific 
recommendation to issue guidelines to each mill 

16 
 
owner/management asking them to provide space for 
construction of dwelling units for their workers out of the 
surplus land available with the mills with a suitable component 
of central financial assistance to the mill owners who 
undertake construction of dwelling units for the workforce.   
 
 
Textile Workers’ Rehabilitation Fund Scheme 
(TWRFS)  
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 2.25) 
 
14. The Committee had observed that not even a single worker 
of the closed jute mills had been provided with any financial 
benefit under the Textile Workers' Rehabilitation Fund Scheme. 
The insipid explanation furnished by the Ministry that no 
application had been received in this regard from the office of 
Textile Commissioner and that 'at present none of the jute mills 
have been declared closed under sector 25(O) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act and hence no relief has been extended under the 
scheme’ was irrespo nsible and anti worker. The Committee had 
recommended that guidelines of the TWRFS be amended and the 
requirement of permission under section 25(O) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 be done away with. The Committee were of 
the view that senior officers from the office of Textile 

17 
 
Commissioner should visit the mill which were declared closed 
and after due verification, the approval for disbursement of relief 
to its eligible workers must be given expeditiously but preferably 
within three months positively.  Further, the Committee 
recommended that for any undue delay in disbursement of relief, 
personal responsibility of the concerned officer must be fixed and 
progress made in this regard might be intimated to the 
Committee within six months. 
 
15. In the actio n taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 
 
'Under TWRFS guidelines one of the essential conditions to 
become eligible under TWRFS is that a mill should have been 
closed after 5.6.1985 and declared as closed under  Section 
25(O) of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or alternatively an 
Official Liquidator should have been appointed under the 
Companies Act, 1956. 
None of the closed jute mills are fulfilling any of the above two 
eligibility conditions regarding the legal c losure and hence in 
terms of the existing TWRFS guidelines, the workers of the 
closed jute mills, as on date, are not eligible for relief under 
existing TWRFS guidelines. 
A detailed proposal for relaxation of the conditions of the 
existing TWRFS guidelines had moved to Cabinet in July 2009 

18 
 
for modification of the Scheme.  However, the same was not 
supported by the Ministry of Finance.' 
 
16. The Committee are surprised to note that although nine 
private jute mills were closed in different States, yet no 
financial benefits under the Textile Workers' Rehabilitation 
Fund Scheme (TWRFS) were provided to the workers of these 
closed jute mills on the ground that none of the jute mills 
were declared closed under Section 25(O) of the Industrial 
Dispute Act, 1947 nor the Official Liquidator appointed under 
the Companies Act, 1956 with respect to them.  While 
observing that a detailed proposal for relaxation of the 
conditions of existing TWRFS guidelines was moved by the 
Ministry of Textiles to the Cabinet in July 2009,  the 
Committee observe that the proposal for relaxation of TWRFS 
guidelines was mooted by the Ministry of Textiles in July 
2009, but apparently for want of sound empirical study and 
the inability to reflect the conditions of the jute mill workers, 
the prop osal did not get the Government approval.  
Surprisingly, no renewed efforts were made to work out a 
sound proposal reflecting the deplorably inhuman conditions 
of the jute workers before seeking the Government approval.  
Obviously, there is lack of resolute will and firm determination 
to ameliorate the inhuman living conditions of the jute mill 
workers.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendations that the Government take immediate 

19 
 
necessary action for verification of closed mills by t he Textile 
Commissioner and the relief under TWRFS be extended to the 
affected workers of the closed jute mills without any further 
delay.  The Committee should like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard.   
 
Widening the purview of JPM Act  
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 3.32) 
 
 
17. The Committee had noted that only foodgrain and sugar were 
under the purview of the Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory 
Use in Packing Commodities) Act, 1987 and recommended that 
orders issued under the clause 3(1) of the Act with regard to the 
coverage of commodities to be considered for compulsor y 
packaging be reviewed annually by the Government.  The 
Committee had deplored the lopsided approach of the Ministry and 
had recommended that at least packaging of foodgrain and sugar 
be made compulsory under the JPM Act so as to put an end to any 
speculation of volatility and to create an atmosphere of confidence 
in the jute sector.  The Committee had also desired that more 
commodities be brought under the purview of the JPM Act and 
recommended that Ministry of Textiles undertake R&D activities to 
improve the quality of jute as a packaging material. 
 
18. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 

20 
 
 
'The Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in Packing 
Commodities) Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred as JP M Act, 
1987) was enacted to provide for the compulsory use of jute 
packaging material in the supply and distribution of certain 
commodities in the interests of production of raw jute and jute 
packing material and of persons engaged in the production 
thereof, and for matters connected therewith.  The Act was 
enacted mainly to protect the interest of persons engaged in 
raw jute production and jute industry. 
Clause 4(1) of the JPM Act empowers the Central Government 
to constitute Standing Advisory Committee (SAC) consisting of 
such persons as have, in the opinion of the Government, the 
necessary expertise to give advice in the matter of determining 
the commodity or class of commodities or percentages thereof 
in respect of which jute packaging material shall b e used in 
packaging commodities. 
 
Clause 3(2) of the Jute packaging Material (Compulsory Use in 
Packing Commodities) Rules, 1987 provides that the members 
of the SAC shall hold office for a term of three years. 
 
Clause 3(5) of the Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in 
Packing Commodities )Rules, 1987 stipulates that the 
Committee shall meet at least once a year to review the 
commodities or class of commodities or percentage thereof, 

21 
 
required to be packed in jute packaging material under section 
3 of the JPM Act, 1987. 
 
The objective behind the annual review is to examine the 
availability of raw jute, jute materials, production of the 
commodities required to be packed each year and to determine 
the level of reservation so that the supply chain of jute ba gs 
for packing such commodities does not get adversely affected. 
 
Continued reliance on sacking of the organized jute mills has 
been a bottleneck to modernization.  A very small portion of 
the annual turnover of jute mills goes into purchase of new 
machines and the off take from the Technology Upgradation 
Fund and Jute Technology Mission is also quite low.  Due to 
slow pace of modernization in the jute industry compared to 
what the Textiles industry has achieved, it is imperative that 
the industry should come to rely less on sacking. 
 
It may be mentioned in this connection that JPM Act, 1987 
defines that "Commodity" means any essential commodity or 
any article manufactured or produced by any scheduled 
industry.  If at all any commodity is considered to be br ought 
under the purview of JPM Act, the commodity has to be an 
essential commodity as per Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
and a product of any scheduled industry under Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. 

22 
 
 
Amendments in the JPM Act 1987 may h ave to be done to 
bring other commodities under the purview of the Act.'  
 
19. The Committee are dismayed to note that despite the 
admission by the Government that amendments in the Jute 
Packaging Materials (compulsory use in packaging 
commodities) Act, 19 87 may have to be done to bring other 
commodities under the purview of the Act, no concrete steps 
have been taken by the Government in this regard. While 
endorsing the present mechanism of contribution of Standing 
Advisory Committee (SAC) to give advice in  the matter of 
determining the commodity or class of commodities or 
percentages thereof in respect of which jute packaging 
material shall be used in packaging commodities, t he 
Committee recommend that JPM Act 1987 be suitably 
amended and a fixed percentage  of the total production of 
essential commodities like pulses and cereals be earmarked to 
be compulsorily packed in jute.  The Committee have reason 
to believe that such an amendment would act as a catalyst for 
an overall increase in the production of jute  and help ensure 
that the interest of the persons/workers engaged in jute 
production Industry do not get adversely affected even in 
times of natural calamities and also ensure that jute mills 
keep functioning in troubled times.   
 

23 
 
20. The Committee are als o concerned to note low offtake 
from the Technology Upgradation Fund and Jute Technology 
Mission by the Jute Mills is resulting in slow pace of 
modernization of the Jute Industry.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Government to take necessary steps to 
ensure modernization of Jute Mills and also recommend that 
regular workshops and training programmes for workers be 
conducted and information on the multiple uses of jute 
disseminated to promote commercial use of jute not only as a 
packaging material but als o for various other purposes given 
the artistic ingenuity of our artisans and the industry. 
 

24 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.23) 
Payment of Statutory Dues to Workers:-  
The Committee were pained to note that crores of rupees of 
workers were pending recovery from jute mill owners/management 
under PF and ESIC, as old dues.  This had raised serious question 
over the efficacy of the functioning of the offices of the CPFC and 
DG, ESIC and CLC.  Obviously, the workers were forced to go on 
strikes every now and then when the law enforcement machinery 
abdicate its responsibility or failed to uphold the law.  The 
Committee recommended that a mill -wise assessment of dues of 
workers be undertaken and recovery process wherever applicable be 
started with immediate effect. 
 
The Committee also recommended that all the 
departments/agencies of Central Government, viz.  Jute 
Commissioner, Textile Commissioner, CPFC, DG, ESIC and CLC 
(C) shou ld compulsorily meet along with the officials of State 
Labour departments at least in every six months to discuss and 
resolve the issues pertaining to the jute growing farmers, workers 
engaged in Jute mills and mill owners.  A report on issues raised, 

25 
 
discussion held and action taken/proposed to be taken in every 
such meeting should invariably be furnished to and monitored by 
both the Ministries at highest level regularly till the problems of 
Jute Industry persist. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Enforcement of Social Security Act:-  
 
Secretary (L&E), in December 2008 conveyed to Government 
of West Bengal that it has been decided to initiate a special drive for 
more effective enforcement of social security laws viz. EPF & MP 
Act, 1952, ESI Act, 1948 and Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 and as 
such the CPFC, DG, ESIC and CLC (C)   were   requested for a 
comprehensive survey in Jute Mills and Plantation Workers for 
extension of benefits as well as constitution of joint survey team 
consisting EPFO/ESIC/State Labour Depar tment and 
representatives of employers and workers. In a meeting taken by 
Secretary (L&E) on 21.01.2010 on the recovery of EPF/ESI 
arrears/dues from the Jute Mills in West Bengal, EPFO/ESIC was 
directed to compile the following information: 
i) Mill-wise case history of accumulations of dues and its 
recovery and summary position of the total amount due 
and its period, details of court cases indicating stay, if 
granted, etc.; 

26 
 
ii) What action EPFO/ESIC has taken/is taking to recover 
arrears against the estab lishment before getting it 
registered under BIFR; 
iii) Proceedings in the Court in all cases should be expedite 
and wherever stay order is there, an application be 
moved to get the stay vacated on an appeal be filed in 
higher court; 
iv) Whether any arrear pertaining to previous years have 
been recovered during 2009 -2010?  If so, the amount, 
Mill-wise; 
v) What is the status of current compliance?  If dues are 
not being paid what action is being taken; and 
vi) Number of employees covered under each mill. 
 
Following above directions, a Joint Inspection Team of EPFO 
and the ESIC was formed.  First round of joint inspection was 
conducted from 2 -31st March, 2010 and the second round of joint 
inspection was conducted from 1-28th September, 2010.  
 
Joint Inspection of Jute Mills:- 
 
The outcome of the Joint Inspection conducted by ESIC and 
EPFO in respect of Jute Mills as far as ESIC coverage is concerned 
is as under: 
 
 

27 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
 Region 
No. of 
Units 
Inspected 
No. of 
coverable 
but not 
covered 
employees 
detected 
No. of 
Declaration 
Forms 
received 
Insurance 
Numbers 
allotted 
1. Barrackpore 23 4512 2880 2874 
2. Kolkata 73 16883 4744 4744 
3. Total 96* 21395 7624 7618 
 
The action taken under the provisions of the ESI Act, 1948 in 
respect of 96 units inspected is as follows: 
 No Action required   :  10 
  No. of cases and amount paid by the: 27(`19,36,646) 
  Employer against the action taken   
  No. of C-19 issued   : 45 
  No. of cases under process  : 14 
      TOTAL : 96 
Summary of the action taken in case of  86 units    
      (in `) 
Name of the 
Region 
C-
18 
45-
A 
C-
19 
D-
18 
85-
B 
D-
19 
Amount 
Involved 
No. of 
Court 
Cases 
Amount 
Involved 
Barrackpore 23 22 15 5 5 0 522218618 08  
31255221 
Kolkata 63 34 30 0 0 0     8553187 12    
3198677 
Total 86 56 45 5 5 0 530771805 20 34453898 
Note:  
1. C-18:  Show Cause Notice to Employer regarding contribution. 
2. 45-A:  Order under Section 45A reg. determination of 
contribution. 
3. C-19: Order to Recovery Officer reg, recovery of contribution.  

28 
 
4. D-18: Show Cause Notice regarding damages. 
5. 85-B: Order regarding recovery of damages.   
6. D-19: Order to Recovery Officer reg. recovery of damages. 
 
All legal action has been taken to get the stay vacated.  Separate 
lawyers have been engaged by the ESIC for reviewing/pursuing the 
cases in Court/BIFR as directed by Ministry of Labour & 
Employment. 
 
 
Recovery  of dues of Workers:- 
 
EPFO has informed that an amount of ` 825.87 lakh has been 
recovered up to 30.06.2011 from defaulting Jute mills in Sub -
Regional Office, Howrah and an amount of Rs. 4402.91 lakh is still 
outstanding.  All necessary action to recover the dues is being 
taken by the organisation.  A Statement of default 
position/litigation status, Jute mill -wise   is   at   Annexure-A.   
During   the   joint inspection carried out in February 2010 to 
April, 2010, 10,030 cases of evasion of membership were detected 
for which 7A enquiry has been init iated in majority of the cases as 
detailed in Annexure-B.  Similarly, another joint inspection was 
carried out during the month of September and October, 2010.  In 
this drive, 9616 cases of evasion for non -membership were 
detected by the squad as per details given in Annexure-C.    
 

29 
 
Regarding status of arrears and current demands, out of total 
default of Rs. 17134.56 lakhs towards arrear demand, a sum of Rs. 
3785.47 lakhs has been recovered upto 31.05.2011 leaving a 
balance of Rs. 13359.09 lakhs.  Similarly, out of total default of Rs. 
17632.60 lakhs towards current demand, a sum of Rs. 3793.65 
lakhs have been recovered upto 31.05.2011 leaving a balance of 
Rs. 1338.95 lakhs.  Details are given in Annexure-D.  About 85% 
of the dues are locked up in litigation  in High Court.  Vacation 
petitions, as directed by Ministry of Labour & Employment, have 
been filed in most of the cases.  On 08.06.2010, the RPFC, Kolkata 
convened a meeting with Panel Lawyers for taking all possible 
measures to realize such pending dues . The department is also 
proposing to write to Hon’ble Chief Justice of Kolkata High Court 
with a view to constitute a Special Bench to deal exclusively with 
PF cases.  
 
EPFO has also informed that with respect to coverage and 
increase in subscription, special squad of Enforcement Officers for 
the purpose of coverage and detection of evasion of membership 
was constituted.  Similar squads have been constituted by Sub -
Regional Office, Park Street, Barrack pore, Howrah, Durgapur and 
Port Blair. 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
Payment of Gratuity 
 
 
It is submitted that as per details relating to the gratuity 
cases in respect of employees of the jute mills falling in the Central 
sphere, out of 30 nos. of gratuity case, 29 cases have already been 
disposed of  as per information obtained from the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (C), Kolkata (list attached). As already submitted the 
State Government is the appropriate authority to implement 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. 
 
Regarding providing soft loans to the mills for the purpose of 
settling dues of the workers, Textile Ministry may incorporate their 
reply suitably.  As regards time frame of six months to complete 
this exercise, Textile Ministry may take a lead in this regard.  As 
far as this Ministry is concerned, we have already constituted joint 
teams of ESIC/EPFO/State Governments to monitor recoveries of 
PF/ESI/Gratuity dues.  
 
{Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/5/2011-Parl. dated 05.08.2011} 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3.26) 
 
Modernization of jute mills:- 
 
The Committee observed that lack of modernization and 
underutilization of installed capacity of the 78 jute mills in the 

31 
 
country had resulted to a dismal outcome.  Though modernization 
of jute mills was one of the issues incorporated in Jute Technology 
Mission, no significant results had been achieved.  The Committee, 
therefore recommended that norms under JTM be relaxed and 
that a mill -wise study be conducted to ascertain the actual 
requirement of funds by the  mill owners for modernization. The 
Committee were quite optimistic that such efforts would not only 
go a long way in ensuring enhanced profitability of the jute mills 
but also enable the mill owners to clear all the statutory dues of 
the workers in time.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It may be mentioned that out of the total number of 78 
composite jute mills which were operating during the period of 
reporting, 10 jute mills (including six NJMC jute mills) were closed 
for more than five years. Accordingly, tho se mills could not be 
considered for calculation of capacity utilization. The list of jute 
mills which have been closed for more than five years at the time of 
reporting is enclosed in the Annexure E. 
 
It may be mentioned that the range of capacity utiliza tion of these 
66 jute mills range from 11.3% (in case of M/s Tripura Jute Mill, 
which is under Govt. of Tripura) to 116.7% with an average of 
76.3%. Further, leaving out the abnormally low capacity utilization 
value of M/s Tripura Jute Mill, the range of capacity utilization is to 

32 
 
the tune of 50.2% to 116.7% with an average of 77.3%. The number 
of Jute mills having capacity utilization with the following ranges 
are given in the Annexure F.  
<50%, 51-60 %, 61-70 %, 71-80%, 81-90%, 91-100%, >101%. From 
the distribution it appears that the percentage of jute mill having 
capacity utilization between 61 -70 and 81 -90 is 26% and 21% 
respectively. 
 
Out of the 78 number of composite jute mills, the list of jute mills 
closed and their reasons for closure is given in the Annexure E. 
 
The Government has launched the Jute Technology Mission (JTM) 
for this particular purpose. The Committee has been already 
apprised of the progress made so far under the JTM so far. The 
progress of the JTM is currently under review through t he 
mechanism of Mid Term Appraisal and the schemes under JTM 
may be modified / reoriented on the basis of its findings and 
recommendations. Details of the Progress made so far as follows:- 
a) Since inception (1st March, 2007) 166 claims were settled and 
subsidy of Rs.4561.79 lakhs has been released against 
investment for Modernisation / Upgradation of Rs.22808.92 
lakhs all over India. 
b) 73 units have so far availed the benefit which included 53 
composite jute mills, 15 yarn & twine units, 2 weaving units, 2 
JDP manufacturing units and 1 green-field unit. 

33 
 
c) 53 jute mills in West Bengal, 7 units in Andhra Pradesh, 6 
units in North Eastern States, 2 units in Bihar, 2 units in 
Haryana, 2 units in Orissa  and 1 unit in Kerala have so far 
availed subsidy. 
 
It may be stated that following representations by the jute industry, 
the cap of subsidy for modernization / technology upgradation has 
been raised by the Govt. of India on the basis of recommendations 
of the Ministry of Textiles. Thus the subsidy cap rose from Rs.75 
lakh per jute mill/ JDP unit to Rs 350 lakh per jute mill/ JDP unit 
in general area and from Rs 100 lakh to Rs 400 lakh in the Special 
Category States. This led to noticeable upsurge in modern ization of 
jute mills and utilization of funds has also risen correspondingly. 
 
It is felt that such studies can be carried out through a suitable 
technical institute or agency, which will identify the areas of 
required modernization/ upgradation and the c onsequent funding 
requirement. However, the Government can only provide subsidy to 
a certain extent (20% at present) and the rest have to be borne by 
the jute mills themselves.  
 
Mill-wise study as recommended has been undertaken by the 
Indian Jute Mills A ssociation (IJMA), which facilitated NJB in 
working out fund requirement for the commitments under the 
scheme. In considering the study by IJMA having limited coverage, 
a comprehensive study is being commissioned by NJB to ascertain 

34 
 
the actual requirement of funds by all the mills / jute units for 
modernisation and / or upgradation effected in their respective 
units. 
{Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/5/2011-Parl. dated 05.08.2011} 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3.27) 
 
Implementation of Jute Technology Mission 
(JTM):- 
 
The Committee were dismayed at the result of the Jute 
Technology Mission (JTM) launched in 2007 and operationalised 
through four Mini Missions, Mini Mission I and II and Mini 
Mission III and IV being implemented by Ministry of Textiles and 
Ministry of Agriculture respectively. The Committee found that the 
Ministry had not been able to achieve even 50 per cent of the 
physical and financial targets under both the Missions despite 
completion of three and half years of the XI th Plan period. The 
Committee found it quite shocking that under some schemes of 
Mini Mission IV viz., commercialization of technology, setting up 
jute parks for the diversified sector, productivity improvement etc., 
the expenditure of funds was either nil or below 10 percent. The 
Ministry were in the process of engaging an independent agency to 
make a midterm appraisal of the implementation status of various 
schemes under JTM. The Committee recommended that after 

35 
 
getting the said appraisal report, the existing targets should be 
reviewed and set afresh in a realistic manner covering maximum 
number of beneficiaries in the remaining plan period and 
recommended that JTM be further extended to the 12th Five Year 
Plan and instead of setting cumulative targets for five years, yearly 
targets be fixed under each scheme for their effective 
implementation. The Committee strongly recommended that a 
high level Monitoring Committee be set up to keep a strict and 
constant vigil over the implementation so that the targets 
stipulated were achieved within time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to develop the Jute Sector, Govt. of India has approved a 
five year project known as Jute Technology Mission -MM-III (2007-
12) with a budget of Rs. 64.80 crores  where JCI being the Official 
Agency of the said project. The crux of the project is the 
construction/ development of Departmental Purchase Centres 
(DPCs), Development of Market Yards, Construction of Retting 
Tanks, Development of High -Speed Jute Ribboners  and 
Demonstration/Training of new technology to Jute Growers with 
the help of Jute Research Institutes, State Governments and others. 
 
Details of progress under MM-III are at Annexure G. 
 

36 
 
The progress of implementation of the schemes under MM -IV of 
JTM, a s referred to by the Committee has improved considerably 
since the last reporting. The status is placed below :- 
 
Sustainable Human Resource Development in Jute Mill Sector 
(Scheme 6.1) 
 
Since inception, training has been imparted to 12671 Master 
trainers, Supervisors, Maintenance Workers and other Workers in 
39 jute mills. The Master Trainers and Supervisors have already 
trained a further 7620 workers in 16 mills. Institute of Jute 
Technology has developed 21 audio -visual modules on different 
process of production as training aid for sustainable training in the 
jute mills. 
 
Development of Jute Mill Machinery (Scheme No.6.2) 
 
A state -of-art Centre for Jute Machinery Development (CJMD) 
under PPP mode has been established. 5 identified machines viz. 
Spreader, Carding, Drawing, Spinning and Shuttleless looms for the 
jute industry are being developed in the CJMD. Development of 
Electronic and Microprocessor based integrated Instrumentation for 
Jute Grading System by NIRJAFT under ISMDCP.   
 
 
 
 

37 
 
Productivity Improvement & TQM Facilitation (Scheme No.6.3) 
 
The scheme to improve productivity and to establish Total Quality 
Management (TQM) facilities in the jute industry has been provided 
under Mini Mission – IV of the JTM with NJB as facilitating agency 
of the s cheme. The identified areas of operation of Productivity 
Improvement & TQM Facilitation are 
(i) Total Quality Management,  
(ii) Energy Management   
(iii) Waste Management  
(iv) Maintenance Management  
(v) Work Study & Ergonomics.  
 
To facilitate these studies, NJB has engaged 4 N ational level 
reputed Agencies / Institutions to conduct the studies under the 
scheme and implement recommendations in selected 6 jute mills. 
After completion of diagnostic studies, corrective implementation 
plans have been finalized in consultation with t he respective jute 
mills. Implementation of the corrective measures has started in the 
5 Jute Mills.   
 
In addition, TQM studies are going on in 6 mills in Kerala producing 
and exporting floor covering.  
 
 
 

38 
 
Modernisation and Upgradation of Technology in Ju te Mills – 
Capital Subsidy (Scheme No.6.4): 
 
 The upper limit of the subsidy has been raised to Rs. 350 
lakhs per mill for the existing units and Rs.400 lakhs for mills 
at North Eastern States and for setting up new units. 
 Since inception (1st March, 2007), 166 claims were settled and 
subsidy of Rs.45.62 crores has been released against 
investment for modernization of Rs.228.09 crores all over 
India. 
 75.93% % of the investments have been for Mill -side 
machinery meant for preparatory to spinning and winding 
processes. 17.74% of the investments have been for weaving to 
finishing processes of manufacturing. Remaining 6.33% was 
for Material handling and other miscellaneous machinery.  
 70 units have so far availed the benefits under the scheme, 
which included 54 composite jute mills, 13 yarn & twine mills, 
2 diversified jute product units and 1 weaving unit. 
 State-wise – West Bengal 50 units, Andhra Pradesh 7 units, 
Bihar 2 units, Haryana 2 units, Kerala 1 unit, Orissa 2 and 
NER (Assam) 6 units availed of the benefits. 
 The evaluation of the applications for further enlistment of 
vendors assigned to IJT has since been completed. They have 
recommended 10 out of the 12 applications for enlistment. 
 
 

39 
 
Design and Development of JDPs (Scheme No.7.1) 
 
Total 20 market driven R&D Studies on different aspects have been 
awarded to the following institutions  
 Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur – 7 studies 
 South India Textile Research Association, Coimbatore – 2 
studies 
 National Institute of Research on Jute and Allied Fib re 
Technology, Kolkata – 1 study. 
 Indian Jute Industries Research Association, Kolkata – 6 
studies 
 Institute of Jute Technology, Kolkata – 4 studies 
The studies range between 36 -60 months each. NJB monitors the 
progress and marketability of the products an d process under 
development by organizing seminars / workshops / meetings 
regularly with the stakeholders. 
In addition, NJB engaged 11 agencies (designers, institutes, 
entrepreneurs) for undertaking need based design development 
projects of jute diversified products.  
 
Helping NGOs and Women Self Help Groups (WSHGs) for 
developing jute diversified products (Scheme No.7.2): 
 
 46 NGOs have been identified  
 258 Clusters developed 

40 
 
 872 Women Self Help Groups in 88 districts of 18 States 
imparted training to 13950 artisans on production of JDPs 
 531 Nos. machines were distributed to 260 Women Self Help 
Groups. 
 
Scheme for Promotion of Jute Diversification (Scheme No.7.3) 
 
 36 Jute Service Centres have been established 
 30 Jute Raw Material Banks have been established 
 1373 training programmes were organized by Jute Service 
Centre benefiting 26459 artisans. 
 301 JDP, SHG units were setup.  
 138 machines were distributed to the JSC developed units. 
  
Setting up of Jute Park (Scheme No.7.5) 
 
9 Jute Park proposals (6 in WB, 1 in Bihar & 2 in NER) are being 
promoted. Constructions in 4 Jute parks have commenced (2 in 
WB, 1 in Bihar & 1 in NER). 
Financial progress of MM IV may be seen at Annexure H. 
 
Till now the expenditure under MM -III& MM- IV is Rs.166.5 crores  
out of the Rs.294 crores 
 
The report of the Mid Term Evaluation is awaited and as 
recommended by the Standing Committee on Labour the revisions 

41 
 
of targets, strategies may be done on receipt of the same. For the XII 
Plan, the Ministry has formulated a sub -group on jute sector to 
examine the efficacy of existing schemes and also prepare a strategy 
for development of the sector for the XII Plan. 
 
The recommendation is noted for necessary action.   
 
An Empowered Committee chaired by the Secretary Textiles is 
already in place for the purpose.   
{Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/5/2011-parl. dated 05.08.2011} 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3.28) 
 
Promotion of R&D Activities:-  
 
The Committee observed that whil e Research and 
Development in the Jute Sector was a sine-qua-non for quality 
improvement, particularly in the diversification zone, and the 
Ministry had not even incorporated R&D as a component under 
Mini Mission III and IV of JTM, despite the jute sector being loaded 
with obsolete technology.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that R&D be introduced as one of the essential 
components under Mini Mission IV of the JTM with immediate 
effect and sufficient funds be allocated for the purpose and 
recommended that proactive steps be taken by the Ministry for 
engagement of reputed institutions like Indian Institutes of 

42 
 
Technology to find out ways and means for the development of jute 
sector. The Committee also desired that IITs and other technical 
institutions of repute may be approached to introduce ‘Jute 
Development Technology’ as one of the chapters in the existing 
textiles courses keeping in view the huge potential of this eco 
friendly and biodegradable fibre.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The Ministry has undertaken a number of R & D projects 
through various R&D institutes in the past. These projects were 
mainly undertaken at IJIRA, an R & D organization set up for 
exclusively catering to the jute industry. 
 
It may be mentioned that under MM -III, a separate scheme is 
being implemented for the development of jute Ribboner.  
 
Under MM-IV, scheme 7.1, separate funds have been allocated 
for R & D of Jute Diversified products. The projects are being 
funded by MOT a nd are being implemented by various R &D 
organizations like IJIRA, IIT-Kgp, IJT, SITRA etc.  
 
Further, under MM -IV a scheme for Development of Jute 
Machinery is underway under PPP mode.  The status of the 
implementation is as follows:- 
 

43 
 
Four processing mac hines namely Composite Card, Drawing, 
Spinning & Weaving are under development in CJMD. 
Concept testing is carried put for carding machines. 
 
Prototype development of 5 modern technology machines have 
been undertaken under “Centre for Jute Machinery  
Development ( CJMD) and initial design and  development of “ 
Chain-gill Finisher Drawing Frame” is under process. 
 
Technical Committee approved the proposal for development of 
Electronic & Microprocessor Based Integrated instruments for 
“Development of Integrat ed Equipments for Jute Grading System” 
under ISMDCP.  National Institute of Research on Jute and Allied 
Fiber Technology (NIRJAFT), Kolkata has been assigned the job at a 
cost of Rs.50.00 lakhs. Out of approved fund of Rs.28 crores, 
cumulative expenditure of Rs.16.00 crores has been incurred. 
 
At present IIT, Kharagpur is engaged in the implementation of 
six R & D projects under the sponsorship of the Ministry of Textiles 
(through JTM). 
 
It may be stated that the Institute of Jute Technology (IJT) is 
already engaged in imparting courses on jute technology at various 
levels up to B –Tech level. However, a recent study indicates that 
the industry's requirement of such highly qualified technical 
persons is limited and IJT have been asked to modify their course 

44 
 
structure accordingly.  Further only one IIT imparts course on 
Textile Technology and Textile Technologists are perfectly capable 
for work in jute related area as jute is also a textile fibre. There are 
M Tech Course in Textile Technology and on Technical Textiles and 
students passing out from these courses can work for the jute 
sector also, as indeed some of them are doing at present. 
{Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/5/2011-Parl. dated 05.08.2011} 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3.29) 
 
Trademark and Quality Assurance:- 
 
      The Committee also observed that the Ministry proposed to 
develop eco-labelling for jute products namely (i) yarn (ii) Hessian 
(iii) Hydrocarbon-free quality jute hessian bag (iv) Floor covering (v) 
jute Geo-textiles and (vi) Shopping ba gs. For the purpose, selection 
of competent agency/consultants is in process with the National 
Jute Board. The Committee appreciated the vision of the Ministry 
as such a step would definitely enable jute products to carve a 
niche in domestic as well as int ernational market. However, the 
Committee found that limiting the criteria of the eco -labelling to the 
aforesaid six categories of items as unjustified. Also the marking of 
‘quality assurance’ had not been included in the terms of reference 
of the eco-labelling body. The Committee, therefore, impressed upon 

45 
 
the Ministry that the scope for inclusion of new items introduced as 
a result of the R&D activities in diversification of jute products be 
kept open for eco -labelling and all the labelled jute items be g iven 
subsidy to promote quality production and sale. The Committee 
also urged the Ministry to include marking of ‘quality assurance’ as 
part of the label and expected the Ministry to complete all the 
procedural formalities expeditiously but within a stipul ated 
timeframe. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NJB has already initiated the process of “Eco -labelling” of jute 
products by initiating a study through M/s Pricewaterhouse 
Coopers.  The first phase of study is nearing completion.  After 
acceptance of the repor t by the industry, the second phase of 
implementation will be taken up by NJB. 
 
The process of “Eco -labelling of jute products has been so 
structured that the study in process brings in its ambit the aspect 
of “Quality Assurance” of the  products as deemed  essential by the 
laws and practice of the consuming countries under consideration. 
The widening of the coverage of the process to include more number 
of newly developed jute products has been kept in view and the 
exercise is slated for the subsequent phase of the study. 
 
{Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/5/2011-Parl. dated 05.08.2011} 
 

46 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3.30) 
 
Revival of NJMC Mills:- 
 
The Committee observed that out of the six closed jute mills 
of the National Jute Manufacturers Corporation (NJMC), the 
Government propose to revive three of them and necessary 
approval had been obtained in the matter and desired that revival 
of these mill  be completed within the XI th Plan Period. The 
Committee found no valid reason as to why the rest of the mills 
under NJMC cannot be survived. The Committee were of the 
considered view that opening of more NJMC mills would not only 
boost the growth of the j ute sector but would also generate 
employment in the sector and wanted a fresh revival plan to be 
mooted for three NJMC Mills.  As regards, paucity of funds for 
revival of these mills, the Government may consider generation of 
funds through sale of surplus  land and old machinery as done by 
the NTC. If more funds were required for the purpose, the Ministry 
of Finance could be approached for term loans.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government of India approved the Revival Plan for NJMC 
with cost of Scheme of Rs. 1562.98 Crores on 19 th March and 25 th 
November 2010.The three units namely Kinnison, Khardah of 

47 
 
Kolkata and RBHM Jute Mills Katihar (Bihar) will be revived and 
modernized. The IDBI (operating agency) has submitted the report 
along with approval of G overnment which was accepted and 
circulated by BIFR, on 5th January 2011, through news paper, to all 
concerned. The BIFR has approved the Revival Scheme of NJMC on 
31st March 2011. 
 
Ministry of Textiles has constituted a Modernisation Committee to 
start the revival process of Mills of NJMC. The machine audit has 
been completed in all the three mills. The civil work and trial run is 
being undertaken with repair and renovations of old plant and 
machineries. The first jute bag (sacking) was manufactured in 
Kinnison & Khardah mills in August 2010 and in RBHM Katihar in 
September 2010. Regular production of 10 MT per day has 
commenced in RBHM Katihar. 
 
The RBHM has produced more than 2600 bales of sacking (B Twill) 
which is under despatch to Government Food procu ring agencies. 
More than 600 worker are getting employment with resumption of 
RBHM Mills Katihar and goods worth more than Rs 3 Crores has 
been produced and despatched . 
 
The machines for   production of more than 10 MT per day is also 
ready in Kinnison an d Khardah Mills and regular production will 
start soon, on restoration of the power in these two units. Efforts 
are on for early restoration power supply. 

48 
 
The NJMC has already started implementation of Revival Plan as 
approved by BIFR on 31 st March 2011.  
 
The process of sale of surplus assets of three closed Mills shall also 
be undertaken as per the schedule and procedure approved by 
BIFR. 
 
The recommendation is noted for revival of the remaining three 
mills which have not been included in the ongoing revival scheme.   
  
{Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/5/2011-Parl. dated 05.08.2011} 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3.31) 
 
Revival of Sick Private Jute Mills:- 
 
The Committee found that nine private jute mills were 
temporarily lying closed as on date besides 29 mills which had 
gone for permanent closure during the last five years. The major 
reasons attributed were financial sickness and workers unrest. 
The Ministr y of Textiles launched eight schemes from 1985 
onwards for the development of the sector, including TUFS. 
However, all these schemes resulted in complete failure and had to 
be withdrawn by the Government at different stages. Even the 
popular scheme like TU FS could not make any headway in the 

49 
 
Jute sector as not a single rupee had been utilized under it.  The 
zero performance of TUFS which was one of the signature schemes 
of the Ministry itself indicate the lack of focused approach and 
calibrated efforts by t he Ministry towards strengthening the jute 
industry.  The Committee noted that the Government neither had 
any mechanism to detect sickness in the mills at incipient stage 
nor any viability study had ever been conducted for the purpose of 
reviving them. The  Committee deprecated such languid approach 
of the Ministry towards such an important sector and 
recommended that the Jute Commissioner be entrusted with the 
task of conducting a viability study of all the nine mills in a time 
bound manner. Further, the mi ll-wise quantum of funds required 
for revival be assessed and accordingly a specific scheme be 
devised under which financial assistance on soft terms be 
provided to all the mill owners who come forward to 
revive/modernize their mills. The Committee also re commended 
that a monitoring mechanism be set -up in the office of Jute 
Commissioner to detect sickness in jute mills at initial stage and 
to suggest remedial measures and intimate to the Committee on 
the steps taken and progress made within six months.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It may be stated the jute industry have actually availed the 
scheme of TUFS since its inception in 1999. Total amount of funds 
disbursed to the jute industry under TUFS is Rs 395.48 Crore up to 

50 
 
30-6-2011. Therefore, it would not be correct to state that TUFS has 
failed. Further, since 2002 other schemes for incentive/ subsidy are 
in operation simultaneously. Otherwise, utilization from TUFS 
would have been even higher. 
 
Further, it may be stated that, while the Government makes 
every effort to popularize the schemes for modernization, actual 
steps for modernization have to be taken by individual jute mills 
most of which are in private sector. Even if, the Government 
provides subsidy/ incentive most of the investment have to come 
from the mills' own sources (i.e., including credit from Banks & FIs). 
The decision to modernize by making considerable investment 
ultimately rests with management of jute mills. The Jute 
Commissioner, with help from expert agencies, may undertake 
studies in ind ividual jute mills to detect sickness only if the 
respective mills come forward and the office of the Jute 
Commissioner is provided with necessary funds and manpower.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

51 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.25) 
Textile Workers' Rehabilitation Fund Scheme 
(TWRFS):- 
  
The Committee observed that not even a single worker of 
the closed jute mills had been provided with any financial benefit 
under the Textile Workers Rehabilitation Fund Scheme. The 
insipid explanation  furnished by the Ministry was that no 
application had been received in this regard from the office of 
Textile Commissioner and that 'at present none of the jute mills 
have been declared closed under sector 25(O) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act and hence no  relief has been extended under the 
scheme’ was irresponsible and anti worker. The Committee 
recommended that guidelines of the TWRFS be amended and the 
requirement of permission under section 25(O) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 be done away with. T he Committee were of 
the view that senior officers from the office of Textile 

53 
 
Commissioner should visit the mill which were declared closed 
and after due verification, the approval for disbursement of relief 
to its eligible workers must be given expeditiou sly but preferably 
within three months positively, and recommended that for any 
undue delay in disbursement of relief, personal responsibility of 
the concerned officer must be fixed and progress made in this 
regard may be intimated to the Committee within six months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under TWRFS guidelines one of the essential condition  to 
become eligible under TWRFS is that a mill should have been closed 
after 5.6.1985 and declared as closed under Section 25(O) of 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or alternatively an Official Liquidator 
should have been appointed under the Companies Act, 1956. 
None of the closed jute mills are fulfilling any of the above two 
eligibility conditions regarding the legal closure and hence in terms 
of the existing TWRFS guidelines, the workers of the closed jute 
mills, as on date, are not eligible for relief unde r existing TWRFS 
guidelines. 
A detailed proposal for relaxation of the conditions of the 
existing TWRFS guidelines had moved to Cabinet in July 2009 for 
modification of the Scheme.  However, the same was not supported 
by the Ministry of Finance. 
 
 

54 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3.32) 
Widening the purview of JPM Act:- 
 
The Committee observed that jute packaging materials 
(compulsory use in packaging commodities) Act, 1987 was enacted 
by the Government to provide protection to the jute industry. The 
Committee noted that only foodgrain and sugar were under the 
purview of the Act and recommended that orders issued under the 
clause 3(1) of the Act with regard to the coverage of commodities to 
be considered for compulsory packaging be reviewed annually by 
the Government. On one hand, the Committee had been apprised 
by the representatives of the industry that reviewing these orders 
every year leads to uncertainty about protection under the Act, 
while the Ministry felt that under the liberalized regime, jute 
manufacturers s hould not expect perpetual protection. The 
Ministry further stated that permanent reservation would be 
counterproductive as it would give permanent monopoly to the 
jute industry, which in turn may harm the economy of the 
commodities so packed compulsorily in jute. The Committee were 
not convinced with the reason put forth by the Ministry that the 
jute manufacturers should not expect permanent protection since, 
in Committee’s view, the very purpose of JPM Act was to protect 
‘Jute’ as a packaging industry. Th e Committee deplored such a 
lopsided approach of the Ministry and recommended that at least 
packaging of food grain and sugar be made compulsory under the 
JPM Act so as to put an end to any speculation of volatility and to 

55 
 
create an atmosphere of confidenc e in the jute sector.  The 
Committee also desired that more commodities be brought under 
the purview of the JPM Act and recommended that Ministry of 
Textiles undertake R&D activities to improve the quality of jute as 
a packaging material. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in Packing 
Commodities) Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred as JPM Act, 1987) was 
enacted to provide for the compulsory use of jute packaging 
material in the supply and distribution of certain commodities  in 
the interests of production of raw jute and jute packing material 
and of persons engaged in the production thereof, and for matters 
connected therewith.  The Act was enacted mainly to protect the 
interest of persons engaged in raw jute production and j ute 
industry. 
Clause 4(1) of the JPM Act empowers the Central Government to 
constitute Standing Advisory Committee (SAC) consisting of such 
persons as have, in the opinion of the Government, the necessary 
expertise to give advice in the matter of determini ng the commodity 
or class of commodities or percentages thereof in respect of which 
jute packaging material shall be used in packaging commodities. 
 

56 
 
Clause 3(2) of the Jute packaging Material (Compulsory Use in 
Packing Commodities) Rules, 1987 provides tha t the members of 
the SAC shall hold office for a term of three years. 
 
Clause 3(5) of the Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in 
Packing Commodities )Rules, 1987 stipulates that the Committee 
shall meet at least once a year to review the commodities or  class of 
commodities or percentage thereof, required to be packed in jute 
packaging material under sector 3 of the JPM Act, 1987. 
 
The objective behind the annual review is to examine the availability 
of raw jute, jute materials, production of the commodi ties required 
to be packed each year and to determine the level of reservation so 
that the supply chain of jute bags for packing such commodities 
does not get adversely affected. 
 
Continued reliance on sacking of the organized jute mills has been 
a bottleneck to modernization.  A very small portion of the annual 
turnover of jute mills goes into purchase of new machines and the 
off take from the Technology Upgradation Fund and Jute 
Technology Mission is also quite low.  Due to slow pace of 
modernization in t he jute industry compared to what the Textiles 
industry has achieved, it is imperative that the industry should 
come to rely less on sacking. 
 

57 
 
It may be mentioned in this connection that JPM Act, 1987 defines 
that "Commodity" means any essential commodity or any article 
manufactured or produced by any scheduled industry.  If at all any 
commodity is considered in bringing under the purview of JPM Act, 
the commodity has to be an essential commodity as per Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 and a product of any s cheduled industry 
under Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. 
 
Amendments in the JPM Act 1987 may have to be done to bring 
other commodities under the purview of the Act.  
 
  

58 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM 
IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1.21) 
 
 Crop Insurance for Jute Growing Farmers:- 
 
 The Committee found that the National Agricultural 
Insurance Scheme (NAIS) launched by Government of India 
implemented through the State Government of West Bengal for 
providing crop insurance coverage to the jute growing farmers 
was limited to certain bloc ks, selected by the State Government. 
The total number of beneficiaries during the years 2007, 2008 
and 2009 were 3213, 2636 and 6645 respectively in West Bengal 
whereas there were more than 40 lakh jute growing farmers in 
the country. The jute farmers of other States were not provided 
any crop insurance coverage. Considering the fact that the jute 
crop is prone to natural calamities and certain diseases and the 
fact that Jute is environment friendly and biodegradable fibre, 
the Committee recommended that t he NAIS be extended to all 
Jute growing areas or a new central scheme be launched at the 
earliest to extend crop insurance coverage to jute growing 

59 
 
farmers in all jute growing States. The Committee desired that 
the modalities of such a Scheme be finalized and implemented 
well before the next sowing season of the jute crop.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter is pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture.  However, the 
Directorate of Jute Development, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Government of India has already tak en up the matter with the jute 
growing States for providing crop insurance coverage to the jute 
growing farmers under the NAIS. 
{Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/5/2011-Parl. dated 05.08.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1.22) 
 
Minimum Support Price (MSP):- 
 
The Committee observed that despite the decrease of jute 
yield in the past five years no study had been conducted by the 
Government to ascertain the factors responsible for the decline.  
During the last three years, the gap between MSP and the market 
price had constantly widened significantly. The trend further 
exacerbated when market prices shot up to the tune of Rs. 458 
and Rs. 852 during the years 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 respectively 
whereas the MSP, during the  same period was increased 
marginally, to the t une of Rs. 200/ - and Rs. 125/ -. The 

60 
 
Committee found that decrease in area was mainly due to the 
fact that the farmers were not getting remunerative price and 
hence losing interest in jute cultivation. The Committee found 
that the Government announced MSP o nly for TD-5 and claimed 
that every grade of jute was purchased through Jute Corporation 
of India at MSP. The Committee recommended that the 
Government should not only declare MSP for each grade every 
year but the price so declared should also be profitable enough to 
motivate the farmers to continue jute cultivation. The Committee 
also recommended that MSp should be appropriately hiked when 
the crop come to the market so as to keep in consonance with 
the market price and Government must adopt certain policy  
measures to provide special incentives like subsidized seeds, 
equipment, training at regular intervals, opening of purchase 
centres to promote jute farming. The Committee also desired that 
the proposal for construction of canals, on the lines of irrigatio n 
system in the States of Punjab and Haryana, be considered and 
taken up with the concerned State Governments for its early 
execution and hoped that such a step would help in overcoming 
the problems of low rain/dry monsoon which had been a 
disturbing factor in the production of jute crop. 
 
 
 
 

61 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The matter is pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture.  However, 
the Commission for Agricultural Costs & Prices (CACP) recommends 
the Minimum Support Price of raw jute of TD -5 ex-Assam for every 
jute season (July-June). While determining the MSP for TD -5 grade 
of raw jute Ex-Assam, CACP considers all input cost for production 
of raw jute.  After receipt of the recommendation of the CACP, 
Ministry of Agriculture, Govt. of India, announces the Mini mum 
Support Price. 
 
As per direction of Ministry of Agriculture, Jute Commissioner 
in consultation with Jute Corporation of India fixes the 
corresponding Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) for other varieties 
and grades of raw jute and mesta for various upcount ry markets in 
jute / mesta growing states.  
 
The objective behind declaration of MSP before sowing season 
is to encourage farmers to grow more jute.  
 
Jute is a labour intensive crop and human labour component 
constitutes nearly 74 per cent of the total in put cost. The 
information of cost of production of raw jute is collected from 
different State Governments and after considering the information 
of cost of production and other related elements like fertilizer, 

62 
 
diesel, non -electrical machinery, prices of el ectricity for irrigation, 
CACP fixes the MSP.   
 
 The matter is pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture.  However, 
the Government of India, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation 
is implementing the centrally sponsored scheme of Mini -Mission-II 
of Jute Tech nology Mission (JTM) from 2006 -07.  The scheme is 
being implemented in ten jute growing states of the country.  Under 
this scheme, subsidy / assistance is provided to the jute-farmers on 
various components like seed, implements, etc. 
               
JCI has  a network of 171 departmental purchase centres where 
additional storage capacity has been added under MM III. Further 
new Market Yards have also been   constructed. JCI is in the 
process of displaying daily market rates at each centre. Trainings to 
jute g rowers to adopt modern methods of cultivation and jute 
retting have also been imparted by JCI.  
 
However the National Jute Board implements a Subsidy 
Scheme for Distribution of Certified Seeds to the farmers and under 
the scheme, certified seeds are distri buted to the farmers at a 
subsidy of Rs.40/ - per KG. The target for the year 2010 -11 has 
been fixed at 15,000 quintals against similar subsidy. The network 
of the Jute Corporation of India is being utilized for implementation 
of the scheme. The initiative would substantially help and assure 
farmers of getting certified seeds easily. 

63 
 
 
Further, NJB is undertaking to implement a pilot project in 
two villages of Bihar in 2011 -12 for improvement of quality and 
productivity of jute fibre  covering 2000 acres and 2000 farmers for 
pre-harvesting and post-harvesting operation. 
  
The matter is pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture and State 
Government.  The suggestion of the Committee would be 
communicated to the concerned authorities/State Governments. 
  
{Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/5/2011-Parl. dated 05.08.2011) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.22) 
 
Use of Safety Equipments by Workers:- 
 
 
In the course of their study visit to some private jute mills 
in Kolkata, the Committee were shocked to see hazardous and 
stifling working conditions of the workers and were astounded to 
find that in such extremely hazardous condition not a single 
worker w as using any safety equipment viz., helmet, mask, 
handgloves, safety jackets etc. The workers even informed the 
Committee that they `have not been provided any safety 
equipments by the mill management’.  
 

64 
 
The Committee found that the jute mill owners were blatantly 
violating the statutory norms on safety and health of the workers 
due to inaction on the part of the Regional Labour 
Commissioners and apathetic attitude of the Government.  
 
The Committee recomm ended that periodic inspections be 
carried out by the Regional Labour Commissioners of the States 
and prepare fact finding report and submit the same to Chief 
Labour Commissioner. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that the State Government is the appropriate 
Government for the Jute Mills to ensure safety and health of 
workers.  Moreover, the Factories Act, 1948 is being enforced by 
the Chief Inspector of Factories/Directorate of the State 
Governments.   
 
 Accordingly, we have written to seven State 
Governments where production of jute is concentrated to instruct 
Chief Inspector of Factories, who is an officer of the State 
Government, to inspect each jute mill within a month and prevent 
any violations and al so ensure proper use of safety norms by the 
workers.   They have also been advised that in case any technical 
assistance is required then the O/o the Director General of Factory 

65 
 
Advice Service and Labour Institutions (DG FASLI), Mumbai may 
be contacted.  A copy of our letter dated 11.07.2011 is enclosed. 
 
{Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/5/2011-Parl. dated 05.08.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.24) 
 
Problem of Dwelling Space for Workers:- 
 
The Committee observed that though several developmental 
schemes for jute sector had been launched by the Government, 
the issue of dwelling space for jute mill workers had not being 
addressed.  The workers continue to live in shifts due to space 
constraint and were forced to well in pitiable and unhygienic 
conditions without basic amenities. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommended that specific guidelines be issued to each 
mill owner/management asking them to provide space for 
construction of dwelling units for their workers out of the surplus 
land available with the mills. To help the mill owners in their 
endeavour to do so, a well devised central scheme could be 
launched with a suitable component of financial assistance to the 
mill owners who undertake construction of dwelling units for the 
workforce. By constructing suitable multi storey dwelling units, 
the problem of a clean and hygienic living area for the workers 
can be addressed to a large extent. Such a step would also 

66 
 
benefit the mill owners a s cases of absenteeism, late coming and 
illness of the workers would minimize. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter is pertaining to Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
However, under the National Jute Board Act, part of the Board’s 
charter is to provide for the welfare of workers in jute -producing 
units. To this end, the Ministry of Textiles seeks to formulate 
relevant schemes for the welfare of workers both in jute mills and in 
small units producing JDPs. 
 
In the first phase, National Jute Board (NJB) starte d 
implementation of the following schemes:  
(a) To improve the sanitation, health facilities and working 
conditions in the mill sector and  
(b) To provide incentives to the small and medium JDP units for 
compliance with prescribed working conditions.  
 
{Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/5/2011-Parl. dated 05.08.2011) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.26) 
Issuance of Identity Cards:- 
 
The Committee found that the jute mill workers had not been 
provided any identity proof by the mill owners.  Further, the 
workers were also not shown their service records and details of 

67 
 
contributions to the social security funds viz. PF and ESI thereby 
depriving them of their statutory dues after retirement.  The 
Committee believed that this was done deliberately by the mill 
owners so as not to pay their statutory contribution to the social 
security funds.  The Committee, therefore, recommended strongly 
that this be enquired into without any loss of time by the O/o CLC.  
While making mill -wise assessment of PF and ESI dues, O/o CLC 
must ensure that the mill owners issue identity cards to each 
worker and instruct the mill owners that service records of every  
worker be shown and verified by the individual at least once in a 
year.  Further, in order to ensure strict compliance, penal action 
must be taken against defaulting mill owners and the Committee 
be apprised of the action taken indicating the details of t he mills 
that had taken satisfactory corrective action and the defaulter 
mills. 
Reply of the Government 
 
As already submitted, the State Government is the 
appropriate Government for the Jute Mills under most of the 
enactments.  As such, Jute Mills owners d o not come under the 
jurisdiction of CLC (C) officers and as such they would challenge 
the officials against any action to be taken by the officers of CLC 
(C). Therefore, it is suggested that the assessment of PF/ESI dues 
can be done by the EPFO/ESIC as pe r statutory provisions.  The 
issue of identity card, maintenance of service records can be done 

68 
 
by the statutory authorities of the State Governments while they 
visit the Mills for assessment of wages, dues, etc.  
 
As regards the issue of identity card by EPFO and ESIC, it is 
submitted that both these organisations allot PF Account Number 
and Insurance Number.  ESIC also issues Permanent Identity 
Cards. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                            HEMANAND BISWAL, 
21st   March, 2012                                                                CHAIRMAN,                        
1 Chaitra , 1934 (Saka)                  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

69 
 
    Annexure – A  
COMPLIANCE  OF JUTE MILLS DEFAULTING IN PAYMENT 
IN REGIONAL OFFICE, KOLKATA 
AS ON 31.05.2011 (ARREAR DEMAND) 
 
Sl.  
No. 
Name of the Jute Mill Total Dues 
As on 01.04.2009 
(Rs. In Lakhs) 
Recover
ed 
 upto 
31.03.20
11 
Balan
ce as 
on 
31.03.
11 
Action taken 
7A 14B 7Q TOT
AL 
1 M/S. BUDGE BUDGE  
CO. LTD,WB/1&24 
 
 
New R.R.C(11-12) 
Pd. 09/03 to 01/07 
32.00 
 
34.04 
+32.4
5 
10.74 
14.75 
76.78 
46.90 
32.00 
NIL 
44.78 
46.90 
Recovery action stayed 
by High Court in r/o both 
14B & 7Q dues. Vacation 
of stay petitions filed. 
Matter subjudice of 
Hon’ble HC. Stay by 
EPFAT NO.570(15)2010 
2 M/S. THE HOOGHLY 
MILLS CO. 
LTD.,WB/4 112.55 
 
27.79 
 
30.11 
 
170.4
5 
 
57.90 
(RRC 
Retur
ned) 
112.5
5 
 
Recovery action stayed in 
r/o 7A dues pertaining to 
lower rate of interest by 
High Court. Vacation of 
stay petition filed. 
3 M/S. NJMC LTD. 
WB/8 
0 
 
63.15 
 
0 
 
63.15 
 
0 
 
63.15 
 Under BIFR 
4 M/S. CALEDONIAN 
JUTE & INDS. 
LTD,WB/28 
 
110.00 
 
 
43.84 
 
0 
 
153.8
4 
 
0 
 
153.8
4 
 
Stay order against lower 
rate of interest. Recovery 
action for 7A dues stayed 
by High Court. 
5 M/S. NEW CENTRAL 
JUTE MILL CO. LTD. 
(WB/49,51,5529) 
Lower Rate of interest 
Period 04/88, 02/93 to 
11/2000 
1172.85 
 
0 
 
0 
 
1172.
85 
 
0 
 
1172.
85 
 
Recovery of arrears 
stayed by High Court. In 
r/o lower rate of interest 
in r/o 7A dues in w.p no 
1716 of 2008 dt 30.04.09 
upto 22 -07-09. Paid Rs.5 
lakhs in Dec’10 instead 
of @ Rs. 30.0 lakhs per 
month installment 
granted by HO dt 05 -07-
04. Vacation petition 
filed.Regd. under 
BIFR.W.P. no.1716 of 
2008 for lower rate of 
interest. Stay order 
passed upto 22/07/09 vide 

70 
 
order dated: 30/04/09. On 
25.04.2011 hear ing was 
made as “specially fixed 
matter” and the same is 
concluded but kept for 
delivering judgment. 
  
TOTAL 
 1427.4 201.27 55.60 1683.97 89.9 1594.07  
 
 
COMPLIANCE OF JUTE MILLS DEFAULTING IN PAYMENT 
IN SUB REGIONAL OFFICE, HOWRAH  
AS ON 31.05.2011 (ARREAR DEMAND) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Jute 
Mill 
Total Dues 
As on 01.04.2009 
(Rs. In Lakhs) 
Recovered 
 upto 
30.06.2011 
Balance 
as on 
30.06.11 
Action taken 
7A 14B 7Q TOTAL 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
M/s. North Brook 
Jute Co. Ltd.,WB/72 
130.51 -- 3.31 133.82 5.88 127.94 Stay by HC for 
Rs.118.72 lakhs and 
Stay by EPFAT for Rs 
9.22 lakhs 
7 
 
 
 
 M/s. Delta 
Ltd.,WB/79 
245.27 -- -- 245.27 0.00 245.27 
Stay by HC. Vacation 
petition filed 
8 
 
 
 
M/s. Vijay Shree 
Ltd.,WB/77 
-- 37.16 7.91 45.07 14.46 30.61 
Stay by HC. Vacation 
petition filed 
9 
 
 M/s. Gondalpara 
Jute Mill,WB/375 415.33   415.33 292.93 122.40 Stay by High Court 
10  M/s. Howrah Mills 
Co. Ltd.,WB/76,85 
& 86 
19.24 29.37 0.01 48.62 1.10 47.52 Stay by High Court in 
r/o 7A & 14B dues 
11  M/s. Tepcon 
International 
Ltd.,WB/88 
-- 35.59 -- 35.59 0.00 35.59 
Stay by High Court 
12 M/s. N.J.M.C. Ltd. 
:Unit 
National,WB/78 
121.21 75.39 -- 196.60 121.21 75.39 
Claim amounting to 
Rs. 75.39 lakh filed 
before BIFR 

71 
 
 
 
COMPLIANCE OF JUTE MILLS DEFAULTING IN PAYMENT 
IN SUB REGIONAL OFFICE, HOWRAH  
AS ON 31.05..2011 (ARREAR DEMAND)(Contd…) 
13  M/s. Hastings Jute 
Mill,WB/69 14.89 -- -- 14.89 0.00 14.89 Stay by High Court 
Sl. No. Name of the Jute Mill Total Dues 
As on 01.04.2009 
(Rs. In Lakhs) 
Recovered 
Recovered 
 upto 
30.06.11 
Balance as on 
30.06.11 
Action taken 
7A 14B 7Q TOTAL 
   
14 
  
M/s. Bally Jute Co. 
Ltd.,WB/81 
 
40.33 
 
-- 
 
-- 
 
40.33 
 
0.00 
 
40.33 
 
Stay by High 
Court  
 
 
15  M/s. Victoria Jute 
Mill,WB/62 & 71 
1222.89 22.72 -- 1245.61 62.06 1183.55 
Paying 
Installment @ 
Rs. 1.48 lakh 
p.m. as per High 
Court Order in 
respect of 7A 
amounting Rs. 
806.21 lakhs. 
Dept. filed SLP 
before Hon’ble 
Supreme Court 
for enhancing 
the rate of 
installment. The 
Hon’ble 
Supreme Court 
dismissed the 
SLP on 
21/07/2010. 
Stay by HC in 
r/o 14B dues & 
7A dues of 
lower rate of 
interest. Final 
hearing 
concluded on 
25/04/2011 & 
the matter has 
been adjourned 
for delivering 
judgement. 
16  M/s. Angus Jute 
Mill,WB/63 
683.38 3.38 -- 686.76  180.00 506.76 
Paying 
InstallmentRs. 4 
lakh p.m. as per 
High court 
Order.  

72 
 
 
 
 
COMPLIANCE OF JUTE MILLS DEFAULTING IN PAYMENT 
IN SUB REGIONAL OFFICE, HOWRAH  
AS ON 31.05.2011 (ARREAR DEMAND)(Contd…) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl. No. Name of the 
Jute Mill Total Dues 
As on 01.04.2009 
(Rs. In Lakhs) 
Recovered 
Recovered 
 upto 
30.06.11 
Balance as 
on 30.06.11 
Action taken 
  7A 14B 7Q TOTAL    
17  M/s. 
Samnugar Jute 
Mill,WB/64 909.19  -- -- 909.19  45.00 864.19 
Paying 
Installment @ 
Rs. 1 lakh 
p.m. as per 
HC order.  
 
18  M/s. Kanoria 
Jute & 
Industries Ltd., 
WB/97 907.96 95.72 94.10 1097.78 0.00 1097.78 
Claim filed 
before BIFR 
as per HC 
Order dt. 
27.06.2008 
amounting to 
Rs. 23.72 
Crores.  
19 M/s. Tirupati 
Jute Industries 
Ltd.,WB/90-A 9.27 2.90 5.94 18.11 7.42 10.69 
Recovery 
action stayed 
by EPFAT 
on 24/02/11. 
20 M/s. 
Premchand 
Jute 
Mill,WB/91-A 
 
 
95.81 
 
 
-- 
 
 
-- 
 
 
95.81 
 
 
95.81 
 
 
Nil 
 
The total 
arrear dues 
of Rs.95.81 
lakhs has 
been 
recovered. 
 
TOTAL 4815.28 302.23 111.27 5228.78 825.87 4402.91  

73 
 
COMPLIANCE POSITION OF JUTE MILLS DEFAULTING IN PAYMENT IN SUB-REGIONAL 
OFFICE BARRACKPORE AS ON 31-5-2011 [ARREAR DEMAND] 
           
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the  
Jute Mill 
Total dues as on 30-4-2011              
(in lakh) 
Recovered up to 31-
5-2011             (in 
lakh) 
Balance as on 31-5-2011              
(in lakh) Action 
taken 
7A 7Q 14B 7A 7Q 14B 7A 7Q 14B 
21 Kelvin Jute  
Mill, WB/23 377.32 0.00 1.54 4.00 0.00 0.00 373.32 0.00 1.54 
Instalment 
granted by 
H.C. & 
CBT @ 
Rs.2 lacs  
p.m. WP 
No.20247 
(W)/02, 
BIFR Case 
No.220/87(
Dam amt 
4/03-6/05), 
Stay by 
H.C, WP 
No.5548(W
)/2009 
against 
Rs.49.24 
lac(less 
int.),Stat 
granted H.C 
W.P 
No.5548(W
) of 2009 
for less 
int.case 
22 
Kamarhatty  
Co. Ltd., 
WB/17 
67.37 20.03 78.83 0.00 0.00 0.00 67.37 20.03 78.83 
Stay by 
H.C. on 
damage 
amount. 
W.P. No. 
1127 of '04 
& W.P. No. 
114 of '07 
Request for 
waiver of 
damages 
also 
pending 
before 

74 
 
CBT. 
23 
Sunbeam  
Vanijya Pvt.  
Ltd., Unit:  
Eastern Mfg.  
Co. Ltd., 
WB/354 
87.19 23.65 3.14 0.00 0.00 0.00 87.19 23.65 3.1`4 
HC, Cal 
directed to 
file appeal 
before 
APFAT 
U/S 7I 
within 
18/6//09 
and restrain 
the PF 
athority 
from taking 
any action 
withinin 
fortnight 
from that 
date in WP 
No.8757(W
) of 2009 
ATA 
directed to 
deposite 
Rs.50,000/- 
and case 
stayed till 
disposal of 
the appeal. 
Realisable 
amount is 
Rs.87.19 
(PF) & 
23.65 (7Q). 
Estt. has 
paid 
Rs.2.50 lacs 
suo moto. 
Review 
application 
u/s.7B of 
the Act 
submitted 
by the estt. 
against the 
PF amount 

75 
 
of Rs.87.19 
lacs which 
is under 
process. 
24 
NJMC Ltd.,  
Unit: 
Alexandra, 
 WB/46 
0.00 0.00 38.22 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 38.22 
BIFR case 
no. 506/93, 
CPSU, 
Cont & 7Q 
amout is 
realisable, 
CP-I issued, 
letter issued 
to Min.of 
Textile, 7Q 
RRC for 
Rs.4.38lac 
withdrawn 
by 
Authorised 
Officer 
25 
NJMC Ltd.,  
Unit: Kinnison, 
 WB/48 & 55 
0.00 0.00 424.65 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 424.65 
BIFR case 
no. 506/93, 
CPSU 
26 
NJMC Ltd.,  
Unit: Khardah, 
 WB/11 & 46 
0.00 0.00 299.40 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 299.40 
BIFR case 
no. 506/93, 
CPSU,  
27 
Gourepore Co.  
Ltd., WB/7 & 
25 
548.26 0.00   0.00 0.00 0.00 548.26 0.00 0.00 
The Estt. is 
under 
liquidation. 
Claim file 
before the 
O/L and 
DRT 

76 
 
28 
Barnagore Jute 
 Factory PLC, 
 WB/2,27 & 40 
526.14 0.00 162.25 0.00 0.00 0.00 526.14 0.00 162.25 
Hon'ble 
H.C 
directed not 
to take any 
action 
against the 
new 
managemen
t for old 
dues in the 
matter of 
W. P 
No.17221/0
2. New 
Manageme
nt is now 
paying suo 
moto 
@Rs.2lacs/
month, Stay 
on damage 
amt. AST 
NO.1749/0
5, H.O 
granted 60 
instal.for 
diffn in int 
pd 2k -01to 
05-06,BIFR 
Case 
no.294/04, 
Instalment 
granterd 
H.O in r/o 
7A dues, 
7C amount 
referred to 
RO,Kol for 
apprise the 
same before 
H.O. 
Damage 
amount of 
Rs.15.80 
lakh under 
BIFR. 
29 Nuddea Jute  
Mill, WB/36 & 3005.94 16.51 29.68 0.00 0.00 0.00 3005.9
4 16.51 29.68 Coercive 
action taken 

77 
 
47 to realise 
the dues, 
CP-I issued 
for 7/06 -
11/06 
30 
Hukumchand  
Jute Mill, 
WB/32 
  1.16 4.54 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.16 4.54 Reaalisable 
31 Megna Jute  
Mill, WB/35 411.99 0.00 33.63 6.00 0.00 0.00 405.99 0.00 33.63 
Instalment 
granted by 
H.C @5 
lacs p.m. 
upto 9/08, 
thereafter 
@ 6 lacs 
p.m. till 
recovery of 
dues. MAT 
No.3626 of 
2002,H.C 
granted stay 
WP 
No.5749(W
)/09 for less 
int. case 
32 Waverly Jute  
Mill, WB/30 154.14 36.13 18.43 0.00 0.00 0.00 154.14 36.13 18.43 
Rs.36.30 is 
7Q amt 
against 
which 8F 
notices 
issued. H.C, 
Cal granted 
stay in W.P 
No.3900(W
) of 2010 
against the 
coercive 
action. Stay 
on recovery 
action of 
damage 
amount WP 
No.1519(W
) of 2001, 
Stay by 
H.C. in WP 
No.3904(W
) of 2009 

78 
 
for 
damages 
amount of 
Rs.11.19 
lakh for the 
period 
4/2000 to 
1/2006. 
Stay order 
passed by 
the Hon'ble 
High Court, 
Calcutta in 
WP No. 
21920(W) 
of 2010 
against the 
amount of 
Rs.154.14 
lakh [PF]. 
33 
Empire Jute  
Co. Ltd., 
WB/26 
19.88 0.00 92.30 2.00 0.00 0.00 17.88 0.00 92.30 
Instalment 
granted by 
H.C. @2 
lacs p.m. on 
P.A. Stay 
on damage 
amount WP 
No.2491 of 
'03, WP 
No. 976 of 
'05, BIFR 
Case 
No.302/200
4for the pd. 
01/03-02/07 
34 
Kankinarrah  
Co. Ltd., 
WB/15 
62.58 0.00 30.72 0.00 0.00 0.00 62.58 0.00 30.72 
Stay on 
damage 
amt. WP 
No.1023 of 
'04,BIFR 
Case 
No.30/88(p
d.3/01-
5/07), Stay 
granted 
H.C, 
WPNo.167
49(W)/2008 

79 
 
for less 
interst case 
35 Agarpara Jute  
Mills, WB/37 71.21 0.00 2.41 0.00 0.00 0.00 71.21 0.00 2.41 
H.O.grante
d 60 
instalments 
against 
contr.dues 
@6.72 lacs 
p.m. Stay 
on damage 
amt. WP 
No.2490 of 
'03(legal 
file not 
transferred 
from 
RO,KOL)., 
BIFR case 
No.79/99(3/
05-
11/05,Dam)
. Estt. has 
submitted 
review 
applicaton 
u/s.7B of 
the Act 
against PF 
amount of 
Rs.69.07 
lacs which 
is under 
process. 
36 
Shree Gouri 
 Shankar Jute  
Mills Ltd.,  
WB/38 & 9952 
0.00 0.00 9.46 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 9.46 
CP-I issued 
Dam 
amt.(BIFR 
Case 
No.41/1989
), 
Estt.applied 
for waiver 
of damage 

80 
 
37 
Loomtex 
Engineering 
Pvt. 
 Ltd.,  
Unit: Titagarh  
Mill No.2,  
WB/338 
1023.84 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1023.84 0.00 0.00 
Head office 
granted 60 
instalment 
@4.94 
lacs/month, 
Instalment 
received 
upto 
10/2009. 
Estt. failed 
to remit the 
instalment 
therefore 
8F action 
has been 
initiated to 
recover the 
dues.  
38 
Joy Jute & 
 Industries Ltd., 
 WB/24626 
17.26 7.66 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 17.26 7.66 0.00 
Reaalisable. 
CP-26 
issued.   
  Total: 6373.12 105.14 1229.20 12.00 0.00 0.00 6361.12 105.14 1229.20       
 
  

81 
 
 
Annexure - B 
 
POSITION OF ESTABLISHMENTS WHEREIN JOINT INSPECTION 
OF EPF0 & ESIC CARRIED OUT FROM FEBRUARY 2010 TO APRIL 
2010 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
 
Name of estab. With 
Code No. 
 
Name of 
office 
No. of 
evasion 
of 
members
hip 
detected 
Action taken  if 
any 
Remarks 
UP TO 31-
08-2010 
01 M/s. Budge Budge Co. 
Ltd.,WB/01 & 24 
R.O. 
Kolkata 
543 Notice issued on 
03.06.10 
7A initiated 
02 M/s. Hooghly Mills 
Ltd.,WB/04 
R.O. 
Kolkata 
379 Notice issued on 
03.06.10 
7A initiated 
03 M/s. NJMC (Unit: 
Union),WB/8 
R.O. 
Kolkata 
  2 Notice issued on 
03.06.10 
7A initiated 
04 M/s. Caledonian Jute & 
Industries Ltd.,WB/28 
R.O. 
Kolkata 
973 Notice issued on 
03.06.10 
7A initiated 
05 M/s. Jai Jute Industries 
Ltd.(H.O), WB/24626 
R.O. 
Kolkata 
 23 Notice issued on 
03.06.10 
7A initiated 
06 M/s. New Central Jute Mill 
Co. Ltd. WB/49,51 & 5529 
R.O. 
Kolkata 
2057 Notice issued on 
03.06.10 
7A initiated 
07 M/s. Birla Jute Mill, 
WB/33 
R.O. 
Kolkata 
807 Notice issued on 
03.06.10 
7A initiated 
08 M/s. Cheviot Jute Mill, 
WB/29 
R.O. 
Kolkata 
106 Notice issued on 
03.06.10 
7A initiated 
09 M/s. Calcutta Jute Mfg. 
Co. Ltd., WB/20 
R.O. 
Kolkata 
26 Notice issued on 
03.06.10 
7A initiated 
10 M/s. Bird Jute & Exports 
Ltd., WB/14 
R.O. 
Kolkata 
19 Notice issued on 
03.06.10 
7A initiated 
11 M/s. Soorah Jute Mill ( 
H.O), WB/45 
R.O. 
Kolkata 
Nil NIL  

82 
 
12 M/s. Fraser & Co. Ltd. 
Merged with Jai Jute Mills, 
WB/24984 
  R.O. 
Kolkata 
          
Nil 
NIL - 
TOTAL RO - KOLKATA      4935 
13 M/s. Hukum Chand Jute 
Mill, WB/32 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
07 Show cause 
Notice issued 
NIL 
14 M/s. Gourishankar Jute 
Mill, WB/38 & 9952 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
200 Show cause 
Notice issued 
Nil 
15 M/s. Waverly Jute Mill, 
WB/30 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
337 Show cause 
Notice issued 
NIL 
16 M/s. Baranagar Jute Mill, 
WB/2,27 & 40 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
547 Show cause 
Notice issued 
NIL 
17 M/s. Kankinara Jute 
Mill,WB/15 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
06 Show cause 
Notice issued 
NIL 
18 M/s. Loomtex Eng. Unit: 
Titagarh Jute Mill II, 
WB/338 
 -- -- Inspection 
could not 
be done 
19 M/s. Gourepore Jute Co., 
WB/7 & 25 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
-- -- closed 
20 M/s. Jai Jute Industries Ltd. 
WB/36 & 47 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
-- -- Inspection 
could not 
be done 
due to 
suspension 
of work 
21 M/s. Empire Jute Mill 
WB/26 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
700 Show cause 
Notice issued 
NIL 
22 M/s. Kamarhati Jute Mill, 
WB/17 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
621 Show cause 
Notice issued 
NIL 
23 M/s. Agarpara Jute Mill, 
WB/37 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
229 Show cause 
Notice issued 
NIL 
24 M/s. NJMC Ltd. 
Unit:Alexandra WB/46 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
18 Show cause 
Notice issued 
NIL 
25 M/s. NJMC Ltd., Unit: SRO,Barrac 09 Show cause NIL 

83 
 
Khardah, WB/11 & 43 kpore Notice issued 
26 M/s. Trend Vyapaar  
Ltd.(Kelvin Jute Mill), 
WB/23 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
237 Show cause 
Notice issued 
NIL 
27 M/s. Eastern Mfg. Ltd. 
(Sunbeam Jute Mill) 
WB/354 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
366 Show cause 
Notice issued 
NIL 
28 M/s. NJMC Ltd., Unit: 
Kinnison, WB/48, 48A & 
55 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
07 Show cause 
Notice issued 
NIL 
29 M/s. Megna Jute Mill, 
WB/35 
SRO,Barrac
kpore 
229 Show cause 
Notice issued 
NIL 
 
 
POSITION OF ESTABLISHMENTS WHEREIN JOINT INSPECTION 
OF EPF0 & ESIC CARRIED OUT FROM FEBRUARY 2010 TO APRIL 2010 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
 
Name of estab. With Code No. 
 
Name of 
office 
No. of 
evasion of 
membersh
ip detected 
Action taken  if any Remarks UP 
TO 31-08-
2010 
30 M/s. Jagatdal Jute & Industries, 
WB/12 
SRO,Barrackp
ore 
312 Show cause Notice 
issued 
NIL 
31 M/s. Alliance Jute Mills 
(Lessees), WB/13 & 16 
SRO,Barrackp
ore 
104 Show cause Notice 
issued 
NIL 
32 M/s. Anglo Indian Jute Mills 
Co. Ltd. WB/21 & 34 
SRO,Barrackp
ore 
1206 Show cause Notice 
issued 
NIL 
33 M/s. Auckland International 
Ltd., WB/22 
SRO,Barrackp
ore 
48 Show cause Notice 
issued 
NIL 
34 M/s. Nafar Chandra Jute Mills 
Ltd., WB/39 
SRO,Barrackp
ore 
Nil -- NIL 
35 M/s. Naihati Jute Mills, WB/19 SRO,Barrackp
ore 
232 Show cause Notice 
issued 
NIL 
36 M/s. Prabartak Jute Mills, 
WB/742 
SRO,Barrackp
ore 
Nil  NIL 
37 M/s. Reliance Jute Mills, 
WB/52 
SRO,Barrackp
ore 
150 Show cause Notice 
issued 
NIL 
38 M/s. NJMC Ltd., Unit Kinisson, SRO,Barrackp Nil -- NIL 

84 
 
WB/48A ore  
 
TOTAL S.R.O - BARRACKPORE 5565 
39 M/s. North Brook Jute Co. Ltd, 
WB/72 
SRO, Howrah 1225 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
26/05/2010 
7A 
INITIATED 
40 M/s. Delta Ltd., WB/79 SRO, Howrah 851 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
26/05/2010 
7A 
INITIATED 
41 M/s. Vijay Sree, WB/77 SRO, Howrah 159 7A Notice issued on 
06/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
103 
ENROLLED 
42 M/s. Gondalpara Jute Mill, 
WB/357 
SRO, Howrah 730 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
27/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
402 
ENROLLED 
43 M/s. Howrah Mills Co. 
Ltd.,WB/76,85 & 86 
SRO, Howrah 741 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
28/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
299 
ENROLED 
44 M/s. Tepcon International 
Ltd.,WB/88 
SRO, Howrah -- -- NIL 
45 M/s. NJMC, Unit: National, 
WB/78 
SRO, Howrah -- -- NIL 
46 M/s. Hastings Jute Mills, 
WB/69 
SRO, Howrah 697 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
27/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
121 
ENROLLED 
47 M/s. Bally Jute Co. Ltd., 
WB/81 
SRO, Howrah 552 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
27/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
374 
ENROLLED 
48 M/s. Victoria Jute Co. Ltd., 
WB/62 & 71 
SRO, Howrah 573 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
27/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
436 
ENROLLED 
49 M/s. Angus Jute Mills, WB/63 SRO, Howrah 139 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
27/05/2010 
7A INIATED  
50 M/s. Samnugur Jute Mill, 
WB/64 
SRO, Howrah -- -- 7A INIATED 
51 M/s. Kanoria Jute Mill, WB/97 SRO, Howrah -- -- - 
52 M/s. Mahadeo Jute & Industries 
Ltd., WB/93 
SRO, Howrah 68 7A Notice issued on 
06/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
49 
ENROLLED 

85 
 
53 M/s. Tirupati Jute Industries 
Ltd. WB/90A 
SRO, Howrah 100 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
28/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
63 
ENROLLED 
54 M/s. Ludlow Jute & Specialities 
Ltd, WB/87 
SRO, Howrah 118 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
28/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
42 
ENROLLED 
55 M/s. WB Agro Textiles Corpn. 
Ltd, Unit: Bharat Jute,WB/94 
SRO, 
Howrah 
138 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
26/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
62 
ENROLLED  
56 M/s. Al Champdani Industries 
Ltd., Unit: Wellington Jute, 
WB/58 
SRO, 
Howrah 
628 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
28/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
57 M/s. Dalhousie Jute Co., 
WB/60 
SRO, 
Howrah 
244 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
25/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
92 
ENROLLED 
58 M/s. Bristi Vinimay Pvt. 
Ltd.,Unit: Premchand Jute Mill, 
WB/91A 
SRO, 
Howrah 
987 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
28/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
131 
ENROLLED 
59 M/s. Amboca Jute Mills Ltd., 
WB/89A 
SRO, 
Howrah 
666 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
26/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
577 
ENROLLED 
60 M/s. Bowreah Jute Mills Ltd., 
WB/96 
SRO, 
Howrah 
55 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
28/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
52 
ENROLLED 
61 M/s. Ganges Mfg. Ltd., WB/67 
& 70 
SRO, 
Howrah 
405 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
28/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
290 
ENROLLED 
62 M/s. Gloster Jute Mills Ltd., 
WB/74 
SRO, 
Howrah 
151 -- 151 
ENROLLED 
63 M/s. Murlidhar Ratanial  
Exports Ltd., Unit: India Jute 
Co. Ltd.WB/57,61 & 65 
SRO, 
Howrah 
803 Show-cause notice 
issued on 
27/05/2010 
7A INIATED 
232 
ENROLLED 
64 M/S. Ganges Mfg. Co.Ltd. 
WB/6335 
SRO, 
Howrah 
-- -- NIL 
65 M/s. Ganges Jute Pvt. Ltd. 
WB/41096 
SRO, 
Howrah 
-- -- - 
66 M/s. Ludlow Jute Specialities 
Ltd. WB/5231 
SRO, 
Howrah 
-- -- NIL 
67 M/s. The Champdany Industries 
Ltd. WB/25132 
SRO, 
Howrah 
-- -- NIL 

86 
 
TOTAL S.R.O - HOWRAH 10030 
GRAND TOTAL 
                            
20530 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

87 
 
Annexure - C 
 
 
INSPECTION OF JUTE MILLS BY EPFO & ESIC OFFICERS HELD DURING THE 
MONTH SEPTEMBER’2010 - OCTOBER ‘2010 
 
Sl No Name of Establishment Name of The 
Office 
No of Evasion of membership 
detected 
1 M/s Cheviot Co. Ltd. WB/29 RO-Kolkata 118 
2 M/s Caledonian Jute & 
Industries Ltd, WB/28 
RO-Kolkata 199 
3 M.s Calcutta Jute Co. Ltd. 
WB/20 
RO-Kolkata 111 
4 M/s Birla Jute Mills, WB/33 RO-Kolkata 401 
5 M/s New Central Jute Mills Co. 
Ltd, WB/49 & 51 
RO-Kolkata 124 
6 M/s Hooghly Mills Co. Ltd, 
WB/4 
RO-Kolkata 151 
7 M/s Bird Jute Expotrs Ltd. 
WB/14 
RO-Kolkata 25 
8 M/s NJMC – Unit Union WB/8 RO-Kolkata 68 
9 M/s Sura Jute Mills, WB/45 RO-Kolkata Suspension of Work 
10 M/s Budge Budge Co. Ltd, 
WB/1 & 24 
RO-Kolkata 271 
11 M.s Fraser & Co. LTD. 
WB/24984 
RO-Kolkata NIL 
12 M/s Jay Jute Industries Ltd., 
WB/24626 
RO-Kolkata Inspection could not be 
conducted 
TOTAL R.O-KOLKATA 1468 
13 M/s North Book Jute Ltd. 
WB/72 
SRO-Howrah 184 
14 M/s Vijay Shree WB/77 SRO-Howrah  17 
15 M.s Gondal para Jute WB/375 SRO-Howrah  Suspension of work 
16 M/s Howrah mills Co Ltd, 
WB/76,85,86 
SRO-Howrah  Suspension of work 
17 M/s Tepcon International Ltd, 
WB/88 
SRO-Howrah Sus[ension of work 
18 M/s Bally Jute Co. Ltd., WB/81 SRO-Howrah  176 
19 M/s Victoria Jute Co. Ltd, 
WB/62 & 71 
SRO-Howrah  65 

88 
 
20 M/s Angus Jute Mills WB/63 SRO-Howrah  122 
21 M/s Ludlow Jute, WB/87 SRO-Howrah  114 
22 M/s Bharat Jute, WB/94 SRO-Howrah  129 
23 Ms Dalhousi Jute Co, WB/60 SRO-Howrah 37 
24 M/s Ambika Jute Mills, 
WB/89A 
SRO-Howrah 118 
25 M/s Gloster Jute Mills, Wb/74 SRO-Howrah 73 
26 M/s N.J.M.C, (HO) WB/78 SRO-Howrah Mill Closed but HO could not be 
visited 
27 M/s Hastings Jute Mills, WB/69 SRO-Howrah 368 
28 M/s Kanoria Jute Mill, WB/97 SRO-Howrah Closed 
29 M/s Mahadeo Jute & Industries 
Ltd., WB/93 
SRO-Howrah 01 
30 M/s Tirupati Jute & Industries 
Ltd, WB/90A 
SRO-Howrah 125 
31 M/s Al Champdany Industries 
Ltd., WB/58 
SRO-Howrah 37 
32 M/s Premchand Jute Mill, 
WB/91A 
SRO-Howrah 272 
33 M/s Ganges Mfg Ltd., WB/67 
& 70 
SRO-Howrah 937 
34 M/s India Jute Mills, WB/57,61 
& 65 
SRO-Howrah 232 
35 M/s Ganges Mfg Co. Ltd. (HO), 
WB/6335  
SRO-Howrah NIL 
36 M/s Ganges Jute Pvt. Ltd., 
WB/41096 
SRO-Howrah 88 
37 M/s Ludlow Jute Specialities 
Ltd., (HO), WB/5231 
SRO-Howrah 01 
38 M/s The Champdany Industries 
Ltd., WB/25132 
SRO-Howrah 02 
39 M/s Delta Ltd., WB/79 SRO-Howrah 533 
40 M/s Shyamnagar Jute Mills, 
WB/64 
SRO-Howrah Could not be visited as per 
report dated 04-10-2010 
41 M/s Bowreah Jute Mills Ltd., 
WB/96 
SRO-Howrah Could not be visited as per 
report dated 04-10-2010 
TOTAL S.R.O - HOWRAH 3631 
42 M.s Kelvin Jute Mills, WB/23 SRO-
Barrackpore 
205 
43 M/s Estern mfg Co Ltd, SRO- 485 

89 
 
WB/354 Barrackpore 
44 M/s Meghna Jute Mill, WB/35 SRO-
Barrackpore 
250 
 
 
INSPECTION OF JUTE MILLS BY EPFO & ESIC OFFICERS HELD DURING THE 
MONTH SEPTEMBER’2010 - OCTOBER ‘2010 
 
Sl No Name of Establishment Name of The 
Office 
No of Evasion of membership 
detected 
45 M/s kamarhati Co. Ltd., 
WB/17 
SRO-Barrackpore 159 
46 M/s Jagatdal Jute WB/12 SRO-Barrackpore 121 
47 M/s Alliance Jute Mills, 
WB/13&16 
SRO-Barrackpore 192 
48 Ms Anglo Jute Mills, 
WB/21&34 
SRO-Barrackpore 202 
49 M/s Auckaland Jute Mills , 
WB/22 
SRO-Barrackpore 845 
50 M/s Naffar Chand Jute 
Mills, WB/39 
SRO-Barrackpore 163 
51 M/s Naihati Jute Mills, 
WB/19 
SRO-Barrackpore 144 
52 M.s Prabartak Jute Mils, 
Wb/42 
SRO-Barrackpore 69 
53 M.s Reliance Jute Mills , 
WB/52 
SRO-Barrackpore 51 
54 M/s Hukumchand Jute 
Mills, WB/32 
SRO-Barrackpore 47 
55 M/s Sree Gouri Shankar Jute 
Mills, WB/38&9952 
SRO-Barrackpore 148 
56 M.s Waverly Jute Mills, 
WB/30 
SRO-Barrackpore 257 
57 Ms Kankinara Jute Mills, 
WB/15 
SRO-Barrackpore 31 
58 M/s Loomtex Engineering 
Pvt Ltd, Wb/338 
SRO-Barrackpore 484 
59 M/s Empire Jute Mills, 
WB/26 
SRO-Barrackpore 269 
60 M/s Agarpara Jute Mills, SRO-Barrackpore 395 

90 
 
WB/37 
TOTAL S.R.O - BARRACKPORE 4517 
GRAND TOTAL 9616 
 
 
 
 
 
  

91 
 
Annexure - D  
 
 
 
COMPLIANCE OF JUTE MILLS DEFAULTING IN PAYMENT 
IN  ARREARS DEMAND & CURRENT DEMAND IN KOLKATA  REGION   
AS ON 31.05..2011 (ARREAR DEMAND) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Office Total Dues 
As on 01.04.2009 
(Rs. In Lakhs) 
Recovered 
 upto 
31.05.2011 
Balance 
as on 
31.05.201
1 7A 14B 7Q TOTAL 
  
ARREAR DEMAND 
 
 
1 
  
REGIONAL 
OFFICE,KOLKATA 
1997.96 168.82 55.81 2222.59 660.9 1561.69 
 
2 
 
 
SUB REGIONAL 
OFFICE,HOWRAH 
4815.28 302.23 111.27 5228.78 813.91 4414.87 
 
3 
 
SUB REGIONAL 
OFFICE,BARRACK
PORE 
8103.87 1252.62 326.70 9683.19 2310.66 7372.53 
 
TOTAL 
 
14917.11   1723.67  493.78 17134.56   3785.47 13349.09  
CURRENT DEMAND 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Office Total Dues 
As on 01.04.2010 
(Rs. In Lakhs) 
Recovered 
 upto 
31.05.2011 
Balance 
as on 
31.05.201
1  
7A 14B 7Q TOTAL 
 
1 
  
REGIONAL 
OFFICE,KOLKATA 
 -- 32.45 14.46 46.91 0.00 46.91 
2  
SUB REGIONAL 
OFFICE,BARRACK
PORE 
385.95 20.34 44.84 451.13 8.18 442.95 

92 
 
 TOTAL 385.95 52.79 59.30 498.04 8.18 489.86 
 
GRAND TOTAL 15303.06 1776.46 553.08 17632.60 3793.65 13838.95 
 
 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of the 
Applicant 
Name of the 
Employer 
Amount of 
Gratuity 
Remarks Pending 
1. Kishori Mohan 
Das, No. 
48/11/2010/E.3 
Indian Jute 
Industries 
Research 
Association, 
Kolkata 
Rs. 9,181/- Awarded - 
2. Asit Majumder, 
48/12/2011/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 6,414/- Awarded - 
3. Ram Chandra 
Prasad 
48/13/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 12,614/- Awarded - 
4. Shyamadas 
Ganguly, 
48/14/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 30,634/- Awarded - 
5. Pradeep Kr. 
Ghosh 
48/15/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 20,458/- Awarded - 
6. Pintu Dutta, 
48/16/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 15,571/- Awarded - 
7. Debdas Nandi,  
48/10/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 43,855/- Awarded - 
8. Gautam 
Chattopadhyay, 
48/08/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. NIL - Rs. 
3,50,000/- 
has already 
been paid 
by the 
employer 
9. Shyama Prasad 
Nayak, 
48/02/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 19,467/- Awarded - 
10. Rabin 
Mukherjee, 
-Do- Rs. 35, 706/- Awarded - 

93 
 
48/06/2010/E.3 
11. Ratan Roy, 
48/04/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 32, 107- Awarded - 
12. Rama Kanta 
Behera, 
48/01/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 8,027/- Awarded - 
13. Goutam Kar, 
48/03/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs.3,687/- Awarded - 
14. Tapan Kr. Sen, 
48/05/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 32,126/- Awarded - 
15. Pradeep Kr. 
Sarkar,  
48/17/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 34,168/- Awarded - 
16. Sujit Kumar 
Paul, 
48/18/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 6,414/- Awarded - 
17. Baidya Nath 
Hazra 
48/19/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs.21,187/- Awarded - 
18. Shyamal Kr. 
Bakshi, 
48/20/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 15,571/- Awarded - 
19.  Tapas Basak, 
48/21/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 42,749/- Awarded - 
20.  Sujit Kumar 
Saha, 
48/22/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 22,295/- Awarded - 
21. Tapas Kr. Sen, 
48/23/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 41,097/- Awarded - 
22. Samarendra 
Nath, 
48/24/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 20,030/- Awarded - 
23. Sambhu 
Bhattacharya, 
48/25/2010/E.3 
-Do- Rs. 13,724/- Awarded - 
24. Utpal Burman 
Roy, 
48/07/2010/E.3 
-Do- NIL Applicant 
not 
pursued 
the case 
- 

94 
 
25. Nihar Kanti 
Mukherjee, 
48/09/2010/E.3 
-Do- NIL -Do- - 
26. Kanailal 
Bhandari, 
48/47/2010/E.2 
National Jute 
Manufacturer 
Corporation 
Rs. 37,161/- Awarded - 
27. Nirmal Ch. 
Pramanik, 
48/19/2010/E.2 
National Jute 
Manufacturer 
Corporation 
Rs. 30,975/- Awarded - 
28. Rabindranath 
Sasmal, 
48/18/2010/E.2 
National Jute 
Manufacturer 
Corporation 
Rs. 
1,49,635/- 
Awarded - 
29. Mohammad 
Ashique, 
48/17/2010/E.2 
National Jute 
Manufacturer 
Corporation 
Rs. 44,936/- Awarded - 
30. Smt. Sanjay 
Biswas, 
48/02/2010/E.2 
National Jute 
Manufacturer 
Corporation 
- - Pending for 
hearing 
  Total Rs. 7,40,608/-   
 
  

95 
 
 
Annexure E 
 
Jute mills have been closed, state-wise and year wise and the reasons for 
closure of each such mill. 
  
MILLS IN WEST BENGAL       - 
 
S. No. Name of the Jute Mill Date of 
Closure 
Reasons 
1 NJMC-NATIONAL 17.02.2003 Continuous cash loss resulting 
in financial crisis due to lack of 
working capital and huge 
accumulated loss  
2 NJMC- KINNISION 26.03.2004 -do- 
3 NJMC-KHARDAH 26.03.2004 -do- 
4 NJMC-
ALEXANDRA 
01.09.2002 -do- 
5 NJMC-UNION 11.03.2003 -do- 
6 NJMC- RBHM 24-03-
2004 
-do- 
7 KANORIA 25.04.2004 Winding up notice by BIFR 
8 SOORAH 29.03.2004 Not known 
9 GOURIPORE 04.09.1998 Financial sickness BIFR 
recommended for winding up 
10 KANPUR 13.04.1987 Not known 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

96 
 
 
Annexure F 
 
Percentage distribution of capacity utilization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


97 
 
Annexure G 
 
Progress of JTM (Mini Mission -III) 
 
 
Scheme for details of plan outlay and expenses 
 
Sl. 
No
. 
Scheme 
Physical 
Target 
(Allocation
) 
Work 
Complete
d 
Workin
g 
Progress 
Financia
l Targets 
(Rs. In 
Crores) 
Financia
l 
Progress 
(Rs. In 
Crores) 
31.03.11 
1 
Constructions 
of Marketing 
Yards  
(60 :40  
Central Govt. 
: State Govt.) 
12 7 5 7.98 6.00 
2 
Construction 
of 
Departmental 
Purchase 
Centre (100% 
GOI) 
40 18 22 44.00 27.57 
3 
Constructions. 
Mini Retting 
Tanks (90:10 -  
GOI : 
Beneficiary) 
50 26 24 4.50 3.60 
4 
Demonstratio
n  of Retting 
Technology 
(100% of 
GOI) 
200 160 40 2.00 1.60 

98 
 
5 
Development 
of High Speed 
Ribbboners 
(100% GOI) 
- - - 1.60 1.60 
          60.08 40.37 
 
 
 
  

99 
 
Annexure H 
 
SCHEME-WISE EXPENDITURE OF JTM MM-IV 
 
Sl. 
No. SCHEMES Total 
Missio
n 
Period 
(2007-
12) 
FUND UTILISED 
   2007-
08 
2008-
09 
2009-
10 
2010-11 
[Provisio
nal] 
Cumula
tive 
[upto 
2010-11] 
   Rs./ 
Crores 
Rs./ 
Cror
es 
Rs./ 
Cror
es 
Rs./ 
Cror
es 
Rs./ 
Crores 
Rs./ 
Crores 
6 SCHEMES FOR MODERNISATION OF ORGANISED JUTE MILLS 
  
6.1 Training of Workers & 
Supervisors 4.50 2.00 0.77 0.50 1.00 4.27 
6.2 Machinery 
Development 28.00 0.08 5.75 7.62 4.08 17.53 
6.3 
Productivity 
Improvement & TQM 
Facilitation 
6.00 0.04 0.12 1.00 2.66 3.82 
6.4 
Acquisition of 
Machinery and Plant – 
Capital Subsidy 
80.00 5.86 7.46 11.24 21.80 46.36 
 TOTAL (6) 118.50 7.98 14.10 20.36 29.54 71.98 
7 SCHEMES FOR PROMOTION OF JUTE DIVERSIFICATION 
   
7.1 Design and 
Development of JDP 14.00 2.20 2.56 1.52 2.38 8.66 
7.2 
For helping the NGOs 
and WSHGs for 
developing JDPs 
17.00 0.38 1.52 1.79 5.23 8.92 
7.3 Scheme for Promotion 23.52 1.97 5.21 4.91 3.90 15.99 

100 
 
of Jute Diversification: 
7.4 
Scheme for 
Commercialisation of 
Technology 
1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
7.5 
Scheme for setting up 
Jute Parks for the 
Diversified sector 
60.00 0.06 0.83 1.50 13.34 15.73 
 TOTAL (7) 115.52 4.61 10.12 9.72 24.85 49.30 
 Total Mini Mission -
IV (Schemes) 234.02 12.59 24.22 30.08 54.39 121.28 
 Administrative / 
Monitoring Expenses    0.35  0.97  1.58 1.95 4.85 
 Total Mini Mission -
IV  234.02 12.94 25.19 31.66 56.34 126.13 
 
 
 

101 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 16TH JANUARY, 2012.  
 
The Committee met from 1600 hrs. to  1630 hrs in Committee 
Room '074', Parliament Library Building, New Delhi to consider and 
adopt the draft Report on "Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 16 th Report of the Committee on 
the subject, 'Development of Jute Sector' of the Ministry of Textiles.  
PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri Narahari Mahato 
3.     Shri Hari Manjhi 
4.     Shri S. Pakkirappa 
5.     Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
6. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
7. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
8.   Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
9. Shri Rajaram 
10. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 
 
  
  SECRETARIAT 
          
1. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
2. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Under Secretary  
 
 
-2- 
 

102 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the draft Report on "Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the 16 th Report 
of the Committee on the subject, 'Development of Jute Sector' of the 
Ministry of Textiles. 
  
3. The Committee took up the draft Report for consideration and 
adopted the same without any modification.   
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the 
same to both the Houses of Parliament.   
 
5.  XX     XX    XX 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX Do not pertain to this report. 
 
 
 
 

103 
 
 
      APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
         Total Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations      14 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have          
been accepted by Government 
 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.23, 3.26, 3.27,  
3.28, 3.29, 3.30 and 3.31)                  07     50% 
  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s replies 
 
Nil                             Nil          Nil  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration 
 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.24, 2.25 and 3.32)           03           
21.4% 
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which     
final replies of Government are of interim in  nature 
 
(Paragraph Nos. 1.21, 1.22, 2.22 and 2.26)          04        28.6% 
                          ---------
-- 
                        100% 
                     
 