 
8  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty-Ninth  Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on 
the `Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation – Employees’ Pension Scheme, 
1995’] 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2010/ Phalguna,  1931 (Saka) 


EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty-Ninth  Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on 
the `Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation – Employees’ Pension Scheme, 
1995’] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4th March, 2010  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4th March, 2010  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
March, 2010/Phalguna,  1931 (Saka) 
 


  
   
CONTENTS 
       
      PAGE(S)
       
    
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
  
   replies of Government have not been accepted by  
   the Committee and which require reiteration………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature    …………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Ninth  Report  
  (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-10) 
 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL-CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
              2. Shri  M. Anandan  
              3. Shri  P. Balram   
              4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq    
              5. Shri  Sudarshan Bhagat  
              6. Shri  Hassan Khan  
              7. Shri  Kaushalendra Kumar  
              8. Shri P. Lingam  
              9. Shri  Hari Manjhi  
            10. Shri  P.R. Natarajan  
            11. Km. Mausam Noor  
            12. Shri  S. Pakkirappa  
            13. Shri  Ramkishun  
            14. Shri  Mahendra Kumar Roy  
            15. Shri  Chandu Lal Sahu  
            16. Shri  Murari Lal Singh  
     ***17. Shri Raj Babbar  
*****18. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar     
            19.      Vacant  
             20. Vacant  
             21. Vacant 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
             22. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy  
             23. Shri  Rudra Narayan Pany  
        **24. Shri  Pyarelal Khandelwal  
             25. Shri  Rajaram  
             26. Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
             27. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
           *28. Shri  Mohammad Adeeb  
   ****29. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal    
            30. Vacant   
            31. Vacant  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*                  Changed the nomination from Committee on Labour to Committee on  
                    Commerce w.e.f. 17th September, 2009. 
**                Expired on 6th October, 2009. 
***              Nominated w.e.f. 3rd December, 2009. 
****            Nominated w.e.f 31st December, 2009. 
 *****         Nominated w.ef 11th January, 2010. 
 

   
  SECRETARIAT 
 
                
 1.    Shri Devender Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri B.S. Dahiya    - Director  
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
 4.    Smt. Archana Srivastava  - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been 
authorised  by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Eighth  Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty -Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on  the `Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation – 
Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995’. 
 
2. The Thirty -Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 20.2.2009.  The Ministry of Labour and Employment furnished 
their replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that 
Report on 9th November, 2009.  The Report was considered and adopted by the 
Standing Committee on Labour at their sitting held on 17.2.2010.  
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty -Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed in thick 
type in the body of the Report.  
 
New Delhi;                    HEMANAND BISWAL 
28th January,  2010                                              CHAIRMAN, 
Magha 8, 1931 (Saka)                       STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR. 
     
  
 
  

 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Labour deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Thirty -Ninth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on `Employee s’ 
Provident Fund Organisation -Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995’ 
relating to the Ministry of Labour and Employment which was presented 
to Lok Sabha,  and laid in Rajya Sabha, on 20.02.2009. 
 
2. The Ministry of Labour and Employment were requested to furnish 
action taken replies to the recommendations contained in the Thirty -
Ninth Report within three months from the presentation of the Report 
i.e. by 20. 05.2009.  The report contained 8  
recommendations/observations.  The action taken replies of the 
Government in respect of all the recommendations contained in the 
report were received on 09.11.2009.  These have been categorized as 
under:-  
 

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government —Rec. Sl.Nos. 1,3,6,7 and 8.  (Para Nos. 
75, 77, 80, 81 and 82) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply – Rec. 
Sl.No.4 (Para No. 78) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Com mittee 
and which require reiteration—NIL. 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which replies of 
the Government are interim in nature -Rec.Sl.No.2 and 5 . 
(Para Nos. 76, 79) 
 
  
3. The Committee desire that action taken replies in respect of 
recommendations contained in Chapter I may be furnished to them 
at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of the Report.   
 

4.      The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations which  merit comments 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Increase in Wage Ceiling 
 
 (Rec. Sr. No.1, Para 75) 
5. The Committee noted that the wage ceiling of Rs.6,500 /- for the 
purpose of coverage under EPF Scheme was last revised w.e.f. 1 st June 
2001.  Keeping in view the rapid transformation that ha d taken place in 
our economy , leading to substantial increase in the wages of the 
employees, the wage limit in vogue had lost its relevance.  While 
accepting the changing trend in our employment scenario, ESIC, the 
another organisation of the Ministry, accordingly revised the wage 
ceiling to Rs.10,000/- for the purpose of coverage.   The Committee were 
of the consistent view that the Scheme called for self valuation based on 
sound and real principles of economic management for  revamping and 
reorienting the Scheme ensuring maximum coverage of workers as well 
as enhanced rate of pension to them.   The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommended that the Government should come out of its 
slumber and retrograde approach by adapting itself to the opportunities 

being thrown by the new employment scenario of high wages and revise 
the wage ceiling for coverage under EPFO to Rs. 15,000 /- without any 
delay. 
 
6. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry have stated:- 
 `In order to implement the recommendation of the  Committee 
 regarding  increase in wage ceiling for  coverage under the 
 Employees’ Provident  Funds &  Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
 1952 from Rs.6,500/- to  Rs.15,000/-,  various  options to 
neutralize the  associated liability on Pension Fund due to this revision  
are  being explored in consultation with the experts and  thereafter, the 
proposal shall be moved for carrying  out the  requisite  
amendments in the Act/Scheme’.  
 
7. The Committee are saddened to note that the Ministry of 
Labour has been mulling over the wage ceiling revision proposal 
under the EPF Scheme for too long unwarrantedly.  Such an 
attitude of apathy and indifference negates the very mandate to 

safeguard the interest of workers in general and of those who 
constitute the  poor, the deprived and the disabled sections of 
society.  Apparently, the Ministry is either oblivious or pays scant 
regard to the Constitutional mandate directing the State to strive 
to secure just socio -economic order, among others, and to try to 
secure a living wage and decent standard of living. Considering the 
whopping contributions which have accumulated with the EPFO 
over the years and which continue to mount, the Committee have 
sound reasons to believe that  given proper will, commitment and 
concern expected of a welfare State, the EPF wage ceiling can be 
enhanced suitably, as recommended by the Committee, and also 
revised periodically to safeguard the interest of the intended 
beneficiaries. 
 
B. Need to revise rate of contributions 
(Rec. Sr. No.2, Para 76) 
 
8. The Committee noted that EPS, 1995 is a contributory scheme 
wherein the employers’ contribution towards the pension of the 
employee is diverted @ 8.33% from the total contribution of 12% made 

towards social security obligations. Under the EPS,  no contribution is 
taken from the member, i.e., the employee for the pension scheme. The 
Government contributes @ 1.16% to the pension fund. Neither of the 
above rates of contributions had been revised for the last 14 years .  
Commenting on the callous att itude of the Government towards the 
workforce in non -revision of the rates of contributions even after one 
and a half decade,   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended 
that the formula regarding rate of contribution should be revised at 
periodic intervals wherein the rate of contribution from the Government 
should at least be fixed at half of the rate of contribution which is being 
made by the employer or the employee towards the pension scheme. 
 
9. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committ ee, the 
Ministry have stated as follows:- 
 `At present, an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship  of 
 Special Secretary (Labour and Employment) consisting  of 
actuaries, expert of finance and representatives of all  stakeholders 
 is reviewing the Employees' Pension  Scheme, 1995 as a whole and 
 any decision/action  regarding enhancement of Government’s 

 contribution will  be considered after the receipt of the 
 recommendations  of this Expert Committee’.  
10. The Committee find the reply of the Government  rather 
dilatory and evasive at best. The reply is conspicuously silent as to 
when was the expert committee appointed and what were  its terms 
of reference and the time by which the Committee would give its 
report to the Government. I n the absence of any sp ecific reply by 
the Government, it is also not clear whether the said Expert 
Committee will also look into the issue of revision of rate of 
contribution by the Government and employers.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire  the Government to intimate the terms  of 
reference of the expert committee.  They also desire that the 
Expert Committee may be asked to finalize its report within a fixed 
time-frame.  A copy of the report, along with action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations, may also be furnished to the 
Committee at the earliest.  
 
C. Separate Pension Division and Grievance R edressal 
 Mechanism for Pensioners 
 

(Rec. Sr. No.3, Para 81) 
 
11. The Committee noted that there were about 30 lakh  pensioners of 
different categories under the EPS, 1995 in the country. Moreover, there 
was no separate mechanism of grievance redressal specifically for the 
pensioners, however, a Public Grievance Handling System exist ed 
whereby grievances for all the thr ee schemes i.e., EPF Scheme, 1952, 
EPS, 1995 and EDLI, 1976 were handled.  The Committee were of the 
view that owing to lack of separate grievance redressal cell, the 
grievances of pensioners were not getting the due attention and timely 
redressal.  The Co mmittee, therefore, strongly recommended that 
keeping in view the sizeable number of pensioners in the country and 
their grievances, a separate pension division within EPFO need to be 
established by taking necessary measures and till such a mechanism is 
put in place, a specific grievance redressal cell, within the Public 
Grievance Handling System itself, m ight be set up for resolution of 
grievances of the pensioners within a definite time frame. 
 
12. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, t he 
Ministry have stated as follows: 

 `In order to implement the recommendation of the  Committee 
regarding the ever-increasing number of  pensioners and their related 
grievances, the organisation is  working on the formation of a separate 
pension division for  redressal of specific grievances pertaining to 
Pension  Scheme, in a definite time-frame’. 
 
13. The Committee in their recommendation had  underlined the 
need for a separate pension division withi n EPFO.  The Committee 
had also recommended that till such a mechanism is put in place, a 
specific grievance redressal cell, within the Public Grievance 
Handling System itself, be set up for resolution of grievances of the 
pensioners.  The Committee note t hat even after passage of 
considerable time nothing concrete has been done to create the 
specific grievance redressal cell, within the Public Grievance 
Handling System as a makeshift arrangement.  The Committee, 
however, note the assurance of the Governmen t to set up a 
separate pension division for redressal of specific grievances 
pertaining to pension scheme.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the time frame by which the proposed pension division 
would be functional. 

CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation [Para 75] 
 
 The Committee note that the present wage ceiling of rs.6,500/ - for 
the purpose of coverage under EPF Scheme was last revised w.e.f. 1 st 
June 2001.  The present wage limit has now lost its relevance in view of 
the rapid transformation that have taken place in our economy leading 
to substantial increases in the wages of the employees.  ESIC, the other 
organisation of the Ministry, has well accepted the changing trend in 
our employment scenario and accordingly revised the wage ceiling to 
Rs.10,000/- for the purpose of coverage.  However, EPFO is still 
treading over beaten tracks without properly understanding the issue in 
the proper perspective and is sticking to an implausible stand which is 
anti-worker purely for hypothetical reasons.  On the question of revising 
wage ceiling, the Ministry has informed the Committee the ‘rising of 
wage ceiling would have a wider impact on the Employees’ Pension 
Scheme, 1995.  Hen ce, unless the impact of pension scheme is fully 
taken care of, the rise in wage ceiling may not be appropriate.’  When 
the further wanted to know whether any study/evaluation has been 
done to ascertain the impact of increase in wage ceiling on EPS, 1995, 
the Government, evading direct reply, stated that ‘the increase in the 
pension eligibility salary from Rs.5,000/ - to Rs.6,500/- made effective 
from 01.06.2001 has increased the liability to the extent of Rs.10,000/ -
crore.’ It has further been stated that a s soon as a suitable solution is 
found to remove/reduce such impact, the wage ceiling can be increased. 
The Committee feel that with the enhanced wage ceiling, the future 
receivable contributions will receive a quantum boost and the liability of 
the Government towards pension will begin only after   The Committee,  
years or beyond. Undoubtedly, the earning on such contributions, 
despite the possibility of pre -mature withdrawal, will leave the 
Government in a comfortable financial position. EPS, 1995 is a sc heme 
having defined contribution and benefits, wherein contribution is 

uniform and re -distributive in nature. The Committee refuse to accept 
the actuarial observations as gospel truth for foreclosing any 
exploratory avenues. The Committee are of the consis tent view that the 
scheme calls for self -valuation based on sound and real principles of 
economic management for revamping and reorienting the scheme 
ensuring maximum coverage of workers as well as enhanced rate of 
pension to them. Regarding future  contri butions after the increase in 
wage ceiling, even the vaguer has observed ‘through there will be 
corresponding increase in the receivable contribution in future, there is 
no way of collecting the additional contribution in future, there is no 
way of collect ion the additional contribution from members who have 
already been members of the scheme before the date of the change’. 
This cannot be an insurmountable obstacle as the same or similar issue 
might have cropped up during the last wage revision as well. Mor eover, 
the payable pension can suitably be restructured by devising an 
appropriate formula taking to account the contributions made by the 
pensioner under both pre-revised and revised wage ceiling. Hence there 
is absolutely no justification for the inflexi ble and obtrusive attitude of 
the Government regarding revision in the wage ceiling. therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Government should come out of its 
slumber and retrograde approach by adapting itself to the opportunities 
being thrown by the new employment scenario of high wages and revise 
the wage ceiling for coverage under EPFO to Rs. 15,000/ - without any 
delay.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to implement the recommendation of the Committee 
regarding increase in wage ceiling for coverage under the Employees’ 
Provident Funds & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 from Rs.6,500/ - 
to Rs.15,000/-, various options to neutralize the associated liability on 
Pension Fund due to this revision are being explored in consultation 
with the experts and thereafter, the proposal shall be moved for carrying 
out the requisite  amendments in the Act/Scheme.  
 
(Rec. Sr. No.3, Para 77) 
 
 The Committee observe that the record of updated figures about 
the actual number of pensioners is the nucleus for the effective, 
transparent, satisfactory and successful implementation of the scheme. 
However, the figures regarding the pensioners in the Employees’ 
Pension Scheme, 1995 are not only inaccurate and unreliable but 
appear to be inflated and imaginary also. In r eply to a question 
regarding existing members of the provident fund who did not opt for 
erstwhile Family Pension Scheme, 1971, but have joined the new EPS, 
1995, it has been replied that no such data is maintained on  the 
ground that the number of such per sons are very few and most of them 
would have completed more than 37 years of service and got the due 
benefits. On being further asked about the manner in which the data 
regarding different kind s of pensioners are being maintained and the 
absence of authe ntic data how the calculation regarding pensionary 
liability are arrived at, it has been stated that the data regarding 
different kinds of pensioners and their status at different times are 
maintained with the help of pension claims received from the membe rs 
and their families. The valuing actuary uses the available authentic 
data to arrive at the pensionary liability for projection the figure with 

the help of accepted actuarial practices. Regarding number of 
pensioners in the country, two different replies  quoting different figures 
i.e., 29,53,412 at one place while 15,19 956 at another have been given. 
The Committee are shocked to find the irresponsible manner in which 
such important statistics involving workers’ money having vital social 
security implicat ions for the workers and their families are being 
maintained. The organization, instead of taking its own initiative to 
exactly determine the number of pensioners of different categories, is 
relying on the claims being received by it from members and their  
families to arrive at the figures of pensioners. This is certainly glaring 
example of shirking basic responsibility. The Committee are perturbed 
to note that in the era of e -governance, the Ministry id yet to take 
advantage of the latest technology. The Committee, therefore, urge upon 
the Government to develop a database of the existing members as well 
as the new entrants into the scheme wherein appropriate column may 
be added in the format indicating the minimum time after which the 
subscriber will be eli gible for pension and actual date of his retirement 
as per the age of superannuation making him a pensioner.  Some 
column may also be introduced in between for identifying those 
members who have rendered minimum qualifying service for pension 
but left befo re reaching the age of superannuation.  Appropriate 
columns could also be introduced into the database for other categories 
of pensioners.  Government may consider to issue appropriate Smart 
Cards to members/pensioners containing the requisite details incl usive 
of self -updation of information about the job profile of the members.  
This will not only help in exacting the number of different category of 
pensioners but will also give the figures about the exit rate, the money 
outgo at such exit, the financial health of the scheme and the 
organisational liabilities towards the pensioners as well.” 
   
 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to implement the recommendation of the Committee, t he 
Organisation has planned for the total computerisation  of all its 
transactions/processes in two phases with the association of National 
Informatics Centre (NIC) as per the decision of the  Central Board of 
Trustees, Employees’ Providential Fund.  The  software development 
and its launching are in progress.  This  software on successful testing 
will be introduced in all the offices  in the phased manner during the 
current financial year.  Already, the software developed by NIC has been 
launched at Sub -Regional Office, Karnal on 07.09.2009 and now this 
shall be replicated in all field offices at the earliest.  This software 
developed by NIC prerequisites for the updation of members profile 
before any transaction takes place either for crediting the contribution 
to the members account or the withdrawal under any Scheme. 
 To develop the database of the members of the Employees’ Pension 
Fund and to complete the task in a time -bound manner, a detailed 
circular dated 16.4.2009 was sent to all field offices to complete the job 
at the earliest.  To capture the details of  the members, the information 
Services Division has provided the data structure to all the field offices 
and work in this direction is going on.  Also, issuing Unique 
Identification No. to all the subscribers of EPF will be taken up in the 
subsequent phases of the project’.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation [Para 80] 
 
 The Committee observe that out of total workforce of over 43 crore, 
only 4.44crore workers of the country are covered under the EPF 
Scheme. Various reasons like the limitation clauses pertaining to 
threshold limits, wage ceiling, Schedule I enumerating the classes of 
industries for coverage, etc. have attributed for the inadequacy of 
coverage. The threshold limit was last revised on 31.12.1960 bringing it 
to 20 employees and as many as 186 classes of 
industries/establishments have been brought under the purview of the 
EPF & MP Act, 1952. However, with the sea change in th e employment 
pattern following modernization and technological upgradation, the 
Schedule I as well as ceiling of 20 employees has become redundant. 
When employment of lesser employees and maximization of turnover is 
the order of the day, the interest of th e employees are expected to be 
well taken care of . Unfortunately, the Committee are saddened to note 
that the employees’ genuine interests are being compromised despite 
having rendered arduous services for years on. It is a matter grave 
concern that the E PF & MP Act, 1952 have miserably failed to address 
the newer problems emerging out of the transformed employment 
scenario impairing the welfare of the workers. The Schedule containing 
enumeration of industries for coverage has lost its significance and 
justification. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that in 
keeping pace with the emerging employment trends, it will not only be 
desirable but also befitting if the concept of having Schedule of 
industries for coverage alongwith the threshold limit i s promptly done 
away with and all the workers irrespective of their numbers and the 
industries they are engaged in are brought within the purview of the 
EPF Scheme and EPS, 1995.” 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to implement the recommendation of the Committee, the 
matter is being processed for placing a proposal in this regard before 
the Central Board of Trustees, employees’ Provident Fund.  
 
Recommendation [Para 81] 
 
 The Committee note that there are about 30 lakh  pensioners of 
different categories under the EPS, 1995 in the country. This number is 
bud to swell by each month/year. As of now, EPFO is not well equipped 
and under staffed to deal with the growing number of pensioners. With 
the possible increase in wage  ceiling, there may be a phenomenal 
increase in the number of subscribers and consequently in the number 
of pensioners as well. The Committee not that even the present number 
of pensioners is in no way insignificant and it may perhaps become very 
difficult in course of time to render efficient and satisfactory services to 
the subscribers as well as to the pensioners if proper plans are not put 
in place earnestly. The Committee feel that for serving the beneficiaries 
effectively and smoothly, it is essential  that the EPFO is adequately 
equipped and staffed. Further, the scheme as such is flawed one on 
many counts giving rise to pensioners’ grievances. Needless to say, the 
pensioners are senior citizens of the country and not in a position to 
move too frequently in connection with the settlement of their grievance 
redressal mechanism for pensioners makes the matter all the worse for 
them. When asked about a separate grievance redressal mechanism for 
the pensioners, it was replied that there is no separate mecha nism of 
grievance redressal specifically for the pensioners. The Ministry stated 
that there is a Public Grievance Handling System whereby grievances 
for all the three schemes i.e., EPF scheme, 1952, EPS, 1995 and EDLI, 

1976 are handled and that ‘the organi zation in tune with its objectives 
lays considerable importance to the redressal of grievances of the 
members.’ The Committee was informed that Regional Offices, Sub -
Regional Offices and District Offices register the grievance of all the PF 
members including pensioners and necessity follow up action are taken 
to redress the grievances. Besides, pension division in the Head Office 
and pension wing in the field offices also attend to the specific 
grievances of the pensioners. The Committee do not accept the 
explanation as the Ministry has not been able to give any input or 
feedback regarding the satisfaction level of pensioners’ grievances. The 
Committee are of the view that owing to lack of separate grievance 
redressal cell, the grievances of pensioners are n ot getting the due 
attention and timely redressal. Further, due to the lack of bargaining 
power, the pensioners are in no position to have a proper and effective 
say into the matter. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
keeping in view the size able number of pensioners in the country and 
their grievances, a separate pension division within EPFO need to be 
established by taking necessary measures and till such a mechanism is 
put in place, a specific grievance redressal cell, within the Public 
Grievance Handling System itself, may be set up for resolution of 
grievances of the pensioners within a definite time frame.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to implement the recommendation of the Committee 
regarding the ever -increasing number of pensioners and their related 
grievances, the organisation is working on the formation of a separate 
pension division for redressal of specific grievances pertaining to 
Pension Scheme, in a definite time-frame. 
 

 
Recommendation [Para 82] 
 
 The Committee note that as on 31.03.2007, the pension fund had 
a corpus of Rs.81,606.22 crore. The corpus is being revamped by 
incremental monthly accruals. The pensionary liability of the fund is 
also increasing continuously and the funding f or this scheme is 
primarily from the rate of return which is being generated. The rate of 
return in the current situation is not stable and fluctuates depending 
on various factors. Even the value has recommended that there should 
be liberal pattern of inve stment to increase the inbound whereas EPFO 
is still following the pattern issued by Ministry of Labour and 
Employment in 2003. The Committee were informed that the Central 
Board of Trustees (CBT) has made certain recommendations to allow 
more flexibility in choosing the instruments for investments. However, 
the recommendations of the CBT are yet to be notified. Asked about the 
recommendation of ILC to set up Workers’ Bank where EPF and the 
deduction could be deposited for better returns, the Government 
informed that creating a parallel banking structure would not be 
necessary in view of the administrative costs, RBI GUIDELINES AND 
OTHER PROBLIMS SUC AS LACK OR CORE COMPETENCIES. The 
Committee are of the view that corpus under EPS, 1995 is quite 
staggering. The CBT recommendations on private sector investments 
may not be appropriate in view of the uncertainties in the market and 
strong opposition by Central Trade Unions, but the issue of Workers’ 
Bank appear tone a feasible option wherein baking activities it self may 
be initiated by the organization.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that to manage the huge amount deposited under EPS, 
some new methodology be adopted, which may be in addition to the 
conventional investments in Government securities, to ensure that the 
corpus receives healthy returns on its capital so that pensionary 
liabilities are met smoothly.” 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to implement the recommendation of the Committee, the 
Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation, d uring the  Financial Year 
2008-09, has decided to introduce competition in fund management 
including that accruing to the Pension Fund and accordingly, four fund 
managers in place of existing one manger have been appointed  to 
manage the corpus under the Central Boa rd of Trustees, EPF.  It is 
expected that this arrangement will bring about higher returns on 
investment. 
The investment pattern notified by the Ministry of Finance in 2008, 
allowing investments in equities and trading in securities to achieve 
higher yield, in addition to the conventional investment in Government 
securities, is under examination by the Central Board of Trustees, 
Employees’ Provident Fund.      
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDTIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
Recommendation [Para 78] 
 
 The Committee find the objective behind the actuarial valuation of 
the scheme is to estimate the liability under the scheme so as to take 
necessary steps   that the estimated assets are sufficient to meet the 
future liability. So far eight actuarial valuations have been don e. The 
last was carried out in 2004. The mahjor factors which are taken into 
consideration by the actuary while evaluation the schemes are the 
Mortality Rate, Interest Rate, Salary Escalation Rate, Exit Rate and 
other assumptions like premature withdrawal,  the Hazard Rate in the 
industry where the employees work, the average size of the family of the 
member, difference In the age of spouses, chances of remarriage of 
widows/widowers. The component of the Interest Rate consists of the 
rate at which the presen t assets are expected to grow in future. On the 
other hand, future income and liabilities are also brought down at the 
same rate. The Committee further note that for the 8 th valuation (for the 
period 2003 -04) the information which was sought by actuary and  
supplied by EPFO related to details of coverage of establishments under 
EPS 1995, details of contributions received details of exits from the 
scheme during the year, details of beneficiaries and the benefits paid to 
them and data on members and beneficiar ies, etc. Based on these 
criteria, the future projections were pronounced and an actuarial  deficit 
of more than twenty two thousand crore was arrived at. How ever, the 
committee are unable to understand the basis of time factor for this 
kind of evaluation . Any  figure, howsoever trustworthy, it maybe/ 
appear to be, is bound   after three decades. Therefore, these projections 

are least convincing as all the factors considered to arrive at this 
decisions i.e., mortality rate, exit rate, salary escalation rat e, interest 
rate and other assumptions are more hypothetical and unreliable 
because nothing can be said with certainty about any of the above 
criteria based on which prediction is being made. The scheme itself is 
designed on the bases of defined contributi on and benefits. The 
Committee are of the view  that the contribution made in the scheme 
alongwith the interest accrued on such contribution should be 
computed together for the purpose of pension rather than harping on 
the interest earned only as has been stated by the government . The 
contention of the Government  that the discount rate of 1% has  helped 
them in offsetting the deficit of the scheme itself substantiates the 
impression that actuarial valuations are more imaginary that actual. 
Even going by t he simple principle of contribution received and liability 
disbursed every month, it   be difficult for the Government to manage 
the affairs as the Government   the affairs as the Gove4rnment itself has 
admitted that during the year 2006 -07, the total cont ribution received 
was rs.8050.68 crore at the monthly average accretion of Rs.670.89 
crore whereas the monthly disbursement under the scheme was only 
Rs.294.4 crore. It is only due to this continuous trend in receipt and 
expenditure that the corpus under p ension scheme has accumulated to 
the tune of more than Rs. 80,000 crore as on 31 March, 2007. This 
pattern of receipts is unlikelytochange in future as the number of 
subscribers to  the scheme will be more than pensioners at any given 
point of time. . Thus , the pension liability will continue tobe met from 
the interest of such a corpus without involving any expenditure from 
the original contribution. The only efforts required to achieve this is to 
develop a cyclical system, with no or minimum default, of en suring the 
receipt or receivable contribution from the subscribers. The Premature 
withdrawals from the scheme, though diminishes the quantum of fund, 
nevertheless also and the Government is not at a loss in such cases 
because some percentage of the interes t accrued on the money so 
withdrawn remains with the Government only. Therefore, the actuarial 
calculations cannot be taken to be authentic. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that instead of placing reliance on the inaccurate 

and imaginary actuarial conclusions, it would be appropriate if a work -
force friendly, financially prudent and progressive approach is developed 
to manage the all important ever flowing and growing EPS, 1995. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that instead of placin g 
reliance on the inaccurate and imaginary actuarial conclusions, it 
would be appropriate if a work -force friendly, financially prudent and 
progressive approach is developed to manage the all important ever 
flowing and growing EPS, 1995.  The Committee als o reiterate that the 
actuarial evaluation should also be done of a period not exceeding 5 
years from the date of evaluation based on sound, real and short term 
factors enabling the Government to judge the accuracy or otherwise of 
such valuation.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee have been taken note of 
for future evaluations.  The Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation 
undertakes annual valuations through recognized actuarial bodies.  The 
actuarial valuation is done by the pr ofessional actuaries as per the 
universally accepted norms and standards. 

  
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
Recommendation [Para 76] 
 
 The Committee note that EPS, 1995 is a contributory scheme 
wherein the employers’ contribution towards the pension of the  
employee is diverted @ 8.33% from the total contribution of 12% made 
towards social security obligations. Under the EPS, no contribution is 
taken from the member, i.e., the employee for the pension scheme. The 
Government contributes @ 1.16% to the pension  fund. Admittedly, 
neither of the above rates of contributions has been revised for the last 
14 years. On being asked about the reasons for non -revision of 
contribution by the Government, it has been stated that generally the 
Government contribution is inc reasing. It has further been staged that 
presently there is no proposal to enhance the contribution of the 
Government. The non -revision in the rates of contributions even after 
one and a half decade, speaks volumes about the callous attitude of the 
Government towards the work-force. More so, when this segment of the 
workforce has contributed enormously in the economy of the country 
leading to increase in leaps and bounds in the revenue collection of the 
Government.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recomm end that the 
formula regarding rate of contribution should be revised at periodic 
intervals wherein the rate of contribution from the Government should 
at least be fixed at half of the rate of contribution which is being made 
by the employer or the employee towards the pension scheme.” 
 
 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
 
 At present, an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of 
Special Secretary (Labour  and Employment) consisting of actuaries, 
expert of finance and representatives of all stakeholders is reviewing the 
Employees' Pension Scheme, 1995 as a whole and any decision/action 
regarding enhancement of Government’s contribution will be considered 
after the receipt of the recommendations of this Expert Committee.  
Recommendation [Para 79] 
 
 The Committee observe that the pension payable   categories of 
pensioners under the scheme is extremely insignificant. It is as low as 
less than s.100/ - in a large  number of cases rendering the pension -
scheme a mock -exercise in social security. The Committee have been 
apprised that the government has decided to appoint a Committee to 
review the EPS, 1995. As the scheme is a funded one, any increase in 
the pensionary benefit is to be actuarially denied based on the principle 
of pooling of resources and sharing of risks. The benefits are, therefore, 
not linked to the cost of index but based on assets and liability factors, 
Hence, the pension payable under EPS 1995 is f ixed. However, at the 
time of fixation it includes the DA component of the salary for  the 
member. It is noting indexed linked Central Government pension. 
Nevertheless, there is a provision to declare relief a and when the 
position of the pension fund so p ermits. The committee feel periodic 
review of the payable pension is an innate and inalienable component of 
the pension scheme. Hence, to delink it from price index is beyond   
despite it being linked with assets and liabilities. Moreover, 
commutation of pension is also the right of the pensioner  at the time of 
superannuation. It does not add to the burden of the pension fund as it  
correspondingly reduces the payable pension for a certain period. The 
notification of the Government withdrawing the facility  of commutation 
of pension in the considered view of the committee, is not only improper 

but ill conceived and anti -worker as it has further compounded their 
miseries. Such a withdrawal cannot be justified on any found as it 
violates the fundamental right of a pensioner who assiduously  
contributed during the entire period of his working in the hope that at 
the time of his  superannuation, he will get some lump sum abound so 
as to meet his familial and social responsibilities. The Committee are 
also of the view that EPS, 1995 has outlived its utility due to its 
inherent shortcomings like inadequate wage ceiling, low rate of 
contribution, inept actuarial valuation, payable DA. The committee have 
been apprised that the government has constituted a Committee un der 
the Chairmanship of the Additional ?Secretary to the Government to 
look into the viability of the present rate of benefits and their possible 
revision. Regrettably, however, no timeframe has been fixed for the 
committee to submit its report. The stakes  involved in the terms of 
reference of this committee are too well known and hence, a deadline 
should have been fixed to accomplish the task. Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that Government shed its lackadaisical approach 
towards the welfare of th e worker and take positive steps in right 
earnest for linking the present EPS, 1995 with price index, restore the 
commutation facilities as originally envisaged in the scheme and amend 
the scheme as such having bearings on rate of contribution, wage 
ceiling and also fix a reasonable decent amount as minimum pension in 
consultation with Central Trade Unions.” 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 As stated in reply to para 76, an Expert Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Special Secretary (Labour and Employment) consisting 
of actuaries, expert of finance and representatives of all stakeholders is 
reviewing the Employees' Pension Scheme, 1995 at present and the 
issues of  linking the Scheme with price index and withdrawal of 
commutation can be cons idered after the receipt of the 
recommendations of this Expert Committee.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;     (HEMANAND BISWAL) 
28th January,  2010                              CHAIRMAN, 
Magha 8, 1931 (Saka)        STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.  
    
 

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 17TH FEBRUARY, 2010.  
 
 The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1715 hrs in Committee Room 
‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to hear the views of the 
representatives of central Trade unions and Indian Jute Mills Association 
on the ‘Development of Jute Sector’ with particular reference to the strike 
by workers in Jute Mills in West Bengal. 
  
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri M. Anandan 
3.   Shri P. Balram 
4.   Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
5.      Shri Hassan Khan 
6.      Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7.      Shri P. Lingam 
8.   Shri Shri Hari Manjhi 
9.      Shri P. R. Natarajan 
10.  Shri Raj Babbar 
11. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
  
  RAJYA SABHA  
12. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
13. Shri Rajaram 
14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
   

 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 3. Shri Ashok Sajwan        - Additional Director 
 
 
2. XX    XX      XX 
3. The Committee then took up the draft action taken Report  on 
the recommendations contained in 39 th  Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on 
‘Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation -Employees Pension 
Scheme 1995’ for consideration and adoption and adopted the same 
without any  modification/ amendment. The Committee authorized 
the Chairman to present the same in the ensuing session of 
Parliament. 
4.  XX    XX      XX 
5. XX    XX      XX 
6. XX    XX      XX 
7. XX    XX      XX 
8.  XX    XX      XX 
9.  XX    XX      XX 
10. XX    XX      XX 
 

 
11. XX    XX      XX 
12. XX    XX      XX 
 
         The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________ 
XX Do not pertain to this report. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
                 APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY -NINTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations      08  NIL 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have          
 been accepted by Government 
 (Sl. Nos. 1,3,6,7 & 8)         
 (Para Nos. 75,77,80,81 & 82)     05  62.5% 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s replies-      
 (Sl. No. 4) 
 (Para No. 78)        01  12.5%  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
 which Government’s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration             NIL   8.33% 
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which     
 final replies of Government are of interim in  nature       
         02   25% 
 (Sl. Nos.2 & 5)    
(Para Nos. 76 & 79)                           ----------- 
              100% 
                                          ----------- 
  
 
 
 
 