 
12 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fourth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants for the year 
2009-10.] 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May, 2010/Vaisakha,  1932 (Saka) 


2 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fourth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants for the year 
2009-10.] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  06.05.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  06.05.2010 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May, 2010/Vaisakha,  1932 (Saka) 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
       
     PAGE(S) 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
   
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………..    
*CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
accepted by the Government…………………………. 
*CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
*CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration………… 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
which  replies of the Government  are interim  
in nature    …………………………………………………. 
APPENDICES 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.  
  II *Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
Recommendations contained in the Fourth  Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*    Will be appended at the time of printing. 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-10) 
 
  SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL-CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
              2. Shri  M. Anandan  
              3. Shri  P. Balram   
              4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq    
              5. Shri  Sudarshan Bhagat  
              6. Shri  Hassan Khan  
              7. Shri  Kaushalendra Kumar  
              8. Shri P. Lingam  
              9. Shri  Hari Manjhi  
            10. Shri  P.R. Natarajan  
            11. Smt. Mausam Noor  
            12. Shri  S. Pakkirappa  
            13. Shri  Ramkishun  
            14. Shri  Mahendra Kumar Roy  
            15. Shri  Chandu Lal Sahu  
            16. Shri  Murari Lal Singh  
***      17. Shri Raj Babbar  
***** 18. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar     
******19. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar  
             20. Vacant  
             21. Vacant 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
             22. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy  
             23. Shri  Rudra Narayan Pany  
        **24. Shri  Pyarelal Khandelwal  
             25. Shri  Rajaram  
             26. Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
             27. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
           *28. Shri  Mohammad Adeeb  
    ****29. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal    
             30. Vacant   
             31. Vacant 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 *   Changed the nomination from Committee on Labour to Committee on  
       Commerce w.e.f. 17th September, 2009. 
 **   Expired on 6th October, 2009. 
         ***   Nominated w.e.f. 3rd December, 2009. 
        ****   Nominated w.e.f 31st December, 2009. 
      *****   Nominated w.ef 11th January, 2010. 
     ******  Nominated w.ef 26th February, 2010. 
 
 
   
  SECRETARIAT 
 
                
 1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri B.S. Dahiya    - Director  
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
 4.    Shri Suresh Kumar   - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 
  

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Twelfth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on  Demands for Grants for 
the year 2009-10 of the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 17.12.2009.  The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations conta ined in that Report 
on 12.4.2010.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Labour at their sitting held on 05.05.2010. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed in thick type 
in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                       HEMANAND BISWAL 
 3  May, 2010                                                      CHAIRMAN  
13  Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka)             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

7 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants for the year 
2009-10 of the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha, and also laid 
in Rajya Sabha, on 1 7.12.2009.  It contained 1 3 recommendations.  
Replies of Government in respect of all the recommendations have 
been received and have been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government --Paragraph Sl. No. 1,3 and 
4.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply  -   
NIL. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reitera tion--Paragraph Sl. 
Nos. 2, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 12. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature --
Paragraph Sl. Nos. 8, 10, 11 and 13.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
 
  
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect 
of recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action 
taken notes in respect of recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V for which only interim replies have been given by 
the Government be furnished to them at the earliest and in any 
case not later than Three months of the presentation of th is 
Report.   
 
4.      The Committee will now deal with the action taken replies of 
the Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
  

9 
 
A. Implementation of Schemes in North-Eastern Region 
Recommendation( Sl. No.1, Para 3.24) 
 
5. The Committee while taking cognizance of the availability of 
raw material for textile related activities in large quantities and 
various kinds of crafts being manufactured in North Eastern 
Region, had recommended that the Ministry should, thoroughly re-
examine the scope of textile growth in that part of the country 
keeping in view the national perspective of integrated and 
harmonious national development.  The Committee had also desired 
that model integrated textile parks be set up in North  Eastern 
Region involving 100 percent funding by the Union Government.  
 
6. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry have stated:- 
 `The Government has taken a view to encourage handloom 
 weavers to get exposed to powerlooms. As  a first step, the O/o 
 the Textile Commissioner has conducted exposure visits of 
 handloom weavers of the North Eastern Region to the 
 developed clusters of powerloom like Ludhiana, Amritsar, 
 Bangalore etc. During the year 2007 -08 and 2008 -09, 40 
 weavers participated in such exposure visits conducted in the 
 North Eastern Region. During the current year more exposure 
 visits from the North Eastern Region are proposed to be 
 conducted. Organizing more seminars, awareness program will 
 go a long way in pro moting new Powerloom units in the North 
 Eastern Region. Apart from the exposure visits, six seminars / 
 workshops were conducted by the Regional O/o the Textile 
 Commissioner, Kolkata in association with the State 
 Government on the subject of TUFS awaren ess and a total 
 number of 460 participants attended to them. 
   

10 
 
 
  Since the North Eastern Region mostly has handloom 
 industries and very few mills and powerlooms, as and when 
 the number of textile units (other than handlooms) increases, 
 the proposal f or creating additional Regional office of Textile 
 Commissioner can be considered.   
  The Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks is a demand 
 driven Scheme.  No proposal from the North Eastern Region 
 was received during the 10 th Five Year Plan.  Therefore, to 
 attract projects in the 11 th Five Year Plan, it was decided that 
 the Government of India support will be provided @ 90% of the 
 project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs.40 crore for the first two 
 projects in the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Man ipur, 
 Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim and Jammu 
 & Kashmir. Inspite of making the scheme so attractive, no 
 textile park proposal was received from the North -East. 
 Therefore, it seems that in order to set up textile parks in the 
 North Eastern Region and make the scheme a success in the 
 region, the State Governments  need to provide more 
 incentives to the entrepreneurs and grant necessary approvals 
 i.e. land registration and other statutory clearances in time.  
 Assistance under the scheme for North Eastern Region is 
 already @90% and it may not be prudent to  increase it to 
 100% as  margin money of 10% by the SPV is necessary to 
 ensure appropriate involvement towards successful 
 implementation/operation of the project.’     
 
  

11 
 
 
7. The Committee are seriously concerned that instead of 
making strenuous efforts to suitably restructure and promote 
signature schemes like TUFS and SITP  in the North -Eastern 
Region, the Ministry are trying to justify their helplessness in 
the matter.   Obviously, due to their inability to focus on 
revival/reopening of a large number of closed powerloom units 
in the region through Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme, 
the Government are encouraging handloom weavers to shift to 
powerlooms. Moreover, taking handloom weavers on exposure 
visits to developed powerloom centres  in other regions only 
reinforces such an apprehension .  The Committee strongly 
believe that such a  policy shift by the Ministry would only ruin 
the well developed handloom s ector in North -Eastern region.   
While deploring such a policy shift, the Committee reiterate 
their earlier recommendation and desire that apart from 
ensuring uninterrupted power supply and availability of 
adequate raw material to powerloom units , functioning in 
North-Eastern region, concrete efforts must be made to 
modernize and reopen all the closed powerloom units 

12 
 
expeditiously in a time bound manner.  In addition , quarterly 
targets for conducting seminars/workshops/exposure visits for 
powerloom sector be fixed and achieved without fail.  Needless 
to say that proper and effective use of local print and 
electronic media be made for spreading awareness about the 
schemes.  The Committee also reiterate that at least a few 
model textile park s be set up to cover all the Nort h-Eastern 
States with 100 per cent funding by the Union Government 
within the XIth plan period.  
 
  

13 
 
B. Quarterly Expenditure 
Recommendation( Sl. No.2, Para 3.25) 
 
8. The Committee while criticizing the uneven expenditure during 
the four quarters of the year 2008 -09, particularly rush of 
expenditure towards the last financial quarter, had recommended 
that all the Banks/lending agencies linked with the implementation 
of TUFS  be advised to forward the  bills on quarterly basis.  The 
Committee had further desired that in order to ensure proper 
distribution and utilization of the allocated funds, there should be a 
monitoring Committee headed by the Secretary of the Ministry and 
which should meet at least once in a month to ensure strict 
compliance of the laid down norms/guidelines in this regard. 
 
9. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee 
regarding uneven expenditure, the Ministry have stated:- 
 
 `The suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for 
 compliance. Concerted efforts are being made to fully utilize 
 plan funds and also to  spread the expenditure evenly over the 
 four quarters through regular monitoring of performance and 
 expenditure. There were lumpy releases in the past due to 
 reasons given below: 
 The cut -off dates have been prescribed under TUFS by 
reconstituted IMSC in its 1 st meeting held on 19 th Jan., 
2009.   Accordingly, the cases sanctioned before 31.03.2007 
are to be covered in the quarter ending Dec., 2008, the cases 
sanctioned during the period 1 st April 2007 to 31 st March 
2008 are to be covered in the quarter ending June, 2009 and 
the cases sanctioned on or after 1 st April, 2008 are to be 
covered within one year of date  of sanction of loan . To meet 

14 
 
these deadlines the lending agencies were covering their 
previous cases. 
 The erstwhile TUFS was getting over by 31.03.2007, 
therefore, maximum units got their loans sanctioned during 
the year 2006-07.   All these cases were coming for subsidy . 
   
 Further, the requirement of funds has increased as the 
capital subsidy of 10% has been provided for technical 
textiles  and garmenting machinery, in addition to 
processing  machinery  w.e.f. 01.04.2007. 
   
  As per the norms under TUFS, Formats I to III have been 
 devised to be submitted every quarter by all primary Nodal 
 Agencies / Nodal Banks / Co-opted PLIs for working out bank-
 wise, unit-wise subsidy requirement. 
 
    Regular scheme-wise monitoring of expenditure is being 
 done and also reviewed by Secretary (Textiles) in the weekly 
 meetings of Senior Officers’ (SOM) of the Ministry.  Such a 
 monitoring system  vis -à-vis the budget outlays helps in 
 visualizing gaps and making timely  efforts towards ensuring 
 full utilization of allocated funds/outlays.’ 
  

15 
 
10. The Committee are unhappy to note that despite regularly 
monitoring the performance of the schemes and the pace of 
expenditure, hardly any visible headway has been made as the 
expenditure of Plan funds continued uneven in the year 2009 -
10 unabated.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the 
entire process of releasing funds under each scheme, including 
TUFS be streamlined so that the instructions of the 
Government regarding the pace and regularity of expenditure 
are strictly adhered to.  
 
  

16 
 
C. Non-Plan Expenditure 
Recommendation( Sl. No.3, Para 3.26) 
 
11. The Committee, while noticing a huge variation in Budget 
Estimates and Actual Expenditure of Non-Plan funds during the 
year 2008-09,  had urged the Government to adopt a more coherent 
and rational approach of forecasting the Budget Estimate for Non-
Plan expenditure so as to avoid locking of precious financial 
resources and surrender of huge unutilized amounts at the end of 
the financial year. 
 
12. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee 
regarding non-plan funds, the Ministry have stated:- 
 
 `The non -plan budget proposals are prepared after detailed 
 discussion with the concerned Divisions. Thereafter, the non -
 plan budget estimates are discussed in detail with the officials 
 of the Ministry of Finance. The progress of expenditure is also 
 monitored regularly by the Secretary.  
  As per the decision of the Cabinet, VRS was notified in all 
 the mills. The workmen have opted for VR S and all benefits 
 have been released. The secured liabilities of NJMC have also 
 been liquidated. Most of the statutory dues of NJMC have been 
 settled as well, but the VRS package could not be implemented 
 in respect of officers of NJMC. Hence, the fund s were 
 surrendered. The process of approval of Cabinet is under 
 consideration of Minister. However, observations made by the 
 Committee are noted for strict compliance in future.’ 
 
 

17 
 
  
13. The Committee find that the Ministry surrendered Non-
Plan funds merely due to non -implementation of VRS package 
in respect of officers of NJMC  whereas, VRS dues of all the 
workmen who were comparatively large in number, have been 
cleared.  The Committee feel that this is due to poor planning, 
and lack of calibrated eff orts on the part of the Government .  
The Committee  would, therefore, like to know the precise 
reasons as to why the VRS package for officers could not be 
implemented and the remedial steps, if any, being taken for the 
implementation of the Scheme.  
  

18 
 
D. Textile Exports 
Recommendation( Sl. No.4, Para 3.27) 
  
14. The Committee had recommended that the components of 
Duty Draw Back Scheme be reviewed with immediate effect and the 
rates as suggested by the representatives of the Industry be 
considered and implemented without any further delay. Besides, 
special drives be launched to exp loit untouched markets of EU and 
other textile demanding countries. The Committee had also 
recommended that a separate study should be conducted to explore 
new potential in the domestic market. Further, efforts need be made 
to improve and upgrade the infra structure base in areas of 
technology, design and training so that Indian Industry could stand 
up to global competitiveness.  
 
15. In their action taken reply,  the Ministry stated as follows: 
 `The action taken is indicated below ad seriatim: 
 
 (i) The ra tes suggested by the representatives of the 
 Industry were examined in the Ministry and the proposal was 
 forwarded to Ministry of Finance to consider increase in the 
 prevalent drawback rates of readymade garments. The 
 Drawback Committee constituted for formulation of All 
 Industry Rates of duty drawback for 2009 -10 examined the 
 proposal and observed that the data did not justify increase of 
 rates. It was observed by Ministry of Finance that due to global 
 meltdown since 2009 -10, the central excise duti es of most of 
 the goods has already been reduced from 14% to 8% during 
 December, 2008 and February, 2009. This would have 
 necessitated reduction of the drawback rates but due to the 
 hardship faced by the industry the Drawback Committee 

19 
 
 decided not to reduce but to retain the existing drawback 
 rates. 
 
 (ii) Market Development Assistance (MDA) and Market 
 Access Initiative (MAI) scheme with higher allocation is being 
 provided to exploit untapped countries including EU. Apart 
 from this, 26 new markets have been added under the Focus 
 Market Scheme. These include 16 new markets in Latin 
 America and 10 in Asia-Oceania. The incentive available under 
 Focus Market Scheme (FMS) has also been raised from 2.5% 
 to 3%. Market Linked Focus Product Scheme (MLFPS ) has 
 been greatly expanded by inclusion of products classified 
 under as many as 153 ITC (HS) Codes at 4 digit level.  This 
 covers textiles madeups, knitted and crocheted fabrics.’ 
  

20 
 
16. The Committee take note of the remedial steps taken by 
the Ministry to support textile exports and growth of textile 
industry as a whole.  The Committee , appreciate the further 
reduction of central excise duties, allocation of more funds 
under market development assistance and market access 
initiative schemes to e xploit untapped markets worldwide  and 
further efforts of the Government for upgradation of 
infrastructure base, design and training etc. The Committee, 
however, desire that  constant monitoring needs to be done to 
ensure effective implementation of all sch emes/initiatives so 
that the aspirations of textile sector are fully met  with.  The 
Committee hope  that these steps will enable the Ministry to 
achieve the desired targets.  The Committee would await the 
outcome of the steps so taken.  
 
  

21 
 
E. Utilization Certificates 
 
Recommendation( Sl. No.5, Para 3.28) 
 
17. The Committee while taking cognizance of the fact that as 
many as 1969, utilization certificates involving an amount of 
Rs.162.59 crore were outstanding as on 31 st March, 2009,  had 
recommended that the guidelines for disbursement of funds to 
NGOs and other private organizations be reviewed afresh and strict 
norms be followed for selecting such agencies after due verification. 
The factors like the infrastructural base, financial posit ion, past 
performance, availability of manpower etc. with the organization be 
taken into consideration before their selection. The Committee had 
also desired that efforts be made to get the outstanding Utilization 
Certificates liquidated urgently and stren uous action be taken 
against the defaulting agencies/organizations including black - 
listing them.   
   
18. In their action taken reply regarding utilization certificates ,  
the Ministry stated as follows: 
 
 `As on 31 st March, 2009, there were 1969 Utilizati on 
 Certificates amounting to  Rs.162.60 crore outstanding. 
 However, as on 31st December, 2009, the pending  Utilization 
 Certificates have been reduced to 1513 amounting to 
 Rs.127.30 crore.  However, the observation made by the 
 Committee is noted for strict compliance.  O/o the DC 
 (Handloom) and DC (Handicrafts), with whom most of these 
 UCs  are pending, have been instructed accordingly.’ 
 

22 
 
 
19. The Committee find that the efforts made by the 
Ministry during the year 2009 to liquidate outstanding 
utilization certificates are far from satisfactory as only 456 
utilization certificates were rec eived out of 1969 pending in 
the beginning of the year.  The Committee desire that a 
Committee of experts be constituted to look into the problem 
of outstanding utilization certificates  and suggest measures to 
resolve it. 
 
  

23 
 
F. Waiver of ceilings under TWRFS 
Recommendation( Sl. No.6, Para 3.37) 
20. The Committee, while noticing that a large number of workers 
of closed textile mills have been deprived of the benefits under 
TWRF scheme due to the rigid and impractical eligibility criteria laid 
down under the scheme, had recommended that the aforesaid wage 
ceilings be waived off and all the workers of the closed mills be 
covered under the Scheme.  
 
21. In their action taken reply regarding TWRF Scheme , the 
Ministry stated as follows: 
 
 `The TWRFS was commissioned w.e.f. 15.9.1986.  The workers 
 engaged in a closed textile unit on the date of its closure 
 continuously for five years or more and earning a wage  
 equivalent of Rs. 1600/- per month or less and having been on 
 the records of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner of 
 the State concer ned were entitled to get relief under the 
 Scheme. 
 
  The Scheme was modified by the CCEA in its meeting  
 held on 12.8.1992 as follows: - 
 
 
   1.     The Scheme was made applicable to cases of partial 
   closure on a case-to-case basis, where an uneconomic  
   activity had been closed down and the rest of the mill  
   was in operation. 
   2.     The wage ceiling was enhanced from Rs. 1600/- per 
   month to Rs. 2500/- per month.  
 
  The Scheme was further modified by the CCEA in its 
 meeting held on 05.02.2 002 enhancing the wage ceiling from 
 Rs.2500/- per month to Rs. 3500/ - per month and the 

24 
 
 enhanced ceiling was made applicable to the eligible textile 
 units which were closed on or after the date of the CCEA 
 decision. 
  
22. The Committee note that presently when organizations 
like ESIC and EPFO have raised the ceilings by covering 
subscribers earning upto Rs.10,500 /- per month, the Ministry 
of Textiles are trying to implement welfare measures for jobless 
workers of textile mills with such a low ceil ing of Rs.3,500.   
The Committee strongly deprecate such a discriminatory  
approach of the Government and reiterate their earlier 
recommendation  so that the present ceiling under TWRFS is 
done away with to cover all the workers who come under the 
definition of `workmen’.  
  

25 
 
G. Modification in TWRFS Guidelines 
 
Recommendation( Sl. No.7, Para 3.38) 
 
23. The Committee while noticing that 2610 workers of 59 closed 
mills ha d not received any relief under TWRF Scheme due to not 
fulfilling the eligibility criteria by the mills, had recommended that 
guidelines of the TWRFS should be modified at the earliest.   
 
24. In their action taken reply regarding TWRF Scheme ,  the 
Ministry stated as follows: 
 
 `As stated in the above para, that though   271 number of 
 mills are lying closed in  the country, as on 31 -12-2009 with 
 117914 workers. But these mills do not fulfill  the eligibility 
 criteria under the Scheme. The CCEA Proposal mo ved by this 
 Ministry which addresses the issues raised by the Standing 
 Committee could not  get the  concurrence of Finance 
 Ministry.’ 
 
 
 
 
25. The Committee are distressed to note that every year , a 
large number of workers are rendered jobless due to closure of 
textile mills.  The Government, instead of extending the 
financial assistance to these workers under TWRF Scheme, are 
taking the plea that the concerned mills do not fulfil the 

26 
 
eligibility cri teria prescribed under the Scheme.  The 
Committee find it rather strange that while the Government 
themselves furnish data of closed textile mills but on the 
contrary they are not ready to accept that the se mills are 
closed.  The Committee feel that it is the sole responsibility of 
the Government to ensure that the mill owners go for lawful 
closure of their mills.  The Committee are of the firm opinion 
that in any case the jobless and innocent workers of closed 
mills should not be deprived of the intended b enefits under the 
Scheme.  They, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and strongly urge the Government to modify 
the existing guidelines under the Scheme without further 
delay.  
  

27 
 
H. Allocation of Funds under TUFS 
Recommendation( Sl. No.8, Para 3.46) 
 
26. The Committee while considering the backlog of Rs.1884 crore 
under TUFS during the year 2008 -09, had recommended that the 
matter be taken up with the Ministry of Finance to allocate 
sufficient funds required under the Scheme to clear the backlog and 
ensure its smooth functioning. 
 
27. In their action taken reply regarding TUFS,  the Ministry 
stated as follows: 
 `Ministry has proposed an  allocation of Rs.3600.00 Crore 
 under TUFS for the year 2010-11.’  
 
28. The Committee take note of the e nhanced allocation of 
Rs.3600 crore under TUFS for the year 2010 -11.  The 
Committee hope that the proposed amount would be adequate 
enough to settle all the claims likely to be received under the 
Scheme during the current financial year and the Ministry 
would be able to clear the entire backlog as well.  
 
 

28 
 
I. Implementation of TUFS in North-Eastern Region 
Recommendation( Sl. No.9, Para 3.47) 
29. The Committee observed that the TUFS is virtually a non -
starter in the North Eastern States as not even a single paisa has 
been spent under the Scheme there since the year 2005 -06. The 
Committee, therefore, had recommended that imaginative and 
concrete steps be taken to popularize the Scheme in that region. 
 
30. In their action taken reply regarding TUFS,  the Ministry 
stated as follows: 
 `The Regional Offices of the Textile Commissioner, Ministry 
 of Textiles has conducted various awareness programmes, 
 campaigns, workshops, seminars, training programme for 
 popularizing the TUFS in the NER. A seminar/workshop 
 was organised in Guwahati on 12th June 2009.  Total 160 
 no. of entrepreneurs from various parts of North -Eastern 
 region participated in this semin ar.  Some of the 
 entrepreneurs specially from Imphal came forward to set -
 up new Automatic/Semi Automatic powerloom units in this 
 region. In total 6 (six) seminars/workshops were organized 
 in different parts of North -East region like Dimapur 
 Agartala Imphal, Aizwal, 2 times (2006 -07 and 2009-10) at 
 Guwahati  in association with concern State Government 
 Authority in order to boost the Govt. Schemes in this region 
 since the year 2006 -07.  In addition, Joint Secretary has 
 written to Chief Secretaries o f NER State for creating 
 congenial atmosphere and popularize the Scheme for 
 development of textile industries in NER.’ 
 
 
 

29 
 
 
31. The Committee take an adverse note of the f aint efforts 
made so far by the Ministry with regard to implementing TUFS 
in North-Eastern region.  In Committee’s view, these efforts are 
not likely to make any headway in bringing about a significant 
improvement in implementation of TUFS  in the entire regio n 
comprising the seven States.  The Committee expect the 
Ministry to sh rug off the escapist approach in implementing 
TUFS in the region and reiterate their earlier recommendation  
and desire that all out efforts be made to encourage more and 
more entrepreneurs to set up textile units in the region.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
J. Opening of NIFT Centres 
Recommendation( Sl. No.11, Para 3.55) 
 
32. The Committee urged upon the Government to set up NIFT 
centres throughout the country, particularly in the NER, J& K, 
Himachal and Uttrakhand so  that apart from providing 
infrastructural base and promoting textile industry there, the 
interested students are able to study within their vicinity. The 
Committee desired that urgent steps should be taken to move the 
proposal in this regard and the whole exercise should be completed 
expeditiously but positively within the ensuing financial year. 
 
33. In their action taken reply regarding NIFT, the Ministry stated 
as follows: 
 
 
 `NIFT Centre in Kangra (Himachal Pradesh): 
 
  The NIFT Centre at Kangra became operational from 
 August, 2009 with following five courses:  
  (i) Fashion Design 
  (ii) Fashion Communication 
  (iii) Accessory Design 
  (iv)   Textile Design  
  (v)  Fashion Technology.  
 

31 
 
  The Centre has well equipped le cture rooms, design 
 studios, resource centre, activity Centres and hostels etc. 
  It is proposed to set up a “Centre for Apparel & Textile 
 Studies (CATS)” to offer PHD/ Faculty Training Programs at 
 Kangra also. 
 Proposal for Setting up of NIFT Centre in J & K (Budgam): 
 
  Proposal for setting up of a NIFT Centre in J&K was 
 received  in response to letter of HMOT to Chief Minister of 
 J&K.   
  The State Government of J&K has identified some 
 structures for setting up of a temporary Campus.  As agreed 
 with State Government officials, the site visit has been 
 scheduled on 22 nd February, 2010 at Srinagar, when the 
 suitability of the structures for setting up of a temporary 
 Campus will be assessed.  A final decision will be taken 
 thereafter.   
  Principal Secretary, J&K has informed that the proposal 
 for formal approval of setting up of NIFT Centre is pending for 
 Cabinet approval. 
  The Principal Secretary of J&K has telephonically asked 
 NIFT to issue EOI for selection of Architects for permanent 
 Centre and the same shall be done shortly. 
 
 Proposal for Setting up of NIFT Centre in Uttrakhand 
 
  No such proposal for setting up of NIFT Centre in 
 Uttrakhand has been received from the State Government of 
 Uttrakhand.’ 
 
 

32 
 
 
34. The Committee are happy to learn that NIFT centre at 
Kangra in Himachal Pradesh has become operational and the 
centre proposed at Budgam in Jammu & Kashmir shall be 
opened shortly.  However, the  Government have not given due 
consideration to the need for setting up a NI FT centre  in 
Uttarakhand.  The Committee desire that a communication be 
sent to the State Government of Utt arakhand showing 
intention of the Union Government to open a NIFT centre 
there.  The Ministry should also conduct a survey at the 
earliest to find ou t a suitable place for the NIFT centre  in 
Uttarakhand.   
  

33 
 
K. Modernistion of 12 viable NTC mills 
Recommendation( Sl. No.12, Para 3.64) 
 
35. The Committee while noticing that  12 viable mills had been 
dropped from the modernization process since most of the 
employees of these mills opted for Voluntary Retirement Scheme 
and also due to paucity of funds, had recommended  the 
Government to review its decision and take steps to revive these 12 
mills.  
 
36. In their action taken reply regarding  NTC mills , the Ministry 
stated as follows: 
 
 `Because of shortage of funds it is very difficult to revive these 
 12 mills. Due to the recession in the real estate market funds 
 could not be generated from sale of surplus assets and the 
 earlier projects in hand i.e. 3 new Green field mills are also 
 being delayed due to shortage of funds. NTC is managing to 
 complete the in hand projects by borrowing / loans from 
 financial institutions .Therefore, at this juncture revival of 
 these 12 mills is very difficult’. 
 
  

34 
 
37. The Committee are astonished to note that rather than 
taking suo-motu steps to open more and more textile mills to 
meet the increasing demand for clothing and related textiles in 
the country, the Ministry have, on the contrary, dropped 12 
viable mills from the modernization process  due to non 
availability of funds.  The Committee are distressed to note the  
sale of surplus land of  NTC mills below the circle rate and the 
resulted loss to the Government as pointed out by C&AG .  The 
Committee are of the considered view that viable units must 
not be closed for want of funds.  They, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to include all 12 
viable mills in the list of NTC mills being modernized/proposed 
to be modernized without any further delay either through 
Public Private Partnerships or the Mini stry of Finance may be 
urged to provide the required funds on term loan basis.   
 
  

35 
 
L. Revival of BIC Mills 
 
Recommendation( Sl. No.13, Para 3.69) 
 
38. The Committee recommended that the matter of conversion of 
leasehold land of BIC mills in to freehold should be taken up with 
the State Government of Uttar Pradesh at highest level and be 
vigorously pursued further till it fructifies. They further desired that 
the ongoing study by Wool Research Organization be  completed 
within the current financial year. The progress made in this regard 
should be intimated to the committee within three months. 
 
39. In their action taken reply regarding BIC mills, the Ministry 
stated as follows: 
 
 `The issue of grant of permission of state Govt. of U.P. on sale/ 
 conversion of BIC/subsidiaries land is pending since long 
 despite vigorous efforts made by Ministry/Company. The 
 matter had been taken up at various levels in the state 
 Government. A DO letter from Minister of Textiles to Chief 
 Minister of UP Government has been  issued on 6.1.2010.  The 
 Wool Research Association has completed the study and 
 submitted their report on 18.12.2009. The financial para -
 meters will be assessed by Industrial Finance Corporation of 
 India (IFCI) to whom the report has been sent and is e xpected 
 to be completed by end of January 2010 after which a note to 
 BRPSE will be sent.’ 
 
  

36 
 
40. The Committee find that the matter of conversion of 
leasehold land of BIC mills into freehold by the State 
Government of Uttar Pradesh is still in limbo  despite several 
communications sent by Ministry of Textiles to the State 
Government.  Despite the clearance given by BIFR, the 
Committee find no valid ground as to why the Government 
should refer the matter to BRPSE for assessment of viability of 
the BIC m ills de novo. The Committee consider such exercise  
futile if the issue of land conversion is not resolved with the 
State Government in time.  They, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and desire that the matter be pursued 
conclusively with the State Government at the highest level to 
sort out all the outstanding issues at the earliest.   

37 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl.No 1, Para 3.24) 
 
 The Committee note that the Budget Estimate of Rs.2500 for 
the year 2008 -09 was revised to Rs.4092.32 crore at Revised 
Estimate stage. However, the Ministry had to surrender Rs.267.65 
crore as unspent provisions. Asked to furnish the reasons for 
surrender of funds, the Ministry replied that a major portion of 
these unutilized funds was on account of the 10 percent mandatory 
allocation for the North Eastern Region. The Ministry stated that 
the funds could not be utilized as there was no demand for the 
schemes like TUFS, SITP, and TMC from the North Eastern Region 
mainly due to non feasibility, risk factor or law and order problems 
etc. with the result no expenditure could be incurred under these 
Schemes in North Eastern Region despite the best efforts. The 
Committee find that only two Seminars in 2006 -07, two in 2007-08 
and one each in 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 have been organized by the 
Ministry in North Eastern Region, and the participation of 
artisans/weavers has been limited to the States of Assam, Manipur, 
Mizoram, Tripura and Nagaland. Needless to say the number of 
seminars/workshops was far from adequate for spreading 
awareness about textile industry/schemes in the North Eastern 
Region where and for which purpose far greater and concerted 
efforts are required to be made. The Committee feel that so far the 
Ministry have not been able to develop proper infrastructure for 
planned growth of North Eastern Region as there is only one 
regional office of Textile Commissioner for implementing/monitoring 
the central schemes in the entire region. All these facts themselves 
speak volumes about the seriousness and the ability of the Ministry 
to promote textile growth in North Eastern Region. Taking 

38 
 
cognizance of the large availability of raw material for textile related 
activities and various kinds of crafts being manufactured in North 
Eastern Region since long, the Committee strongly recommend that 
the Ministry should, thoroughly re -examine the scope of textile 
growth in that part of the country keeping in view the national 
perspective of integrated and harmonious national development. 
Apparently, setting up of required number of regional offices of 
Textile Commissioner, DCs for Handlooms and Handicrafts, 
adequate number of raw material depots, training centers and 
conducting of adequate and periodic 
workshops/seminars/exposure events in North Eastern Region is 
overwhelming need of the hour. The Committee are quite optimistic 
that sustainable and inclusive growth will automatically bring peace 
and help maintaining social, econ omic and political harmony. The 
Committee also desire that model integrated textile parks be set up 
in North Eastern Region involving 100 percent funding by the Union 
Government. Participation of people in such parks should be kept 
open at later stages wit hout fixing any minimum financial cap, so 
that even the artisans/weavers/textile workers who are working in 
very small capacity could come forward. Further, such initiation 
would lead to formation of entrepreneur groups who would be able 
to take over the textile parks from the Government in due course. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for 
compliance. The Ministry, during the XI Plan has taken a number of 
new initiatives such as training programmes for skill u p-gradation 
and technical development, aggressive marketing efforts, 
reorganization of sick handloom units and taking up unique social 
security measures like providing Health Insurance and Life 
Insurance covers to handloom weavers and their families. Howev er, 
as regards implementation of handlooms schemes in the NER, 
under Integrated Handloom Development Scheme, so far, 101 
cluster projects and 104 Group Approach projects have been 
sanctioned.  For the development of these projects, a sum of 
Rs.2654.00 crore has been released to various states and 55,799 

39 
 
weavers have been  covered.  Under Health Insurance Scheme also 
the coverage is 14,413 weavers and under Mahatma Gandhi 
Bunkar Bima Yojana, 44,061 lives have been covered till December, 
2009.  So far, 80 Yar n Depots have been set up in the NER to 
assure availability of yarn under the Mill Gate Price Scheme.  
Concerted efforts are being made to popularize handloom products 
all over the country and in accordance 164 National Handloom 
Expos/Special Expos and Dis trict Level Events and Export Projects 
have been sanctioned in the NER. These efforts indicate the 
Government’s commitment to providing continuous support to the 
handloom sector. 
 Further, the Government has taken a view to encourage 
handloom weavers to ge t exposed to powerlooms. As a first step, 
the O/o the Textile Commissioner has conducted exposure visits of 
handloom weavers of the North Eastern Region to the developed 
clusters of powerloom like Ludhiana, Amritsar, Bangalore etc. 
During the year 2007-08 & 2008-09 exposure visit conducted from 
the North Eastern Region are as under.  
 
Year No. of weavers 
who 
participated in 
the exposure 
visit  
From  Destination of visit 
2007-08 20 Imphal & 
Guwahati 
Bangalore & 
Mysore 
2008-09 20 Guwahati Ludhiana & 
Amritsar 
 
 During the current year more exposure visits from the North 
Eastern Region are proposed to be conducted. Organizing more 
seminars, awareness program long way in promoting new 
Powerloom units in the North Eastern Region 
  

40 
 
 Apart from the exposure visits, the following seminars / 
workshops were conducted by the Regional O/o the Textile 
Commissioner, Kolkata in association with the State Government 
on the subject of TUFS awareness schemes:- 
Year No. of 
seminars/ 
workshops 
Venue Date No. of  
participants 
(Approx.) 
2006-07 2(Two) Guwahati 
Dimapur 
18.12.2006 
12.02.2007 
     50 
     50 
2007-08 2 (Two) Agartala 
Imphal 
20.04.2007 
07.01.2008 
     45 
     75 
2008-09 1 (One) Aizwal 29.05.2008      80 
2009-10 1 (One) Guwahati 12.06.2009      160 
       
 The Regional Office of the Textile Commissioner, Kolkata has 
jurisdiction of North Eastern Region also. One powerloom service 
centre (PSC) is working under the administrative  control of 
Indian Jute Industries Research Association (IJIRA)  at Guwah ati. 
Activities of PSC-Guwahati are also monitored by  the Regional 
Office, Kolkata. Since the North Eastern Region  mostly has 
handloom industries and very few mills and  powerlooms, as and 
when the number of textile units (other  than handlooms) 
increases, the proposal for creating  additional Regional office of 
Textile Commissioner can be  considered.   
 With respect to Handicrafts, the Office of the Development 
Commissioner (Handicrafts) has a well developed field formation in 
the country including in the states of North Eastern Region.  
Activities for the development of Handicrafts sector in the region are 
being coordinated and supervised by the Regional Office at 
Guwahati.  Under the Administrative control of this Regional Office 
there is a Regional Design and Technical Development Centre 

41 
 
situated at Guwahati and there are  nine Handicrafts Marketing 
and Services Extension Centre’s (HM&SEC), in every state capital of 
North Eastern Region, for providing extension services to artisans in 
the region. Efforts are being made to extend the benefits of the 
schemes to the maximum number of artisans in the region.   In this 
direction major projects executed during the year 2008-09 include 4 
Raw Material Banks, 6 Museum, 3 Design Banks and  1 State 
Initiated Design Centre in different states of NER.  In addition 107 
design workshops/Integrated Design projects & 92 ma rketing 
events and sourcing shows have been organized during the year 
2008-09.  A number of awareness workshops have also been 
organized at different locations in the NER. The Scheme for 
Integrated Textile Parks is a demand driven scheme. Industry 
associations/ Groups of entrepreneurs are the main promoters of 
SITP.  The primary objective of the SITP is to facilitate world class 
infrastructure for setting up textile units.  This scheme was initially 
approved in the 10 th Five Year Plan during which, assistan ce was 
provided @ 40 percent of the project cost subject to a ceiling of 
Rs.40 crore in general. However, no proposal from the North 
Eastern Region was received during the 10 th Five Year Plan.  
Therefore, to attract project in the 11 th Five Year Plan, it w as 
decided that the Government of India support will be provided @ 
90% of the project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs.40 crore for the 
first two projects in the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim and 
Jammu & Kashmir. Inspite of making the scheme so attractive, no 
textile park proposal was received from the North-East. Therefore, it 
seems that in order to set up textile parks in the North Eastern 
Region and make the scheme a success in the region, the S tate 
Governments  need to provide more incentives to the entrepreneurs 
and grant necessary approvals i.e. land registration and other 
statutory clearances in time.  Assistance under the scheme for 
North Eastern Region is already @90% and it may not be prudent to  
increase it to 100% as  margin money of 10% by the SPV is 
necessary to ensure appropriate involvement towards successful 
implementation/operation of the project. 
          
 

42 
 
 During 2008-09, there was a budget provision of Rs.8.00 crore  
for NER und er Jute Technology Mission (JTM) which was fully 
utilized towards implementation of various schemes under Mini 
Mission III and IV.  Special emphasis is being given and special 
promotional drives are being undertaken for implementation of 
developmental schemes in NER under JTM by Jute Manufactures 
Development Council and Jute Corporation of India Ltd.   
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009-Parl., dated  12 /04/2010) 
 
(Please see para 7 of chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No 3, Para 3.26) 
 
 The Committee finds that there is a huge variation in Budget 
Estimate and the actual expenditure during each of the first two 
years of XIth plan period. The reasons for huge variation in BE and 
actual expenditure during 2008-09 were attributed to non -payment 
towards voluntary retirement scheme of NJMC. The Committee feels 
that it is more due to poor planning and short -sightedness on the 
part of the Government. The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Government to adopt a more coherent and rational approach of 
forecasting the Budget Estimate for non -plan expenditure so as to 
avoid locking of precious financial resources and surrender of huge 
unutilized amounts at the end of the financial year. 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The non -plan budget proposals are prepared after detailed 
discussion with the concerned Divisions. Thereafter, the non -plan 
budget estimates are discussed in detail with the officials of the 
Ministry of Finance. The progress of expenditure is also monitore d 
regularly by the Secretary.  
  
 As per the decision of the Cabinet, VRS was notified in all the 
mills. The workmen have opted for VRS and all benefits have been 
released. The secured liabilities of NJMC have also been liquidated. 
Most of the statutory dues of NJMC have been settled as we ll, but 
the VRS package could not be implemented in respect of officers of 
NJMC. Hence, the funds were surrendered. The process of approval 
of Cabinet is under consideration of Minister. However, 
observations made by the Committee are noted for strict compliance 
in future.  
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009-Parl., dated  12/04/2010) 
(Please see para 13 of chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No 4, Para 3.27) 
 
 The Committee observe that India’s total export growth of 
textiles and clothing during 2005, 2006 , 2007 was 23.74 %, 8.42% 
and 4.37% respectively, whereas the share of China stood at 
20.92%, 25.05% and 18.83% during the years 2005, 2006 and 
2007. The Committee are of the view that apart from the 
steps already taken by the Government so far, issues like revision of 
duty draw back rates, upgradation of technology, proper exposure 
and study of domestic market and finding out new markets 

44 
 
worldwide for accelerating the textile exports should also be 
addressed to improve the economic health of the textile Industry. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
components of Duty Draw Back Scheme should be reviewed with 
immediate effect and the rates as suggested by the representatives 
of the Industry should be considered and implemented without any 
further delay. Besides, there is urgent need for launching special 
drives to exploit untouched markets of EU and other textile 
demanding countries. The Committee also recommend that a 
separate study should be conducted to explore new potential in the 
domestic market. Further, efforts need be made to improve and 
upgrade the infrastructure base in areas of technology, design and 
training so that Indian Industry could stand up to global 
competitiveness.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The action taken is indicated below ad seriatim: 
 
(i) The rates suggested by the representatives of the Industry 
were examined in the Ministry and the proposal was forwarded to 
Ministry of Finance to consider increase in the prevalent drawback 
rates of readymade garments. The Drawback Committee constituted 
for formulation of All Industry Rates of duty drawback for 2009 -10 
examined the proposal and observed that the data did not justify 
increase of rates. It was also observed by Ministry of Finance that 
due to global meltdown since 2009 -10, the central excise d uties of 
most of the goods has already been reduced from 14% to 8% during 
December, 2008 and February, 2009. This would have necessitated 
reduction of the drawback rates but due to the hardship faced by 

45 
 
the industry the Drawback Committee decided not to re duce but to 
retain the existing drawback rates. 
 
(ii) Market Development Assistance (MDA) and Market Access 
Initiative (MAI) scheme with higher allocation is being provided to 
exploit untapped countries including EU. Apart from this, 26 new 
markets have be en added under the Focus Market Scheme. These 
include 16 new markets in Latin America and 10 in Asia -Oceania. 
The incentive available under Focus Market Scheme (FMS) has also 
been raised from 2.5% to 3%. Market Linked Focus Product Scheme 
(MLFPS) has been greatly expanded by inclusion of products 
classified under as many as 153 ITC (HS) Codes at 4digit level.  This 
covers textiles madeups, knitted and crocheted fabrics. 
 
(iii)           Efforts are being made to upgrade the infrastructure 
base in areas of T extiles and Jute technology through Technology 
Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS). The identified sectors under this 
scheme may avail concessional loans for their technology 
upgradation requirements. Investments in common infrastructure 
or facilities by an ind ustry association, trust or co -operative society 
and other investments specified are also eligible for funding under 
the scheme. A total of Rs. 2699.81 Crore has been released under 
this scheme upto 31.01.2010 during the current financial year. 
 
(iv)            Efforts are also being made to improve the design and 
training through National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT), 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Institute of Training and Management 
(SVPITM) and Apparel Training & Design Centre (ATDC). NIFT and 
SVPITM are premier Institutes of Design, Management and 
Technology; developing professionals for taking up leadership 
positions in fashion business in the emerging global scenario. ATDC 

46 
 
is conceptualized by AEPC to meet the industry’s growing 
requirement for a steady supply of trained workforce and 
professionals with domain expertise especially in Apparel 
Manufacturing Technology.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009 -Parl., dated   
12/04/2010) 
 
(Please see para 16 of chapter 1) 
 
 
  

47 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDTIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
 
 
 
 
        NIL 
 
 
 
  

48 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No 2, Para 3.25) 
 
 The Committee note that during 2008 -09 there was uneven 
expenditure during the four quarters of the year.  The financial 
rules of the Government clearly stipulate the spreading of 
expenditure evenly over the four quarters and bar the undue 
utilization of funds in the last quarter of the year.  The Committee 
are least convinced with the reply of the Ministry that the release of 
funds in large tranches under TUFS at certain points of time, as 
and when bank furnish the bills, is the main reason for increased 
total expenditure in the first and fourth quarter.  The Committee 
are seriously concerned since the uneven pace of expenditure, 
particularly rush of expenditure towards the last fin ancial quarter, 
directly affects the proper and effective implementation of 
developmental and welfare schemes and consequently the growth of 
the entire sector is hampered.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that all the Banks/lending agencies should be a dvised 
to forward the bills on quarterly basis.  The Committee further 
desire that in order to ensure proper distribution and utilization of 
the allocated funds, there should be a monitoring Committee 
headed by the Secretary of the Ministry and which shoul d meet at 
least once in a month to ensure strict compliance of the laid down 
norms/guidelines in this regard 
 
 
 

49 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for 
compliance. Concerted efforts are being made to fully utilize plan 
funds and also to  spread the expenditure evenly over the four 
quarters through regular monitoring of performance and 
expenditure. There were lumpy releases in the past due to reasons 
given below: 
 The cut -off dates have been prescribed under T UFS by 
reconstituted IMSC in its 1 st meeting held on 19 th Jan., 2009.   
Accordingly, the cases sanctioned before 31.03.2007 are to be 
covered in the quarter ending Dec., 2008, the cases sanctioned 
during the period 1 st April 2007 to 31 st March 2008 are to be 
covered in the quarter ending June, 2009 and the cases sanctioned 
on or after 1 st April, 2008 are to be covered within one year of date 
of sanction of loan . To meet these deadlines the lending agencies 
were covering their previous cases. 
 The erstwhile T UFS was getting over by 31.03.2007, therefore, 
maximum units got their loans sanctioned during the year 2006-07.   
All these cases were coming for subsidy . 
 
 Further, the requirement of funds has increased as the capital 
subsidy of 10% has been provided f or technical textiles and 
garmenting machinery, in addition to processing machinery w.e.f. 
01.04.2007. 
 
 As per the norms under TUFS, Formats I to III have been 
devised to be submitted every quarter by all primary Nodal Agencies 
/ Nodal Banks / Co -opted PL Is for working out bank -wise, unit -
wise subsidy requirement. 
 
   
 

50 
 
 
 Regular scheme-wise monitoring of expenditure is being done 
and also reviewed by Secretary (Textiles) in the weekly meetings of 
Senior Officers’ (SOM) of the Ministry.  Such a monitoring system  
vis-à-vis the budget outlays helps in visualizing gaps and making 
timely  efforts towards ensuring full utilization of allocated 
funds/outlays. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009-Parl., dated  12/04/2010) 
(Please see para 10 of chapter 1) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para 3.28) 
 
 The Committee find that as many as 1969 utilization 
certificates are outstanding as on 31 st March, 2009 involving an 
amount of Rs.16,259.85 lakhs. When enquired about the concrete 
action taken in the matter, the Minis try replied that the concerned 
organizations/agencies were not responding to the communications 
sent to their addresses. The Committee deplore such an approach 
of helplessness and therefore, recommend that the guidelines for 
disbursement of funds to NGOs a nd other private organizations 
should be reviewed afresh and strict norms should be followed for 
selecting such agencies after due verification. The factors like the 
infrastructural base, financial position, past performance, 
availability of manpower etc. with the organization should be taken 
into consideration before their selection. The Committee also desire 
that efforts should be made to get the outstanding Utilization 
Certificates liquidated urgently and strenuous action should be 
taken against the defa ulting agencies/organizations including 
black- listing them.     
 

51 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As on 31 st March, 2009, there were 1969 Utilization 
Certificates amounting to Rs.162.60 crore outstanding. However, as 
on 31 st December, 2009, the pending Utilization Certificates have 
been reduced to 1513 amounting to Rs.127.30 crore. However, the 
observation made by the Committee is noted for strict compliance. 
O/o the DC (Handloom) and DC (Handicrafts), with whom most of 
these UCs are pending, have been instructed accordingly. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009-Parl., dated  12/04/2010) 
 
(Please see para 19 of chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para 3.37) 
 The Committee observe that the rigid and impractical eligibility 
criteria laid down under TWRFS have deprived maximum number of 
workers of the much needed benefits of the Scheme. The Committee 
are at loss to understand the very purpose of implementing this 
Scheme with such a low wage ceiling of Rs.2500 per m onth or less 
for the mills closed between 6 June, 1985 and 1 April 1993 and Rs. 
3500 or less for those closed thereafter. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the welfare scheme should have been so designed to 
cover all jobless workers irrespective of the ir past wage/salary or 
any such factor relating to their previous job. The Committee, while 
considering the matter to be of paramount importance, strongly 
recommend that the aforesaid wage ceilings should be waived off 
and all the workers of the closed mil ls should be covered under the 
Scheme.  
 
 
 

52 
 
Reply of the Govenrment 
 
The TWRFS was commissioned w.e.f. 15.9.1986.  The workers 
engaged in a closed textile unit on the date of its closure 
continuously for five years or more and earning a wage equivalent of 
Rs. 1600/- per month or less and having been on the records of the 
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner of the State concerned is 
entitled to get relief under the Scheme. 
 
The Scheme was modified by the CCEA in its meeting held on 
12.8.1992 as follows: - 
 
1.     The Scheme was made applicable to cases of partial closure 
on a case -to-case basis, where an uneconomic activity had been 
closed down and the rest of the mill was in operation. 
2.     The wage ceiling was enhanced from Rs. 1600/- per month to 
Rs. 2500/- per month.  
 
The Scheme was further modified by the CCEA in its meeting 
held on 05.02.2002 enhancing the wage ceiling from Rs.2500/ - per 
month to Rs. 3500/- per month and the enhanced ceiling was made 
applicable to the eligible textile units which wer e closed on or after 
the date of the CCEA decision. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009-Parl., dated 12/04/2010) 
 
(Please see para 22 of chapter 1) 

53 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para 3.38) 
 
  The Committee are deeply concerned to note that 2610 
workers of 59 Mills, which were closed during the last 3 years, have 
not received any relief under Textile Workers Relief Fund Scheme. 
The Committee take a serious view of such a sorry state of affairs as 
the very purpose of the TWRFS is defeated due to such inord inate 
delay in providing relief to the workers. The Committee strongly feel 
that the closure of the Mills to enable them to run their families 
without difficulty while switching over to a new job or for making 
alternate arrangement for livelihood. The Comm ittee, therefore, 
recommend that guidelines of the TWRFS should be modified.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 As stated in the above para, that though   271 number of mills 
are lying closed in the country, as on 31 -12-2009 with 117914 
workers. But these mills do not fulfill the eligibility criteria under 
the Scheme. The CCEA Proposal moved by this Ministry which 
addresses the issues raised by the Standing Committee could not  
get the  concurrence of Finance Ministry. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009-Parl., dated 12/04/2010) 
 
(Please see para 25 of chapter 1) 
 
  

54 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9 Para 3.47) 
 
 The Committee observe that the TUFS is virtually a non -
starter in the North Eastern States. Since the year 2005 -06, not 
even a single paisa has been spent under the Scheme in North -
Eastern States of the country. Such a lopsided approach 
constitutes a sad reflection on the planning of the Government, to 
say the least. Surprisingly, the Government propose to get 
exemption from the compulsory allocation of 10% funds of the total 
B.E. to NER under the Scheme stating that there is no demand 
from that region. The Committee outright reject such an approach 
as this will only discourage the artisans/ weavers working there. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that imag inative and 
concrete steps should be taken to popularize the Scheme in that 
region. 
 
Reply of the Government 
     The Regional Offices of the Textile Commissioner, Ministry of 
Textiles has conducted various awareness programmes, 
campaigns, workshops, seminars, training programme for 
popularizing the TUFS in the NER. A seminar/workshop was 
organised in Guwahati on  12th June 2009.  Total 160 no. of 
entrepreneurs from various parts of North -Eastern region 
participated in this seminar.  Some of the entrepreneurs specially 
from Imphal came forward to set -up new Automatic/Semi 
Automatic powerloom units in this region. I n total 6 (six) 
seminars/workshops were organized in different parts of North -
East region like Dimapur Agartala Imphal, Aizwal, 2 times (2006 -
07 and 2009 -10) at Guwahati  in association with concern State 
Government Authority in order to boost the Govt. Schemes in this 
region since the year 2006 -07. In the day to day activities, 
technical supports and other required assistances are being 
extended to Powerloom Service Centre -Indian Jute Industries’ 
Research Association, Guwahati for the growth of textile 
industries in North-East region.  In addition, Joint Secretary has 

55 
 
written to Chief Secretaries of NER State for creating congenial 
atmosphere and popularize the Scheme for development of textile 
industries in NER. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009-Parl., dated  12/04/2010) 
 
(Please see para 31 of chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12 Para 3.64) 
 The Committee note that 12 viable mills which were earlier 
due for modernization have been dropped since most of the 
employees of these mills opted for Voluntary Retirement Scheme 
and also due to paucity of funds. The Committee are distressed to 
note that these mills have been left out of the modernization 
process despite the fact that these were viable units and there was 
scope of modernizing them. The Committee strongly recommend the 
Government to review its decision and take steps to revive these 12 
mills.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Because of shortage of funds it is very difficult to revive these 
12 mills. Due to the recession in the real estate market funds could 
not be generated from sale of surplus assets as either the earlier 
projects in hand i.e. 3 new Green field mills are also being delayed 
due to shortage of funds. NTC is managing to complete the in hand 
projects by borrowing / loans from financial institutions .Therefore, 
at this juncture revival of these 12 mills is very difficult. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009-Parl., dated 12/04/2010) 
 
(Please see para 37 of chapter 1) 
   

56 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8 Para 3.46) 
 
 The Committee find that still there is a requirement of Rs. 
1884 crore forsettlement of claims during the current financial  year 
under the Scheme and the budgetary allocation of Rs. 2890 crore 
appears to be inadequate  to clear the dues. The Committee, while 
taking cog nizance of the fact that results of the Scheme are 
encouraging, recommend that the matter should be taken up with 
the Ministry of Finance to allocate estimated funds required under 
the Scheme to clear the backlog and ensure its smooth functioning. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry has proposed an  allocation of Rs.3600.00 Crore 
under TUFS for the year 2010-11.  
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009-Parl., dated  12/04/2010) 
 
(Please see para 28 of chapter 1) 
  

57 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 10 Para 3.54) 
 
 The Committee express their concern over the slow progress of 
setting up of a Fashion hub in Delhi as the identified land is yet to 
be allotted and the amount of Rs. 1 crore allocated under the said 
scheme during each of the last three years has remained u n-
utilized. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
whole process needs to be reviewed on an urgent basis and the 
departments/agencies involved, should be asked to expedite the 
completion of all procedural formalities and provide necessary 
approval without any further delay. The Committee further 
recommend that land for setting up of Fashion hubs in other States 
also should be identified so that local artisans, weavers and crafts 
persons and other skilled textile workers are able to showcase a nd 
market their products locally as also all over the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Fashion Hub is one of the new initiatives emanating from the 
Union Budget of 2007 -08. Fashion Hub is one of the six new 
schemes of Ministry of Textiles with a total o utlay of Rs.229.00 cr. 
for the 11 th Five year Plan (2007 -12). The scheme envisages setting 
up of Fashion Hub in the country to serve as single stop fashion 
business point, developing production and design studios for 
commercial purposes including accessories required in Textiles. 
 
 A concept paper was prepared and submitted by the National 
Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT) and by the Export Promotion 
Council of Handicrafts (EPCH). The concept paper4 covers a range 
of issues relating to the development and establishment of a 
Fashion Hub/Fashion Market Centre. Following decisions have 
been a meeting by Secretary (T) with JS and DG, NIFT. 
 

58 
 
(i) On the basis of the proposals received from NIFT as well as 
EPCH, it was decided to send a proposal for allotment of 
land to the Urban Development Ministry; 
(ii) To hire a consultant to make a study on the feasibility of 
the project for establishing a Fashion Hub based on India 
Habitat Centre Model. 
 
Only token money of Rs.1.00 cr. has been allocated during the 
last three years i.e. 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10. Since land has 
not yet been allotted and no Consultant has been hired so far to 
make a study for establishing a Fashion Hub, therefore, no 
amou7nt has been utilized till date. 
 
 After concerted efforts of the Ministry of Textiles, finally DDA 
responded to the request of the Ministry and informed that it has 
identified a piece of 10 acres of land in IGNOU Campus in Maidan 
Garhi for allotment to the Ministry for Fashion Hub. It further 
informed that the cost of land will be decided in consultation with 
Finance Division and the MOUD and is likely to be on the pattern of 
land allotted to the Ministry of Textiles for setting up National Craft 
Complex in Vasant Kunj. Formal allotment letter would be issued 
only after completing the statutory process of change of land use by 
DDA. 
 
 In order to expedite the establishment of Fashion Hub, with 
the approval of Secretary (Textiles) a Core Advisory Group had been 
constituted under the chairmanship of Director General, NIFT to 
suggest the terms of reference, eligibility criteria for selection of a 
consultant. The advisory Group has submitted its report and the 
same is being examined. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009-Parl., dated  12/04/2010) 
 

59 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 11 Para 3.55) 
 
 The Committee also urge upon the Government to set up NIFT 
centres throughout the country, particularly in the NER, J&K, 
Himachal and Uttrakhand so  that apart from providing 
infrastructural base and promoting textile industry there, the 
interested stu dents are able to study within their vicinity. The 
Committee desire that urgent steps should be taken to move the 
proposal in this regard and the whole exercise should be completed 
expeditiously but positively within the ensuing financial year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
NIFT Centre in Meghalaya (Shillong): 
 NIFT Shillong Centre became operational from academic year 
2008 with 2 programmes - B. Des. (Fashion Design) & B.Des. 
(Accessory Design) from a temporary accommodation in the old 
NEIGHRIHMS Campus which has been renovated. The Centre has 
well equipped lecture rooms, design studios, resource centre, 
activity Centres and hostels and the Centre is working in full swing.  
 
NIFT Centre in Kangra (Himachal Pradesh): 
 
 The Centre at NIFT Kangra became operationa l from August, 
2009 with following five courses:  
i. Fashion Design 
ii. Fashion communication 
iii. Accessory Design 
iv. Textile Design 
v. Fashion Technology 
 

60 
 
 The Centre has well equipped lecture rooms, design studios, 
resource centre, activity Centres and hostels etc. 
 It is proposed to set up a “Centre for Apparel & Textile Studies 
(CATS)” to offer PHD/ Faculty Training Programs at Kangra also. 
Proposal for Setting up of NIFT Centre in J & K (Budgam): 
 
 Proposal for setting up of a NIFT Centre in J&K was received 
in response to letter of HMOT to Chief Minister of J&K.   
 Chief minister of J&K vide his letter dated 25.08.2009 
intimated that the State Government has identified land measuring 
10 acres at Budgam and the funds required for infrastructure have 
also been earmarked.   It was also informed that Industries and 
Commerce Department of the State Government has been 
nominated as the nodal department for the Project. 
 Accordingly, vide letter dated 31.08.2009, Principal Secretary 
and Commerce was requested to indicate some convenient dates for 
the visit for preliminary discussion on the issues involved. 
Subsequently, a visit on 22 nd & 23rd October, 2009 was undertaken 
to Srinagar by DG NIFT to check the site being offered by the State 
Government for NIFT Srinagar. However, th e site for the temporary 
centre was not found suitable.   
 Principal Secretary Industry & Commerce, J& K vide letter dt. 
28/10/09 was requested to demarcate the 10 acres of land next to 
the Navodaya Vidyalaya in Budgam and was also requested to 
forward a copy of demarcation and the proposed road enabling NIFT 
to take a final decision and for the temporary c entre, it was 
informed that 16 -20 thousand sq. ft. of useable area for the 
academic block would be required. In addition to this, a suitable 
hostel accommodation for boys and girls (separate hostel & separate 
building) and faculty accommodation would also be needed.  
 The State Government of J&K has identified some structures 
for setting up of a temporary Campus.  As agreed with State 
Government officials, the site visit has been scheduled on 22 nd 
February, 2010 at Srinagar, when the suitability of the stru ctures 

61 
 
for setting up of a temporary Campus will be assessed.  A final 
decision will be taken thereafter.   
 Principal Secretary, J&K has informed that the proposal for 
formal approval of setting up of NIFT Centre is pending for Cabinet 
approval. 
 The Principal Secretary of J&K has telephonically asked NIFT 
to issue EOI for selection of Architects for permanent Centre and 
the same shall be done shortly. 
Proposal for Setting up of NIFT Centre in Uttrakhand 
 
 No such proposal for setting up of NIFT Centre in Uttrakhand 
has been received from the State Govt. of Uttrakhand. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009-Parl., dated 12/04/2010) 
(Please see para 34 of chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 13 Para 3.69) 
 
 The Committee note that a techno -economic viability study of 
BIC is being done through the Wool Research Association. After 
receipt of the study Report, a proposal will be submitted for 
consideration of the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector 
Enterprises (BRPSE) and, thereafter, approval of the Cabinet will be 
required. The Committee find that the long pending issue of 
conversion of land by State Government of Uttar Pradesh has not 
made any visible headway till date and, without which the whole 
exercise, which is being carried out, would prove futile. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the matter should 
be taken up with the State Government at highest level and be 
vigorously pursued further till it fructifies. They further desire that 

62 
 
the aforesaid ongoing study needs to be completed within the 
current financial year. The progress made in this regard should be 
intimated to the committee within three months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The issue of grant of permission of state Govt. of U.P. on sale/ 
conversion of BIC/subsidiaries land is pending since long despite 
vigorous efforts made by Ministry/Company. The matter had been 
taken up at various levels in the state Govt. A DO letter from  
Minister of Textiles to Chief Minister of UP Govt. has been issued on 
6.1.2010 (copy enclosed). The Wool Research Association has 
completed the study and submitted their report on 18.12.2009. The 
financial para -meters will be assessed by Industrial Financ e 
Corporation of India (IFCI)to whom the report has been sent and is 
expected to be completed by end of January 2010 after which a note 
to BRPSE will be sent.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. 2/16/2009-Parl., dated   12/04/2010) 
 
(Please see para 40 of chapter 1) 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       HEMANAND BISWAL 
  3  May, 2010                                                      CHAIRMAN  
13 Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

63 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 5TH MAY, 2010.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs in Room No. 
116, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider 
and adopt draft Action Taken Report  on 
recommendations/observations contained in their Fourth Report on 
Demands for Grants for the year 2009-10 of  Ministry of Textiles.  
PRESENT 
    Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri K. Murugesan Anandan 
2. Shri P. Balram 
3. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri Hassan Khan 
6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7. Shri P. Lingam 
8. Smt. Mausam Noor 
9. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
10. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
11. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 12. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 13. Shri Rajaram 
 14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 15. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  
   
         

64 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
  3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the draft Action Taken Report  on 
recommendations/observations contained in their Fourth Report on 
Demands for Grants for the year 2009-10 of  Ministry of Textiles.  
 
3.  The Committee took up the draft Report for consideration.  
After detailed deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report 
without any modification.   
 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
Report and to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  
 
 
 

65 
 
                 APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-THIRD REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations       13 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have    
 been accepted by Government 
 (Sl. Nos.1,3 and 4)            3  7.70 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s  replies-NIL     NIL  NIL 
      
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  7  61.54 
 which  Government’s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration-(Sl. Nos. 2, 5,6,7,9 and 12)               
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  4  30.76    
 final replies of Government are of interim in  nature       
 (Sl. Nos. 8,10, 11 and 13                             --------- 
                    100% 
                                   --------- 
  
 
 