1 
 
 
41 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-Fifth  Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for the year 2013-14] 
 
FORTY- FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
February,  2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 


2 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
  
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-Fifth  Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for the year 2013-14] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2014 
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2014 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February,  2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
  
 CONTENTS 
      
                    
PAGE(s)     
     


3 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv)
         
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………….. 
   
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
  
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the  
    Committee  do not desire to pursue in view 
of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
    which replies of Government have not been 
     accepted by the Committee and which 
require     
 reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth  
   Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
   
   
  
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2013-14) 
 SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN - CHAIRMAN 
 

4 
 
 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Ashok Argal  
3.  Shri Ismail Hussain  
4.  Dr. Manda Jagannath  
5.  Dr. Virendra Kumar  
6.  Shri Nara Hari Mahato  
7.  Shri Hari Manjhi  
8.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel  
9.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy  
10
.  
Smt. J. Shantha  
11
.  
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh [Lalan]  
12
.  
Shri Ratan Singh  
13
.  
Shri Dinu Solanki  
14
.  
Shri Makansingh Solanki  
15
.  
Shri K. Sugumar  
16
.  
Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai  
17
.  
Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware  
18
.  
Shri Om Prakash Yadav  
*19.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
20
.  
Vacant  
21
.  
Vacant  
             Rajya Sabha  
 
22
.  
Smt. T. Ratna Bai  
23
.  
Shri D. Bandyopadhyay  
24
.  
Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot  
25
.  
Shri P. Kannan  
26
.  
Shri Mohd. Ali Khan  
27
.  
Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati  
28
.  
Smt. Renubala Pradhan  

5 
 
 
29
.  
Shri Rajaram  
30
.  
Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
31
.  
Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh  
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
-- 
 
*  No           * Nominated w.e.f 17th December, 2013 
 
 
 
                     SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy - Director 
 3. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report 
on their behalf, do present this Forty -first Report on the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Thirty -Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour 
(Fifteenth Lok S abha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment for the year 2013-14. 
 
2. The Thirty -Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and 
also laid in Rajya Sabha on 29 th April, 2013.  The Ministry of 
Labour and Employment furnished their repli es indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 23rd 
August, 2013 .  The Standing Committee on Labour at their 
sitting held on 1 9th December, 2013 considered and adopted the 
draft report and authorized the Chairman to finalise the same 
and present it to the Parliament.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty -Fifth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                               DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
  December, 2013                                                        CHAIRMAN,  

7 
 
 
   Agrahayana ,1935 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in  the Thirty -Fifth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment for the year 2013-14. 
 
1.2 The Thirty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid on 
the Table in Rajya Sabha on 29 th April, 2013. It contained 19 
recommendations/ observations. Replies of Government in respect of all the 
recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:-  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government –  
Para Nos. Nos.4.3, 4.4, 4.5,4.6,4.8,4.9, 
4.10,4.11,4.12,4.13,4.14,4.15,4.18 and 4.19 
 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)            
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Para Nos. 4.1, 4.2 and 4.7 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature- 
Para Nos. 4.16 and 4.17 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
 
   
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect of 
recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action taken notes 
in respect of recommendations contained in Chapter -V for which only 
interim replies have been given by the Government may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not later than 3 months of the 
presentation of this Report.   
A. Issuance of a Status Paper 
(Recommendation No.4.1) 
1.4 The Committee while deploring the irresponsible attitude of the 
Ministry reiterated their earlier recommendation for issuance of Status 
Paper depicting the details of the Schemes framed by the Union 
Government, contribution of the State Government alongwith the completion 
status of the Schemes, the number of beneficiaries, total expenditure 
incurred, State-wise and the reasons for non completion etc. within a month 
of presentation of the Report and also desired to be intimated the reasons 
for delay. 
1.5 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
stated that … the status paper on the various Schemes being administered 
by Ministry of Labour & Employment is at Annexure-I. 
1.6 The Committee find that their recommendation has still not been 
adhered to despite their reiteration.  The Committee desired that the 
Status Paper be i ssued giving wide publicity to the details of the 
Schemes framed by the Union Government, contribution of the State 
Government along with the completion status of the Schemes, the 
number of beneficiaries, total expenditure incurred, State -wise and the 
reasons for non completion etc.  However, the Ministry have chosen to 

9 
 
 
remain silent on the issue.  Moreover, even while furnishing the reply 
to them specific information with any reasons for delay is not 
forthcoming.  The Committee while strongly deploring the  callous 
attitude of the Government towards their recommendations, desire 
that the ‘Status Paper’ be issued without further delay indicating all 
details as spelt out by them. 
B. Utilisation of funds 
(Recommendation No.4.2) 
1.7 The Committee desired that the fund allocation for important schemes 
be given due weightage and the Ministry might also seek approval / 
clearance from the Ministry of Finance for diversion of funds from other 
heads where the funds were being surrendered due to one reason or the 
other. That would enable the Ministry to at least start the most important 
schemes viz. Kaushal Vikas Yojana , Skill Development and Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojana.  
1.8 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
stated that …  the budgetin g is done on realistic basis only. However, the 
involvement of other Ministries/Department such as Ministry of Urban 
Affairs (CPWD) in respect of Civil Works and that of the UPSC and SSC in 
respect of appointment / recruitments leads to delay in the proces s 
resulting in under utilization of the allocated budget. Efforts are being taken 
to synchronize the process through Inter -Ministerial / Departmental follow 
up.  Further, the  Centrally Sponsored Schemes of Ministry of Labour & 
Employment  which comprise a  significant part of the outlay are dependent 
on the State Governments for execution. Due to various reasons, even after 
thorough follow-up, proposals and utilization certificates are very often not 
received in time, resulting in underutilization of funds.  Follow up actions is 
taken through letters from Hon’ble Minister of Labour & Employment to the 
Chief Ministers / Administrators of 33 participating States / UTs.   High 

10 
 
 
level meetings with State Labour Ministers, Principal Secretaries of State 
Government are also held at regular intervals. From time to time, review 
meetings are being held including visits to various states. Review meetings 
are held on regular basis for centrally funded institutes (CFIs). 
1.9 The Committee find that the reply of the Governm ent is silent on 
the main thrust of the recommendation viz.  seeking approval / 
clearance from the Ministry of Finance for diversion of funds from 
other heads where the funds are being surrendered due to one reason 
or the other, and the efforts made to get approval of Ministry of 
Finance for the same.  It is disconcerting to note that rather an 
attempt is being made to link the issue to lack of effective 
coordination between different Central Ministries/State Governments 
etc.  They therefore, desire that the  Ministry to take up the issue with 
the Ministry of Finance and take required measures to ensure 
coordination between the Central and State Governments without 
further delay. 
C. Review and reorganization of Schemes 
(Recommendation No.4.3) 
 
1.10 The Committee while expressing their displeasure at the state of 
affairs emanating from lack of coordination between the Ministry, Ministry of 
Finance and the Planning Commission, desired the Ministry to take up the 
matter once again with concerned Ministries to ensure expeditious 
implementation of schemes. They also desired the Ministry to review the 
plethora of Schemes being operated by them, as to analyze the efficacy 
thereof with a view to reorganize and consolidate them to cover manageable 
broad areas.  

11 
 
 
 
1.11 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
stated that …  the Employment Exchange Mission Mode Project was 
presented twice before EFC on 07.07.2010 and 10.01.2012 respectively and 
the observations raised by the EFCs members were appropriately addressed. 
Keeping in view the inputs received from EFC and other stakeholders, the 
Project was revised resulting in reduction of cost from Rs.2167.29 crore to 
Rs.1725.00 crore. After the revision, the project was again placed before pre 
EFC meeting under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary (Expenditure) on 
08.11.2012 wherein certain issues were raised. These issues are under 
examination and have been taken up with the State Governments / UT 
Administrations as well as Department of Legal Aff airs, Ministry of Law & 
Justice. Responses to the observations raised in pre EFC meeting are still 
awaited and EFC memo will be revised accordingly.  In an endeavor to 
reorganize the existing schemes, the Ministry of Labour & Employment has 
initiated the t hird party evaluation with a view to ascertain the need of 
continuing the existing central sector schemes in the XII Plan. 
1.12 While appreciating the efforts of the Ministry, the Committee 
desire that the evaluation of the existing schemes initiated throu gh 
third party for their review and reorganization be expedited in a time 
bound manner so that only viable schemes could be implemented 
smoothly. 
D. Filling up of vacancies 
(Recommendation No.4.4) 
1.13 The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommen dation for 
filling up of vacancies through Employment Exchanges as a stop -gap 
arrangement till the UPSC/SSC forwards the panel for regular appointment 
also desired that the process of filling up of vacancies might be strictly 
monitored and in case of delay  / irregularity the responsibility must be 

12 
 
 
fixed. As regards the demand for additional staff for which the Minister for 
Labour and Employment had written to the Finance Minister for relaxed 
norms, the Committee suggested that the matter might be pursued wi th the 
Ministry of Finance vigorously. 
1.14 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
stated that … it is stated that the requisition for filling up of various Group 
A and Group B Gazetted posts under the Ministry of Labour & Emplo yment  
have been sent to Cadre controlling Authorities viz. UPSC / DOP&T. These 
vacancies cannot be filled as a stop gap arrangement through Employment 
Exchange as the incumbents to the posts carry statutory, administrative 
functions and quasi judicial  under various labour laws.  Like wise the 
existing vacancies of Direct Recruitment quota cannot be filled up through 
Employment Exchanges as a stop gap arrangement as the candidates may 
claim regular appointment. As per Government of India instructions, 
subordinate posts are filled up from outsourcing through registered 
contractors. 
1.15  The Committee were well aware of the statutory, quasi 
judicial and administrative functions of Group A and Group B posts and 
therefore, recommended that the matter of relaxa tion of norms for 
additional staff taken up by the Minister of Labour and Employment 
with the Ministry of Finance be pursued vigorously.  It is, however, 
perplexing to find that the action taken reply does not find any 
mention of the progress achieved in t he matter or the response of the 
Ministry of Finance to the request made by the Minister of Labour and 
Employment.  They, therefore, caution the Ministry to furnish full and 
complete replies to their recommendations in future.  They also desire 
to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 

13 
 
 
 
E. Penalty provision in Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
(Recommendation No.4.7) 
1.16 The Committee found that neither the existing penalty nor the 
proposed penalty was an effective deterrent in the case of violation of any of 
the provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948. They therefore, 
recommended that while considering the amendments to the Act, the 
punishment so prescribed need to be in conformity with the current price 
index or linked with the size of the establishm ent / profit margin of the 
violator to be a deterrent in the real sense of the term. 
1.17 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
stated that …  the amendment proposal to the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
was drafted way back in the yea r 2005. The proposal was placed before 
Central Advisory Board under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 which is the 
apex body for deciding policy matters relating to the Minimum Wages Act, 
1948. The Board considered the proposal and recommended to increase the 
fine from Rs.500/ - to Rs.5,000/ - for first contravention and an amount 
between Rs.5,000/ - to Rs.10,000/ - in subsequent contraventions.  The 
Board also recommended enhancing the imprisonment clause from six 
months to one year for the subsequent contraventions.  Although the 
enhanced fine is also not adequate, it was considered to be an effective 
deterrent against violation of provisions under the Minimum Wages Act, 
1948 when seen in conjunction with the provision for imprisonment. 
Moreover, since the apex body  Central Advisory Board has already 
recommended the revision, it is, therefore, not considered desirable to revise 
it which would have delayed the amendment process further.  However, the 
proposal to link enhanced fine with the price index  and size of 
establishment or profit margin of the violators have been noted for 
consideration at an appropriate time. 
 

14 
 
 
1.18 The Committee do not subscribe to the explanation advanced by 
the Ministry for reviewing and enhancing the punishment in case of 
violation of any o f the provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948.  
They also take exception to the fact that the Government do not feel 
the need to revisit the amendment proposal to the Minimum Wages 
Act, 1948 was drafted way back in the year 2005 on the specious  plea 
that the Central Advisory Board had recommended for a revision in the 
penalty provision.  The Committee are of the strong view that even 
after 8 years of drafting of the said proposal the amendments are yet to 
be enacted by Parliament.  They, therefore, are o f the considered 
opinion that the revision as proposed by the Committee of linking it 
with the price index and size of establishment or profit margin of the 
violators could still be actively considered.  The Committee opine that 
it is high time the penalty  provisions not only in the Minimum Wages 
Act but also other Acts administered by the Ministry need careful and 
thoughtful consideration for revision to serve as an effective deterrent 
in cases of violations.  They therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation for linking it with the price index and size of 
establishment or profit margin of the violators in case of violation of 
any of the provisions of the Acts. 
F. Reporting of Child Labour and Bonded Labour 
(Recommendation No.4.12) 
1.19 The Committee desired that the incidents of Child Labour and Bonded 
Labour must be reported to the concerned authorities which came to notice 
of CBWE during the course of their providing of training, etc. which would 

15 
 
 
help the Government in eliminating such stigma from th e society.  They also 
desired to be apprised of incidents so reported to the concerned authorities 
during the last five years. 
1.20 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
stated that …  the CBWE organizes two day special seminars  for Child 
Labour and Parents of Child Labour with a view to generate desired 
awareness among them to know their rights and entitlements under various 
Labour Laws and Welfare Schemes launched by the Central / State 
Government for their amelioration.  Durin g the period 2008 to 2013, 561 
special seminars for Child Labour and 592 special seminars for Parents of 
Child Labour were organized by  CBWE. 
1.21 The Committee find that the reply of the Government is silent on 
the reporting by CBWE of the incidents of engagement of Child 
Labour/Bonded Labour by the industries/individuals. They therefore, 
desire that any case of Child Labour/Bonded Labour which is in the 
knowledge of CBWE during the course of providing training, must be 
reported to the appropriate authority for required action. 
G. Setting up of ESIC Hospital in Ferozabad and Odisha 
 (Recommendation No.4.16) 
1.22 The Committee recommended for starting the process of setting up of 
an ESI Hospital at Firozabad and also desired to be apprised of the latest 
status of a proposal of setting up of ESI Medical College and hospital at 
Rourkela, Odisha and the time by which a final decision is likely to be 
taken. 
1.23 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
stated that …  a fresh survey was conducted in the Firozabad and 
Shikhohabad area and the total number of Insured Persons in the above 
areas is 26220. The matter is being placed at the next meeting of Employees’ 

16 
 
 
State Insurance Corporation for consideration. As regards status of 
proposal o f setting up of ESI Medical College and Hospital at Rourkela, 
Odisha, it is submitted that a Sub -Committee was constituted by the 
Government to decide the location of Medical College and Hospital in 
Odisha.  The Report of the Sub -Committee is under conside ration of the 
Government. 
1.24 The Committee find the reply of the Ministry matching with the 
reply given to them during their study visit to Kochi during June, 
2013.  They opine that it had already taken considerable time, the 
meeting of ESIC be therefore , convened at the earliest so that the 
process of setting up of ESI Hospital at Firozabad is expedited.  They 
also desire that the Report of the Sub -Committee constituted for 
deciding the location of Medical College and Hospital in Odisha be 
finalized and the Committee be kept informed.   
H. Representation of SC/ST/OBC while engaging Contract Workers 
(Recommendation No.4.17) 
1.25 The Committee found that while engaging contract workers, the 
Government’s policy on prescribed representation to SC/ST/OBC was n ot 
applied. Since a huge workforce is being engaged through outsourcing, the 
lack of stipulated representation to deprived sections of the society amounts 
to denial of their legitimate rights. The Committee, therefore, recommended 
that Government may explo re the feasibility of issuing instructions/ 
guidelines to all concerned for giving due regard to representation of these 
categories while outsourcing/engaging Contract Labour.  
1.26 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
stated that … the matter has been referred to Ministry of Law & Justice for 
advice.  

17 
 
 
1.27 The Committee found that while engaging contract workers, the 
Government’s policy on prescribed representation to SC/ST/OBC was 
not applied. Since a huge workforce is being engaged through 
outsourcing, the lack of stipulated representation to deprived sections 
of the society amounts to denial of their legitimate rights.  They opine 
that mere referring the matter to Ministry of Law & Justice for advice 
would not serve any purp ose unless it is pursued vigorously with the 
Ministry for early action.   They therefore, desire that the matter may 
be expedited at the level of Secretaries of both the Ministries. 
I. Minimum Wage/Fair Wage 
(Recommendation No.4.18) 
1.28 The Committee desired that parameters must be so fixed that the Act 
should define the criteria for fixation of minimum wages.  They, therefore, 
desired that the proposed amendments may be expedited. They also opined 
that a concept of "Fair Wages" simultaneously be evolv ed and it might be 
ensured that these fair wages are paid by all the profit earning PSUs/ 
organizations/ Autonomous Bodies to contract / casual / outsourced 
workers employed by them. 
1.29 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
stated that …  since, there is no definition of minimum wages at present 
under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, as a workable alternative, minimum 
wages are fixed keeping in mind the norms defined by the 15 th Indian 
Labour Conference in 1957. Also, Supreme Court  judgement on Raptakos & 
Co. V/s its workers is taken into account for fixing the minimum wages. So 
far as Fair Wage is concerned, a Committee was set up in 1948 which 
indicated a broad concept of “Fair Wage” in the manner as described in the 
Annexure: -  

18 
 
 
1.30 From  the reply of the Government, the Committee find that the 
concept of ‘Fair Wage’ was evolved way back in 1948 by the Committee 
on Fair Wages.  However, the Committee note that the concept of `Fair 
wage’ was not put in its proper perspective till date by the 
Government. The Committee, therefore, desire that some mechanism 
must be drawn either within the Department or through other means to 
ensure payment of Fair Wages by the profit earning PSUs/Departments 
to the Contract Workers. They desire to be apprised of the action taken 
in the matter. 
J. The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011 
(Recommendation No.4.19) 
1.31 The Committee found that presently the Indian Laws are applicable 
upto 12 nautical miles. Hence, the interests of the contract workers engaged 
by some oil exploring companies having their setups beyond this limit are 
not protected.  However, as per the proposed amendment to the Mines Act, 
1952 its applicability is being extended from existing 12 nautical miles to 
200 nautical miles (Exclusive Econo mic Zone).  The Committee opined that 
since the workers are out of the purview of the present laws, the amendment 
to the Mines Act, 1952 becomes imperative to safeguard them.  They 
therefore, desired that the amendments to the Act may be expedited. 
1.32 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
stated that …  the Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011 was tabled in the Rajya 
Sabha on 23 rd March 2011.  It was referred to the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Labour. The Lok Sabha Secretariat forwarded the 22nd Report 
relating to the Mines Amendment Bill, 2011 to the Ministry.  The said Report 
was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 th December, 
2011. The said report has been examined in the Ministry.  The Ministry 
proposed to introduce Official amendments to the said Bill for which the 

19 
 
 
Cabinet Note was prepared and submitted to Cabinet Secretariat on 
22.08.2012 for placing it before the Cabinet. During the discussion in the 
Cabinet Meeting held on 06.09.2012, Ministry of Min es raised objection to 
the issue of inclusion of definition of Foreign Company in the Amendment 
Bill, 2011, since there is no provision of granting leases to the Foreign 
Companies under the MMDR Act.  As per the decision of the Cabinet dated 
06.09.2012, the Ministry of Labour and Employment was directed to discuss 
the issue with the Ministry of Mines and thereafter, a supplementary note be 
brought for the consideration of the Cabinet. The concerns of the Ministry of 
Mines was sorted out and the Cabinet Note  submitted to the Cabinet 
Secretariat on 16.04.2013 for placing it before the Cabinet. The Cabinet 
considered the proposal in its meeting held on 09.05.2013 and decided that 
matter relating to definition of owner, continuation of liability and other 
related provisions be appropriately reformulated by the Minister of Labour 
and Employment in consultation with the Minister of Communications and 
Information Technology, the Minister of Coal and the Minister of Mine and 
the proposal may, thereafter be brought fo r consideration of the Cabinet. 
Further action is being taken accordingly. 
1.33 While reiterating their earlier recommendation the Committee 
desire that amendment to the Mines Act may be expedited to safeguard 
the interest of a large number of contract wor kers engaged by the oil 
companies having their setups beyond EEZ limits. 
 
  

20 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.3) 
 
 The Committee are, however, constrained to note that delayed 
approval of the Schemes by the Planning Commission in general and one of 
the Schemes namely Mission Mode Project for Upgradation and 
Modernisation of Employment Exchanges in particular, announced  by the 
Finance Minister in his Budget Speech for the year 2009, is still awaiting the 
requisite approval, thereby negating the very purpose for which the schemes 
were intended. The Committee express their displeasure at the state of 
affairs emanating from lack of coordination between the Ministry, Ministry of 
Finance and the Planning Commission and desire the Ministry to take up 
the matter once again with concerned Ministries to break the vicious circle 
and ensure expeditious implementation of these scheme s. The Committee 
also desire the Ministry to review the plethora of Schemes being operated by 
them, as to analyze the efficacy thereof with a view to reorganize and 
consolidate them to cover manageable broad areas.  
Reply of  the Government 
 The Employment Exchange Mission Mode Project was presented twice 
before EFC on 07.07.2010 and 10.01.2012 respectively and the observations 
raised by the EFCs members were appropriately addressed. Keeping in view 
the inputs received from EFC and other stakeholders, the P roject was 
revised resulting in reduction of cost from Rs.2167.29 crore to Rs.1725.00 
crore. After the revision, the project was again placed before pre EFC 
meeting under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary (Expenditure) on 
08.11.2012 wherein certain iss ues were raised. These issues are under 
examination and have been taken up with the State Governments / UT 
Administrations as well as Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & 
Justice. Responses to the observations raised in pre EFC meeting are still 
awaited and EFC memo will be revised accordingly. 
 
In an endeavor to reorganize the existing schemes, the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment has initiated the third party evaluation with a view to ascertain 
the need of continuing the existing central sector schemes in the XII Plan.  

21 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.12 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.4)     
 
 The Committee further note that shortage of staff is also impacting the 
implementation of the important schemes. The Committee here would like to 
remind the Ministry that on an earlier occasion also, they had recommended 
that the existing vacancies of Direct Recruitment (DR) quota be filled up 
through Employment Exchanges as a stop -gap arrangement till the 
UPSC/SSC forwards the panel for regular appointment which would help 
ease the pressure on the Ministry. They, howe ver, feel that this 
recommendation was not given a serious thought by the Government.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates their earlier recommendation and suggests 
that the existing vacancies be filled up within three months, through 
Employment Exchanges  as a stop -gap arrangement till the UPSC/SSC 
forwards the panel for regular appointment. They also desire that this 
process of filling up of vacancies may be strictly monitored and in case of 
delay / irregularity the responsibility must be fixed. As regard s the demand 
for additional staff for which the Minister for Labour and Employment had 
written to the Finance Minister for relaxed norms, the Committee suggests 
that the matter may be pursued with the Ministry of Finance vigorously. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  
 It is stated that the requisition for filling up of various Group A and 
Group B Gazetted posts under the Ministry of Labour & Employment  have 
been sent to Cadre controlling Authorities viz. UPSC / DOP&T. These 
vacancies cannot be filled as a  stop gap arrangement through Employment 
Exchange as the incumbents to the posts carry statutory, administrative 
functions and quasi judicial  under various labour laws.  
 Like wise the existing vacancies of Direct Recruitment quota cannot be 
filled up through Employment Exchanges as a stop gap arrangement as the 

22 
 
 
candidates may claim regular appointment. As per Government of India 
instructions, subordinate posts are filled u p from outsourcing through 
registered contractors. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.15 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.5) 
 The Committee find that the data collected/provided by the Labour 
Bureau through different surveys about number of beneficiaries of various 
schemes is at variance with the data collected by private agencies / NGOs.  
The Co mmittee feel that the statistics collected by the Labour Bureau 
should provide a clear picture about the number of beneficiaries for each of 
the Schemes implemented by the Ministry. They, therefore, desire that the 
methodology adopted by the Labour Bureau should be reviewed and further 
improved to make their results more closer to ground realities. 
Reply of  the Government 
  Labour Bureau is responsible for the collection, collation and 
dissemination of statistics and related information on prices, wages, 
earnings, productivity, absenteeism, labour turn over, industrial relations, 
working and living conditions of different segments of workers. It also 
undertakes studies on evaluation of working of various labour enactments,  
Labour Bureau does not conduct an y survey  with the specific  objective of 
collecting  / providing data about number of beneficiaries of a particular 
scheme being implemented by the Ministry or Central / State Governments 
or evaluating  the impact of the scheme on its target group.  
 Further, as regards the suggestions of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee regarding review and improvement in methodology adopted by 
the Labour Bureau, it is informed that Labour Bureau continuously 
endeavors to do so. For this purpose, appropriate mechanism s have been 
put  in  place  to  ensure  that methodology adopted in the surveys of Labour 
Bureau is reviewed and appropriately improved.  To illustrate, in connection 
with the Annual Employment –Unemployment Survey, an Expert Group   is 
constituted by Mini stry of Labour & Employment to finalize the schedules, 

23 
 
 
instructions, sampling design and other technical details of the surveys.  
Similarly, approval of Technical Advisory Committee on Statistics of Prices 
and Cost of Living (TAC of SPCL) of Ministry of St atistics and Programme 
Implementation is sought on vital parameters pertaining  to selection of 
States, sample villages and training to field  staff etc. in respect  of base 
updation of Consumer Price Index Number for Industrial Workers and 
Consumer Price Index Numbers for Agricultural Labourers and Rural 
Labourers.  
 Improvement in methodology of surveys conducted by Labour Bureau 
is an on -going and continuous process.  However, the suggestion of 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Labour  regarding  the n eed for 
review  and further improvement in the methodology adopted by Labour 
Bureau is welcome and will be kept in view  while undertaking any review of 
the parameters. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.6) 
 During the examination of Demands for Grants 2012 -13, the 
Committee were informed that the Government proposed to amend various 
Acts like the Employment Exchange (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) 
Act, 1959, the Factor ies Act, 1948, the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the 
Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970, the Employees' 
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 etc.  However, the 
Committee find that Ministry have not been able to bring any of th e 
amending Bills before the Parliament so far.  The Committee desire the 
Ministry to expedite the examination of all these Acts and bring amending 
Bills before the Parliament at the earliest.  The Committee notes that the 
Ministry is administering 44 Acts for the welfare of labour covering both 
organized and un-organised sector.  Some of these Acts touch upon only few 
aspects of the welfare activities.  The Committee desires the Ministry to 
review the Acts, particularly those which have remained quiescent o r have 
become outdated so as to bring about a comprehensive legislation covering 
the welfare of labourers in its entirety.   
Reply of  the Government 
 Labour Laws have been enacted / amended from time to time to 
protect the  interests of workers engaged both in organized and unorganized 
sectors. The Ministry reviews labour laws and carries out amendments in 

24 
 
 
order to bring them in tune with the emerging n eeds of the economy after 
consulting the stakeholders and taking into account the overall interests of 
the workers. 
 Recently, amendments have been carried out under the Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936, the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, the Apprentices Act, 
1961, the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972,      the Employees’ State Insurance 
Act, 1948, the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the Plantations Labour Act, 
1951, the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 and the Workmen’s Compensation 
Act, 1923 (now called Employees’ Compensation Act, 1923).  
 Further, the Government has introduced Bills in Parliament for 
amendment in the Labour Laws (Exemption from Furnishing Returns and 
Maintaining Registers by Certain Establishments) Act, 1988, the Mines Act, 
1952, the Inter -State Migrant W orkmen (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1979, the Child Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986, the Building and Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996, the 
Building and Oth er Construction Workers Cess Act, 1996 and the 
Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 in 
the Parliament.  
         In addition, the Government has approved the proposal for 
introducing a Bill in Parliament for the amendment o f the Minimum Wages 
Act, 1948. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.8) 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry are facing problems in 
implementation of the Schemes which are executed by the State 
Governments.  Some of the State Governments do not even respond to 
communications / Report to Ministry or attend meetings etc.  The 
Committee desire that cases of such State Governments which are neither 
performing nor utilizing central funds properly, must be reported to the 
Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission so that annual grant of such 
States be commensurate with their performance in respective schemes.  
 
 
 
 

25 
 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  As suggested by the Committee, the status will be forwarded to the 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission so that annual grant of such 
States be commensurate with their performance in respective schemes. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.9) 
 The Committee note that Modular Employable Skills (MES) Scheme, 
earlier implemented by the Ministry, is now proposed to be implemented by 
the State Governments for which funds are to be provided by the Ministry.   
Given the past performance of some State Governments, it is doubtful, if the 
States would be able to do justice in implementation of this scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that an effective monitoring mechanism must 
be put in place to ensure the implementation of the scheme to achieve its 
intended objectives. The Committee are deeply concerned about the 
irregularities reported in the implementation of the sc heme, particularly in 
Uttar Pradesh, and would like the matter to be enquired into and report in 
respect thereof be submitted to them. 
Reply of  the Government 
 The Skill Development Initiative (SDI) is being implemented through 
State Governments/ Union Territories Administrations since September, 
2010. As per procedure prescribed, Directorate General of Employment & 
Training (DGE&T), New Delhi releases funds to the States / UTs after receipt 
of their Action Plans.  Before the start of financial year, States / UTs are 
requested to send Action Plans relating to number of persons to be trained 
in financial year. States / UTs are advised to prepare Action Plan   based  on 
skill mapping for which they are advised to develop a suitable mechanism at 
state level so as to ascertain manpower requirement as the scheme is 
designed mainly toward employability.  States/UTs are also informed that 
the persons trained under the sche me get employment and the expenditure 
incurred on the training does not go waste. Since funds available under the 
scheme are less than requests made by the States/UTs, the funds are 
distributed among States/UTs based on demographic parameters in order to 
avoid the sense of discrimination. 4.22 lakh persons have been trained / 
tested during the 2012 -13 and 5200 Vocational Training Providers have 
been registered across the country.  

26 
 
 
 The web -portal for SDI scheme has been operationalised since 
01.01.2012 and all the activities of the SDI schemes are executed through 
Web-portal. The performance of States/UTs and other Stakeholders is 
monitored through web -portal. Efforts are being made to improve the 
monitoring of the implementation of the scheme in order to me et the 
intended objectives. 
 Some irregularities had come to the notice of the DGE&T, New Delhi 
in May, 2010 in the implementation of the scheme and immediately 
corrective measures have been taken. One of the measures taken was 
settling the issue of pendin g bills of Vocational Training Providers (VTPs) 
and Assessing Bodies (ABs) for the training conducted during 2009 -10 
under the scheme.  
 Accordingly, committees were formed consisting of Officers of DGE&T 
and State Government dealing with SDI scheme and re presentatives of 
Assessing Bodies who would visit premises of VTPs for verification and 
authenticate bills.  Committees visited various VTPs of Uttar Pradesh during 
February, 2012 to September, 2012 and they have submitted reports to 
Directorate of Employment & Training, Government of Uttar Pradesh. Based 
on reports submitted by the Government, Committees visited 427 VTPs out 
of which 104 VTPs refused to get their premises inspected. Committees had 
recommended to release payment to 157 VTPs. The Government of Uttar 
Pradesh has already started releasing the payment to those VTPs who have 
been recommended for payment.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.10) 
 The Committee note that an evaluation study of the performance of 
Central Board of Workers Education (CBWE) was carried out by the V.V. 
Giri National Labour Institute, NOIDA in December, 2012 and the report is 
under examination by the Ministry.   The Committee find that a number of 
recommendations made by them would necessitate mindful consideration. 
The Committee strongly feel that recommendations made by the Institute for 
evaluation of the training programmes must be implemented in letter and 
spirit within a specified time and a st udy be also conducted to assess the 
impact of such training  programmes on the workers' 
performance/productivity. 
 

27 
 
 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  V. V. Giri National Labour Institute, Noida conducted the Evaluation 
Study of Performance Report of CBWE on       December, 2012. The action 
taken report in respect of the recommendation of the Evaluation Report is as 
under:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Subject Action Taken/ Comments 
A. Infrastructure Regional Directors are instructed to contact the 
respective State Governments wherever possible for 
getting office accommodation. The Regional Directors 
are also advised to seek accommodation in the central 
pool of office accommodation. 
B. Human 
Resources 
The proposal of the Board for revival of 160 posts is 
under consideration in the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment. After approval of the IFD Division, 
Ministry of Labour & Employment, the proposal will be 
sent to Department of Expenditure, the competent 
authority for creation and revival of the posts.  
  Once the Research and Devel opment Wing is 
established, all the officers can be trained in research 
related to labour issues. However, the Education 
Officers are being trained by VVGNLI, ISTM, IIWE and 
other institutes from time to time.  
C. Promotion 
Policy  
The matter will be considered in due course. 
D. Training  
and Education  
The 163rd meeting of the Governing Body of the CBWE 
approved the revised expenditure pattern. The was 
examined in the Ministry and some clarification was 
sought, which is awaited  from the Board. 
E. Restructuring 
Training 
Process 
CBWE conducts the grass -root level Training 
programmes with the help of rural volunteers. The 
Board is in the process of selecting of new rural 
volunteers and to train them for conducting more 
programmes. 
  

28 
 
 
 
F. 
Research and 
Impact 
Assessment  
A proposal for the establishment of a Research Wing 
at Head Office and Zonal Directorates was approved in 
the 155 th Governing Body Meeting. The matter is 
under process.  
G. Publications         The post of Editor, who responsible for 
publications of Board’s literature, is under deemed 
abolition. The same is under consideration in the 
Ministry for revival.  However, CBWE is considering 
the decentralization of publications. A sub -committee 
shall be constituted to evolve modalities of State 
level/Regional level publication. 
H. Restructuring 
of Zonal / 
Regional 
Directorates 
A proposal for restructuring of Zonal / Regional 
Directorates in North-Eastern States i.e. in Nagaland, 
Arunachal Prades h, Mizoram and Tripura will be 
placed before the Governing Board in due course.  
I. Revision of 
Administrative 
Manual 
The revision of Administrative Manual is under 
progress in the Board. 
J. Recruitment 
Rules 
 
It was decided in the 156th Meeting of Governing Body 
held on 12 th July, 2010 that there is no need of 
amendment of the Recruitment Rules, at present, the 
pay-scale of Education Officers cadre is sub -judiced 
before Hon’ble High Court, Calcutta. 
K. Representative
s of Education 
officers in 
Governing 
Body. 
This proposal was placed before the 164 th  meeting of 
the Governing Body of the Board held on 24.07.2013. 
The proposal was considered by the committee but 
not approved the proposal.  
L Recruitment of 
Education 
officers. 
 
The proposal of the Board for revival of 160 posts 
including the posts of Education Officer, is under 
consideration in the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment. After approval of the IFD Division, 
Ministry of Labour & Employment, the proposal will 
be sent to Depart ment of Expenditure, the competent 
authority for creation and revival of the posts. 
M Network 
Development 
CBWE has started collaborating with VVGNLI. The 
Board has plan to establish a separate Research Wing 

29 
 
 
at IIWE, Kurla, Mumbai. 
N Setting up of 
CBWE 
Laboratory. 
All the Education officers of the Board may be trained 
in action research training. After the training, Action 
research may be conducted in every region. 
O Consultancy The CBWE only conducts the training programmes 
for organized, unorganized and  rural sector workers 
and does not provide the Consultancy Services. 
However, the funds are generated by conducting the 
SGF programmes to some extent. 
P Governing 
Body. 
 
A proposal was placed before the 164 th Governing 
Body Meeting held on 24 th July, 2013 and approved 
that the Director General, VVGNLI will be nominated 
as member of Governing Body of Board.  
Q Indian 
Institute of 
Workers 
Education. 
 
 A proposal for up -gradation of manpower, up -
gradation of Library, Setting up of New Editorial 
Section and Infrastructural development  are already 
prepared for placing before the ensuing Managing 
Committee Meeting for IIWE. The proposal for 
teaching staff will also be put before the Managing 
Committee Meeting for IIWE. IIWE’s existing Hostel is 
already renovated. A proposal for separate building 
for hostel is under process.  
R Evaluation 
 
Research agencies are being contacted to conduct an 
independent Evaluation and Impact study of the 
Training programmes of the CBWE. 
 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.11) 
 The Committee find that the Central Board of Workers Education 
(CBWE) has a network of 50 Regional, 9 Sub -Regional Directorates and 6 
Zonal Directorates.  Going through the data provided by the Ministry, they 
observe that there are 183 vacancies aga inst sanctioned staff strength of 
686.  Keeping in view the significance of the CBWE, it becomes imperative to 
provide at least the sanctioned staff if not the additional staff.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that all the vacancies in CBWE be filled up 
urgently, by resorting to the method indicated by them elsewhere in this 
Report. The Committee also recommends that the Centre of CBWE in 

30 
 
 
Srinagar which was closed 22 years back due to extraordinary 
circumstances be re -opened immediately and simultaneously  a feasibility 
report may also be obtained for establishment of a CBWE Centre in Leh. 
They desire to be apprised of the action taken in this matter at an early 
date. 
Reply of  the Government 
  The proposal of the Board for revival of 160 posts is under 
consideration in the Ministry of Labour & Employment. After approval of the 
IFD Division, Ministry of Labour & Employment, the proposal will be sent to 
Department of Expenditure, the competent authority for creation and revival 
of the posts.  
 
 164th meeting of the Governing Body of the Board was held on 
 24.07.2013 in New Delhi, wherein it has been decided the following:- 
 
 to convert the Sub -Regional Directorate, Srinagar into Regional 
Directorate; 
 to convert Regional Directorate, Jammu into Sub -Regional 
Directorate; and 
  to open a new Sub-Regional Directorate in Leh. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.12) 
 The Committee note that the CBWE has a reach to all categories of 
workers. The Committee opines that during the course of providing training, 
CBWE might have come across some incidents of engagement of Child 
Labour and Bonded Labour by industries / individuals .  The Committee 
desire that such incidents must be reported to the concerned authorities 
which would help the Government in eliminating such stigma from the 
society. They would like to be apprised of incidents so reported to the 
concerned authorities during the last five years. 
 
 

31 
 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  The CBWE organizes two day special seminars for Child Labour and 
Parents of Child Labour with a view to generate desired awareness among 
them to know their rights and entitlements under various Labour La ws and 
Welfare Schemes launched by the Central / State Government for their 
amelioration. 
 During the period 2008 to 2013, 561 special seminars for Child 
Labour and 592 special seminars for Parents of Child Labour were organized 
by CBWE. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.21 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 (Recommendation at Para No. 4.13) 
 
 The Committee note that the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) 
was launched in the year 2008 to provide health insurance to the lowest 
strata of the society viz. the BPL families.  Since its inception, it has become 
one of the largest health insurance s cheme in the world in terms of 
numbers.  The Committee find that approximately 120 million people have 
already been enrolled in the Scheme but the Ministry have been able to 
provide cards to 34 million people only.  They are of the firm opinion that 
issuance of cards to the beneficiaries is the precursor to implement the 
scheme, which is getting delayed.  They, therefore, desire that the process of 
issuance of cards needs to be accelerated so as to enable the beneficiaries to 
avail the benefits of the schem e without undue delay. The Committee also 
desire the Ministry to explore the possibility of including more and more 
categories of workers in the ambit of the Scheme.   
Reply of  the Government 
  Under Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY), a single Smart Card 
is provided for entire family and therefore the numbers indicated above 
about 34 million smart cards is actually covering 34 million families and 
thus approximately 120 million persons (upto five members in a family). The 
Smart Cards are distributed in RSBY on the spot at enrolment station itself 
and there is no delay or backlog in delivery of smart cards. The Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) was initially launched to cover only the BPL 
unorganised workers. Thereafter it has been extended to some other 

32 
 
 
occupational groups such as building and other construction workers; beedi 
workers; domestic workers; street vendors; Railway porters and MGNREGA 
beneficiaries, who have worked for more than  15 days in the preceding 
financial year. In the current year’s Budget, Finance Minister has already 
announced about the Government’ intention to extend the coverage of RSBY 
to Sanitation Workers, Mine Workers, Rickshaw pullers, Rag pickers and 
Auto/Taxi drivers. The details are being worked out and the scheme shall 
reach out to these sections of the society soon.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.14) 
 
   The Committee, in their earlier report on Demands for Grants, 
desired that the shortcomings / lacunae / deficiency / weakness pointed 
out in the evaluation studies of RSBY be taken up seriously and course 
corrected. The Committee, reiterate their recommendation and desire that 
fresh evaluation studies be conducted for examination of shortcomings / 
lacunae / deficiency / weakness, of the Scheme. 
Reply of  the Government 
  Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) has been consistently 
evaluated and the initial evaluations have revealed  that out of pocket 
expenditure for RSBY beneficiaries has come down as compared to those 
that are not enrolled under RSBY. More evaluations are being proposed in 
the current year for process evaluation as well as impact evaluation of the 
scheme and the outcome of these evaluations will surely help the Ministry in 
devising better strategy for the effective implementation of the scheme.     
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.15) 
 The Committee note that an ESI Hospital was set up in Nagda 
Junction of Madhya Pradesh which remained functional for about two -three 
years and, thereafter, was closed.  The Committee find that closing this 
hospital has not only hampered the medical facilities  to the local IPs but 
also the assets so created are idling.  They, therefore, desire that the ESI 
hospital at Nagda be re-started without further delay. 
 

33 
 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 The ESI Hospital in Nagda is not shut down.  It is being run by the 
State Government of Madhya Pradesh. The bed occupancy of the Hospital is 
very low.  The number of Insured Persons(IPs) in the Nagda Region is 
around 8987 only and  there is shortage of specialists  and assistant 
surgeons. Madhya Pradesh Government has informed th at they are taking 
steps for smooth functioning of ESI Hospital at Nagda, Madhya Pradesh.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.18) 
 The Committee were informed that t he Government have proposed 
amendments to the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 which, inter-alia, include 
making National Floor Level Minimum Wage (NFLMW) statutory and 
applicable to all employments across the states. The amendment proposal to 
the Minimum Wages Act , 1948 has been approved by the Cabinet and the 
Draft Bill on the proposed amendments is being prepared in consultation 
with the Ministry of Law & Justice.  The Committee find that at present 'The 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948' neither defines 'minimum wages' no r lays down 
any norm/criteria for fixing the minimum wages.  In the absence of any 
standard methodology, the norms recommended by the Indian Labour 
Conference, held in 1957 are taken into account.  The Committee desire that 
parameters must be so fixed that  the Act should define the criteria for 
fixation of minimum wages.  They, therefore, desire that the proposed 
amendments may be expedited.  
 The Committee opines that a concept of "Fair Wages" simultaneously 
be evolved and it may be ensured that these fair  wages are paid by all the 
profit earning PSUs/ organizations/ Autonomous Bodies to contract / 
casual / outsourced workers employed by them.  
Reply of  the Government 
  Since, there is no definition of minimum wages at present under the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948, as a workable alternative, minimum wages are 
fixed keeping in mind the norms defined by the 15 th Indian Labour 
Conference in 1957. Also, Supreme Court judgement on Reptakos & Co. V/s 
its workers is taken into account for fixing the minimum wages. So far as 
Fair Wage is concerned, a Committee was set up in 1948 which indicated a 
broad concept of “Fair Wage” in the following manner: - 
 Fair Wage would be a wage whose lower limit is the minimum wage 
and upper limit would vary on the basis of paying capac ity of the particular 

34 
 
 
industry. Although, this concept of Fair Wage is not being monitored, 
enforcement of minimum wages is being carried out by the Central 
Industrial Relations Machinery (CIRM) and different state enforcement 
machineries regularly. 
Norms for fixation of Minimum Wages 
 The Minimum Wages Act has neither defined minimum wages nor has 
it laid down any norms/criteria for fixing the minimum wages.  Many a 
times, the ‘minimum wages’ get confused with ‘fair wages’ and the ‘living 
wages’.  The Comm ittee on Fair Wages (1948) had given the concepts of 
living wages, minimum wages and fair wages as under :- 
(i) Living wage:  Living wage should enable the wage earner to provide for 
himself and his family not merely the bare essentials of food, clothing and 
shelter but also a measure of frugal comfort including education of children, 
protection against ill health, requirements of social needs and a measure of 
insurance against the more important contingencies like old age. 
(ii) Minimum Wage : Minimum wage must provide not merely for the bare 
sustenance of life but for preservation of the efficiency of the worker. For 
this purpose the minimum wage must also provide for some measure of 
education, medical requirements and amenities. 
(iii)  Fair wage : The Commi ttee did not define fair wage but it indicated 
where it would lie in the context of the living and minimum wage.  While the 
lower limit of the fair wage must obviously be the minimum wage, the upper 
limit is equality set by what may broadly be called the c apacity of the 
industry to pay. 
 In the absence of any standard methodology, the norms recommended 
by the Indian Labour Conference, held in 1957 are taken into account while 
fixing the minimum wages.  These are as follows: -  
 3 consumption units for one earner. 
 Minimum food requirements of 2700 calories per average Indian adult. 
 Clothing requirements of 72 yards per annum per family. 
 Rent corresponding to the minimum area provided for under 
Government’s Industrial Housing Scheme. 
 Fuel, Lighting and other mi scellaneous items of expenditure to 
constitute 20% of the total minimum wage. 

35 
 
 
 There was a judicial pronouncement also in the year 1992 when the 
Supreme Court delivered a historic Judgement in the case of Reptakos & Co. 
Vs. its workers that the children’s education, medical requirement, 
minimum recreation including festivals / ceremonies, provision for old age, 
marriage etc. should further constitute 25% of the minimum wage and used 
as a guide in fixation of minimum wages. The State Governments are 
requested from time to time to keep the above said norms and judicial 
pronouncement in view while fixing/revising the minimum wages.   
 A Working Group was set up under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 by 
the Central Advisory Board.  The Group after having visited site s of 
backward areas in States of Chhattisgarh and Odisha and indepth analysis 
of the ground realities and detailed discussion recommended the following 
norms for fixation of minimum wages: - 
(i) The norm of 3 consumption units i.e. 2 adults plus 2 children  for one 
earner. 
(ii) Minimum food requirement of 2700 calories per average Indian adult.  
This incidentally synchronizes almost with 2668 calories of basket of food 
items worked out as per capita food consumption in rural area reported 
by NSSO (55 th Round) Consumer Expenditure Survey in 1999 -2000, 
which may be accordingly calibrated with reference to NSSO 
quinquennial Surveys.   
(iii)The clothing requirement in terms of per capita expenditure as 
estimated by NSSO Consumer Expenditure Survey. 
(iv) The expenditure on fuel, lighting and miscellaneous as per ILC norms 
and expenditure on children’s education, medical requirement etc. as per 
Supreme Court Judgement should also be determined by the results of 
Consumer Expenditure Survey conducted by NSSO. 
(v) The minimum wages so determined using the guidelines as 
enumerated in a) to d) above would be applicable to the unskilled labour 
each for rural area and the urban area and in respect of each scheduled 
employment. 
(vi) The minimum wages for semi -skilled, skill ed and highly skilled 
workers need not be fixed separately as these would automatically get 
settled at relatively higher levels. 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 30 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 

36 
 
 
(Ministry of  Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.19) 
 The Committee in their Twenty -Second Report on 'The Mines 
(Amendment) Bill, 2011' had approved the proposal of the Ministry to amend 
Section 1 of the Pri ncipal Act to include the territorial waters, continental 
shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976.  The 
Committee find that presently the Indian Laws are applicable upto 12 
nautical miles. Hence, the interests of the contract work ers engaged by the 
some oil exploring companies having their setups beyond this limit are not 
protected.  When the Committee raised their concern, the  Ministry informed 
that the Mines Act, 1952 is being amended to extend its applicability from 
existing 12 nautical miles to 200 nautical miles (Exclusive Economic Zone) 
thereby covering the health, safety and welfare aspects of all workers 
including contract labour.  The Committee opines that since the workers are 
out of the purview of the present laws, the a mendment to the Mines Act, 
1952 becomes imperative to safeguard them.  They therefore, desire that the 
amendments to the Act may be expedited. 
Reply of  the Government 
  The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011 was tabled in the Rajya Sabha on 
23rd March 2011.  It was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Labour. The Lok Sabha Secretariat forwarded the 22 nd Report relating to 
the Mines Amendment Bill, 2011 to the Ministry.  The said Report was 
presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Raj ya Sabha on 20 th December, 
2011. The said report has been examined in the Ministry. 
 The Ministry proposed to introduce Official amendments to the said 
Bill for which the Cabinet Note was prepared and submitted to Cabinet 
Secretariat on 22.08.2012 for plac ing it before the Cabinet. During the 
discussion in the Cabinet Meeting held on 06.09.2012, Ministry of Mines 
raised objection to the issue of inclusion of definition of Foreign Company in 
the Amendment Bill, 2011, since there is no provision of granting l eases to 
the Foreign Companies under the MMDR Act.   
 As per the decision of the Cabinet dated 06.09.2012, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment was directed to discuss the issue with the Ministry 
of Mines and thereafter, a supplementary note be brought fo r the 
consideration of the Cabinet. The concerns  of the Ministry of Mines was 
sorted out and the Cabinet Note submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat on 
16.04.2013 for placing it before the Cabinet. The Cabinet considered the 
proposal in its meeting held on 09.05.2013 and decided that matter relating 

37 
 
 
to definition of owner, continuation of liability and other related provisions 
be appropriately reformulated by the Minister of Labour and Employment in 
consultation with the Minister of Communications and Inform ation 
Technology, the Minister of Coal and the Minister of Mine and the proposal 
may, thereafter be brought for consideration of the Cabinet.  
 Further action is being taken accordingly. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.33 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 
  

38 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

39 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.1)     
 
 The Committee in their 19th Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) 
of the Ministry had recommended for issuance of a Status Paper depicting 
the details of the Schemes framed by the Union Government, contribution of 
the State Governments along with the completion status of the Schemes, the 
number of beneficiaries, total expenditure incurred, State -wise and the 
reasons for non completion etc., especially in the case of Schemes in PPP 
mode.  However, the action taken replies of the Ministry stated "the 
observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance ".   The 
compliance report in the matter is still awaited from the Ministry.  The 
Committee deplore such irresponsible attitude of the Ministry, and 
therefore, reiterate that the Status Paper be issued w ithin a month of 
presentation of this Report and the reasons for delay may also be intimated 
to them. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  
 The status paper on the various Schemes being administered by 
Ministry of Labour & Employment is at Statement-4.1. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.6 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 
 

40 
 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.2)     
 
 The Committee note that the Budget Estimate for the year 2012-13 for 
plan schemes was Rs.2403.88 crore which was revised downward at the RE 
stage to Rs.2000.00 crore.  However, the Ministry could utilize only 
Rs.1463.87 crore upto 04.03.2013 which is around 60% of the Budget 
Estimates and 73% of the Revised Estimates. The Committee have been 
repeatedly impressing upon the Ministry to follow a realistic budgeting 
process and reiterate that Ministry should take corrective measures to 
ensure utilization of allocated funds so that the imp ortant schemes of the 
Ministry do not suffer. 
 
  The Committee further notes that in respect of the important 
schemes of the Ministry viz.  Skill Development Programme, Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojana and Child Labour Project, the allocated amount was 
far less than the amount sought for by the Ministry.  The Secretary informed 
that against a demand of Rs.34,914 crore for the 12th Five Year Plan the 
Planning Commission has given a only Rs.13,223 crore and asked the 
Ministry to distribute the same among vario us schemes. The Ministry also 
informed that due to such resource crunch even the major schemes of the 
Ministry could not take off and more so as a result the Planning 
Commission is even not approving the new schemes due to insufficient 
allocation. The Comm ittee fail to understand that when the Ministry have 
the authority, flexibility and discretion to distribute the funds amongst 
different schemes out of the lumpsum allocation, then they ought to know 
which scheme is to be given how much weightage. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the fund allocation for important schemes be given due 
weightage and the Ministry may also seek approval / clearance from the 
Ministry of Finance for diversion of funds from other heads where the funds 
are being surrendered du e to one reason or the other. This, in their 
considered opinion, would enable the Ministry to at least start the most 
important schemes viz. Kaushal Vikas Yojana , Skill Development and 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana.   
Reply of  the Government 
  
 The budgeting is done on realistic basis only. However, the 
involvement of other Ministries/Department such as Ministry of Urban 
Affairs (CPWD) in respect of Civil Works and that of the UPSC and SSC in 

41 
 
 
respect of appointment / recruitments leads to delay i n the process 
resulting in under utilization of the allocated budget. Efforts are being taken 
to synchronize the process through Inter -Ministerial / Departmental follow 
up. 
 Further, the  Centrally Sponsored Schemes of Ministry of Labour & 
Employment  which comprise a significant part of the outlay are dependent 
on the State Governments for execution. Due to various reasons, even after 
thorough follow-up, proposals and utilization certificates are very often not 
received in time, resulting in underutilizati on of funds. Follow up actions is 
taken through letters from Hon’ble Minister of Labour & Employment to the 
Chief Ministers / Administrators of 33 participating States / UTs. 
 High level meetings with State Labour Ministers, Principal Secretaries 
of State Government are also held at regular intervals. From time to time, 
review meetings are being held including visits to various states. Review 
meetings are held on regular basis for centrally funded institutes (CFIs). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 12 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 
 (Recommendation at Para No. 4.7)     
 The Committee also find that neither the existing penalty of Rs.500/ - 
or imprisonment for six months or both nor the proposed penalty of 
Rs.5,000/- or imprisonment upto six months or both is an effective 
deterrent in the case of violation of any of the pro visions of the Minimum 
Wages Act, 1948. The Committee, therefore, recommends that while 
considering the amendments to the Act, the punishment so prescribed need 
to be in conformity with the current price index or linked with the size of the 
establishment /  profit margin of the violator to be a deterrent in the real 
sense of the term.   
 
 

42 
 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  
 The amendment proposal to the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 was 
drafted way back in the year 2005. The proposal was placed before Central 
Advisory Board under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 which is the apex body 
for deciding policy matters relating to the Minimum Wages Act, 1948. The 
Board considered the proposal and recommended to increase the fine from 
Rs.500/- to Rs.5,000/ - for first contravention and an amount between 
Rs.5,000/- to Rs.10,000/ - in subsequent contraventions.  The Board also 
recommended enhancing the imprisonment clause from six months to one 
year for the subsequent contraventions.  
 Although the enhanced fine is also not adequate, it was considered to 
be an effective deterrent against violation of provisions under the Minimum 
Wages Act, 1948 when seen in conjunction with the provision for 
imprisonment. Moreover, since the apex body Central Advisory Board has 
already recommended the revision, it is, therefore, not considered desirable 
to revise it which would have delayed the amendment process further.  
 However, the proposal to link enhanced fine with the price index  and 
size of establishment or profit margin of the violators have been noted for 
consideration at an appropriate time. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.18 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 
  

43 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.16) 
 The Committee were further informed that on the recommendation of 
the Committee, ESIC had undertaken special drives for fresh IP mapping 
more than once during the last six months for opening of ESI Hospital at 
Firozabad, Uttar Pradesh.  As per the latest figures, the last drive was 
undertaken in August, 2012 with total of 24352 IPs in and around 
Firozabad.  As per the guidelines of ESIC, a minimum of 25000 IPs are 
required to open a ESI Hospital.  In the given circumstances, the Committee  
are sure that the number of IPs by this time would have crossed 25,000 
mark and now does meet the criteria for opening an ESI Hospital in 
Firozabad.  They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should start the 
process of setting up of an ESI Hospital at  Firozabad without any further 
delay. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the latest status of a 
proposal of setting up of ESI Medical College and hospital at Rourkela, 
Odisha and the time by which a final decision is likely to be taken. 
Reply of  the Government 
  A fresh survey was conducted in the Firozabad and Shikhohabad area 
and the total number of Insured Persons in the above areas is 26220. The 
matter is being placed at the next meeting of Employees’ State Insurance 
Corporation for consideration. 
 As regards status of proposal of setting up of ESI Medical College and 
Hospital at Rourkela, Odisha, it is submitted that a Sub -Committee was 
constituted by the Government to decide the location of Medical College and 
Hospital in Odisha.  The Report of the Sub -Committee is under 
consideration of the Government.  
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.24 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 

44 
 
 
 (Recommendation at Para No. 4.17) 
 The Committee were informed that at present the number of contract 
workers in the PSUs is approximately 18,44,224 engaged through licensed 
contractors, excluding the workers of contractors employing less than 20 
workers. The Committee find that while engaging contract workers, the 
Government’s policy on prescribed representation to SC/ST/OBC is not 
applicable. The Committee are concerned that since a huge workforce is now 
being engaged through outsourcing, the lack of stipulated representation to 
deprived sections of the society amounts to denial of their legitimate rights. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Government may explore the 
feasibility of issuing instructions/ guidelines to all concerned for giv ing due 
regard to representation of these categories while outsourcing/engaging 
Contract Labour.  
Reply of  the Government 
 The matter has been referred to Ministry of Law & Justice for advice.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.27 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H -11013/3/2013-Coord. 
dated 23.08.2013) 
 
 
 
New Delhi;              DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
December, 2013                                              CHAIRMAN,  
 Agrahayana ,1935 (Saka)  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 

45 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 19 th December, 2013 from 1500 hrs. 
to 1700 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
   Shri Dara Singh Chauhan - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Dr. Manda Jagannath 
3.    Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
4.      Shri Ratan Singh 
5.    Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
6.    Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
   Rajya Sabha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
7. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
8. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
9. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
10. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
11. Shri Rajaram 
12. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri A.K Singh    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

46 
 
 
  
2.     XX    XX   XX 
3.  XX    XX   XX 
4.  XX    XX   XX 
5.  XX    XX   XX 
6.  XX    XX   XX 
7.   XX    XX   XX 
8.  XX    XX   XX 
9.  XX    XX   XX 
 
10. The Chairman then apprised the Members about the Draft 
Reports to be considered and adopted on Action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
the Thirty-Fifth  Report of the Standing  Committee on Labour on 
the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment for the year 2013 -14’ and `The Employment 
Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Amendment 
Bill, 2013’ .  
11. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft R eports 
without any modification. 
12. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
Reports after factual verification from the concerned Ministry and 
present the Reports first to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha and 
thereafter to the Houses. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

47 
 
 
  APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
        Total Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations      19   
II. Recommendations/Observations which have  14       74%   
 been accepted by Government 
 
 (Rec. Para. Nos.4.3,4.4,4.5,4.6, 4.8,4.9,4.10, 
 4.11,4.12,4.13,4.14,4.15,4.18 and 4.19  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s reply  
         NIL        NIL
  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
 which replies of Government have not been 
 accepted by the Committee       03        16% 
  
 (Rec.  Para. Nos. 4.1,4.2  and 4.7) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which    02       10% 
 final replies of Government are of interim in  nature 
  
 (Rec. Para Nos. 4.16 and 4.17)       
          
                                         
          ---------- 
           100% 
                                     ------------ 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 Fair Wage would be a wage whose lower limit is the minimum wage 
and upper limit would vary on the basis of paying capacity of the particular 
industry. Although, this concept of Fair Wage is not being monitored, 
enforcement of minimum wages is being carried out by the Central 
Industrial Relations Machinery (CIRM) and different state enforcement 
machineries regularly. 
Norms for fixation of Minimum Wages 
The Minimum Wages Act has neither defined minimum wages nor has it laid 
down any norms/criteria for fixing the minimum wages.  Many a times, the 
‘minimum wages’ get confused with ‘fair wages’ and the ‘living wages’.  The 
Committee on Fair Wages (1948) had given the concepts of living wages, 
minimum wages and fair wages as under :- 
(i) Living wage:  Living wage should enable the wage earner to provide for 
 himself and his family not merely the bare essentials of food, clothing 
 and shelter but also a measure  of frugal comfort including education 
 of children, protection against ill health, requirements of social needs 
 and a measure of insurance against the more important contingencies 
 like old age. 
(ii) Minimum Wage: Minimum wage must provide not merely for  the bare 
 sustenance of life but for preservation of the efficiency of the worker. 
 For this purpose the minimum wage must also provide for some 
 measure of  education, medical requirements and amenities. 
(iii)  Fair wage : The Committee did not define fai r wage but it indicated 
 where it would lie in the context of the living and minimum wage.  
 While the lower limit of the fair wage must obviously be the 
 minimum wage, the upper limit is equality set by what may broadly 
 be called the capacity of the industry to pay. 

49 
 
 
 In the absence of any standard methodology, the norms recommended 
by the Indian Labour Conference, held in 1957 are taken into account while 
fixing the minimum wages.  These are as follows: -  
 3 consumption units for one earner. 
 Minimum food requirements of 2700 calories per average Indian adult. 
 Clothing requirements of 72 yards per annum per family. 
 Rent corresponding to the minimum area provided for under 
Government’s Industrial Housing Scheme. 
 Fuel, Lighting and other miscellaneous items o f expenditure to 
constitute 20% of the total minimum wage. 
 There was a judicial pronouncement also in the year 1992 when the 
Supreme Court delivered a historic Judgement in the case of Raptakos & 
Co. Vs. its workers that the children’s education, medical requirement, 
minimum recreation including festivals / ceremonies, provision for old age, 
marriage etc. should further constitute 25% of the minimum wage and used 
as a guide in fixation of minimum wages. The State Governments are 
requested from time to time  to keep the above said norms and judicial 
pronouncement in view while fixing/revising the minimum wages.   
A Working Group was set up under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 by the 
Central Advisory Board.  The Group after having visited sites of backward 
areas in States of Chhattisgarh and Odisha and in -depth analysis of the 
ground realities and detailed discussion recommended the following norms 
for fixation of minimum wages: - 
(i) The norm of 3 consumption units i.e. 2 adults plus 2 children for 
one earner. 
(ii) Minimum food requirement of 2700 calories per average Indian 
adult.  This incidentally synchronizes almost with 2668 calories of 
basket of food items worked out as per capita food consumption in 
rural area reported by NSSO (55 th Round) Consumer Expenditure 
Survey in 1999 -2000, which may be accordingly calibrated with 
reference to NSSO quinquennial Surveys.   

50 
 
 
(iii) The clothing requirement in terms of per capita expenditure as 
estimated by NSSO Consumer Expenditure Survey. 
(iv) The expenditure on fuel, lighting and miscellaneous as per ILC 
norms and expenditure on children’s education, medical 
requirement etc. as per Supreme Court Judgement should also be 
determined by the results of Consumer Expenditure Survey 
conducted by NSSO. 
(v) The minimum wages so determined using  the guidelines as 
enumerated in a) to d) above would be applicable to the unskilled 
labour each for rural area and the urban area and in respect of each 
scheduled employment. 
 The minimum wages for semi -skilled, skilled and highly skilled 
workers need not  be fixed separately as these would automatically get 
settled at relatively higher levels. 
 
 
  

51 
 
 
Statement 4.1 
Present status of the schemes of Ministry of Labour & Employment  
 
1. Mine Accidents Analysis and Modernization of Information 
Database (MAMID) (Plan Scheme) 
This is an ongoing Scheme, which was evaluated by an expert 
committee. The committee has recommended for continuation of the scheme 
in the 12 th Five Year Plan. The Competent Authority i.e. AS&FA and 
Secretary (L&E) has approved the continuati on of scheme in the 12 th Five 
Year Plan. Approved outlay of 12th Plan (2012-17) is Rupees 14.42 crore. 
 
 
2. Strengthening of Infrastructure Facilities and Core Functions of 
DGMS (SOCFOD) (Plan Scheme) 
 
This is an ongoing Scheme, which was evaluated by an expert 
Committee.  The committee has recommended for continuation of the 
scheme in the 12th Five Year Plan.  The Competent Authority i.e. AS&FA and 
Secretary (L&E) has approved the continuation of scheme in the12th Five 
Year Plan. Approved outlay of 12thPlan (2012-17) is Rupees 75 crore. 
 
3. e-Governance in Directorate General of Mines Safety      (e -DGMS) 
(New Scheme)  
 
 
A decision has been taken in the Ministry not to launch the Scheme 
as a separate independent Scheme. It has been decided with the approva l of 
the Competent Authority i.e. AS&FA and Secretary (L&E) to incorporate the 
activities of the proposed Scheme into the above mentioned existing two 
Plan Schemes of DGMS viz. “MAMID” and “SOCFOD”. Accordingly, the 
scheme has been merged into both the existing plan schemes. 
     
     The file is presently with IFD to finalize the modalities of merger of 
activities / funds proposed for this Scheme in the 12th Plan are as under:-  
         
Rs.15.00 crore into MAMID 
Rs.10.00 crore into SOCFOD 
 
  
4. Strengthening of DGFASLI Organisation and OSH in Factories, 
Ports and Docks (Plan Scheme)  
 
 
This is an ongoing Scheme, which was evaluated by an Independent 
Agency Viz. the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee. They have 

52 
 
 
recommended for continuation of the Scheme in the 12th Five Year Plan also.  
The Competent Authority i.e. AS&FA and Secretary (L&E) has approved the 
continuation of scheme in 12 th Five Year Plan. Approved outlay of 12 thPlan     
(2012-17) is Rupees 60.70 crore. 
 
5. “Development of Region al Labour   Institute,   Faridabad as 
Advanced Centre for Safety Systems in MSME and Chemical 
process” (New Scheme) 
 
The plan Scheme – Establishment of RLI Faridabad was 
continuing from 9 th, 10th & 11th Five years plans.  Now the scheme has 
been modified as “Development of Regional Labour   Institutes,   Faridabad 
as Advanced Centre for Safety Systems in MSME and Chemical process” 
with a view to include new components in the scheme.  The proposal has 
been approved by IFD which has advised to go for SFC to be chaired by 
Secretary (L&E). 
 
   Planning Commission has been requested for In -Principle approval as 
well as comments on  SFC proposal before meeting of the SFC is convened.  
The Planning Commission ma de certain observations which have been duly 
replied.  The matter is presently pending with the Planning Commission. 
However, since a representative from the Planning Commission would also 
be invited to the SFC meeting, they can make their observations/com ments 
at the meeting itself. 
 
Approved outlay of 12thPlan (2012-17) is Rupees 14.50 crore. 
 
 
6. Establishment of Regional Labour Institute, Shillong (New 
Scheme)  
 
IFD has advised that the SFC meeting would be held only after the 
land survey and acquisition of land from the concerned State Government is 
completed and the cost estimates of building plans are firmed up. 
 
Ministry has taken up the matter with the State Government of 
Meghalaya for acquisition of land.  
 
Meanwhile, In -Principle approval of the Planning Commission has 
been sought. The Planning Commission made certain observations which 
have been duly replied.  The matter is presently pending with the Planning 
Commission. 
 
The SFC under the chairmanship of Secretary (L&E) would be 
convened only after acquisition of land and the cost of the building plan are 
firmed up and ‘in principle’ approval of Planning Commission is received. 
Approved outlay of 12thPlan (2012-17) is Rupees 8.10 crore. 
 

53 
 
 
7.      Identification, Elimination and Control of Silicosis and Asbestosis 
in India (New Scheme) 
 
IFD earlier advised not to proceed with the proposal as an 
independent Scheme. The matter was again examined and IFD/ AS&FA has 
recommended to run the proposed new Scheme as a component of existing 
Scheme of DGFASLI.  viz.  ‘Strengthening of DGFASLI Organisation  and 
OSH in Factories, Ports and Docks’.  
 
Approved outlay of 12thPlan (2012-17) is Rupees 3.99 crore. 
 
8. National Policy on Child Labour 
A National Policy on Child Labour (NCLP) was announced in August, 
1987 to address the complex issue of Child Labour in a comprehensive and 
focused manner.  The three major elements of the policies are as under: 
 Legal Action Plan; 
 Focus on general development programmes for the benefit of the 
families of the Child Labour; and 
 Project-based action in areas of high concentration of Child Labour. 
 As part of the project based Plan of Action, Government had initiated 
the National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme in 1988 to rehabilitate 
working children in 12 child labour endemic districts of the country.   
 
EXPANSION OF NCLPs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objective of the Scheme: 
 
 This is the major Central Sector Scheme with 100% central grant from 
planned budget of the Ministry of Labour & Employment to the NCLP 
Project Society headed by District Magistrate, who in turn allocates the 
funds to the child labour special schools run by the Project Societies / 
NGOs / VOs for the rehabilitation of child labour. 
 
 The Scheme seeks to adopt a sequential approach with focus on 
rehabilitation of children working in hazardous occupations & 
processes in the first instance.   
Year Number of NCLPs Sanctioned Total  
1988 12 12 
IX Plan  88 100 
X Plan 150 250 
XI Plan  21 (INDUS) 271 

54 
 
 
 Under the Scheme, survey of child labour engaged in hazardous 
occupations & processes has been conducted.  
 The identified children are to be withdrawn from these occupations & 
processes and then put into special schools in order to enable them to 
be mainstreamed into formal schooling system.  
 Project Societies at the district level are fu lly funded for opening up of 
special schools/Rehabilitation Centres for the rehabilitation of child 
labour.   
 The special schools/Rehabilitation Centres provide: 
 
 Non-formal/bridge education 
 
 Skilled/vocational training 
 
 Mid Day Meal 
 
 Stipend @ Rs.150/- per child per month.  
 
 Health care facilities through a doctor appointed for a group of 
20 schools. 
The Target group : The project societies are required to conduct survey to 
identify children working in hazardous occupations and processe s. These 
children will then form the target group for the project society. Of the 
children identified those in the age group 5 -8 years will have to be 
mainstreamed directly to formal educational system through the SSA. 
Working children in the age group of 9-14 years will have to be rehabilitated 
through NCLP schools established by the Project Society.  
Project Implementation: The entire project is required to be implemented 
through a registered society under the Chairmanship of administrative head 
of the di strict, namely, District Magistrate/ Collector / Deputy 
Commissioner of the District. Members of the society may be drawn from 
concerned Government Departments, representatives of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions, NGOs, Trade Unions, etc.  
Funding pattern : The projects have been taken up in the Central Sector, 
the entire funding is done by the Central Government (Ministry of Labour & 
Employment). Funds are released to the concerned Project Societies 
depending upon the progress of project activities.  
Present Status of NCLP Scheme:  As on date, the Scheme is in operation in 
266 districts in the country and running about 7000 special schools under 
NCLP scheme.  

55 
 
 
Beneficiaries under NCLP Scheme 
At present approximately three lakh children are enrolled in the NCLP 
Schools. As on date about 9.7 lakh children have been mainstreamed into 
the formal education system since inception of the NCLP Scheme.  During 
the last three years approx. 3.2 lakh children have been mainstreamed 
through NCLP Scheme.  Further, with the persi stent effort of the Ministry 
and other welfare schemes of the Government, the number of working 
children has been reduced from 90.75 lakh  (as per 2004 -05 NSSO survey) 
to 49.85 lakh ( as per 2009 -10 NSSO Survey) which is a reduction of about 
45%in the number of working children.    
 
The State-wise details of Grants released under NCLP during last five 
years is as under: - 
(Rupees in Lakhs) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of  
State 
2008-
09 
2009-
10 
2010-
11 
2011-
12 
2012-
13  
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
1056.31 399.52 705.69 1013.61 821.57 
2.  Assam 352.19 616.68 378.55 891.57 728.77 
3.  Bihar 2130.96 1661.44 727.43 1338.49 1131.42 
4.  Chhattisgarh 603.80 293.99 364.82 620.44 824.04 
5.  Gujarat 250.17 169.64 165.01 67.12 92.98 
6.  Haryana 156.39 63.28 186.77 99.10 261.37 
7.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
11.41 0 25.66 50.60 33.00 
8.  Jharkhand 354.29 155.95 47.78 391.63 388.35 
9.  Karnataka 404.94 447.03 64.47 220.74 371.63 
10.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
838.68 560.92 608.25 1332.28 911.07 
11.  Maharashtra 514.12 419.39 433.32 973.17 780.38 
12.  Nagaland 28.34 21.43 40.87 36.55 96.38 
13.  Orissa 1109.14 862.56 1167.78 1374.26 1536.74 
14.  Punjab 329.88 127.22 130.59 208.82 242.05 
15.  Rajasthan 1510.60 371.58 395.64 436.53 323.69 
16.  Tamil Nadu 348.71 449.53 504.28 854.26 733.10 
17.  Uttar Pradesh 2307.92 1627.43 1772.83 1585.40 1225.51 
18.  Uttarakhand 0 0 0 26.40 0 
19.  West Bengal 1866.97 1015.35 1537.63 2204.98 1707.71 
 
 
9. ‘Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana’ 
 The ‘ Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana’,  providing for smart card 
based cashless health insurance, including maternity benefit, cover of 
Rs.30,000/- per annum on family floater basis to BPL families (a unit of five) 
in the unorganised sector, was formally launched on 1 st October, 2007. The 
scheme became operational w.e.f. 01.04.2008. Government of India 
contributes 75% of the annual premium. State Governments contribute 

56 
 
 
25%. In case of North -East region and Jammu & Kashmir, the premium is 
shared in the ratio of 90:10. The beneficiary family pays Rs.30 per annum 
per family as registration/renewal fee.  Administrative cost is borne by the 
State Governments. Transportation cost of Rs.100/ - per visit is given to the 
beneficiaries.  
 
 During the course of implementation, apart from BPL families , RSBY 
coverage has been extended to following additional categories:- 
 
  (i). Building & Other Construction Workers 
  (ii). Railway porters  
  (iii). Street Vendors 
          (iv).  MGNREGA workers who have worked for more than fifteen 
days during preceding financial year, 
  (v). Beedi workers 
  (vi).    Domestic workers.  
   
Recently Government has extended (approved on 4.6.2013 by the 
Cabinet) the coverage of RSBY to: 
 Sanitation Workers,  
 Mine Workers,  
 Rickshaw pullers,  
 Rag pickers and 
 Auto/Taxi drivers.  
 
The scheme is being implemented in 28 States and Union Territories 
covering 459 districts. As on 17.06.2013, more than 3.52 crore smart 
cards have been issued. More than 54.56 persons have visited the hospital 
as on 17.06.2013 and more than Rs.2485.83 cror e have been paid by the 
insurance companies as claim amount upto 17.06.2013. 
 
As on 17.06.2013, 28 States/ Union Territories , namely, Andhra 
Pradesh, Assam , Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &  Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, Manipur, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, 
West Bengal, Puducherry and Chandigarh Administration are implementing 
the scheme. The State of Rajasthan is implementing RSBY only to 
MGNREGA workers, street vendors and beedi workers (not for BPL category). 
Andhra Pradesh has started rolling out of smart cards for extending RSBY to 
Building and other Construction Workers in one district . Sikkim is also in 
the process  of implementation of the scheme. Tamil Nadu and Goa had 
participated in the scheme earlier but now have launched their own health 
insurance schemes. 
 
During the year 2013 -2014, Budget allocation of Rs.1265 Crore has 
been mad e for RSBY. Year -wise and State wise central share of premium 
released under RSBY is as under:-.  
 

57 
 
 
Release of Premium under Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (Rupees in crore) 
 
  Amount of Central Share Released 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State 
2008-
09 
2009-
10 
2010-
11 
2011-
12 
2012-
13 
Total  
01. Gujarat 22.56 8.77 34.31 112.02 53.49 231.15 
02. Punjab 1.60 5.94 5.88 4.87 8.88 27.17 
03. Tamil Nadu 1.61 2.69 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.30 
04. Himachal 
Pradesh 
1.75 1.64 6.81 5.58 10.53 26.31 
05. Haryana  13.43 27.10 18.10 27.30 18.23 104.16 
06. Bihar 4.75 31.98 55.86 150.19 245.18 487.96 
07. Kerala 13.71 18.34 52.69 65.93 73.69 224.36 
08. West Bengal 2.52 20.08 50.63 164.28 210.27 447.78 
09. Maharashtra 0.89 37.19 33.93 59.65 35.02 166.72 
10. Uttarakhand 0.00 2.43 3.67 6.92 9.05 22.07 
11. Uttar Pradesh 29.73 69.10 162.34 191.70 64.44 517.31 
12. Jharkhand 5.24 8.91 11.49 23.66 56.68 105.98 
13. Chandigarh 0.00 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.00 0.40 
14. Delhi 2.15 1.47 7.46 3.90 3.86 18.84 
15. Chhattisgarh 0.00 16.06 22.52 69.28 36.16 144.02 
16. Assam 0.00 0.76 7.43 12.82 6.78 27.79 
17. Nagaland 0.00 2.40 2.30 3.86 6.33 14.89 
18. Tripura 0.00 6.68 6.80 6.36 18.42 38.26 
19. Meghalaya 0.00 0.77 1.24 4.43 2.27 8.71 
20. Goa 0.00 0.00 0.15 0.00 0.00 0.15 
21. Karnataka 0.00 0.00 4.92 0.96 45.14 51.02 
22. Odisha 0.00 0.00 20.44 3.64 76.53 100.61 
23. Mizoram 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.52 5.39 8.91 
24. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.16 1.16 
25. Manipur 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.06 3.37 5.43 
26. Puducherry 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.29 0.29 
27. Madhya Pradesh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.05 
28. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.43 2.43 
 Total 99.94 262.51 509.17 922.97 993.64 2788.23 
  

58 
 
 
10. Strengthening of Adjudication Machinery and Holding of Lok 
Adalats 
 
The Plan Scheme “Strengthening of Adjudication Machinery and 
Holding of Lok Adalats” is a Central Sector Scheme.  Under this Plan 
Scheme 12 Central Government Industrial Tribunal -cum-Labour Courts 
(CGITs) have been set up under the provisions of Industrial  Disputes Act, 
1947 at various locations all over India. Of these, one CGIT at Guwahati is 
situated in North-Eastern Region.  
 
The Scheme is an ongoing scheme and is being continued through 
various five year Plans of Central Government. The objective of th e Scheme 
is adjudication of the Industrial Disputes arising in the central sphere which 
is a continuous process, therefore, status on completion or non -completion 
of scheme is not relevant to this scheme.    
 
11.  
 
(a)  Machinery for better conciliation and up -gradation of office 
infrastructure at CLC(C) and RLCs (C) 
 
(b)  Improvement & Strengthening of Training Wing of Central Labour 
Service 
 
These schemes are related to opening of offices in remote areas for 
better conciliation service, better supervisi on and enforcement of Labour 
and to provide in house training on regular basis to the officers of CLS and 
LEOs with a view to enhance their skills and knowledge in various areas of 
their functioning and effective discharge of their duties. 
Objective: 
 To au gment machinery for investigation, mediation and Conciliation 
Service in industrial disputes to meet the increasing intake. 
 
 Strengthening the enforcement machinery which was considered quite 
inadequate considering the number of establishments falling in t he 
central sphere. 
 
 To have better and close supervision over the enforcement work. 
 

59 
 
 
 The objective of the scheme is to update infrastructure facilities to  
provide computers, fax and photo copiers to the offices set up in the 
remote areas so that they coul d render conciliation service and 
enforcement of Labour Laws effectively. 
 
 To provide in house training on regular basis to the officers of CLS 
and LEOs 
 
Under this scheme, it was proposed to construct office 
accommodation, residential complexes for the field offices. It was also 
proposed to provide combined office complex for CLC(C) office and RLC(C), 
New Delhi. Further it is proposed to provide Computers, Xerox machines 
and other office equipments to field offices. The computers and other office 
equipments are being provided to field offices in a phased manner depending 
upon the allocation of funds. 
 
The officers are posted in the following three streams: 
 Central Industrial Relations Machinery 
 DGLW’s organization 
 Welfare Officers under Factories Act in I ndustrial establishments 
under the control of Central Government. 
 
The officers of Central Labour Service are required to perform diverse 
functions as per the responsibilities entrusted to each stream. Since the 
officers of CLS are posted from one stream t o another, a need is felt to 
provide effective training which would also include practical on the job 
training in order to equip them with skills, knowledge and aptitude to enable 
them to perform their functions efficiently and effectively in each of the 
stream. 
The name of the Scheme after merger is “ Machinery for better 
conciliation prevention mediation, effective enforcement of labour 
laws, construction of combined office complex for the office of CLCs 
and RLC(C) New Delhi and providing training of CLS officers”. 
Expenditure (Rupees in Lakhs) 
Component  2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
Salary 600.00 650.00 700.00 700.00 700.00 
Non-Salary 258.00 335.00 436.00 436.00 436.00 
Civil Work 200.00 200.00 1366.66 1366.66 1366.66 
 

60 
 
 
Expenditure (Rupees in Lakhs) 
Component  2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
Training of 
CLS Officers 
0.60 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.77 
 
12. Labour and Employment Statistical System 
The details of the 'Labour & Employment Statistical System' (LESS) 
being implemented by the Labour Bureau along with the current status of 
its various components are given in the 'Brief Note on Plan Scheme of 
Labour Bureau' below. Further, as the Scheme is wholly financed by the 
Central Government, there is no fin ancial contribution on the part of the 
State Governments in this Scheme. As regards the number of beneficiaries, 
it is stated that apart from playing a important role in determination of 
dearness allowance of Government employees and minimum wages of 
workers, the data generated by various surveys of the Labour Bureau have 
been found to be immensely useful by policy makers, planners as well as 
researchers. Lastly, the total Actual Expenditure incurred on 
implementation of the LESS Scheme in 2012-13 was 15.00 crore. 
The Scheme is a Central Sector Scheme having the following 
components: - 
1. Consumer Price Index numbers for Industrial Workers on base year 
2001=100 (CPI-IW). 
2. Rural Labour Enquiry (RLE) (including construction of Consumer 
Price Index numbers for Agricultural and Rural Labourers). 
3. Annual Survey of Industries (sample sector) 
4. Occupational Wage Survey (OWS). 
5. Socio-economic Surveys of different Segments of Labour (SESDSL). 
(i) Working and Living conditions of Labour belonging to SC / ST 
communities. 
(ii) Socio-economic conditions of Women workers in industry. 
(iii) Working and living conditions of workers in unorganized sector 
of industries / employment. 
(iv) All-India survey on evaluation of Minimum Wages Act, 1948. 
 
Other Important Surveys: 
(i) Quarterly Survey on employment in India. 
(ii) All-India Survey on Employment-Unemployment. 
 
6.     Modernization of Machine Tabulation Unit (MTU). 
 

61 
 
 
 The objectives and current status of the various components of 
Labour & Employment Statistical System as on 17.07.2013 are as follows: - 
1. CONSUMER PRICE INDEX NUMBERS FOR INDUSTRIAL WORKERS 
(CPI-IW). 
 
OBJECTIVES 
The various objectives of compilation of CPI-IW are: 
 Its utilization in the determination of dearness allowance being paid to 
millions of Central/State Government employees as also to the 
workers in the industrial sectors of the economy. 
 Its utilization in fixation and revision of minimum wages in scheduled 
employments.  
 For measuring inflation.  
 Other policy formulations.  
 
      The Current CPI (IW) series is being compiled on the base 2001=100. 
This base was introduced w.e.f January, 2006. Indices for a month are 
released on the last working day of the succeeding month. The Coverage of 
CPI (IW) extends to 78 centers all ove r the country. A total of 289 markets 
are covered for the collection of retail price data. The number of items in the 
index basket is 370.  
 
CURRENT STATUS 
Till date, Labour Bureau has compiled and released the Consumer 
Price Index Numbers for Industrial W orkers on base: 2001=100 up to the 
month of May, 2013. 
 
2. RURAL LABOUR ENQUIRY (INCLUDING CONSTRUCTION OF 
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX NUMBERS FOR AGRICULTURAL AND 
RURAL LABOURERS, CPI - AL/RL). 
 
OBJECTIVES:  The main objectives of Rural Labour Enquiry are: 
 To provide up to date serial data on important socio -economic 
characteristics of Rural Labour in general and Agricultural Labour in 
particular in the form of five quinquennial reports. 
 To provide data on consumption expenditure for the purpose of 
derivation of wei ghting diagram for updating the series of CPI 
Numbers separately for Agricultural and Rural Labourers. 

62 
 
 
 To serve as a guiding factor in the fixation and revision of minimum 
wages in the scheduled employments in rural areas under the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948. 
 To collect, compile and publish wage rate data in respect of 18 
agricultural and non -agricultural occupations which is of immense 
use in drawing up appropriate policies and programmes, conducting 
cost studies and estimating the National / State income.  
 
Under Rural Labour Enquiry, NSSO collects the data, quinquennially 
based on which Labour Bureau brings out five analytical reports on different 
aspects of Rural and Agricultural Labour Households. Besides, NSSO also 
collects data on prices and wage rates o n regular monthly basis from 600 
sample villages. Labour Bureau utilizes the Price data for compilation of CPI 
Numbers for Agricultural and Rural Labourers with base 1986 -87=100. The 
Daily wage rates are published in Indian Labour Journal on regular monthly 
basis w.e.f. April, 1998. 
CURRENT STATUS 
 Labour Bureau has compiled & released CPI Numbers for Agricultural 
& Rural Labourers (Base 1986-87=100) upto the month of May, 2013. 
 Wage rate statistics have been compiled upto the month of April, 2013 
and published in the Indian Labour Journal, a monthly publication of 
Labour Bureau. 
 The Latest round of RLE for which data has been made available to 
Labour Bureau is 2004 -05. Based on this, the Bureau has released 
the following reports.  
 
 RLE (2004 -2005) repo rt on “Employment & Unemployment of 
Rural Labour Households”. 
 RLE (2004 -2005) report on “Wages & Earnings of Rural Labour 
Households”. 
 RLE (2004 -05) report on “Indebtedness among Rural Labour 
Households”. 
 RLE (2004-05) report on “General Characteristics of  Rural Labour 
Households” has been finalized and in the process of printing. 
 RLE (2004 -2005) report on “Consumption Expenditure of Rural 
Labour Households” has been finalized. 
 
3. COLLECTION OF LABOUR STATISTICS UNDER THE ANNUAL 
SURVEY OF INDUSTRIES (EXTENSION TO SAMPLE SECTOR). 
 
OBJECTIVES:  The main objectives of ASI (Sample Sector) are: 

63 
 
 
 To build series of data base on Employment, Absenteeism, Labour 
Turnover, Earnings and Labour Cost in Manufacturing Sector not 
covered under the Census Sector. 
 To d isseminate information and analyze various components of 
Labour Cost such as Wage/Salary, Bonus, Social Security and Staff 
Welfare Cost in this sector. 
 To provide comprehensive, factual and systematic data on different 
aspects of labour for future planning and policy formulation. 
 
For Annual survey of Industries (ASI), Data is being collected by NSSO 
and Labour Bureau compiles and disseminates data collected under the 
Labour Part i.e. Block E of Part I and Part -II of ASI schedule, which includes 
data on Absenteeism, Labour Turnover, Labour Employment, and Man days 
scheduled to work, Man days worked and various components of Labour 
Cost. Statistics collected under the scheme is supplied to India office of ILO 
and also presented in Indian Labour Year Book bein g brought out by the 
Labour Bureau every year. 
CURRENT STATUS: - Report of Statistics on Employment & Labour Cost 
(Volume I) and ‘Absenteeism, Labour Turnover, Employment & Labour Cost’ 
(Volume II) for the year 2009-10 have been released. 
 
4.  OCCUPATIONAL WAGE SURVEY 
OBJECTIVES: Under Occupational Wage Survey (OWS), Occupational wage 
data are collected in respect of workers in selected Plantations, Mines and 
Manufacturing Industries at periodic intervals, so as to facilitate generation 
of an  up to-date data base. The main objectives of OWS are: 
 To obtain occupation -wise data on employment, wage rates and 
dearness allowance for building up base year weights for updating the 
base of Wage Rate Index Numbers. 
 
 To obtain data on different components of pay roll earnings for 
different occupations for scientific studies of inter -industry and intra-
industry differentials in earnings in Plantation, Mining & 
Manufacturing Industries. 
 
CURRENT STATUS  The sixth round of OWS covering 56 industries is in 
progress. Under t his round the following reports relating to 37 industries 
have been released: 
 The report on four service sector industries 
 The report on three plantations (tea, coffee and rubber). 
 The report on tea processing industry. 
 The report on four mining (Coal Mine s, Iron Ore Mines, Manganese 
Mines and Oil Mines) Industries. 

64 
 
 
 The report in respect of five Textiles (Cotton, Woolen, Silk, Synthetic 
and Jute Industries. 
 The report on Textile Garment Industry. 
 The report in respect of Ten Engineering Industries. 
 The report in respect of Nine Engineering Industries. 
 
5.    SOCIO -ECONOMIC SURVEYS OF DIFFERENT SEGMENTS OF 
LABOUR (SESDSL) 
 
OBJECTIVES The SESDSL aims at: 
 Conducting  surveys on an All –India basis so as to generate and 
disseminate data for formulation of me aningful policies aimed at 
ameliorating the working and living conditions of SC/ST workers, 
workers in the unorganised sector and women workers.  
 Evaluating the implementation of Minimum Wages Act, 1948 in different 
employments, both in organised and unorganized sector. 
 Studying the industry wise trends in wages, employment, skill 
requirements, social security, etc. of the target groups following the 
liberalisation/globalization of Indian economy. 
 
    The Bureau strives to ensure that the collected informa tion is 
comprehensive, useable and relevant for policy making.  
CURRENT STATUS 
Socio-Economic Conditions of Women Workers:  So far, 21 surveys have 
been conducted under the segment and all the reports thereon released. The 
last survey was conducted in the plantation industry. 
 
Working and Living Conditions of Workers in Unorganised Sector of 
Industries/Employments: So far, 31 surveys have been conducted and all 
the reports have been released. The latest survey was carried out in the 
Leather Industry and report thereon was released.  
 
Working   and   Living Conditions of   Labour   belonging to     SC/ST 
Communities: So far, Labour Bureau has conducted 9 Scheduled Castes 
workers and 9 Scheduled Tribes workers surveys.  The last ST survey was 
conducted in Scheduled Tribes belt of Kalahandi, Bolangir & Korapat (KBK) 
districts of Orissa in the month of Sept., 2009. The report on the same has 
been released. 
 
Studies on Evaluation of Implementation the Minimum Wages Act, 
1948:  So far, 27 such studies have been cond ucted and all the reports 
released.  The last two studies were conducted in “Stone Breaking and Stone 
Crushing” employment in Gujarat and Karnataka, reports on which were 
released. 

65 
 
 
Other Important Surveys 
(a) Quick Employment Surveys on Impact of Global Ec onomic 
Slowdown on Employment in India 
 
On the basis of a specific direction received from the M/O Labour & 
Employment, Labour Bureau has been conducting “Quarterly Quick 
Employment Surveys” on a continuous basis to assess the impact of 
economic slowdown o n employment in India in the selected sectors.  The 
first survey was conducted in the month of January, 2009 for the quarter 
Oct.-Dec., 2008.  So far seventeen such surveys have been conducted and 
reports thereon submitted to the Ministry. The seventeenth quarterly quick 
employment survey for the period of Jan - Mar, 2013 was conducted in the 
month of April, 2013. At overall level of the sectors combined, employment 
increased by 1.07 lakh during the period of January-March, 2013. 
 
 
(b) Employment and Unemployment surveys  
 
Main source of data on employment -unemployment in the country so 
far have been the surveys conducted by NSSO on a quinquennial basis. 
However with a view to have such data at regular annual interval, the 
Ministry of La bour & Employment directed Labour Bureau to undertake 
nation-wide survey every year. In compliance of this directive, Labour 
Bureau has been conducting annual Employment -Unemployment Survey 
(EUS) with the prime objective of providing data on employment and  
unemployment at regular annual interval. 
 
The first EUS for the year 2009 -10 was conducted during the year 
2010 across 28 States/UTs by covering 300 districts. About 46,000 
household schedules were canvassed. The report on the first EUS was 
released in September 2010.  
 
The second Annual Employment -Unemployment Survey for the year 
2010-11 has been conducted in all the States/UTs by covering all the 
districts of the country.  A total sample of about 1,28,298 households is 
covered during the second survey. Processing of data was completed and the 
report was released in July, 2012. 
 
The Third Annual Employment-Unemployment Survey 2012-13 with a 
moving reference period has been launched from October, 2012 and is in 
progress. This survey is also being conducted in all the States/UTs by 
covering all the districts. A sample size of about 1,30,000 household 
schedules are proposed to be covered in the third round. The report is likely 
is to be released shortly. 
 
 
 

66 
 
 
6.   MODERNISATION OF MACHINE TABULATION UNIT (1978) 
 
The main objectives of the component are: 
 Computerisation of all the schemes of the Bureau in a phased 
manner. 
 Implementation of National E-Governance Plan (NEGP) of the Govt. of 
India. 
 Regular updation and Maintenance of Labour Bureau’s website.  
 
CURRENT STATUS:  Website of Labour Bureau both in English and Hindi, 
is being updated regularly.  
 
 
7.  IMPROVEMENT OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT STATISTICAL 
SYSTEM 
 
(A)  Base Updation of CPI-IW Index 
 
           The objective of updation of base year of the CPI (IW) is to accurately 
reflect changes in the consumption pattern of industrial workers over time.  
The CPI (IW), on scientific lines, was first introduced with base 1960=100 
which was updated on 1982=100. Last revision updated the base to 
2001=100.  The ne ed for frequent revision of the base on account of fast 
changing consumption pattern of the target group has been reiterated at 
various platforms such as International Labour Organisation, National 
Statistical Commission, National Commission on Labour and also Technical 
Advisory Committee on Statistics of Prices and Cost of Living.  To ensure the 
capturing of latest consumption pattern of the target group, it is proposed to 
further update the base of current series on base 2001=100 to a recent 
period. 
CURRENT STATUS 
           The proposal has been approved by SFC and IFD of the Ministry. 
Preliminary work has been initiated by the Labour Bureau and data on 
employment by industry codes is being collected. Besides this, the process 
to fill up the posts on cont ract basis recruitment staff sanctioned under the 
scheme is in advanced stage. First standing Tripartite Committee Meeting 
under the scheme was held on 02.07.2013 at Ministry level and the scheme 
for base updation of CPI-IW Index series launched. 
(B)  Base Updation of CPI (AL/RL) 
 
           The objectives of updation of base year of the CPI (AL/RL) are: 
 To reflect changes in consumption pattern of agricultural and rural 
labourers over time. The CPI (AL/RL) with scientific base was first 
introduced with base 1960 -61=100 which was updated to 1986 -
87=100.  

67 
 
 
 The index serves as a guiding factor in the fixation  and revision of 
minimum wages in scheduled employments in rural areas under the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948.  
 
           The need for frequent revision of the base on account of fast 
changing consumption pattern of rural and agricultural labour has been 
reiterated at various platforms such as International Labour Organisation, 
National Statistical Commission, National Labour Commission and also 
Technical Advisory Committee on Statistics of Prices and Cost of Living.  To 
ensure the gap between the two series i s not too large, it is proposed to 
further update the base to the new preferred base 2009-2010=100. 
CURRENT STATUS 
 In the review meeting on Labour Bureau activities held on 
23.04.2013, the Secretary (L&E) suggested that Base updation of AL / RL -
2004-05=100  and Wage Rate Index 2006 -10 may be taken up and included 
in the EFC Memorandum of Labour Bureau activities.  
 
(C)  Base updation of Wage Rate Indices (WRI). 
 
Presently Labour Bureau is compiling WRI in respect of industries with 
1963-65=100 as the base.  The base updation of WRI assumes importance 
in light of the following developments that have taken place over the years. 
 Many new important industries have emerged, which need to be 
covered   under Wage Rate Index. 
 The occupational pattern has under gone significant changes in post 
liberalisation era resulting in emergence of many new occupations and 
disappearance of many old ones at the same time. 
 Most of the existing sample units have lost their representation due to 
closure of industrial units, imp rovement in technology, fall in 
employment and emergence of new units in different industries.  
Therefore, to increase the coverage of industries and occupations and 
also to make Wage Rate Index truly representative of industrial 
structure of the economy, it is necessary to revise and update its base. 
 
CURRENT STATUS 
 
   The activities under this component could not be taken up during the 
Eleventh Plan essentially due to substantial additional work relating to 
Quarterly Employment surveys and Annual Employm ent-Unemployment 
survey entrusted to the Bureau. In the review meeting on Labour Bureau 
activities held on 23.04.2013, the Secretary (L&E) suggested that Base 
updation of AL / RL -2004-05=100  and Wage Rate Index 2006 -10 may be 
taken up and included in the  EFC Memorandum of Labour Bureau 
activities.  

68 
 
 
(D)  Improvement of Labour Statistics – Training-cum-Liaison Scheme 
OBJECTIVES         
 To ensure timeliness, accuracy, relevancy, reliability and quality of 
data. 
 To achieve uniformity of concepts and definitio ns so as to remove all 
ambiguities to ensure clarity of the terms and concepts in historical 
data. 
 Switch over to automation by adopting data collection, processing, 
presentation and dissemination of data/information by internet, e -
mailing, fax and compute rs, to train the personnel of the State and 
Central agencies involved in collections and compilation of Labour 
Statistics etc. 
 
CURRENT STATUS 
The activities under this component could not been taken up so far 
and are proposed to be pursued during the 12th plan. 
 
(E) Human Resource Development 
OBJECTIVES 
 To update / upgrade the knowledge and skill of the officers and officials 
of Labour Bureau; to identify the gaps in availability and requirements of 
skills-managerial as well as technical. 
 To fill-up the same by arranging workshops/seminars/training programs; 
to improve the techniques and methods of data collection with regard to 
price and Labour Statistics by providing training to Price Collectors/Price 
Supervisors and other State Government officials engag ed in collection of 
price and other Labour Statistics.  
 To update/upgrade the knowledge and skill of the officers in the field. 
CURRENT STATUS: - The activities under this component could not been 
taken up so far and are proposed to be pursued during the 12th plan. 
 
(F)  Creation of Management Information System including 
Upgradation of In-House Printing Facility 
Modernisation of Machine Tabulation Unit (MMTU) has been an 
ongoing plan scheme effective since 1965. It is a well established plan 
activity cateri ng to the needs of Bureau’s tabulation work. In the recent 
study, SIU has recommended MMTU as a separate plan activity.  SIU has 

69 
 
 
found full justification for MMTU activity and thus has recommended it as a 
separate activity.  The main job under MTU is the t abulation of data of 
existing activities of the Bureau and supply the tabulated data to the users. 
Computerization of Bureau’s activities comes under the purview of MMTU 
scheme.  
 OBJECTIVES 
 Set up an internet which would be connecting all the PCs using hi gh 
speed LAN.  
 To put the data on MIS after dissemination with the help of various 
divisions of Bureau compiling the data under plan and non -plan 
scheme of the Bureau.  
 To make the Bureau’s website more interactive so that users could get 
more useful information.  
 To provide a link to Ministry of Labour & Employment at New Delhi of 
MIS for easy access to Bureaus’ data. All attached and subordinate 
offices of the Ministry will also be linked to MIS system. 
CURRENT STATUS The activities under this component could not been 
taken up so far and are proposed to be pursued during the 12th plan. 
(G)  Creation of Infrastructural Facilities – Office Building 
 Labour Bureau has all India network with its headquarters at 
Chandigarh and a major Wing at Shimla besides regional offices at Chennai, 
Kanpur, Kolkata and Ahmedabad with a sub -regional office at Mumbai. The 
Chandigarh office came into being in the year 19 71 by shifting a part of the 
office from Shimla. Due to shortage of space, the Chandigarh office is 
located at two places at Chandigarh in a rented accommodation in Sector -
17, and in Kendriya Sadan, Sector-9. The working of Labour Bureau is such 
that it ha s to do continuous interaction with various state departments, 
organizations such as NSSO, CSO, various govt. departments, state 
governments etc.  It also organizes training programs for different target 
groups viz. international trainees under ISEC, ISS/I ES probationers, central 
training programs for state govt. officials, price collectors and price 
supervisors etc. The area available for library, store, printing unit, record 
room etc. is quite inadequate. The present Committee Room, used for 
organizing meetings/workshops and regular trainings, has limited capacity.  
A guest house facility is a necessity for dignitaries from various international 
organizations like ILO, US Bureau of Labour Statistics, IMF, senior officers 
of Labour Ministry and other govt. departments visiting Labour Bureau from 
time to time.  It is also proposed to acquire own buildings at other regional 
offices viz. Kanpur, Ahmedabad and sub -regional office at Mumbai in due 
course.  
CURRENT STATUS 

70 
 
 
 Under the component – 'Creation of Infras tructure facilities – Office 
Building', construction of Office Building in Sector 38 (West), Chandigarh, 
construction of boundary wall has been completed. Revised building plan, 
as per the new guidelines, which was submitted by the CPWD has been 
approved by the Chandigarh Administration. The CPWD has also submitted 
to Labour Bureau, the revised cost estimates of the Office Building. SFC 
Note on the activity was submitted to the Ministry to expedite construction 
of office building as Hon'ble Home Minister in  a meeting of Inter -State 
Council, had asked Labour Bureau to hand over the vacant possession of 
the J&K Govt. Building occupied by it within 18 months. Secretary (L&E) 
had convened a meeting of concerned officers on 3 rd January 2013 to sort 
out the issues  related to the construction of office building of Labour 
Bureau. It was decided that as a special case, the approval of finance 
Ministry may be sought. Accordingly, Ministry had sent the request for 
sanction to Finance Ministry and in reply Finance Minist ry expressed its 
inability to treat it as a special case as it is a part of Umbrella Scheme titled 
“Labour & Employment Statistical System (LESS)”, which will only be 
considered in the EFC meeting. Accordingly Secretary (L&E) has requested 
Chief Secretary,  Government of J&K,  to extend the tenure of rent of J&K 
Building till the construction of the new Labour Bureau office, even with a 
revised rent as may be assessed by the CPWD. 
 
13. DEVELOPMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
This is an ongoing scheme formulate d on the directives of Planning 
Commission for making a provision of 2 -3% of the plan funds for 
programmes/schemes relating to Information Technology. This scheme 
intends to initiate a drive towards improving computerization in various 
programmes of the Mi nistry and to improve their efficacy. The progress of 
scheme is being regularly monitored by Senior Officers. There is an IT 
Manager to assist, manage, plan, execute, and review the Scheme. The IT 
Manager also ensures that uniformity of standards and devel opment tools 
are used in the development of application modules in the Ministry. 
 
14. Grants-in-Aid to research and academic institutions, voluntarily 
organizations and non -governmental organizations for 
undertaking research in approved labour related matters 
 
Under this scheme, grant is provided to deserving research and 
academic institutions, voluntarily organizations, NGOS on the merits of the 
proposals examined and recommended by the respective subject matter 
divisions in the Ministry.  This scheme was started in 1995-96. 
 Since its inception, sixty four research studies in the areas of labour 
welfare, social security, industrial relations, enforcement of minimum 

71 
 
 
wages, employment services and training have been completed.  Presently, 
twelve research studies are in pipeline. 
 Under this scheme, two types of proposals, internal and external are 
considered for funding to the organizations.  Internal proposals are such 
proposals which are taken up on the demand of the subject matter divisions 
in the Ministry .  External proposals are those proposals which are 
submitted suo-motto by the institutions/organizations. 
 The scheme was last modified in September 2008 raising the ceiling 
on cost per study to Rs.6.00 lakh.  Some features of guidelines have also 
been ch anged so as to attract proposals from reputed institutions. 
Consequently, the Ministry is receiving a number of good proposals on 
various labour related issues.  During 2012 -13, expenditure of Rs.7.61 lakh 
was incurred.  An amount of Rs.20.00 lakh has been  allocated during 
annual plan 2013-14. 
 
15.   CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEME FOR REHABILITATION OF 
BONDED LABOUR 
 
In order to assist the State Governments in their task of rehabilitation 
of released bonded labourers, the Ministry of Labour launched a Centrally  
Sponsored Scheme on 50: 50 basis since May, 1978 for rehabilitation of 
bonded labourers. The rehabilitation assistance @ Rs.20,000/ - per bonded 
labourer is provided to State Governments and in the case of North Eastern 
States, 100% Central assistance, if they express their inability to provide 
their share. 
 
The Scheme is being implemented by the State Governments who are 
mainly responsible for identification, release and rehabilitation of bonded 
labour. The Ministry of Labour and Employment is providing gr ants for the 
purpose and monitoring the Scheme through collection of quarterly returns 
and holding meetings as well as writing to the State Governments from time 
to time for implementation of the scheme /Act. 
 
Besides, under the orders of the Hon’ble Supre me Court,the National 
Human Rights Commission is also monitoring the Bonded Labour System 
Act and has been organizing Workshops at various places throughout the 
country. A Special Group under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Labour & 
Employment) has been con stituted as per the directions of the Prime 
Minister’s office to monitor the implementation of the Bonded Labour 
System (Abolition) Act, 1976. The Group is holding region-wise meetings and 
up till now 20 such meetings have been held in different regions. 
 
The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 do not differentiate 
between adult bondage and child bondage and on caste or sex. As such no 
separate data is being maintained for male/female bonded labour. As more 
than 85% of the bonded labour is from SC/ST  category, no separate 
allocation of budget etc. is kept separately for these categories. So far as 

72 
 
 
North East States are concerned, 10% of the total Plan Budget for the 
Scheme is earmarked for these States. 
 
As the Central grants are released only on rece ipt of complete 
proposals from the State Governments i.e. receipt of Utilization certificates 
for the grants released earlier, no targets can be fixed. The bonded labour 
whenever identified, are released and rehabilitated by the respective State 
Government. The Central Government is providing grants on 50: 50 basis 
for rehabilitation of bonded labour. The State Governments are also 
provided assistance for conducting survey of bonded labour, awareness 
generation activities and evaluatory studies. 
 
16. Central Board for Workers Education 
 
(a) Central Board for Workers Education 
 
(b) MGNREGA 
 
Central Board for Workers Education (CBWE) sponsored by the 
Ministry of Labour, Government of India, is a tripartite society established in 
1958 with headquarters at  Nagpur, to implement Workers Education 
Scheme at national, regional and unit/village levels. 
 
Board’s training programmes cover workers from organized, 
unorganized, rural and informal sectors. Special programmes (MGNREGA) 
and skill Development initiatives  as well as Supervisory and managerial 
cadres are also covered through joint educational programmes. While most 
of the programmes for workers in the organized sector and all the 
programmes in the rural/ 
unorganized sectors are conducted free of charge with  the cooperation of 
managements, trade unions and other agencies, few programmes at selected 
units in the organized sector are fund generating for which a nominal 
amount is charged from the managements. In accordance with the declared 
objectives of the Boa rd, effort is made to create awareness among the 
working class 
about their rights and obligations for effective participation in the socio -
economic development of  the country. National level training programmes 
for members of Central Trade Union Organisat ions and Federations are 
conducted by the Indian Institute of Workers Education (IIWE), Mumbai 
established by the CBWE in 1970. Pre -employment training and orientation 
for Board’s Officers are also imparted by the IIWE, Mumbai. 
 
The Board has a network of 50 Regional and 9 Sub -Regional 
Directorates spread throughout the country to implement the scheme at 
regional and unit /village levels. Out of 50 Regional Directorates, 8 are 
residential. The Six Zonal Directorates at Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai, 
Guwahati and Bhopal monitor the activities of the Regional and Sub -
Regional Directorates within the Zones. 

73 
 
 
 
OBJECTIVES 
 
 To strengthen among all sections of the working class, including rural 
workers, a sense of patriotism, national integrity, unity, amity, 
communal harmony, secularism and pride in being an Indian; 
 
 To equip all sections o f workers, including rural workers and women 
workers, for their intelligent participation in social and economic 
development of the nation in accordance with its declared objectives; 
   
 To develop amongst the workers a greater understanding of the 
problems of their social and economic environment, their 
responsibilities towards family members, and their rights and 
obligations as citizens, as workers in industry and as member s and 
officials of trade union; 
 
 To develop capacity of workers in all aspects to meet the challenges of 
the country from time to time. 
 
 
 To develop strong, united and more responsible trade unions and to 
strengthen democratic processes and traditions in t he trade union 
movement through more enlightened members and better trained 
officials; 
 
 To empower the workers as employees of the organization and to 
develop sense of belongingness as effective instruments of amicable 
industrial relations and maintaining industrial peace. 
 To meet the needs of workers to have access to ways of acquiring and 
continuous up gradation of knowledge and skills that they require to 
find and hold a job. 
  

74 
 
 
DGE&T (Training) 
 
17. Upgradation of 1396 Government ITIs through PPP 
 
Under the scheme “Upgradation of 1396 Government ITIs through 
PPP” a total of 1227 Government ITIs were covered during the XI Plan period 
and   Rs.3067.50 Crore has been released. The time line envisaged for up -
gradation of ITIs is 5 years from release of loan. The up-gradation process is 
at various stages of execution as per the year of release of interest free loan 
and as per the Institute Development Plan. Thirty States have been covered 
in the scheme except Sikkim, Manipur, Andaman & Nicobar, Daman & Diu 
and Lakshadweep. The status of fund utilization by the various States on 
the basis of year of release of fund is at Annexure-1. 
  
A mid -term evaluation study of the scheme “Upgradation of 1396 
Government ITIs through PPP” was conducted by V.V.Giri National Institute 
and the gist of the report is enclosed as   Annexure-2. 
 
1188..  SSkkiillll  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  ooff  YYoouutthh  iinn  3344  ddiissttrriiccttss  aaffffeecctteedd  bbyy  LLeefftt  WWiinngg  
EExxttrreemmiissmm 
 
Cost of Scheme: Rs.241.65 crore. 
Duration: From 29th March 2010 to 31st March 2014 
Covered Area: 34 Districts in 9 States. 
Objective: 
 Establishing one ITI & two Skill Development Centers (SDCs) in 
each district. 
 To run demand driven vocational training courses in long term, 
short term and Instructor training courses. 
Components: 
(i) Skill training programmes  for 
 1000 youth in Long Term Training @ 30 per district 
 4000 youth in Short Term Training @ 120 per district 
 Train 340 youth in Instructor Training @ 10 per district 
(ii)  Additional infrastructure will be created for:- 
 34 Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) @ one ITI per district  
 68 Skill Development Centres (SDCs) @ two SDCs per district 
 
 

75 
 
 
Contribution of the State Governments alon gwith the completion 
status: Funding pattern under the scheme is given below: 
Component State 
Government  
 (In %) 
Central Government  
 (In %) 
Skill training programmes  0 100 
Creating additional 
infrastructure for 34 new ITIs & 
68  new SDCs 
25 75 
Central level monitoring cell 0 100 
 
Skill training programme and construction of ITIs and SDCs has started. 
They are expected to be operational during 2014-15. 
 
Number of beneficiaries : State-wise detail of persons completed / 
undergoing training in various skill training programme and number of ITIs 
and SDCs are under construction. 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
States and 
number of 
Districts (in 
bracket) 
Name of District Proposed Persons undergoing Skill 
Training 
SDC ITI Long 
Term 
Short 
Term 
Instructo
r 
Total 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh (1) 
Khamam 2 1 0 0 0 0 
2 Bihar  (6) Jamui, Gaya, 
Aurangabad, 
Rohtas, Arwal 
Jehanabad,  
0 3 0 0 0 0 
3 Chhattisgarh 
(7) 
Dantewada, 
Bastar, Kanker, 
Surguja, 
Rajnandgaon, 
Bijapur, 
Narayanpur 
14 7 115 0 0 115 
4 Jharkhand 
(10) 
Chatra, West 
Singhbhum, 
Palamau, 
Garhwa, East 
Singhbhum, 
Bokaro, 
Lohardaga, 
Gumla,Latehar, 
Hazaribagh 
18 9 170 436 60 666 
  

76 
 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
States and 
number of 
Districts (in 
bracket) 
Name of District Proposed Persons undergoing Skill Training 
SDC ITI Long 
Term 
Short 
Term 
Instructo
r 
Total 
5 Madhya 
Pradesh 
(1) 
Balaghat 2 1 30 120 10 160 
6 Maharashtra 
(2) 
Gadchiroli K, 
Gondia 
4 2 60 240 20 320 
7 Orissa 
(6) 
 
Gajapati, 
Malkangiri, 
Rayagada, 
Deogarh, 
Sambalpur 
10 5 150 330 18 498 
8 Uttar Pradesh 
(1) 
Sonebhadra 2 1 30 120 10 160 
9 West Bengal 
(1) 
PaschimMidna
pur (Lalgarh 
Area)  
2 1 30 120 10 160 
 Total  54 30 585 1366 128 2079 
 
The estimated yield of on ITI will be 200 trainee per annum and that of one 
SDC will be 200 trainee per annum. 
 
Expenditure :State-wise details of fund released so far: 
 
Sl States Fund released so far (Rupees in Lakh) 
2011-12 2012-13 Total 
Skill 
Train- 
ing 
ITIs & 
SDCs 
Total Skill 
Train- 
ing 
ITIs & 
SDCs 
Total Skill 
Train- 
ing 
ITIs & 
SDCs 
Total 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 355.84 355.84 0.00 355.84 355.84 
2 Bihar 0.00 376.77 376.77 0.00 319.15 319.15 0.00 695.92 695.92 
3 Chhattisgarh 0.00 1881.12 1881.12 24.11 281.73 305.84 24.11 2162.85 2186.96 
4 Jharkhand 81.83 1587.17 1669.00 108.44 242.81 351.25 190.27 1829.98 2020.25 
5 Madhya 
Pradesh 
29.32 257.75 287.07 9.73 45.32 55.05 39.05 303.07 342.12 
6 Maharashtra 58.64 511.80 570.44 19.5 90.63 110.13 78.14 602.43 680.57 
7 Orissa 100.16 1372.45 1472.61 48.74 187.93 236.67 148.90 1560.38 1709.28 
8 Uttar 
Pradesh 
29.32 269.64 298.96 9.74 39.83 49.57 39.06 309.47 348.53 
9 West Bengal 29.32 256.90 286.22 9.74 45.71 55.45 39.06 302.61 341.67 
  Total 328.59 6513.60 6842.19 230.00 1608.95 1838.95 558.59 8122.55 8681.14 
 

77 
 
 
Only the States of Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal have reported 
expenditure for construction of ITIs and SDCs. The States of Orissa, 
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh have reported expenditure in Skill Training. 
 
Reasons for delay in implementation 
 The long term trainees are supported for 2 years 
 Proposal from Bihar (6 districts) and Andhra Pradesh            (1 
district) are yet to be received. 
 Orissa (5 districts), Jharkhand (10 districts) & Chhattisgarh    (7 
districts) States are yet to submit the proposal of all candidates.  
 Establishment of ITIs and SDCs are taking  more than expected time 
due to – 
(i) Delay in release of 1st installment (in March 2012). 
(ii) Insurgency in the project area. 
(iii) Lower accessibility to the project area due to remote location. 
 
19. Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure in NE States and 
Sikkim The scheme has provision for Central assistance to States in 
following three components:- 
 
 Upgradation of 20 ITIs by introducing three new trades  per ITI; 
 Supplementing infrastructure deficiencies in 28 ITIs by 
constructing new hostel, boundary wall and su pplementing old 
and obsolete tools and equipments; and  
 Funding Monitoring Cells at Central & State Level.  
 
Contribution of the State Governments along with the completion 
status: 
The scheme is 100% centrally funded. Construction work in all the 
States are yet to be completed. 
 
Number of beneficiaries: Sixty new trades will be established in 20 ITIs and 
annual yield of each trade is 16. 
 
 Expenditure: A total of Rs.3582.26 lakh has been released to eight States 
is as under :- 
 
 
 
 

78 
 
 
Sl.No State Number of covered 
ITIs 
        Fund released (Rupees in 
Lakh) 
Upgrada
t 
ion 
Deficient 
Infrastruct
ure 
2010-
11 
2011-
12 
2012-13 Total 
1 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
3 3 479.60 0.00 137.97 617.57 
2 Nagaland 2 5 559.53 0.00 317.17 876.70 
3 Sikkim 0 3 241.68 0.00 96.32 338.00 
4 Manipur 3 8 0.00 0.00 495.00 495.00 
5 Mizoram 1 3 0.00 0.00 368.23 368.23 
6 Meghalaya 4 4 0.00 256.36 0.00 256.36 
7 Assam 6 1 0.00 227.84 222.91 450.75 
8 Tripura 1 1 0.00 58.03 121.62 179.65 
 Total 20 28 1280.81 542.23 1759.22 3582.26 
 
The States of Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Assam 
have reported expenditure. 
Reasons for delay in implementation 
 Hilly and difficult area to reach due to poor connectivity. 
 Complete halt of construction work for 5 months in an year during 
rainy season in hilly north eastern region. 
 Devastating earthquake in Sikkim. 
 
20. Skill Development Initiative (SDI) scheme 
 
           In May, 2007, the DGE&T undertook development of a new strategic 
framework under SDI Scheme namely Modular Employable Skill (MES) f or 
the early school leavers and existing workers especially in the unorganized 
sector. The MES NCVT certificate is recognized nationally and 
internationally for gainful employment. Under the scheme, training cost and 
assessment fee is reimbursed to the suc cessful candidates. The on -line 
implementation of the SDI Scheme through the Web -portal has been 
launched since 01 st January, 2012. Achievement as on 15.05.2013 (since 
inception): 
 1433 course modules covering 73 sectors have been developed and 
approved by NCVT. 
 46 organisations have been empanelled as assessing bodies for 
conducting assessment. 

79 
 
 
 18.7 lakh persons have been trained / tested. 
 2.07 lakh persons undergoing training. 
 
For FY 2012-13 (as on 31.03.2013): 
 4.24 lakh persons have been trained / tested. 
 On line web portal launched for implementation & monitoring. 
 3929 Vocational Training Providers (VTPs) have been registered on 
Web Portal. 
 46 organisations have been empanelled as Assessing Bodies. 
 Expenditure to the tune of Rs.308 crore has been incurred. 
  
  

80 
 
 
  

81 
 
 
 
Status of implementation of Skill Development Initiative (SDI) Scheme for the Financial Year  
 
 
 
*   3929 VTPs have been registered on web-portal for 2012-13. 
  **       T    -   Target                             A  - Achievements  
 
Sl.        
No 
Item 
(in 
number)  
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
 
2010-11 
 
2011-12 2012-13 
 
T** A** T A T A T A T A T A 
1 MES 
Course 
modules 
developed 
& 
approved 
by NCVT 
200 271 120 148 200 690 100 146 40 137 30 38 
2 Vocational 
Training 
Providers 
(VTPs) 
registered 
1000 1247 2000 2187 2000 2398 1000 675 300 618 500 3929 * 
3 Trainees 
trained/ 
tested 
10,000 22,528 50,000 1,15,306 1,20,000 5,75,489 3,00,000 4,41,214 3,00,000 2,13961 4,00,000 4,24,304 
4 Expenditu
re 
 (Rupees 
in crore) 
16.00 15.85 
(agains
t 15.90) 
39.00 44.49 
(against 
46.00) 
101.27 100.68 154.70 143.52 FE-121 104.06 700 308 

 

21. Training of 8000 youth of the state of J&K (SDYJK) 
 
 The scheme was initiated to develop 16000 youth of J&K with an outlay 
of Rs.20.16 crore under Modular Employable Skills for their gainful 
employment.  
 Out of 16, 000 youth, 4000 (i.e. 25%) were to be trained inside the state 
whereas 12000 youths (i.e. 75%) were to be trained outside the state 
with a target to train 8000 (6000 outside + 2000 inside) youths each year 
during the FY 2010-11 and FY 2011-12. 
 Due to non achievement of training target, the sch eme was extended 
upto 31st March, 2013.  
 Some of the Vocational Training Providers outside J&K, where the 
training has been conducted are as following: 
 G&G Vocational Training Provider, Panchkula, Haryana 
 L&T Construction Skill Training Institute, Mumbai 
 L&T Construction Skill Training Institute, Chennai 
 Advanced Training Institute, Hyderabad 
 Advance Training Institute for Electronics and Process 
Instrumentation, Hyderabad 
  Cavelier India, Banglore 
Details of Fund released and Utilization certificate received: (Rs. in Lakh):  
   
 
 
Year 2010-11 2011-12 2012-
13 Total 
Fund released 1020.01 Nil 244 1264.01 
Utilization Certificate 
received 749.71 Nil Nil 749.71 
Utilisation certificate to be 
received from the state 270.3 Nil 244 514.30 

84 
 
 
 
Persons trained: 
 
Year 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 Total 
 Target Acheive
ment 
Target Acheive
ment 
Target Acheive
ment 
Targe
t 
Achiev
e 
ment 
Within 
J&K 
2000 1650 2000 2350 Nil Nil 4000 4000 
Outside 
J&K 
6000 1500 6000 4083 6417 Nil 1200
0 
5583 
Total 8000 3150 8000 6433 6417 Nil 1600
0 
9583 
Placement offered to 1456 candidates, offer accepted by 139 persons. 
22. Vocational Training Improvement Project (VTIP) with World Bank 
Assistance 
 
 The Project Development Objective is to improve the employment 
outcomes of the graduates from the vocational training system, by making the 
design and delivery of training more demand responsive. The salient features of 
the scheme includes introduction of multi-skill courses catering to the need of 
a particular cluster of industry around an ITI to prod uce multi -skilled 
workforce of world standard.  The multi -skill courses are popularly known as 
CoE courses.  
 
 Total project cost is Rs.1581 crore out of which Rs.1231 crore is funded 
by the World Bank and the remaining Rs.350 crore is the State share.  The 
Scheme, inter-alia, envisages upgradation of 400 ITIs. 33 State 
Governments/UTs are participating under the pr oject. The cost sharing basis 
between center and State is 75:25 (90:10 for North Eastern States). The scheme 
objective also includes enhancement of knowledge and skills of ITI instructors 
and trainers by strengthening facilities in 14 central institutes. T he closing date 
of the project has been extended by 23 months i.e. till Nov. 2014.  
 
 
Under the project, Rs.1318 cr. has been released to the States and 
centrally funded institutes against which Rs.1225 crore has been utilised till 
March 2013. A statement indicating FY-wise release to States / UTs is attached 
as Annexue-3. 

85 
 
 
 
Key institutional reforms introduced under the project are constitution of 
Institution Management Committee (IMC) at ITI level with chairperson from the 
industry and delegation of enhanc ed academic, financial and administrative 
power to Principal ITI and IMC. Physical component consisted of setting up of 
new classrooms, workshops and modernization of tools, equipment and 
machinery, training of trainees and ensuring congenial environment. Most of 
the States have been able to complete physical infrastructure. In last four 
years, nearly 95,000 trainees have enrolled in CoE programs. Nearly 12,500 
instructors have been trained by central institutes during the project period. 
 
Progress made under Project:  As per the study conducted in the ITIs to 
assess the key performance indicators of the project, following is observed: 
 
 60 % of project ITIs’ pass -outs find employment within one year of finishing 
training, as compared to baseline of 32% conducted in Year 2006-07.  
 
 Rs.3550/- real monthly earnings of employed pass -outs from project ITIs 
measured one year after completing training, as compared to the baseline of 
Rs.2421/- per month conducted in Year 2006-07. 
 
23.  Upgradation of 100 ITIs with Domestic Resources 
 
 The objective of the scheme is to upgrade the existing 100 ITIs into 
“Centers of Excellence (CoE)” for producing mu lti skilled workforce of 
world standard. The implementation of the scheme took -off from FY 
2005-06. These ITIs are provided funds to develop infrastructural 
facilities for introduction of multi -skill courses catering to the need of a 
particular cluster of industry around an ITI to produce multi -skilled 
workforce. 
 100 ITIs are distributed in 22 States / UTs (other than J&K, Sikkim and 
NE States) in proportion to the number of Government ITIs.  The total 
cost of the Scheme is Rs.160 crore, out of which the ce ntral share is 
Rs.120 crore, on a ratio of 75:25 cost sharing basis between Central and 
the State Government, as advised by Ministry of Finance.  
 Total amount of about Rs.115 crore was released till March 2010. The 
scheme has since been closed in March 2010.   
 A statement indicating FY -wise release to States is attached as 
Annexure-4. 

Annexure-1 
 
Status of fund released and expenditure incurred till date 
 
Scheme: Upgradation of 1396 Government ITIs through PPP 
 
Consolidated statement of all years of release i.e. from 2007-08 to 2011-12 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
State/ UTs 
No. 
of 
ITIs 
cove
red  
Fund 
releas
ed 
Rs. in 
Lakh 
Breakup of fund 
released 
Fund 
Utilize
d 
Rs. in 
Lakh 
%age 
of 
utilizat
ion 
against 
fund 
release
d 
Perform
ance 
Categor
y* 
Seed 
Money 
Rs in 
Lakh 
Funds for 
upgradati
on 
Rs. in 
Lakh 
1 Mizoram 2 500 250 250 430.41 86.08% A 
2 Meghalaya 1 250 125 125 210.19 84.08% A 
3 Chandigarh 1 250 90 160 177.72 71.09% B 
4 Kerala 26 6500 1406 5094 4041.51 62.18% B 
5 
Andhra 
Pradesh 61 15250 525 14725 8320.57 54.56% C 
6 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 4 1000 300 700 521.55 52.16% C 
7 Bihar 13 3250 1137 2113 1367.17 42.07% C 
8 Delhi 9 2250 800 1450 1345.23 59.79% C 
9 Gujarat 91 22750 9108 13642 
13560.4
2 59.61% C 
10 Haryana 52 13000 2846 10154 5354.20 41.19% C 
11 
Himachal 
Pradesh 33 8250 1533 6717 4018.86 48.71% C 

87 
 
 
12 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 34 8500 2123 6377 4830.88 56.83% C 
13 Odisha 14 3500 1570 1930 1948.83 55.68% C 
14 Rajasthan 
10
5 26250 7130 19120 
10986.8
6 41.85% C 
15 Tamil Nadu 32 8000 1488 6512 4452.79 55.66% C 
16 Tripura 7 1750 315 1435 896.64 51.24% C 
17 Uttar Pradesh 
11
5 28750 8305 20445 
14856.3
3 51.67% C 
18 West Bengal 28 7000 1002 5998 3182.13 45.46% C 
19 Nagaland 7 1750 620 1130 930.81 53.19% C 
20 Chhattisgarh 42 10500 2182 8318 4315.59 41.10% C 
21 Maharashtra 
25
0 62500 13970 48531 
25530.7
3 40.85% C 
22 Punjab 76 19000 3806 15195 7649.46 40.26% C 
23 Assam 17 4250 585 3665 1413.86 33.27% D 
24 Jharkhand 8 2000 475 1525 792.29 39.61% D 
25 Karnataka 76 19000 1436 17564 4044.45 21.29% D 
26 
Madhya 
Pradesh 74 18500 4200 14300 5036.99 27.23% D 
27 Uttarakhand 43 10750 2069 8681 3040.38 28.28% D 
28 Goa 1 250 45 205 97.44 38.98% D 
29 Puducherry 4 1000 200 800 204.07 20.41% D 
30 
Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli 1 250 25 225 25.00 10.00% E 
Total 1227 306750 69665 237085 133583 43.55% C 
 

88 
 
 
*Performance Category: 'A': More than 80%, 'B': More than 60% and less than 80%, 'C': More than 40% and 
less than 60%, 'D': More than 20% and less than 40% and 'E': Less than 20% 
 
  

89 
 
 
Annexure-2 

Scheme “Upgradation of 1396 Government ITIs through PPP” 
 
A Mid-term evaluation of the scheme “Upgradation of 1396 Government 
ITIs through PPP” was carried out by V.V.Giri National Labour Institute, Noida. 
V.V.Giri National Labour Institute carried out the evalua tion in 120 
Government ITIs out of the 600 Government ITIs that were covered under the 
scheme during 2007 -08 and 2009 -10.  The report published during 2012 has 
brought out various salient features as stated below: 
 
 Distribution of ITIs across operational s cale of Industry partners i.e. 
small, medium and large and the type of support received from the 
Industry partners 
 
 The crucial roles played by the various Industry Partners, the 
composition of the IMC, operation of the IMCs, average number of 
IMC meetings planned and actually held, periodicity planned for IMC 
meetings, average number of members attending the IMC meetings, 
important decisions taken in these IMC meetings. 
 
 Income components and average Income generation by IMCs, 
percentage distribution in te rms of revenue generation, details of ITIs 
according to revenue generation, category of expenditure approved by 
IMCs, utilization of loan amount 
 
 Changes in physical infrastructure post implementation, changes in 
teaching staff i.e. permanent and temporary , status of enrolment, 
filling of permanent faculty, student-teacher ratio 
 
 Analysis of key performance indicators, functioning of placement cell, 
availability of computer facility, language class facilities, availability of 
internet facility, female stude nts and students from disadvantage 
background, training to ITIs staff and improvement in learners / 
teaching resources, involvement of State Government, linkages of ITIs 
with labour market and self employment. 
 
 The report on the whole had concluded that a  greater Institutional and 
quantitative expansion is underway in the project ITIs. Evaluation report in 
printed book form is enclosed. 
 
 The recommendations of the Mid -Term Evaluation were already 
circulated to all the States /UTs. In this regard, a letter  dated 03.08.2012 from 
the Director General was circulated to all the Principal Secretaries requesting 
the State Governments to take immediate action on the recommendations 
highlighted in the Mid-term evaluation report. 

State-wise Releases / Utilisation under the World Bank assisted Vocational Training Improvement Project (VTIP)           
 
       
S. 
No. States / UTs 
Total no 
of ITIs 
covered 
under 
VTIP 
Total 
allocation   
including 
State share * 
*Total fund released  *Total funds 
released 
during 
Project 
period (FY 
07-08 to FY 
12-13 ) 
Expenditure 
till March 
2013  FY 2007-08  FY 2008-09   FY 2009-10    FY 2010-
11    FY 2011-12    FY 2012-13  
1 Andhra Pradesh 25 8727.93 2929.33 2096.36 736.98 1171.56 53.89 168.21 7156.33 5998.59 
2 
Andaman & 
Nicobar 1 237.68 0.00 0.00 48.40 49.33 66.28 71.42 235.43 223.05 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 1 219.09 55.56 54.44 58.76 13.46 3.17 32.04 212.08 164.64 
4 Assam 7 2529.13 618.89 38.89 847.78 310.69 13.31 459.48 2212.45 1820.02 
5 Bihar 8 2743.33 965.33 430.09 0.00 221.49 421.10 0.00 2038.02 1113.12 
6 Chhatisgarh 18 5283.10 690.67 786.67 1746.40 765.36 175.22 730.15 4894.46 3447.08 
7 Daman & Diu 1 203.92 0.00 0.00 0.00 53.33 67.19 71.68 192.20 142.40 
8 Delhi 3 955.13 337.33 253.71 30.00 50.96 20.52 0.00 692.52 532.03 
9 Goa 7 2477.32 409.33 796.00 132.00 679.26 66.53 234.67 2317.79 2483.93 
10 Gujarat 29 11515.43 3278.67 3674.39 990.95 1278.82 1246.27 325.00 10794.08 10043.25 
11 Haryana 16 5206.58 1521.33 508.00 846.67 866.29 709.11 744.16 5195.56 5308.34 
12 Himachal Pradesh 11 3410.10 1604.00 466.67 572.00 384.99 30.50 300.00 3358.15 3358.08 
13 Jammu & Kashmir 10 2266.97 513.33 352.00 0.00 504.00 44.07 337.33 1750.74 1340.85 
14 Jharkhand 3 1093.88 178.67 340.11 70.67 348.14 79.31 64.79 1081.67 988.90 
15 Karnataka 30 11457.18 1970.67 3649.33 2084.79 1560.42 636.83 597.42 10499.46 9958.37 
16 Kerala 7 2718.18 470.67 468.00 468.45 379.37 484.25 323.38 2594.13 2603.36 
17 Lakshadweep 1 76.68 0.00 0.00 25.60 6.40 2.41 0.00 34.41 20.13 
18 Madhya Pradesh 28 7925.92 1182.67 2884.33 1166.20 1108.22 723.57 400.00 7464.99 7456.71 
19 Maharashtra 87 29602.24 3424.00 6264.73 8502.75 6282.86 2958.94 1025.92 28459.19 28712.07 
20 Manipur 2 411.59 110.00 118.89 35.68 46.58 3.98 22.66 334.01 316.63 
21 Meghalaya 1 309.09 0.00 0.00 36.67 183.90 3.17 0.00 223.74 36.42 
22 Mizoram 1 262.68 131.11 10.00 24.44 30.60 0.98 0.00 197.13 154.13 

92 
 
 
23 Nagaland 1 269.33 0.00 53.33 85.56 108.66 11.19 9.24 266.44 254.36 
24 Orissa 9 3514.34 909.07 37.33 951.43 486.18 434.34 353.39 3171.74 2522.98 
25 Pondicherrry 1 224.83 81.33 12.00 71.20 7.16 17.36 9.20 198.25 205.35 
26 Punjab 27 9690.67 2428.00 1688.00 1438.67 2082.17 40.23 677.33 8354.40 7404.83 
27 Rajasthan 10 2691.74 1464.00 68.00 0.00 267.77 288.04 533.49 2621.31 2111.42 
28 Sikkim 1 231.42 153.33 10.00 45.78 12.87 7.32 0.00 229.31 260.59 
29 Tamil Nadu 17 5635.06 506.67 221.33 872.57 2090.31 276.17 897.88 4864.93 4081.68 
30 Tripura 1 372.83 38.89 144.71 126.08 38.68 8.87 1.55 358.52 359.49 
31 Uttar Pradesh 16 5532.50 2153.33 1422.67 898.40 414.79 136.79 0.00 5025.99 4757.64 
32 Uttarakhand 10 2541.71 510.67 68.00 0.00 1100.76 293.57 183.45 2156.45 2176.77 
33 West Bengal 10 3141.12 597.33 218.80 834.03 637.58 238.85 342.03 2868.61 2441.29 
  CFIs                 9714.13 9714.13 
  Total  400 133505.93 29234.18 27136.79 23748.88 23542.96 9563.31 8915.87 131795.85 122512.64 
 
* includes central and State funding in the ratio of 75:25 ( 90:10 for NE States) 
     
               
            
   
                
  

93 
 
 
Releases - Upgradation of 100 ITIs with domestic funding 
    
Annex.-4 
         
  (Rs. In 
lakhs)  
S. No. STATE / U.T. 
No. of 
ITIs 
allotted 
EFC 
central 
allocation 
Total releases   
Total funds 
released till 
March 2010 
 
FY 05-06 FY 06-07  FY 07-08  FY 08-09 FY 09-10 
 
1 Andhra Pradesh 5 600 65.06 36.75 308.88 124.95 63.26 598.9  
2 Bihar 2 240 5.08 24.45 80.16 79.67 29.99 219.35  
3 Chandigarh 1 120 0 39.05 25.45 0 12.165 76.665  
4 Chattisgarh 4 480 42.78 184.59 246.38 6.25 0 480  
5 Delhi 1 120 13.12 34.4 25.6 39.89 0 113.01  
6 Goa 2 240 5.57 27.2 129.1 77.69 0 239.56  
7 Gujarat 8 960 92.36 387.68 333.58 99.21 47.13 959.96  
8 Haryana 5 600 47.55 158.36 218.41 168.64 0 592.96  
9 Himachal Pradesh 3 360 39 49.8 157.85 90.54 0 337.19  
10 Jharkhand 1 120 7.49 27.21 7.49 65.88 10.98 119.05  
11 Karnataka 6 720 51.95 216.4 113.81 337.83 0 719.99  
12 Kerala 5 600 56.55 106.65 162.82 65.32 182.226 573.566  
13 Madhya Pradesh 8 960 92.3 473.71 272.46 120.6 0 959.07  
14 Maharashtra 12 1440 152.75 580.27 361.11 345.94 0 1440  
15 Orissa 2 240 11.26 88.65 18.68 96.7875 24.6225 240  
16 Punjab 8 960 72.87 110.73 181.33 174.54 419.9075 959.3775  
17 Pondicherry 1 120 0 14.1 3.41 16.03 40 73.54  
18 Rajasthan 5 600 36.98 168.48 69.07 24.05 99.55 398.13  

94 
 
 
19 Tamil Nadu 5 600 52.49 106.25 344.965 7.28 87.22 598.205  
20 Uttaranchal 3 360 23.19 30.58 30 68.86 34.43 187.06  
21 Uttar Pradesh 10 1200 121.9 283.13 328.17 441.155 25.64 1199.995  
22 West Bengal 3 360 11.51 70.28 135.66 104.8075 34.66 356.9175  
  CEPT       16.93     0 16.93  
  Total 100 12000 1001.76 3243.61 3554.385 2555.92 1111.781 11467.386  
           
      
FE R.E BE MH  
      
1131 680 1530 3601  
      
40 40 50 3602  
      
20 20 20 2230  
      
1191 740 1600    
 
  

DGE&T – Employment: 
Vocational Rehabilitation Centre for Handicapped 
 
So far as Scheme relating to Vocational Rehabilitation Centre for 
Handicapped is concerned, necessary input on the scheme is given below: 
 
“In order to realize the mandate for economic rehabilitation of Persons 
with Disabilities (PWDs), 20 Vocational Rehabilitation Centres for 
Handicapped (VRCs) have been set up across the country with a view to cater 
to the economic rehabilitation assistance  to different categories of 
handicapped persons.  The main objectives of these Centres are to evaluate 
the residual capacities of PWDs, impart vocational training and extend them 
vocational rehabilitation assistance”.  
 
Physical targets vis -à-vis achievements of VRCs, for the year 2012 -13 is 
given as under 
 
Physical Targets & Achievements 
 
Year Intake Evaluation  Rehabilitation  
 Target Achieve- 
ment 
Target Achieve- 
ment 
Target Achieve- 
ment 
2012-13 32000 33363 31000 33200 12000 12621 
 
 
 

Financial Targets & Achievements     (Rupees in Lakh) 
Period Nature of Scheme BE RE  Expenditure
  
2012-
13 
Plan 479.00 479.00 380.74 
Civil Work 100.00 100.00 100.00 
 Total 579.00 579.00 480.79 
 
 
Coaching-cum-Guidance Centres for SCs/STs 
Directorate General of Employment & Training is implementing the scheme 
for “Welfare of SC/ST job seekers through Coaching, Guidance and Vocational 
Training and introduction of new courses in existing CGCs & Establishment of new 
CGCs in States not covered so far” Under the scheme, Coaching-cum-Guidance 
Centres (CGCs) for SC/STs has been set up by Govt. of India, Ministry of Labour & 
Employment, DGE&T to enhance the employability of SC/ST job seekers through 
coaching/training.  So far twenty four Coaching -cum-Guidance Centres for 
SCs/STs have been set up, one each at Delhi, Jabalpur, Kanpur, Chennai, 
Hyderabad, Thiruvananthapuram, Kolkata, Jaipur, Ranchi, Surat, Aizawl, 
Bangalore, Imphal, Hisar, Nagpur, Bhubaneshwar, Guwahati, Mandi, Kohima, 
Jowai, Jammu, Jalandhar,  Naharlagun and Puducherry .   
 
These centres provide Vocational Guidance /Career Counseling services to 
the educated SC/ST job seekers in order to enhance their employability. Further, 
two Special Schemes through outsourcing have been added to reo rient the 
functioning of these centres, the details are as under:- 
 
 
 
Special Coaching Scheme through Outsourcing 
 
A Special Coaching Scheme to prepare SC/ST candidates for competitive 
examinations/selection tests for Group 'C' posts is also being operated by DGE&T 
in 21 CGCs viz., Delhi ,  Kanpur, Kolkata, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Ranchi, Surat, 
Guwahati, Imphal, Hisar, Jabalpur, Chennai, Thiruvananthapuram, Bhubaneswar, 
Mandi, Jaipur, Nagpur, Jammu, Jalandhar  Kohima & Naharlagun.  The Scheme is 
in progress w.e.f 01.07.2012 with a seating capacity of 1200 candidates.   

97 
 
 
 
Computer Learning Courses through Outsourcing 
Keeping in view the usage of computer in every sphere of knowledge, 
computer training has been introduced.   It is being implemented at Delhi, 
Jabalpur, Chennai, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Jaipur, Surat, Bangalore Nagpur, Hisar, 
Bhubaneshwar, Guwahati, Kanpur, Naharlag un, Thiruvananthapuram, Mandi, 
Ranchi, Jammu, Jalandhar, Kohima and Imphal.  During 2009 -10, the Scheme 
has been reoriented by enhancing the course to ‘O’ Level through DOEACC and 
making it one year course.  The Scheme is in progress w.e.f. 01.07.2012 with  a 
seating capacity of 2000 candidates at 21 CGCs for SC/STs @ around 100 
candidates at each Centre. The one year ‘O’ level computer hardware maintenance 
training through DOEACC has also been introduced and is in progress w.e.f. 
1.8.2012 with a seating capacity of 1300 candidates at 14 CGCs for SC/STs.   
 
The financial and Physical achievements for the last two years are given 
below:- 
FINANCIAL PROGRESS  PLAN (Rupees in Lakh) 
 
Name of the plan scheme                2011-12       2012-13 
BE Exp % BE EXP % 
Welfare of SC/ST job 
seekers through Coaching,  
Vocational Guidance  & 
Training 
600.00 482.59 80.43 700.00 640.15 91.45 
   
NON-PLAN      (Rupees in Lakh)                                                    
 
Name of the plan  2011-12 2012-13 
Scheme BE Exp % BE Exp % 
Welfare of SC/ST job seekers 
through Coaching,  Vocational 
Guidance  &Training 
450.00 427.65 95.03 455.00 471.36 103.6
0 

98 
 
 
ACTIVITY WISE ACHIEVEMENT OF COACHING-CUM-GUIDANCE 
CENTRES FOR SCHEDULED CASTES & SCHEDULED TRIBES 
 
Sl.No. ACTIVITES 
(Number  of candidates provided 
service) 
2011-12 2012-13 
1 Registration Guidance          53810 40704 
2 Individual Guidance  16330 20257 
3 Individual information 24987 33045 
4 Pre Submission Interview Guidance 4807 7058 
5 Confidence Building Programme 18814 21094 
6 Pre Recruitment Training 
Programme 
3964 4913 
7 Shorthand and Typing  11206 11511 
8 Special Coaching Scheme 1200 1200 
9 Computer Training 2000 2000 
 
 