  29 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-12) 
 (FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2012-13) 
  
         TWENTY-NINTH  REPORT 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
           April, 2012/Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
  
 


2 
 
     TWENTY-NINTH  REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 
(FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2012-13) 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 3rd May, 2012    
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2012 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
                   April, 2012/Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE (S) 
    
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (iii)  
    
INTRODUCTION         (v)   
 
      REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I       Review  of  status  of  implementation                          
of  the recommendations contained in 
                   the 11th Report  of the Standing  
                   Committee on Labour on Demands for  
                   Grants(2011-2012) relating to the Ministry 
     of Textiles 
  
CHAPTER-II     Introductory       
         
CHAPTER-III  REPORT – DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13)   
A. General Performance 
B. Handicrafts 
C. Powerlooms 
D. Integrated Skill Development Scheme (ISDS) 
E. Textile Production and Exports 
  
ANNEXURE 
Minutes  of  the sittings  of   the  Standing  Committee  on 
Labour held  on 13.4.2012 and 30.4.2012    
   
   APPENDIX 
Statement of Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Report 
 
 
  
   

4 
 
     COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
2. Shri Raj Babbar 
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
        **5. Shri Pakauri Lal 
6. Shri Narahari Mahato 
         7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Smt. Mausam Noor 
10. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
14. Ms. J. Shantha 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
*16. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
  ****17. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
     21. Vacant 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
25. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
***26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        28. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
        29. Shri Rajaram 
     ***30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri G. N. Ratanpuri 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*   Nominated w.e.f 25th November, 2011. 
**  Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his 
nomination to Standing Committee on Coal & Steel w.e.f. 3rd 
January, 2012. 

5 
 
***   Retired w.e.f. 02.04.2012 and 03.04.2012 respectively. 
****  Nominated w.e.f. 12th April, 2012. 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director  
 3.    Smt. Bharti. S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
      
   
  
 

6 
 
   
INTRODUCTION 
 
          I,  the  Chairman, Standing Committee on Labour (2011-12) having been 
authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this 29 th Report to 
Parliament of the Ministry of Textiles on Demands for Grants  for the year 
2012-2013. 
 
2. The Committee considered the Demands for Grants pertaining to the 
Ministry of Textiles for the year 2012 -2013 which were laid on the Table of the 
House on 26 th March, 2012.    Thereafter, the Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Textiles on 13 th April, 2012. The Committee 
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held 30th April, 2012. 
 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the 
Ministry of Textiles for placing before them the detailed written notes on the 
subject and furnishing the information as desired by the Committee in 
connection with the examination of the Demands for Grants and tendering 
evidence before the Committee. 
 
 
4. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation of the commitment, dedication and valuable assist ance rendered 
to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 

7 
 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body 
of the Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in 
Appendix of the Report.                   
    
 
 
 
New Delhi,                                   HEMANAND BISWAL,   
 30th April,  2012,                           CHAIRMAN,                                                  
10 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
       
 
 

8 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REVIEW OF STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-12) OF MINISTRY OF TEXTILES. 
  
1.1 The Standing Committee on Labour presented their 
Twentieth  Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) pertaining 
to the Ministry of Textiles to Parliament on 30.8.2011.  Out of 18 
recommendations, 14 recommendations at Para Nos. 3.18, 
3.19, 3.20, 3.21, 3.22, 3.23, 4.19, 4.20, 4.21, 4.23, 4.24,  
4.25, 4.26, 4.27, 4.28, 4.29, 4.30, 4.31, 4.32 were accepted 
by the Government.  There were no recommendations which the 
Committee did not desire to pursue. There were no 
recommendations where the reply of the Government were not 
accepted.  Four recommendations at Paragraph Sl. Nos. 3.26, 
3.27, 3.33, and 3.42  were found interim in nature and the 
Government were requested to furnish t he final action taken 
replies thereon.     
 
 
 
 

9 
 
 
1.2 The Standing Committee on Labour presented their Twenty -
sixth Action Taken Report (Action taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in Twentieth Report, Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on 27th March, 2012.   
  

10 
 
   
CHAPTER-II 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
2.1 The Ministry of Textiles came into independent existence in 
1989 after its separation from the Ministry of Commerce.  Textile 
Industry occupies a unique position in our economy and psyche.  
The fate of rural economy and the fortune of major fibre crops and  
crafts-cotton, wool, silk, handicrafts and handlooms, which 
employees millions of  farmers and craft persons in rural and semi -
urban areas, depend on textile industry.  Textile sector provides 
employment next only to agriculture.  
2.2 The main functions a nd activities of the Ministry of Textiles 
are policy formulation and planning, development, export promotion 
and trade regulation of the textile sector.  The Ministry formulates 
policies regarding production, distribution (for domestic 
consumption and exports) and development of all textiles including 
cotton, woollen, jute, silk, synthetics, etc. produced on handlooms, 
powerlooms and in mills.  It is also responsible for readymade 

11 
 
garments, handicrafts and industries related to production of silk 
and cellulosic fibres.    
 
2.3. The developmental activities of the Ministry are oriented 
towards making adequate quantities of raw material available to all 
sectors of textile Industry and augment the production of  fibres at 
reasonable prices from the organized and  de-centralised sectors of 
the industry.  To achieve this objective, the Ministry lays down 
guidelines for a planned and harmonious growth of various sectors 
of the industry. 
 
2.4. The Ministry monitors the techno economic status of the 
industry and provid es the requisite policy framework for 
modernization and rehabilitation.  It also coordinates the activities 
of Textile Research Associations and lends financial support to 
them for undertaking research and development.  The Ministry 
exercises administrativ e control over various organizations and 
public sector undertakings under its charge. 
 
 

12 
 
2.5. The principal functional areas of the Ministry cover the 
following:- 
 The Textiles Policy & Coordination. 
 The man-made Fibre/Filament Yarn Industry. 
 The Cotton Textiles Industry. 
 The Jute Industry. 
 The Sericulture and Silk Textiles Industry. 
 The Wool & Woollen Textiles Industry. 
 The Decentralised Powerlooms Sector. 
 The Exports Promotion  
 Handicrafts 
 Handlooms 
 The Planning & Economic Analysis. 
 The Integrated Finance Matters. 
 The Information Technology 
            
2.6. The Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Textiles for the year 
2012-2013 are given under Demand No. 92.  The detailed Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry were laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 

13 
 
26.3.2012.   The following are the major heads under which the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry have been given:- 
3451  - Secretarial Economic Services 
        2552  -       North-Eastern Areas 
 2851  -       Village and Small Industries  
 2852  - Industries 
         3453   - Foreign Trade and Export Promotion 
 3601  - Grants-in-aid to State Governments 
         3602         -       Grants-in-aid to Union Territory Governments 
 4552  - Capital Outlay on North-Eastern Areas 
         4851        -       Capital outlay on Village and Small    
    Industries 
 4860  - Capital Outlay on Consumer Industries 
 6860  - Loans to Public Sector and other Undertakings  
 
2.7. In order to efficiently carry out the task of implementing 
various schemes, the Ministry has the following  two attached 
offices, two subordinate offices, six advisory boards, three registered 
societies and six statutory bodies under it:- 

14 
 
Attached offices:- 
 
(a) Office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms 
(b) Office of the Development Commissioner for Handicrafts 
Subordinate offices:- 
 
(a) Office of the Textiles Commissioner 
(b) Office of the Jute Commissioner 
Advisory Boards:- 
 
(a) All India Handicrafts Board 
(b) All India Powerlooms Board 
(c) All India Handloom Board 
(d) Cotton Advisory Board 
(e) Jute Advisory Board 
(f) Coordination Council of Textiles Research Associations 
(TRAs) 
Registered Societies:- 
 
(a) Central Wool Development Board (CWDB) 
(b) National Centre for Jute Diversification (NCJD) 

15 
 
(c ) Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Institute of Textiles 
Management (SVPITM) 
Statutory Bodies:- 
(a) Jute Manufactures Development Council (JMDC) 
(b) Central Silk Board (CSB) 
(c ) Textiles Committee 
(d) Commissioner of Payments 
(e) National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT) 
(f) National Jute Board 
2.8. The Committee have attempted to scrutinize the Demands fo r 
Grants for the year 2012-2013 of the Ministry to the extent possible 
and the findings have been illustrated in the ensuing Chapters. 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER-III 
REPORT 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
A. General Performance 
 
3.1As per the information furnished to the Committee, 
Rs.5000 crore were earmarked for Plan expenditure during 
2011-12 which was increased at the Revised Estimate stage 
to Rs.5503 crore.  The total utilization as on 13.2.2012 is 
Rs.3169.11 crore i.e. only 63% of BE and 58% of RE. 
Similarly, Non-Plan expenditure was estimated at Rs 873.75 
crore which was revised to Rs. 942.27 crore and the actual 
expenditure was only Rs 499.80 crore till 13.2.2012 which is 
only 53% of the RE. When asked about the reasons for 
underutilization of funds, the Ministry replied that: 

17 
 
  "The total amount allocated to Ministry of Textiles (MoT) under 
 Plan during the year 2011 -12 is Rs. 5000.00 crore, out of 
 which an amount of Rs. 3302.97 crore, i.e 66.06 percent over 
 BE has been utilized as on 22.3.2012. Accounts for the 
 remaining period are being finalized which is expected to show 
 further progress in expenditure. 
   
 The entire allocation for TUFS could not be utilized due 
 to the slowdown in the textiles industry. Against 
envisaged investments of Rs. 46900 crores under restructured  
TUFS in 2011 -12, investments of Rs 8700 crore were 
witnessed reflecting Macro-economic investment climate in the 
textiles sector. As a result, the TUFS scheme allocations could 
not be utilized resulting in Rs 700 crore of un -utilized 
expenditures. The slo wdown in investments also resulted in 
poor utilization  of SITP allocations where Rs. 80 crores 
could not be utilized. 
  Under SITP, the govt. subsidizes already existing industry 
stakeholders in the creation of common infrastructure through 
a Special Purp ose Vehicle (SPV). The expenditure under this 
scheme is a consequence of claims raised by the SPV of the 
project. While the allocations at BE and RE represented the 
project admitted liability of the Ministry for FY 2011 -12, the 
actual expenditure could tak e  place only when claims were 
raised by individual SPVs. Despite monitoring both at Ministry 
and PMC levels, not all SPVs that were expected to prefer 
 claims could do so, due to a variety of reasons. The 
recent  recession in the textile industry and dela ys in 
obtaining statutory clearances such as environmental 
clearance were some of the reasons for default by SPV on 
submitting the claims.  
 Under Handloom, BE for 2011 -12 was Rs.460 crore 
 which was reduced to Rs. 419 crore at RE stage.  The 
total allocat ion after 3 rd supplementary was Rs. 690.8 crore 
out of which Rs.629.90 crore (Provisional) was utilized during 
2011-12.  At the 3 rd supplementary stage, Rs.264.45 crore 
including  Rs.200 crore for financial package were allocated to 
Handloom, otherwise expenditure was evenly incurred.  Since 

18 
 
the Policy Year (December, 2010 to November, 2011) under 
Health Insurance component of Handloom Weavers’ 
Comprehensive Welfare Scheme does not coincide with the 
financial year, the expenditure is higher in the last quarter.   
   
  The fund allocated for Technical Textiles in the BE, 2011-
12 was Rs. 50.00 crore, which was revised to Rs. 38.00 crore 
in the RE, 2011 -12. Rs. 25.10 crore was allocated under the 
Capital Expenditure and Rs. 12.90 crore was allocated in the 
Revenue Expenditure. As Technology Mission on Technical 
Textiles (TMTT) is a capital intensive scheme, the bulk money 
under Revenue Head could not be spent." 
 
   
3.2  The Committee had, in the past, repeatedly  exhorted  the 
Ministry to devise a mechanism so that funds could be utilized 
evenly in all four quarters so far as practicable.  The Ministry in 
their reply had stated as under:  
  "The Ministry has put in place a mechanism for regular  
  review and monitoring of Plan  Schemes, for fully   
  utilizing the plan allocation evenly in all the four   
  quarters. " 
 
 
3.3  On being asked that in spite of regular review and 
monitoring of schemes, why 47% of funds remained unutilized, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
"BE for Annual Plan - 2011-12 was Rs. 5000.00 cror e, 
which was revised to Rs  5503 crore at the Revised 
Estimate  stage. An amount of Rs.1165.00 crore was 
earmarked for  VSE segment and Rs.3835.00 for 
Industry (BE figures). The total utilization is Rs 3302.97 

19 
 
crore i.e . 66.06 and 62.28 percent over BE & R E 
respectively as on 22.03.2012. The Ministry had indeed 
put in place a mechanism for regular review and 
monitoring of Plan Schemes for fully utilizing the plan 
allocation for 2011-12.  
    
   Following steps are being taken to evenly spread the 
  expenditure of funds during every quarter of the year:  
 
 Along with the progress of physical and 
financial targets in respect of the schemes, the 
expenditure is regularly  monitored in the 
Senior Officers’ Meeting (SOM) chaired by 
Secretary (Textiles) and in -house review 
meetings for the various schemes.   
 These meetings are in addition to various fora  
at which review of the Plan schemes is 
undertaken. For example, periodica l review 
reports are furnished to the Planning 
Commission. Further, Planning Commission 
takes the Performance Review Meetings, on 
half-yearly and yearly basis, of the various 
schemes being implemented by the Ministry. 
In such meetings, representatives from  State 
Governments and  implementing agencies 
are also called for discussions.   
 
 Efforts are also being made for expediting 
submission of  project proposals of schemes 
wherever required so as to  ensure timely 
and even spending of funds. 
 
 Implementation o f projects sanctioned under 
different  schemes is being closely monitored. 
Field officers are being  instructed to 
increase the pace of inspections for effective 
implementation of schemes and based on 
their reports, grants  are released or 
curtailed. 

20 
 
 
 The Ministry in the 11 th Five Year Plan had an 
allocation  of Rs. 14000 crore against which on 
expenditure of Rs. 18000  crore has been incurred, 
reflecting successful scheme  implementation. For 
2011-12 additional allocation of Rs. 500 crores was 
available a fter the 3 rd supplementary. Expenditure 
progress has been on lines of 2010 -11. However the 
investment slowdown meant that a number of schemes 
operated as backended subsidies/under PPP mode did 
not see full realization in 2011 -12. An amount of Rs. 
1000 crores  (approx) could not be utilized.   
 For the Jute sector, Mini Mission -III and Mini 
Mission-IV  are being implemented by Ministry of 
Textiles. An amount of Rs. 54 crore was allotted at BE 
stage during 2011-12 under  the JTM Scheme. Since 
the target period for completion of  JTM expired on 
March 31, 2011, a Cabinet Note was prepared  & sent to 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for 
further extension of two years of JTM Scheme, but PMO 
desired that this may first be put up to CoS for their 
 consideration. The COS approval has since been 
received.  Revised Cabinet Note is being sent to CCEA on 
the line of the COS approval. In view of the above, no 
expenditure could be  incurred against the BE of Rs. 
54 during 2011-12 under the JTM Scheme. 
 The reaso n for slow pace of expenditure in 
Handicrafts is  due to the long process of inviting 
application through advertisements in leading 
newspapers across the country, thereafter, the proposals 
are assessed by the Field Offices/Regional Offices and 
grading of e ach assignment is done and finally the 
proposal duly recommended by the Regional Offices are 
approved by the Development 
Commissioner(Handicrafts)/ IFW. Further, after 
sanctioning the proposal the required documentation for 
presenting pre -receipted bill in  the CPAO for payment 
takes at least three weeks as the documents are directly 

21 
 
received from the organizations which are scattered 
across the country. The entire process is a lengthy one 
which requires three to four months to get completed. 
However, the sa me is essential in order to ensure 
transparency & bonafide utilization of funds. Due to 
above reasons the pace remains slow for first two 
quarters." 
 
3.4  Quarter-wise Plan expenditure by the Ministry is given below:- 
 
 Details of BE, RE and actual expenditure quarter wise during 
 2011 – 12 is given below. 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
 
Item BE RE Expenditure 
during the 
quarter 
Cumulative 
Expenditure 
2011 - 12 5000.00 5303.30   
1st quarter 1597.08 1597.08 (as on 
1.7.2011) 
2nd quarter 250.42 1847.50 (as on 
30.9.2011) 
3rd quarter 1048.97 2896.47 (as on 
30.12.2011) 
4th quarter 406.50 3302.97 (as on 
22.3.2012) 
          Source: B&A Section report. 
 
 
3.5  The Ministry updated their reply after the evidence and 
sent the following information: 
 
Item BE RE Expenditure 
during the 
quarter 
Cumulative 
Expenditure 
Allocation 
for TUFS 
Expenditure 
under TUFS 
2011 - 
12 
5000.00 5303.30     
1st 
quarter 
1597.08 1597.08 (as 
on 1.7.2011) 
3100.00 
(62%) 
1343.62 
2nd 
quarter 
250.42 1847.50 (as 
on 30.9.2011) 
8.79 

22 
 
3rd 
quarter 
1048.97 2896.47 (as 
on 
30.12.2011) 
943.54 
4th 
quarter 
1363.07 4259.54 (as 
on 31.3.2012) 
639.45 
 
  
 
3.6  The Ministry further stated that: 
 
"out of the total allotment of Rs.5000 crore, the 
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) has the 
largest allocation of  Rs.3100 crore. With 62% of BE of 
the Ministry allocated to TUFS, even utilization of Plan 
allocation for the Ministry is to a  large extent 
dependent on the utilization under TUFS. Out of  the 
BE of Rs.3100 crore for TUFS, the quarter wise 
expenditure is Rs.1343.62, Rs.8.79, Rs.943.45 and 
Rs.639.45 respectively. The same trend is reflected in the 
quarter wise expenditure of the Ministry. 
  
  The expenditure figures reported earlier were as on  
  13.02.2012 i.e. about one and a half month before close  
  of financial year 2011-12. The total expenditure as on  
  31.3.2012 is Rs.4259.54 crore i.e. 85.19% of BE. Thus,  
  there is no under utilization of fund." 
 
3.7  The Committee note that the Ministry could utilise 
Rs. 4260 crore only out of the BE of  Rs.5000 crore which was 
revised to Rs 5503 crore at RE stage.  As regards the 
compliance with the governmental instructions that the pace 
of expenditure must be even t hrough out the year so far as 
possible, the Ministry had assured the Committee that they 

23 
 
would ensure even pace of expenditure in future.  The 
Committee are dismayed to note that the expenditure during 
2011-12 uptil the last quarter till 22.3.2012,  was Rs  407 crore 
but it increased to Rs 1363 crore by 31.3.2012 in a span of just 
one week. Further, on perusal of the figures of last 5 years, the 
Committee find that the BE for the last 5 years was Rs 18968 
crore, the RE 21143 crore and the actual expenditure was Rs 
18271 crore. Apparently, the claim of Ministry about their 
financial performance does not stand to scrutiny in view of 
their inability to achieve the desired targets. The idling of 
funds to the tune of Rs 2200 crore till the last week of the 
financial year is yet another matter of serious concern which 
needs to be addressed by the Ministry, Worse, rushing 
expenditure at the end of the financial year besides violation of 
governmental instructions, may dilute scrutiny and monitoring 
leading to wasteful  expenditure.  Since budgeting involves 
fixation of priorities, foresight and forecasting based on sound 
analysis of past trends and the monitoring capabilities of the 
Department, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
evolve sound budgeting principles and monitoring mechanism 

24 
 
so that their resources are optimally allocated, there is no 
idling of funds and there is no rush of expenditure at the fag 
end of the financial year. 
3.8 The Committee note that an amount of Rs 54 crore was 
allocated for 2011-12 under the Jute Technology Mission (JTM) 
scheme but no expenditure could be incurred since the target 
period for completion of JTM expired on March 31, 2011. The 
Committee are dismayed to note that the scheme expired on 
March 31, 2011 and till March 31, 2012, the Ministry could not 
get extension of the scheme. The Committee while deploring 
such apathetic attitude of the Government, desire that the 
Ministry should initiate action on such matters well in advance 
so that implementation of any scheme does not suf fer due to 
procedural delays. 
 
  

25 
 
B. Handicrafts 
 
3.9  When the Ministry were asked whether census of 
handicraft artisans has been completed, it was stated that: 
"The census of handicrafts artisans is under progress.  
However based on the coverage of districts undertaken 
and other parameter, the number of artisans employed in 
the handicrafts sector is estimated to be Rs. 68.86 
lakhs."     
  
Analysis of various schemes for Handicraft Sector 
(i) Human Resource Development Scheme  
 
3.10  The Scheme was launched in 11th Plan in 2007-08. 
  The Human Resource Development Scheme has been 
formulated to provide qualified and trained workforce for 
establishing a strong production base coupled with improvement in 
quality and use of appropriate techniques, processes and innovative 
design to meet present day market requirement. 
  Components 
(a)  Training through Established Institutions 

26 
 
(b)     Training in Innovative Designs for the persons involved in 
 Pattern making/Talim writing/Plaster/Rubber 
 Moulds/Block making etc. 
(c)     Training of Artisans/SHG leaders/NGO in capacity 
 building. 
(d)     Conducting Seminars/Workshops 
(e)     Training through Guru Shishya Parampara 
 
3.11  As regards the number of artisans who have undergone 
training under the Human Resource Development scheme vis -à-vis 
targets fixed, the Ministry stated that: 
"Projects are sanctioned under different components of 
HRD scheme as per  the proposals given by the
 implementing agencies wherein the targets interns 
of beneficiaries are indicated and the same are monitored 
accordingly. The total number of trainees trained during 
the year 2011-12 is 16,918.  In HRD scheme against 
the BE & final RE of Rs. 17.75 crores, the expenditure is 
Rs. 16.92 crores during 2011- 12  which is  95.34%. 
The reason for shortfall of 4.66% is  only due to non - 
receipt of viable proposals primarily  from NER region."  
 
 
 

27 
 
3.12  On being asked about the number of a rtisans who have 
been trained through Guru -Shishya Parampara and whether these 
trainees given boarding and lodging facility during the training 
period, the Ministry replied as under: 
   
"2370 number of artisans have been trained through 
Guru-Shisya Parampara Component of HRD  Scheme in 
2011-12. Further, boarding and lodging facility under 
this scheme is not provided to trainees during the period 
of training as the train ees are from near by clusters 
where the Master Trainer i.e. Shilgurus, National 
Awardee/ State Awardee resides.Trainees are selected by 
the Master Trainer itself with the assistance of our local 
field offices." 
 
3.13  The Ministry w ere asked as to how a prospective trainee 
who resides in a remote area and is not a part of any cluster but 
has a great potential can take training under a renowned artisan 
under this scheme, the Ministry replied as under:- 
 
"Total 224 training programmes wer e conducted during 
the year 2011 -12 by Gurus or Master -craftsperson’s 
under Guru -Shishya Paramapra Component. The 
Scheme  aims to provide hands on training locally and 
the Master -craftsperson’s desiring to impart training 
under the Scheme submit their prop osal to concerned 
offices wherein proposals are shortlisted based on the 
eligibility prescribed under the existing guidelines. The 
Gurus or Master -craftsperson’s hail from villages/small 

28 
 
towns across the country and generally reside in craft 
concentrated a reas. The prospective candidate can 
 approach local master-craftsperson for the training 
as a large number of events are organized under the 
scheme covering entire country." 
 
3.14  As regards, duration of courses offered under the scheme 
and timings of classes for artisans, the Ministry replied that: 
"The duration of courses are given below as prescribed  
  under the component Training through established   
  institutions 
 
 
 
   
 
  Timings of courses are generally from 10.00 a.m. to 5.00  
  p.m. However, sometime it changes as per the climatic  
  condition of that area or at convenience of the Master  
  Trainer." 
 
(ii) Research and Development 
 
3.15  Research and Development scheme was introduced to 
conduct surveys and studies of important crafts and make in -depth 
analysis of specific aspects and problems of Handicrafts in order to 
Sl.No Courses Duration 
1 Short term courses  1 month – 3 months 
2 Long term courses  4 months- 9 months.  

29 
 
generate useful inputs, to aid policy Planning and f ine tune the 
ongoing initiatives; and to have independent evaluation of the 
schemes implemented by this office.  The scheme has been 
continued for implementation during the Eleventh five year plan. 
  Following activities have been  under taken during the 
11th Plan. 
 A  Survey Studies. 
 B Conducting all India Census of handicraft artisans @  
  20%  districts of the country every year. 
 C. Registration of Crafts under Geographical Indication Act  
  & Financial support for certification of raw materials  
  and  products. 
 D. Setting up of new labs/strengthening of existing labs for  
  standardization/certification of raw materials.  
 E. Assisting handicrafts exporters in adoption of GSI global  
  identification standards and  for bar coding, including  
  handicrafts mark for generic products. 
 
3.16  The Ministry were asked about the number of new labs 
which have been set up and the number of existing labs 
strengthened for certification/ standardization of raw materials in 
the last 5 years, it was stated that: 
"During the last five year, one lab has  been set up at 
Delhi and funds released for setting of 3 more labs at 

30 
 
Moradabad, Jaipur and Jodhpur.  However , no 
assistance has been provided to strengthen the existing 
labs.  Three more labs at Saharanpur, Sitapu r and 
Agartala have been sanctioned but funds are yet to be 
released." 
 
3.17  On being asked whether any review of the performance of 
the existing labs has been made, the Ministry replied as under: 
"The Government has no lab of its own and hence the 
question of review of its performance does not arise.  
Under the R&D scheme an allocation of Rs. 8.25 crores 
was made in the Budget Estimates and the same was 
reduced to Rs.7.70 crores in the Revised Estim ates and 
the total expenditure during 2011 -12 was to the tune of 
Rs.4.95 crores which constitute utilization of 64.28% 
from the allocation made under Revised Estimates and 
60% against the allocation made under Budget 
Estimates."  
 
 
3.18  As regards , the number of  handicrafts mark that have 
been issued till date and  the procedure for issuing handicrafts 
mark, the reply of Ministry was as follows:- 
"No handicrafts mark has been issued till date. The 
process for establishing feasibility for such mark is under 
examination." 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
(iii) Handicrafts Artisans Comprehensive Welfare Scheme 
  
 The Scheme has been included in the 11th Five Year Plan. 
 Two main components, aimed at Insurance Cover and Health 
 Care of Handicrafts Artisan and his family:- 
 
A. Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana. 
Objective : Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana aims 
at financially enabling the artisans community to access to 
the best of healthcare facilities in the country.  This scheme 
covers not only the artisans but also any three members out 
of spouse, dependent parents and childrens. 
 
 
Eligibility: All craft persons whether male of female, between  
the age group of one day to 80 years will be eligible to be 
Bima Yojana for Handicrafts Artisans. 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
B Bima Yojana for Handicrafts Artisans. 
 
 
Objective : The objective of “Bima Yojana For Handicrafts 
Artisans”  is to provide life insurance protection to the 
Handicrafts Artisans,  whether male or female, between the 
age group of 18-60 years. 
 
 Eligibility: All crafts persons, whether male or female, 
between the age group of 18 -60  years will be eligible to be 
covered under the BIMA Yojana For  Handicrafts Artisans  
covered under the Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima 
Yojana. 
 
3.19  Regarding the rationale behind covering only 3 members 
out of the family of artisans under the Rajiv Gandhi  Shilpi 
Swasthya Bima Yojana, the Ministry replied that  this provision was 
as per the CCEA approved  scheme. 
 
 
 

33 
 
3.20  The Committee note with concern that no authentic 
figures are available regarding the number of artisans employed 
in the handicrafts sector. As per the census conducted in 1995-
96, 47.61 lakhs artisans were employed in handicrafts sector. 
The Ministry have  stated that based on the coverage of the 
districts undertaken and other parameters, the number of 
artisans employed in the handicrafts sector is estimated to be 
68.86 lakhs. A report of the United Nations, however, has 
revealed that over the past 30 years , the number of artisans in 
India has actually declined by 30% as many of these artisans 
have joined the rank of casual labourers and the informal 
economy. The Committee note that although census of artisans 
is in progress but it took the Ministry 17 years  to undertake 
the process. It is inexplicable how the Ministry are introducing 
schemes, fixing targets and reviewing them without 
ascertaining the actual number of artisans. The Committee are 
of the firm view that the Ministry undertake census of the 
artisans every 10 years as this would help them formulating, 
implementing and reviewing the schemes meant for the sector 
more effectively. 

34 
 
 
3.21  The Committee note that 1393 clusters have been 
sanctioned under the Baba Saheb Hastshilp Vikas Yojana till 
March, 2012. Out of 68.86 lakhs artisans in the country only a 
few are clustered artisans with the result a preponderant 
majority are deprived of the benefits which accrue to clustered 
artisans. These artisans cannot get the benefits under the 
scheme, which makes  them dependent on middlemen who 
exploit them. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government come out with a comprehensive scheme to provide 
quality raw material, training, marketing platform and credit 
facilities to the artisans who are not part  of any cluster or are 
living in remote areas. The Committee also feel that more and 
more visits by the officials of DC(Handicrafts) may be made to 
the remotest of areas where  handicraft artisans reside to make 
them aware of the benefits of clusterisation  etc. besides 
making publicity of various schemes and by involving  local 
governments in a big way. 
 

35 
 
3.22  The Committee note that under the Rajiv Gandhi 
Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana only 3 members of a family of 
artisans are covered. The Committee feel tha t the dependents 
in an average family of artisan include his spouse, two children 
and dependant parents which makes it 5 people.  In such a 
situation, it is very difficult for a poor artisan to bear the 
medical expenses of other family members who are depe ndant 
on him. The Committee, thus, find the cover given to 3 
members of an artisan’s family inadequate. The Committee, 
therefore,  recommend that the number of family members 
should be increased to at least 5.   
 
 
3.23  Under the Guru Shishya Parampara com ponent of the 
HRD scheme, the Committee find that training is provided only 
to the artisans from nearby clusters where the Master trainer 
resides. The Committee are, however, of the consdiered view 
that the training under the scheme should not be limited t o 
those living in nearby clusters but also extended to those living 
in remote areas whose skills need to be honed or upgraded. 

36 
 
Considering their financial distress, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should also give suitable TA/DA to these 
trainees by way of incentive. 
   
  The Committee also note that the timings of the 
courses are generally from 10am to 5pm and sometimes, it 
changes as per the climatic conditions of that area or at the 
convenience of the Master Trainer. The Committee feel that 
the concept of flexible timing may be introduced for the 
courses taking into account the fact that the trainees may 
include women who have to take care of their homes and 
children and artisans who would like to get training after their 
working hours.  
   
  Further, the Committee find that funds have been 
released for setting of 3 labs under the Research and 
Development Scheme and the Government do not review the 
performance of these labs as they have no labs of their own. 
The Committee find it strange that Ministry are giving funds to 
labs without having any check on their performance and 

37 
 
efficiency. The Committee recommend that Government ought 
to monitor the performance of the labs being funded by them 
to ensure that public funds are utilized properly and 
effectively. 
 
3.24  The Committee note that the Government are 
implementing various schemes for the handicrafts sector but 
statedly,   in spite of their best efforts, only 71% of the total 
budgetary allocation could be spent.  In order to make the  
schemes successful, the Committee recommend that more and 
more NGOs should be involved in the process of 
implementation and monitoring. Since, the handicrafts sector 
is largely unorganized, the Government need to take suitable 
action to upgrade the skills of the art isans, make available 
quality raw material on easy terms, provide credit facilities, 
provide market exposure to them and eliminate middlemen. 
The Committee also recommend that in order to make 
handicrafts commercially viable, different Ministries should 
work in tandem to give momentum to the exports of Indian 
handicrafts. Handicraft mark on the lines of handloom mark 

38 
 
may also be introduced at the earliest so that genuine Indian 
craft can be differentiated from the counterfeits.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the measures initiated 
in this behalf in due course. 
  

39 
 
C.  Powerlooms 
 
3.25  As per the information received from the Ministry: 
"Survey to have authentic field level data on Powerlooms  
has not yet been conducted.  However, considering the 
necessity of authentic field level data for planning 
purposes steps have been taken to conduct a powerloom 
survey.  An Agency has been engaged to conduct the 
Powerloom Survey.  The advance payment is b eing 
released.  The Survey Report is likely to be completed 
within 9 months. 
 
3.26  Government of India have launched a revised Scheme 
`welfare of Powerloom workers through Group Insurance Scheme’ in 
association with LIC from 1st July 2003.  
3.27  In accordance with the XIth Five Year Plan, the scheme 
has been modified by merging the existing Janashree Bima Yojana 
(JBY) Scheme and Add-on Group Insurance Scheme (GIS) w.e.f. 1st 
January 2008. As per the modified Scheme, the total premium is 
Rs.330/- out of which, Rs.150/- is to be borne by the Office of the 
Textile Commissioner, Government of India and Rs.100/ - is being 
paid by the LIC from the social security fund of Government of 
India.  Only a premium of Rs.80/ - is to be paid by the powerloom 

40 
 
weaver for getting the benefits under the said scheme. The coverage 
benefit under the scheme is as under: 
 Natural death      – Rs.60,000/- 
 Accidental  Death     - Rs. 1,50,000/- 
 Total Permanent  Disability   - Rs. 1,50,000/- 
 Partial Permanent  Disability  -  Rs. 75,000/- 
 
In addition to the above, a worker under JBY will also be entitled 
the educational grant of Rs.600/ - per child/ per half year for two 
children studying in IX to XII standard for a maximum period of 4 
years under Shiksha Sahayog Yojana (SSY) 
 
3.28  Regarding incentives that are available to powerloom 
weavers whose children desire to pursue higher studies under 
Janashree Bima Yojana, the Ministry replied that: 
 
"The Janashree Bima Yojana is being implemented by the 
Ministry of Textiles under Group Insurance Scheme for 
powerloom workers / weavers.  The Shiksha 
SahayogYojana (SSY) attached to the scheme presently 
limits coverage of two children of beneficiaries studying 
in 9 th to 12 th standards and there is no coverage at 
present for higher studies beyond 12th class." 
 

41 
 
3.29  On being asked about the main features of Health 
Insurance Scheme for powerloom workers/ weavers, the Ministry 
stated as under: 
 
"At present there is no Health Insurance Scheme  
available for powerloom weavers.  During the 12 th Five 
Year Plan a Health Insurance Scheme on the lines of 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) with OPD 
facilities will be implemented in areas where the RSBY 
does not cover this sector, subject to the approval by the 
Planning Commission." 
 
 
3.30  About the number of Powerloom Service Centres in 
existence and that opened in last 5 years and  the role of Powerloom 
Service centres, the Ministry informed that:- 
 
"There are 44 Powerloom Service Centres ( PSCs) in the 
Country, out of which 14 are functioning under the direct 
administrative control of Office of the Textile 
Commissioner, Ministry of Textiles and rest 30 centres  
are under the Textile Research Associations / State Govt. 
Agencies with financial support from Govt. of India in the  
form of  Grant in aid. During last five years,  one  
Powerloom Service Centre has been approved at Imphal 
(Manipur).  The fund of Rs. 70 La khs (out of approved  
fund of Rs. 94.47 Lakhs) has been released to State Govt. 
of Manipur to open a powerloom service centre at Imphal 
under State Govt. of Manipur.  The role of Powerloom 
Service Centre is as follows:  
 

42 
 
(i)To impart practical training and skill to powerloom 
weavers and those who are interested in taking to this 
vocation to help them acquire the requisite knowledge 
and skill in weaving to improve their efficiency and skill 
in producing better quality clothes and in stepping up 
their productivity;  
(ii)To impart training in the various aspects of loom 
working, loom maintenance and tuning, loom repairs and 
servicing. 
(iii)To disseminate knowledge and techniques to 
powerloom weavers by visiting groups of such weavers on 
certain fixed days of every month, in increasing 
productivity and efficiency, reducing wastage and 
minimising cloth damage at minimum possible costs; 
(iv)To guide the powerloom weavers about modernisation, 
the manner in which they may go about it and the 
agencies which they may approach for financial 
assistance for it; 
(v)To carry out an annual survey to collect and compile 
statistical information on the number of powerloom units 
and looms and also on the numb er of powerlooms 
modernised and to make an assessment of the effect of 
such modernisation on production, productivity and 
quality of the products of the units; 
(vi)To guide the powerloom weavers in marketing their 
products, including availing themselves of  the export 
opportunities; 
(vii)To provide testing facilities to the powerloom sector;  
(viii)To conduct Seminars/Workshops and organise 
exhibitions for the benefit of the powerloom sector; 
(ix)To co -ordinate the powerloom development activities 
with the State Government Authorities; 
(x)To act as an agent to transmit the problems of the 
powerloom sector to appropriate quarters for solving 
them; 
(xi)To provide technical consultation facility by rendering 
technical service; and 
(xii)To advise and guide powerl oom units in design 
development and diversification of activities so as to 

43 
 
facilitate their achieving economy in the scale of 
operations."  
 
3.31  The Ministry were asked whether these powerloom 
service centres provide managerial and entrepreneurial traini ng to 
the weavers, they replied: 
  "The PSCs are providing trainings only for workers /  
  weavers for employment in powerloom sector. The PSCs  
  are not providing any Managerial Training." 
 
3.32  As regards permanent marketing areas for the powerloom 
weavers to prevent exploitation by the middlemen/ commission 
agents, the Ministry stated that: 
 
"At present no permanent areas / plots etc. are assigned 
for powerloom weavers. However, Mega Cluster Scheme 
and Integrated Scheme for Powerloom Sector  
Development proposed for 12 th Plan do envisage separate 
marketing area for facilitating the clusters marketing 
effort in an organized way. Buyer Seller Meets are 
organized where the powerloom weavers display their 
products to attract buyers/ traders/ whole  sellers to 
participate in the meet. Accordingly , the powerloom 
weavers are facilitated to approach directly to the buyers 
to avoid middlemen / commission agent for marketing 
their products.  The buyer-seller meet are often held in 
same places in the same year being such area being  
potentially rich area, on account of  results of sale in the 
previous years and proximity to the buyers e.g. buyer 
seller meet is invariably held in Mumbai every year where 

44 
 
buyer groups like Mumbai Merchant Mahajan, 
Hindustan Ch amber of Commerce etc. participate in 
large numbers." 
 
 
3.33  When asked about the facilities available to the weavers 
who are not part of any clusters and are technologically backward 
to get the knowledge of the state -of–the–art technology and adopt 
new techniques which are within their means , the Ministry replied 
that: 
"Government of India has implemented 20% Margin 
Money Subsidy (MMS) under TUFS on investment on 
modern technology of machines in powerloom units. 
There were other options of the subsidy / r eimbursement 
of the interest under TUFS which can also be availed by 
powerloom units for upgrading the technology in their 
units. The Group Workshed Scheme was also 
implemented for construction of the Sheds with subsidy 
provided by the Government to set up  the powerloom 
units with modern technology as per TUFS norms. The 
schemes implemented by Government were uniformly 
applicable all over the country.  The powerloom  weavers  
outside of clusters  are also included in all the 
programmes/exposure visits for awareness of technology, 
product development, market etc."  
 
3.34  About the steps taken to provide adequate linkages in 
terms of availability of raw materials and credit to the clusters and 
individual weavers by the Ministry, it was stated that: 

45 
 
 
"At present, there is no scheme to provide credit facilities 
or raw material  to powerloom weavers. Regarding credit 
facility to the individual weaver, officials of Regional 
Office / Powerloom Service Centres, are used to conduct 
meetings, seminars, workshops with p owerloom weavers, 
bank officials, etc. to apprise  the benefit and need of 
modernization and to extend the credit facility to 
weavers.   
   
 However, typical hard interventions like Yarn Bank 
pre-weaving or processing etc.  are proposed in the 
Integrated Scheme for powerloom sector development as 
recommended by the Working Group on Powerloom for 
the 12th Plan." 
 
3.35  The Committee are concerned to note that no survey 
to have authentic field level data on powerlooms  has been 
conducted so far. The Committee also note that now an agency 
has been engaged to conduct the powerloom survey and the 
survey report is reportedly to be completed within next 9 
months and in their considered view formulation of schemes, 
without a fair assessment of the target group and the 
dimensions of the problems afflicting them, is a shot in the 
dark. The Committee, therefore, hardly need to stress that the 
Ministry first undertake a comprehensive survey of the 
powerloom sector and then formulate the scheme(s).   

46 
 
 
3.36  The Committee note that the powerloom weavers 
covered under Janashree Bima Yojana are entitled to an 
educational grant of Rs 600 per child/ per half year for two 
children studying in IX to XII standard for a maximum period 
of 4 y ears under the Shiksha Sahayog Yojana (SSY).  The 
Committee feel that such grants should also be extended to 
those weavers whose children are meritorious and wish to take 
up professional courses as such grants are incentives to those 
parents who want their wards to study.   
 
3.37  The Committee note that there is no Health 
Insurance Scheme available for the powerloom weavers.  
However, a Health Insurance Scheme on the lines of RSBY is 
proposed to be implemented in areas where the RSBY does not 
cover the pow erloom sector during 12 th Plan, subject to 
approval by the Planning Commission. The Committee are 
unable to understand the rationale behind such a delay in 
introducing a Health Insurance Scheme for powerloom weavers 
when there is already a similar scheme i n operation for 

47 
 
handloom weavers and handicrafts artisans. The Committee 
feel that instead of introducing a new scheme, the Rajiv Gandhi 
Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana or the Health Insurance Scheme 
for handloom weavers be extended to the powerloom weavers 
also.   
 
3.38  The Committee note that during last five years one 
Powerloom Service Centre has been approved at Imphal. The 
Committee also note that the role of Powerloom Service 
Centres include imparting practical training and skill to 
powerloom weavers in various aspects. The Committee find 44 
service centers  far from adequate for the powerloom industry 
in which the weavers are largely untrained. The Committee are 
of the considered view that the Government consider opening 
new institutes for pr oviding training to the powerloom 
weavers/workers in all aspects relating to powerloom sector. 
The Powerloom Service Centres should also impart training in 
managerial courses for existing entrepreneurs as well as for 
new entrants. The Powerloom Service Cen tres besides 
providing training may also educate the weavers and 

48 
 
entrepreneurs about the various schemes of the Government 
meant for the powerloom sector.  
 
3.39  The Committee observe that there are no permanent 
places for the weavers to sell their produc ts and this is one of 
the major problems for small time powerloom weavers due to 
which  they are exploited by unscrupulous middle -men and 
agents. The Committee recommend that special marketing 
areas/places be set up where these weavers can go and sell 
their products without depending on the middlemen and 
agents. Taking note that the Government give 20% margin 
money subsidy under TUFS on investment on modern 
technology of machines in powerloom units, the Committee are 
of the considered view that the Governme nt should also come 
out with another scheme specially for small powerloom owners 
who are working on obsolete looms and cannot take benefits of 
the ambitious schemes of the Ministry but need smaller sums 
for upgrading of their looms.  The Committee, therefo re, 
recommend that the Government undertake a separate study 

49 
 
on the needs of small powerloom owners and come out with a 
proposal/scheme for their development.  
  The Committee further find that there is no scheme 
to provide credit facilities or raw materia l to powerloom 
weavers. The Committee find it a step motherly treatment 
towards the powerloom weavers and urge the Government to 
look into the problems of this sector and come out with a 
comprehensive scheme for their benefit at the earliest. 
  

50 
 
 
D.Integrated Skill Development Scheme (ISDS) 
  
3.40  The objective of the Scheme is capacity building of 
Institutions providing skill development & training in Textiles 
Sector.  This Scheme is in line with the National Skill Development 
Policy. A sectoral target of training 100 lakh persons by the year 
2022 in the Textile sector has been fixed.  The Scheme has two 
components: 
Component 1: Skill development by augmenting and strengthening 
the capacity of institutions and schemes under Ministry of Textiles. 
Through this component, the target would be to train an estimated 
additional 11.25 lakh persons in various skill sets covering all 
segments under the ambit of the Ministry of Textiles over  a period 
of 5 years. 
 
Component 2: skill development in partnership with the private 
sector. The target would be to train an estimated 15.50 lakh 

51 
 
persons in all segments through a PPP model over a period of 5 
years. 
 
 The target of the Ministry of Textiles is to train an additi onal 
11.25 lakh persons in various skill sets over a period of 5 years 
under the Integrated Skill Development Scheme. 
 
3.41  When asked about the  courses being offered for the 
trainers under Integrated Skill Development Scheme and steps 
taken to update their knowledge, the Ministry stated that: 
 
"Under the component I of the scheme, 18 proposals had 
been approved which covered all facets of skill 
development including 'Training of Trainers’ (ToT) in 
Apparel, Textiles including Handloom & Handicraft 
Sector. The trainers for conducting the courses are 
technically well qualified and have adequate experience of 
training. On an average, all the trainers have experience 
of more than 5 years of teaching/training in their 
subject.    Thus, as per the requirement of the course, the 
trainers undergo orientation training which covers the 
details about the scheme, training schedule and content, 
about the target beneficiaries etc.   Apparel Training and 
Design Center (ATDC), one of the implementing agencies 
under Component I of the scheme has even established a 
ToT Academy for training their trainers." 
 

52 
 
3.42  On being asked that whether it is ensured that trainers 
are conversant in local languages and whether the y are computer 
literate, it was stated that: 
 
"The implementing agencies are ensuring that the 
trainers are conversant in local languages. The trainers 
for the courses covered under the scheme are computer 
literate in most of the cases; however in handicraft 
sector, the trainers are not computer literate."  
 
 3.43  As regards any provision for imparting soft skills to the 
trainees and whether there are any professional trainers for 
imparting such skills, the Ministry stated that: 
    
 "There are provisions for imparting soft skills to the 
trainees. As of no w there are no professional trainers 
being engaged by the agencies for the soft skills 
training; however , the trainers are giving soft skills 
training also as per the requirement of the course." 
 
3.44  On being asked about how the courses advertised ,  the 
Ministry informed  that: 
"The courses are advertised by individual implementing 
agencies using the following medium: 
 
• Sending e-mails to industry on ISDS and training  

53 
 
• Distribution of notices 
• Hand bills distribution in public places. 
• Newspaper articles and advertisements 
• Scroll advertisements on local TV Channels" 
 
 
3.45  When the Ministry were asked whether dedicated 
personnel were employed for motivating people to take up the 
courses offered under ISDS, it was stated that:- 
  
"No, the Minis try had not employed dedicated personnel 
for motivating people to take up the courses offered 
under ISDS,  however , some of the implementing 
agencies had employed dedicated mobilisers for 
motivating people to take up the courses offered under 
ISDS. In many  of the implementing agencies , these 
activities are being undertaken by project 
directors/coordinators/trainers. NGOs/State Govt. 
agencies had also been contacted for mobilization of 
candidates." 
 
 
3.46  As regards the major recommendations under the 
Component I of the scheme by PMMC , the following information 
was supplied by the Ministry : 
a. Dedicated mobilisers to be engaged by all 
Implementing Agencies (IAs)  for effective mobilization 
and explore various other options also for mobilization 
of the candidates. 
 

54 
 
b. A refresher programme for all the trainers should be 
organized by all IA s  to ensure standardization in 
training at all the training centers of the IAs. Trainer’s 
Manual can be developed by IAs which can cover not 
only the course material but also the day wise 
schedule, roles and responsibilities of trainers, 
training pedagogy, det ails about practical exercises, 
assessment procedures, MIS and maintenance of 
documents etc.  
 
c. Every course should have a trainer’s manual and it 
should be given to each trainer. 
 
d. All implementing agencies should develop 
Participants’ Handbook which shall cover course 
content in pictorial form wherever possible and 
should be in local language. Every trainee should be 
provided with the Participants’ Handbook. 
 
e. Soft Skills training should be the integral part of the 
training and should be conducted for each b atch. The 
topics such as Discipline, Motivation, Stress 
Management, Anger Management etc. can also be 
included so that they can adjust better at the 
workplace and improve their personality and self -
confidence. These soft skills trainings should be 
conducted by a professional soft skills trainer to make 
the session effective and add to the personality of the 
trainees 
 
f. A scientific method of evaluation need to be developed 
to maintain standardization in assessment across all 
the centers. The methodology and p arameters of 
evaluation of the quality of practical samples should 
be clearly mentioned. 
 

55 
 
 Post training tracking of the candidates should be 
undertaken by all IAs to ensure actual benefits of the 
programme including self-employment. 
 
 
3.47  About the sour ces of revenue generation of the various 
implementing agencies under the scheme and whether the industry 
is contributing towards overall revenue generation of these 
agencies, the Ministry furnished that:- 
"The major source of revenue of the implementing 
agencies is through fee from the candidates. In case of 
some of the implementing agencies, industry is 
contributing towards overall revenue generation in terms 
of sponsorship of course fee and infrastructure such as 
machines and space." 
 
3.48.1  The Commit tee note that 18 proposals have 
been approved covering all facets of skill development 
including ‘Training of Trainers’ under the component I of the 
Integrated Skill Development Scheme and the orientation of 
trainers. The Committee are of the view that the  trainers 
should be informed about other schemes of the Ministry which 
might benefit the trainees.  The Committee also recommend 
that besides imparting the computer skills, trainers should also 
be given training for imparting soft skills. The Committee 

56 
 
recommend that it should be made compulsory for 
implementing agencies to recruit trainers who are well 
conversant in local language.  Besides, the material for courses 
should also be in vernacular languages.  The courses offered be 
more oriented towards impar ting practical knowledge and the 
refresher programmes for updating the knowledge of trainers 
should be conducted regularly and TA/DA paid to the trainers 
for attending such programmes. 
   
3.48.2  The Committee note  that the Ministry have not 
employed dedicated personnel for motivating people to take up 
the courses offered under the Scheme. The Committee endorse 
the view of the Project Management Consultant that dedicated 
mobilisers be engaged by all the implementing  agencies for 
effective mobilization and to explore various other options for 
mobilization of the candidates.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that dedicated mobilisers would, help the 
other personnel involved with the implementation of the 
scheme in concentrating on other areas. These mobilisers can 
also track the trainees in case there is an increase in drop -out 

57 
 
rates in any area, liaison with NGOs/industry and with their 
help the remotest of areas can also be accessed. 
 
3.49  The Committee find that the Ministry have not 
carried out any impact study of the courses being offered under 
the scheme. The Committee also note that as of February 2012 
out of 28664 candidates, 6096 have been placed in industry 
and 5378 have opted for self employment.  The  Committee are 
of the view that impact study needs to be carried out to gauge 
the effectiveness of the courses being offered as these are at 
the nascent stage and hence can be altered easily. The 
Committee feel that industry must be encouraged for recruiting 
the pass-outs on the campuses of these institutes. The Ministry 
can also coordinate with the industry to give hands -on training 
to these candidates and share the stipend to be paid to the 
trainees till the confidence of industry is built. Further, the 
industry may also be encouraged to sponsor candidates for 
these courses.   
 
 

58 
 
 
 
E. Textile Production and Exports 
 
3.50  When asked about the reasons for decline in growth of cloth 
production during April -December, 2011 particularly in powerloom 
and hosiery, man-made fibre production, filament yarn production and 
cotton yarn production, the Ministry gave the following information:- 
 
"Man-made fibre production recorded decrease of about 6% 
and filament yarn production recorded a decrease of about 
2% during Nov .2011.  During April -November, 2011, the 
decline was 2% and 7% respectively.  Cotton yarn 
production decreased by 19% during Nov.2011 and by 13% 
during April-Nov.2011.  Blended and 100% non -cotton yarn 
production remained the same during November, 2011 and  
increased by 5% during the year April -Nov.2011.  Cloth 
production by handloom and powerloom segments increased 
by 5% and 3% and hosiery production decreased by 7% 
during Nov.2011.  During April -Nov.2011, production by 
handloom increased by 3%, powerloom a nd hosiery sectors 
decreased by 4% and 16% respectively.  The total cloth 
production decreased by about 1% during Nov.2011 and by 
6% during April-Nov.2011." 
 
 

59 
 
 
F. Minimum support price for cotton  
3.51  To protect the interests of the cotton growers, the 
Government of India fixes Minimum Support Prices (MSP) of kapas 
(Seed cotton) every year on the recommendation of Commission on 
Agricultural Costs & Prices (CACP) which takes into account the cost of 
cultivation per hectare, cost of production per quintal in various 
regions of the country, changes in input prices like seeds, pesticides, 
fertilizers etc., demand and supply situation, effect of industrial cost 
structure, parity between prices paid and prices received by the cotton 
farmers etc., plus a reasonable profit margin to the cotton farmers. 
3.52  When asked the reasons for decrease in investment in TUFS, 
the Secretary during the evidence stated that:- 
"Basically, there were two or three broad reasons.  One is, 
the interest rates are very high.  When we started the 
scheme, after TUFS subsidy of 5 per cent, they were paying 
2 to 3 per cent for the cost of the borrowed capital.  Now, it 
is coming to about 7 to 8 per cent.  7 to 8 per cent after a 
subsidy of five per cent is a very large amount.  They would 
rather wait.  In addition, the markets are low.  If they 
produce and their end product is not getting sold, where is 
the question that you will have the money to put your equity 
to be able to get in service your loan at such high rates? 

60 
 
  
 
 As I said, there are two or three reasons.  This is the 
main reason.  We have been talking to the industry and this 
is what we get from them that production is low, the off take 
is low, markets are down so, putting mone y into 
upgradation or into expansion does not make sense 
especially when you are not sure that you will get enough of 
a profit to be able to plough into feeding the capital 
expenditure, the interest rates at this rate. 
 Secondly, as I said, cotton became v ery volatile last 
year.  As a result of which cotton mills were left with a very 
high inventory.  When inventory is high, your working 
capital is totally squeezed.  So, there again they were not in 
a position to move. 
 Thirdly, in addition to everything el se the hosiery 
sector has practically come down, it shut down in 2010.  
Tirupur is the major hosiery cluster in India.  Their off take 
of hosiery yarn practically died and, therefore, their growth 
and output had stopped.  This was because they had 
effluent treatment plant problems which are now being 
addressed.  Slowly, new technologies have been found.  They 
are being put down to a zero liquid discharge.  As a result of 
zero liquid discharge they are facing higher costs and 
technology is also being tested.   They are running at about 
20to 30 per cent." 
 
 
 
 

61 
 
3.53  The Committee are concerned to note that the cotton 
yarn production decreased by 19% during November 2011 and 
by 13% during April to November 2011. The Committee are  of 
the view that improving cotton acreage and productivity is the 
key for improving the competitiveness of Indian textiles. The 
Committee note that though Cotton Technology Mission has 
been set up for the purpose but still a lot needs to be done. 
Similarly,  more R&D needs to be undertaken in the field 
including sufficient investment in research programmes related 
to the betterment of cottonseeds and improving their 
productivity. Further, the Committee find that Indian weavers 
are still working on obsolete  looms and a weaver who is 
preoccupied with the volatility in cotton yarn prices cannot 
think of modernizing his looms. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that urgent steps be taken to maintain a balance 
between the interests of both the weavers and the i ndustry by 
at least providing raw material to small weavers at reasonable 
prices in volatile situations. 
 

62 
 
3.54  The Committee note that no subsidy is given under 
TUFS for ventures in investment in new designing techniques. 
The Committee are of the consider ed view that the Indian 
textile industry lacks on the innovation front and, therefore, 
any initiative for new techniques should be encouraged and 
subsidy given to such ventures. The Committee also note that 
subsidy is no longer being given for the setting up of common 
effluent treatment plants under the restructured TUFS. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that, if not under TUFS, the 
Ministry might think of giving other incentives to the 
entrepreneurs who set up the effluent treatment plants 
voluntarily. The Committee also note that the revised TUFS 
Scheme has not been received well by the Industry. The 
Committee feel that since the cost of borrowing capital has 
increased, the scheme has become prohibitive specially for the 
small investors. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry should come out with some innovative scheme to 
maintain the tempo of the process of modernization of Indian 
textile industry. 
 

63 
 
3.55  The Committee are constrained to point out a general 
want of due diligence in many w ings/offices of the Ministry 
given their persistent failure to stick to the given time lines 
while responding to parliamentary matters.  In their considered 
view delay in submitting the information sought is indicative of 
poor control and command system an d a cavalier attitude 
which must be corrected.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the corrective measures taken in this regard to 
ensure that assurance given to Parliament is fulfilled within the 
stipulated time. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                     HEMANAND BISWAL 
 30th April,  2012                                   CHAIRMAN,           
10 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)   STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.   
 
 
  

64 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 13TH APRIL, 2012.  
 
The Committee met  from 1 430 hrs. to 1 700 hrs. in  the  
Committee Room `E'', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to  take  
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Textiles on 
Demands for Grants for the year 2012-13. 
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.     Shri Raj Babbar 
3.     Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4.     Shri Narahari Mahto 
5.     Shri Hari Manjhi  
6.     Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
7.     Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
8.     Ms. J. Shantha 
9.     Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
 
  
  RAJYA SABHA  
10. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
11. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
12. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
13. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
   
 
 
 

65 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
LIST OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES  
Sl.No. Name of the Officer 
Designation 
1. Smt. Kiran Dhingra Secretary 
2. Shri Sourabh Chandra AS & FA 
3. Shri V. Srinivas Joint Secretary  
4. Smt. Monika S. Garg Joint Secretary  
5. Shri Sujit Gulati Joint Secretary 
6. Smt. Sunaina Tomar Joint Secretary 
6. Shri N.D. George Economic Advisor 
7. Shri R.N. Choubey DC (Handlooms) 
8. Shri S.S. Gupta DC (Handicrafts) 
9. Smt. Shamsher Kaur CCA 
10. Smt. Ishita Roy Member, Secretary, CSB 
11. Shri A.B. Joshi Textile Commissioner 
12. Shri K.R. Pillai CMD, NTC 
13. Shri B.K. Mishra CMD, CCI 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman congratulated Smt. Kiran Dhingra 
on taking charge as Secretary, Ministry of Textiles. He welcomed 
her and other accompanying officials of the Ministry of Textiles and 

66 
 
invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 (1) 
of the Directions by the Speaker.   
3. The Chairman, thereafter, asked the Secretary to brief the 
Committee regarding the Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the 
Ministry of Textiles. 
 
4. The Secretary briefed the Committee on the budgetary 
allocations, revised estimates and the actual expenditure for the 
last year vis-à-vis for the year 2012 -13 on various 
schemes/programmes undertaken by the Ministry through a power 
point presentation.  
 
5. The members, thereafter, asked questions and sought specific 
clarifications from the representatives of the Ministry on the various 
schemes and programmes of the Ministry. The following issues were 
broadly discussed:-   
(a)  General Performance of the Ministry regarding Plan and 
Non-Plan allocations of the current year and actual 
utilization of budget allocated during the previous year. 
(b)  Need for even pace of expenditure of plan funds and 
utilization thereof so far as possible. 
(c) Objectives of the Ministry under the 12th Plan. 
(d) E-auctioning of NTC land. 
(e) Brand Building for silk and handlooms. 

67 
 
  (f) Status and activities of NIFT in Srinagar.   
(g) Reasons for decrease in investment under TUFS 
(h) Inaccuracies in Outcome Budget and Detailed Demands 
for Grants. 
(i) Basis, and audit, of Grants to Private Organisation and 
the need for their review so as to deriv e assurance that 
the public money was being spent on approved projects. 
(j) Cash incentive scheme for promotion of Exports of 
carpets and handicrafts. 
(k) Efforts made by the Ministry for utilization of 10% 
support being given to North-Eastern region. 
(l) Updation of website of Ministry of Textiles and reference 
of various schemes on website. 
(m)  Adequate availability of raw material for the textiles 
industry. 
(n) Modernization of silk industry and availability of raw silk 
to the weavers and exploration of  new markets and new 
usages of silk products. 
(o) Encroachment of NTC land and development of multi 
storey buildings and shop complexes on these lands. 
(p) Coverage of only 3 members of family of artisans under 
Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana. 
(q) Institutes for courses on handicrafts sector. 

68 
 
 
6. The Chairman directed the Secretary to send written replies to 
the unanswered queries of the members to the Secretariat within 
two days. 
7. The Chairman thanked the Secretary and other officials for 
giving valuable information to the Committee on various subjects. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 [A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record]. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

69 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 30TH APRIL, 2012.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs in Room 
No.116, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt 
the draft Reports on Demands for Grants for the year 2012 -13 of 
the Ministry of Labour  and Employment and Ministry of Textiles 
and Action Taken Report on the Seventeenth Report on `Welfare of 
Beedi Workers'.  
PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
3. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4. Shri Narahari Mahato 
5. Ms. Mausam Noor 
6. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
7.      Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 8. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
 9. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 10. Dr. E.M.Sudarsana Natchiappan 
 11. Shri Rajaram 
 12. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  
     
 
 

70 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the draft Reports on Demands for Grants for 
the year 2012-13 of the Ministry of Labour and Employment and 
Ministry of Textiles and Action Taken Report on the Seventeenth 
Report on `Welfare of Beedi Workers'.  
  
3.  The Committee then took up the draft Reports one by one in 
the following order and after detailed deliberations, the Committee 
adopted the draft Reports without any modification: 
   
 (i) Draft Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
  Labour and Employment for the year 2012-13; 
 (ii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
  Textiles for the year 2012-13; and 
 (iii) Action taken by the Government on the     
  Recommendations/Observations contained in the   
  Seventeenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on `Welfare of  
  Beedi Workers'. 
 
 
 

71 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the  Chairman to finalise the 
Reports and to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

72 
 
APPENDIX 
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
No. Recommendations/Observations 
1. 
 
3.7  The Committee note that the Ministry could 
utilise Rs. 4260 crore only out of the BE of  
Rs.5000 crore which was revised to Rs 5503 
crore at RE stage.  As regards the compliance 
with the governmental instructions that the 
pace of expenditure must be even t hrough out 
the year so far as possible, the Ministry had 
assured the Committee that they would ensure 
even pace of expenditure in future.  The 
Committee are dismayed to note that the 
expenditure during 2011 -12 uptil the last 
quarter till 22.3.2012,  was Rs  407 crore but it 
increased to Rs 1363 crore by 31.3.2012 in a 
span of just one week. Further, on perusal of the 
figures of last 5 years, the Committee find that 
the BE for the last 5 years was Rs 18968 crore, 
the RE 21143 crore and the actual expenditure 
was Rs 18271 crore. Apparently, the claim of 
Ministry about their financial performance does 
not stand to scrutiny in view of their inability 
to achieve the desired targets. The idling of 
funds to the tune of Rs 2200 crore till the last 
week of the financial year is yet another matter 
of serious concern which needs to be addressed 
by the Ministry, Worse, rushing expenditure at 
the end of the financial year besides violation of 
governmental instructions, may dilute scrutiny 
and monitoring leading to wasteful expenditure.  
Since budgeting involves fixation of priorities, 
foresight and forecasting based on sound 

73 
 
analysis of past trends and the monitoring 
capabilities of the Department, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry evolve sound 
budgeting principles and monitoring mechanism 
so that their resources are optimally allocated, 
there is no idling of funds and there is no rush 
of expenditure at the fag end of the financial 
year. 
 
2. 
 
3.8 The Committee note that an amount of Rs 54 
crore was allocated for 2011 -12 under the Jute 
Technology Mission (JTM) scheme but no 
expenditure could be incurred since the target 
period for completion of JTM expired on March 
31, 2011. The Committee are dismayed to note 
that the scheme expired on March 31, 2011 and 
till March 31, 2012, the Ministry could not get 
extension of the scheme. The Committee while 
deploring such apathetic attitude of the 
Government, desire that the Ministry should 
initiate action on such matters well in advance 
so that implementation of any scheme does not 
suffer due to procedural delays. 
 
3. 
 
3.20 The Committee note with concern that no 
authentic figures are available regarding the 
number of artisans employed in the handicrafts 
sector. As per the census conducted in 1995-96, 
47.61 lakhs artisans were employed in 
handicrafts sector. The Ministry have stated 
that based on the coverage of the districts 
undertaken and other parameters, the number 
of artisans employed in the handicrafts sector is 
estimated to be 68.86 lakhs. A report of the 
United Nations, however, has revealed that over 
the past 30 years, the number of artisans in 
India has actually declined by 30% as many of 
these artisans have joined the rank of casual 

74 
 
labourers and the informal economy. The 
Committee note that althoug h census of 
artisans is in progress but it took the Ministry 
17 years to undertake the process. It is 
inexplicable how the Ministry are introducing 
schemes, fixing targets and reviewing them 
without ascertaining the actual number of 
artisans. The Committee  are of the firm view 
that the Ministry undertake census of the 
artisans every 10 years as this would help them 
formulating, implementing and reviewing the 
schemes meant for the sector more effectively. 
 
4. 
 
3.21 The Committee note that 1393 clusters have 
been sanctioned under the Baba Saheb 
Hastshilp Vikas Yojana till March, 2012. Out of 
68.86 lakhs artisans in the country only a few 
are clustered artisans with the result a 
preponderant majority are deprived of th e 
benefits which accrue to clustered artisans. 
These artisans cannot get the benefits under 
the scheme, which makes them dependent on 
middlemen who exploit them. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government 
come out with a comprehensive scheme t o 
provide quality raw material, training, 
marketing platform and credit facilities to the 
artisans who are not part of any cluster or are 
living in remote areas. The Committee also feel 
that more and more visits by the officials of 
DC(Handicrafts) may be made to the remotest of 
areas where  handicraft artisans reside to make 
them aware of the benefits of clusterisation etc. 
besides making publicity of various schemes 
and by involving  local governments in a big 
way. 
 
  

75 
 
5. 
 
3.22 The Committee note  that under the Rajiv 
Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana only 3 
members of a family of artisans are covered. 
The Committee feel that the dependents in an 
average family of artisan include his spouse, two 
children and dependant parents which makes it 
5 people.  In such a situation, it is very difficult 
for a poor artisan to bear the medical expenses 
of other family members who are dependant on 
him. The Committee, thus, find the cover given 
to 3 members of an artisan’s family inadequate. 
The Committee, therefore,  recommend that the 
number of family members should be increased 
to at least 5.   
 
6. 3.23 Under the Guru Shishya Parampara component 
of the HRD scheme, the Committee find  that 
training is provided only to the artisans from 
nearby clusters where the Master trainer 
resides. The Committee are, however, of the 
consdiered view that the training under the 
scheme should not be limited to those living in 
nearby clusters but also extended to those living 
in remote areas whose skills need to be honed 
or upgraded. Considering their financial 
distress, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should also give suitable TA/DA to 
these trainees by way of incentive. 
The Committee also not e that the timings of 
the courses are generally from 10am to 5pm and 
sometimes, it changes as per the climatic 
conditions of that area or at the convenience of 
the Master Trainer. The Committee feel that the 
concept of flexible timing may be introduced for 
the courses taking into account the fact that 
the trainees may include women who have to 
take care of their homes and children and 
artisans who would like to get training after 
their working hours.  

76 
 
   
Further, the Committee find  that funds have 
been released for setting of 3 labs under the 
Research and Development Scheme and the 
Government do not review the performance of 
these labs as they have no labs of their own. The 
Committee find it strange that Ministry are 
giving funds to  labs without having any check 
on their performance and efficiency. The 
Committee recommend that Government ought 
to monitor the performance of the labs being 
funded by them to ensure that public funds are 
utilized properly and effectively. 
 
 
7. 3.24 The Committee note that the Government are 
implementing various schemes for the 
handicrafts sector but statedly,   in spite of 
their best efforts, only 71% of the total 
budgetary allocation could be spent.  In order to 
make the  schemes successful, the Committ ee 
recommend that more and more NGOs should be 
involved in the process of implementation and 
monitoring. Since, the handicrafts sector is 
largely unorganized, the Government need to 
take suitable action to upgrade the skills of the 
artisans, make available quality raw material on 
easy terms, provide credit facilities, provide 
market exposure to them and eliminate 
middlemen. The Committee also recommend 
that in order to make handicrafts commercially 
viable, different Ministries should work in 
tandem to give momentum to the exports of 
Indian handicrafts. Handicraft mark on the lines 
of handloom mark may also be introduced at 
the earliest so that genuine Indian craft can be 
differentiated from the counterfeits.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the 

77 
 
measures initiated in this behalf in due course. 
 
8. 3.35  The Committee are concerned to note that no 
survey to have authentic field level data on 
powerlooms has been conducted so far. The 
Committee also note that now an agency has 
been engaged to conduct the powerloom survey 
and the survey report is reportedly to be 
completed within next 9 months and in their 
considered view formulation of schemes, 
without a fair assessment of the target group 
and the dimensions of the problems afflicting 
them, is a shot in the dark. The Committee, 
therefore, hardly need to stress that the 
Ministry first undertake a comprehensive 
survey of the powerloom sector and then 
formulate the scheme(s).   
 
 
9. 3.36 The Committee note that the powerloom 
weavers covered under Janashree Bima Yojana  
are entitled to an educational grant of Rs 600 
per child/ per half year for two children 
studying in IX to XII standard for a maximum 
period of 4 years under the Shiksha Sahayog 
Yojana (SSY).  The Committee feel that such 
grants should also be extended to those weavers 
whose children are meritorious and wish to take 
up professional courses as such grants are 
incentives to those parents who want their 
wards to study.   
 
  

78 
 
10. 3.37 The Committee note that there is no Health 
Insurance Scheme available for th e powerloom 
weavers.  However, a Health Insurance Scheme 
on the lines of RSBY is proposed to be 
implemented in areas where the RSBY does not 
cover the powerloom sector during 12 th Plan, 
subject to approval by the Planning 
Commission. The Committee are unab le to 
understand the rationale behind such a delay 
in introducing a Health Insurance Scheme for 
powerloom weavers when there is already a 
similar scheme in operation for handloom 
weavers and handicrafts artisans. The 
Committee feel that instead of introduc ing a 
new scheme, the Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya 
Bima Yojana or the Health Insurance Scheme 
for handloom weavers be extended to the 
powerloom weavers also.   
 
 
11. 3.38 The Committee note that during last five years 
one Powerloom  Service Centre has been 
approved at Imphal. The Committee also note 
that the role of Powerloom Service Centres 
include imparting practical training and skill 
to powerloom weavers in various aspects. The 
Committee find 44 service centers  far from 
adequate for the powerloom industry in which 
the weavers are largely untrained. The 
Committee are of the considered view that the 
Government consider opening new institutes 
for providing training to the powerloom 
weavers/workers in all aspects relating to 
powerloom sector. The Powerloom Service 
Centres should also impart training in 
managerial courses for existing entrepreneurs 
as well as for new entrants. The Powerloom 
Service Centres besides providing training may 

79 
 
also educate the weavers and entrepreneurs 
about the various schemes of the Government 
meant for the powerloom sector.  
 
 
12. 3.39 The Committee observe that there are no 
permanent places for the weavers to sell their 
products and this is one of the major problems 
for small time powerloom  weavers due to 
which  they are exploited by unscrupulous 
middle-men and agents. The Committee 
recommend that special marketing 
areas/places be set up where these weavers can 
go and sell their products without depending 
on the middlemen and agents. Taking note 
that the Government give 20% margin money 
subsidy under TUFS on investment on modern 
technology of machines in powerloom units, 
the Committee are of the considered view that 
the Government should also come out with 
another scheme specially for small p owerloom 
owners who are working on obsolete looms and 
cannot take benefits of the ambitious schemes 
of the Ministry but need smaller sums for 
upgrading of their looms.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government 
undertake a separate study on t he needs of 
small powerloom owners and come out with a 
proposal/scheme for their development.  
  The Committee further find that 
there is no scheme to provide credit facilities 
or raw material to powerloom weavers. The 
Committee find it a step motherly tre atment 
towards the powerloom weavers and urge the 
Government to look into the problems of this 
sector and come out with a comprehensive 
scheme for their benefit at the earliest. 

80 
 
 
 
13. 3.48.1 The Committee note that 18 proposals have 
been approved coverin g all facets of skill 
development including ‘Training of Trainers’ 
under the component I of the Integrated Skill 
Development Scheme and the orientation of 
trainers. The Committee are of the view that 
the trainers should be informed about other 
schemes of t he Ministry which might benefit 
the trainees.  The Committee also recommend 
that besides imparting the computer skills, 
trainers should also be given training for 
imparting soft skills. The Committee 
recommend that it should be made compulsory 
for implemen ting agencies to recruit trainers 
who are well conversant in local language.  
Besides, the material for courses should also be 
in vernacular languages.  The courses offered 
be more oriented towards imparting practical 
knowledge and the refresher programmes  for 
updating the knowledge of trainers should be 
conducted regularly and TA/DA paid to the 
trainers for attending such programmes.  
 
14. 3.48.2 The Committee note  that the Ministry have 
not employed dedicated personnel for 
motivating people to take up the courses 
offered under the Scheme. The Committee 
endorse the view of the Project Management 
Consultant that dedicated mobilisers be 
engaged by all the implementing  agencies for 
effective mobilization and to explore various 
other options for mobilization of the 
candidates.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that dedicated mobilisers 
would, help the other personnel involved with 
the implementation of the scheme  in 

81 
 
concentrating on other areas. These mobilisers 
can also track the trainees in case there is an 
increase in drop -out rates in any area, liaison 
with NGOs/industry and with their help the 
remotest of areas can also be accessed. 
 
15. 3.49 The Committee find that the Ministry have not 
carried out any impact study of the courses 
being offered under the scheme. The 
Committee also note that as of February 2012 
out of 28664 candidates, 6096 have been 
placed in industry and 5378 have opted for self 
employment.  The Committee are of the view 
that impact study needs to be carried out to 
gauge the effectiveness of the courses being 
offered as these are at the nascent stage and 
hence can be altered easily. The Committee 
feel that industry must be encouraged for 
recruiting the pass -outs on the campuses of 
these institutes. The Ministry can also 
coordinate with the industry to give hands -on 
training to these candidates and share the 
stipend to be paid to the trainees till the 
confidence of industry is built. Further, t he 
industry may also be encouraged to sponsor 
candidates for these courses.   
 
 
 
16. 3.53 The Committee are concerned to note that the 
cotton yarn production decreased by 19% 
during November 2011 and by 13% during April 
to November 2011. The Committee are  of the 
view that improving cotton acreage and 
productivity is the key for improving the 
competitiveness of Indian textiles. The 
Committee note that though Cotton 
Technology Mission has been set up for the 
purpose but still a lot needs to be done. 

82 
 
Similarly,  more R&D needs to be undertaken 
in the field including sufficient investment in 
research programmes related to the 
betterment of cottonseeds and improving their 
productivity. Further, the Committee find that 
Indian weavers are still working on obsolete  
looms and a weaver who is preoccupied with 
the volatility in cotton yarn prices cannot 
think of modernizing his looms. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that urgent 
steps be taken to maintain a balance between 
the interests of both the weavers and the 
industry by at least providing raw material to 
small weavers at reasonable pr ices in volatile 
situations. 
 
 
17. 3.54 The Committee note that no subsidy is given 
under TUFS for ventures in investment in new 
designing techniques. The Committee are  of 
the considered view that the Indian textile 
industry lacks on the innovation front and, 
therefore, any initiative for new techniques 
should be encouraged and subsidy given to 
such ventures. The Committee also note that 
subsidy is no longer being given for the setting 
up of common effluent treatment plants under 
the restructured TUFS. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that, if not under TUFS, 
the Ministry might think of giving other 
incentives to the entrepreneurs who set up the 
effluent treatment plan ts voluntarily. The 
Committee also note that the revised TUFS 
Scheme has not been received well by the 
Industry. The Committee feel that since the 
cost of borrowing capital has increased, the 
scheme has become prohibitive specially for 
the small investors. The Committee, therefore, 

83 
 
recommend that the Ministry should come out 
with some innovative scheme to maintain the 
tempo of the process of modernization of 
Indian textile industry. 
 
18. 3.55 The Committee are constrained to point out a 
general want of due  diligence in many 
wings/offices of the Ministry given their 
persistent failure to stick to the given time 
lines while responding to parliamentary 
matters.  In their considered view delay in 
submitting the information sought is 
indicative of poor control a nd command 
system and a cavalier attitude which must be 
corrected.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the corrective measures taken in 
this regard to ensure that assurance given to 
Parliament is fulfilled within the stipulated 
time. 
 
 
 