  
35 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2012-13) 
 (FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2013-14) 
  
         THIRTY- FIFTH  REPORT 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
           April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 


2 
 
       
THIRTY-FIFTH   REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2012-13) 
 
(FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2013-14) 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 29th April, 2013    
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on         2013 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
                   April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 


3 
 
  CONTENTS 
PAGE (S) 
    
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
     
INTRODUCTION          (v)   
 
      REPORT 
 
CHAPTER–I  IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMITTEE'S  
 RECOMMENDATIONS 
  
CHAPTER-II    INTRODUCTORY         
       
CHAPTER-III  REPORT – DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14)   
   A. GENERAL PERFORMANCE 
   B. CENTRAL BOARD OF WORKERS EDUCATION   
    (CBWE)  
   C. MINIMUM WAGES 
   D.   RASHTRIYA SWASTHYA BIMA YOJANA (RSBY) 
   E. ESI HOSPITAL 
   F. OUTSOURCING 
 
CHAPTER-IV- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
ANNEXURES 
   (i) Annexure-I- Plan Expenditure during the year  
 2012-13 (Plan portion) 
 
     (ii) Annexure-II-Non-Plan Expenditure during the year  
    2012-13 
  (iii) Annexure-III-Minutes  of  the sittings  of   the  
 Standing   Committee  on Labour held  on 4.4.2013 
 and  16.4.2013  
 
 
 

4 
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2012-13) 
 SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN - CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ismail Hussain 
*3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
5. Shri Nara Hari Mahato 
6. Shri Hari Manjhi 
7. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
8. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
9. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
10. Shri Dinubhai Boghabhai Solanki 
11. Shri Makhan Singh Solanki 
12. Shri K. Sugumar 
13. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
**14. Shri Ashok Argal 
 ***15. Smt. J. Shantha 
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
  MEMBERS 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
24. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
25. Shri P. Kannan 
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
27. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
28. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
29. Shri Rajaram 
30. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
31. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*     Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his  nomination  
      to   Standing Committee on Commerce w.e.f. 13th December, 2012. 
**   Nominated w.e.f. 9th January, 2013. 
***  Nominated w.e.f. 19th March, 2013. 

5 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy - Director 
 3. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 4. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
          I,  the  Chairman, Standing Committee on Labour (2012-13) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,  present this 
35th Report on Demands for Grants  for the year 2013 -2014 of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment. 
 
2. The Committee considered the Demands for Grants pertaining to the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for the year 2013-2014 which were laid on 
the Table of the House on 21st March, 2013. The Committee took evidence of 
the representatives of the Mini stry of Labour and Employment on 04 th April, 
2013.  
 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for appearing and furnishing the 
information as desired by them in connection with the examination of the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry. 
 
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held 
on 16th April, 2013. 
 
5. For facility of reference, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.                   
    
 
 
 New Delhi;                       DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
 18 April, 2013                                                                CHAIRMAN,  
28  Vaisakha,1935 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 The Twenty-Eighth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of Committee on 
Labour on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment was presented to Parliament on 3 rd May, 2012.  
The Report contained 26 recommendations/observations. 
 
1.2 In compliance of Direction 73 A of Directions by Speaker, the 
Minister of Labour and Employment made a Statement in Lok 
Sabha on    4th March, 2013 giving the status of implementation of 
various recommendations made by the Committee in their Twenty -
Eighth Report.   
 
1.3 On the basis of the Action Taken Notes received on 6th 
August, 2012 from the Ministry of Labour and Employment on the 
above Report, the Committee presented their Thirty -Third Action 
Taken R eport (15 th Lok Sabha) to the Lok Sabha on 30 th August, 
2012.   The Committee commented on the Action Taken Replies 
furnished by the Ministry in respect of Recommendations at Para 
No.3.22,3.29,3.44,3.48,3.58 and 3.59 contained in the original 
Report. 
 
 
 

8 
 
1.4 As per Director 73 A of Directions by Speaker, the 
Minister of the concerned Ministry is required to make a 
Statement in Lok Sabha within six months from the date of 
presentation of the Report i.e. by 2nd November, 2012.  
However, in the instant case the  Statement was made after a 
lapse of ten months.  The Committee expect that henceforth 
the Ministry would ensure laying of Statement by the Minister 
within the stipulated time of six months.  They also expect the 
Government to take conclusive action in the  context the six 
recommendations commented upon by them and furnish 
further action taken notes to them at the earliest. 
 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 Objectives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
 
 
2.1  The Ministry of Labour and Employment is one of  the 
oldest and important Ministries of the Government of India.  The 
main responsibility of the Ministry is to protect and safeguard the 
interests of workers in general and those  who constitute the poor, 
deprived and disadvantaged  sections of the society, in particular, 
with due regard to  creating a healthy work environment for higher 
production and productivity and to develop and coordinate 
vocational skill training and employment services.  Besides  this 
the Ministry is also responsible for laying down policies  in respect 
of labour matters including industrial relations, co- operation 
between labour and management, settlement of labour disputes, 
regulation of wages and other conditions  of work and safet y, 
women labour and child labour, labour  welfare, social security 
etc. besides, development and  administration of employment 
service and training of craftsmen on national basis. 
  
 
  

10 
 
2.2  To achieve the objectives, funds are required by the 
Ministry under the following Heads:-  
 
1. 2225   Welfare of SC/ST and Other Backward 
Classes. 
 
2. 2230   Labour and Employment and Training 
3. 2251    Secretariat -Social Services 
4. 2552    Lump sum Provisions for North Eastern 
Areas 
5. 3601    Grants-in-aid to State Governments 
6. 3602    Grants-in-aid to Union Territories 
Governments 
7. 4225    Welfare of SC/ST and Other Backward 
Classes 
8. 4250   Capital Outlay on other Social Services 
 Functions 
 
 To promote harmonious relations between lab our and 
management and to regulate wages and other 
conditions of work in the central sphere. 
 
 To ensure speedy implementation of labour law 
awards, agreements, code of discipline etc. for 
improving industrial relations with regard to units in 
which Central  Government is the appropriate 
Government. 

11 
 
 To conduct evaluatory studies of implementation of 
labour laws, industrial relations, personnel policies 
and practices etc., in Public Sector Undertakings. 
 
 To regulate working conditions and safety in mines 
and factories. 
 
 To prepare ground work for the formulation of National 
Wage Policy and maintain data on wages, all 
allowances and other related matters. 
 
 To collect and publish statistics to conduct enquiries, 
surveys and research studies on various labour 
subjects. 
 
 To conduct programmes relating to employment 
potential of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe 
candidates through Coaching-cum-Guidance Centres. 
 
 To provide amenities to workers employed in the 
mining industry and beedi manufacturing. 
 
 To assist in rehabilitation of bonded labour. 
 

12 
 
 To provide welfare measures for certain sections of the 
unorganized labour. 
 
 To undertake training, education, research and 
consultancy service in the field of industrial relations 
and labour in general. 
 
 To educate all  sections of workers for their intelligent 
participation in social and economic development of 
the nation. 
 
 To monitor running of social security schemes viz. 
Employees‟ Provident Fund Organization and 
Employees‟ State Insurance Corporation. 
 
 Policy framew ork for National Employment Service, 
Implementation of National Vocational Training 
Programme. 
Organisational set up 
 
2.3 The objectives are sought to be achieved by the Ministry 
through its attached and subordinate offices and autonomous 
bodies.  The important offices and organizations under the Ministry 
are as follows:- 

13 
 
1. Directorate General of Employment and Training 
2. Organisation of the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) 
3. Directorate General of Factory Advice Service and Labour 
Institute 
4. Directorate General of Mines Safety 
5. Directorate General of Labour Bureau 
6. Central Government Industrial Tribunals 
7. Offices of Labour Welfare Commissioners 
8. Employees‟ Provident Fund Organisation 
9. Employees‟ State Insurance Corporation 
10. Central Board for Workers Education 
11. V.V. Giri National Labour Institute 
12. Board of Arbitration (JCM) 
 
2.4  The State Governments are also competent to enact 
legislations, as labour is a subject in the Concurrent list under the 
Constitution of India.  
 
2.5  During the examination of Demands for Grants for  the 
year 2011-12, the Committee observed that most of the  Schemes 
implemented by the Ministry of Labour and  Employment are of 
continuous nature and are being carried  forward to the next five 
year plan.  The Committee, therefore, desired that a t the end of 
every year, a Status Paper be issued showing the details of the 
schemes especially in the case of schemes in PPP mode, which 
could be called `Report to the  People'. 

14 
 
  
2.6  The scrutiny of the  Demands for Grants for the  year 
2013-14 of the Ministry and the 
conclusions/observations/Recommendations are dealt in  the 
succeeding Chapters.  
  
  

15 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 (A)   GENERAL PERFORMANCE   
 
 
3.1  The Ministry of Labour and Employment have  furnished 
Demands for Grants (2013-14) under Demand No.  62.   The total 
Demand for 2013-14 Plan and Non- Plan  together is Rs. 5274.35 
crore (gross figure) of which Rs. 5254.94  crore is under the 
Revenue section and Rs. 19.41  crore under the Capital section of 
the Grant. 
 
3.2  As per the annu al plan allocation approved by the 
Planning Commission for the year 2013 -14,  the total  plan  outlay 
is Rs. 2,524.00 crore.   Out  of  this  Rs. 77.90  crore  has been 
earmarked for Civil Works Component and has been reflected in the 
Demands for Grants of  Ministry of Urban Affairs and Poverty 
Alleviation.  Thus, the total Plan budget  available under Ministry 
of Labour and Employment‟s Demand for Grants is Rs. 2,446.10 
crore (on net basis.) 
 
3.3  Under Non -Plan, an allocation of Rs. 2,635.10 crore on 
net  basis for 2013 -14 has been provided. The major component 
goes to Employees‟ Pension Scheme, 1995 under social security 
with  an amount of Rs.2,040.00 crore which constitutes 72.13% of 
Non-Plan budgetary allocations of Rs.2,828.25 crore (on gross 
figures). 

16 
 
3.4  Apart from this, the Ministry have a recovery budget of 
Rs.184.87 crore, under Revenue section and Rs. 8.28 crore under 
Capital section which makes the gross total of Rs.2,828.25 crore 
under Non -Plan.  The expenditure through recovery budget on 
Labour Welfare schemes  is met from Five Labour Welfare Funds. 
3.5  The details showing Budget Estimates, Revised 
Estimates, Actual Expenditure  incurred during the year 2012 -13 
(upto January, 2013) and percentage of expenditure over BE  and 
RE for the year 2012-13, Plan and Non-Plan  have been given in 
Annexure-I and Annexure-II. 
3.6  The allocation vis-à-vis the expenditure on Plan schemes 
of the Ministry upto  04 th March, 2013  shows  steep decrease in 
expenditure in most of the schemes.  When asked about the 
reasons for underutilization of funds, the Ministry  intimated as 
under :- 
  “The main reasons for shortfall in utilizations in some of  
 the Schemes are non -holding of EFC / SFC meetings,  
 non-submission of adequate proposals by States, delay in 
 release in State share, delay in receipt of utilization 
 certificate, non -filling up of the vacant   posts etc. The 
 performance of the major Schemes of the Ministry, such 
 as, Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) and Skill 
 Development Initiative (SDI) d epends heavily on the 
 submission of proposals by States and the timely release 
 of State share of funds.  The delay in holding EFC 
 meetings and delay in receipt of utilization certificates in 
 respect of past releases have also been the major reasons 
 for shortfall in expenditure under the Schemes of 

17 
 
 Training & Employment and National Child Labour 
 Project (NCLP). “ 
 
3.7  Regarding the higher projections  made at the  Budget 
Estimates stage and revising them downwards at the Revised 
Estimates stage and not achieving the targets, even  then Ministry 
informed as under :- 
"The Ministry had projected higher expenditure 
anticipating approval of various new schemes and 
expansion of coverage of some of the schemes during the 
year. As this did not fully materialize due to reasons such 
as, non-holding of EFC / SFC meetings, non -submission 
of adequate proposals by States, delay in release in State 
share, delay in receipt of utilization certificate etc. this 
resulted in the expenditure being lower than projected.” 
3.8  During evidence of the Ministry, the representatives  of 
the Ministry responded on this issue as under :- 
"…normally in the annual exercise that takes place in the 
Planning Commission, we go and present our request but 
considering the constraint that the Government has in 
terms of availability of resources, we often get much less 
than what we ask for.  I will give you the example.  How 
much we had asked for the 12 th Five Year Plan?  We had 
asked for 34,914 crore for the 12 th Five Year Plan and we 
had g one and made a presentation before the Planning 
Commission Scheme wise and had made a request that 
each of these schemes is important and we need money 
to implement them so that justice can be done to the 
beneficiaries.   The Planning Commission has given us a 

18 
 
total allocation of Rs. 13,223 crore. So, as against Rs. 
34,914 crore for the 12 th Five Year Plan, we got only Rs. 
13,223 crore. We were asked to distribute among our 
schemes.  They said that we are giving total this much. 
For the financial year 2012 -13, we had asked for Rs. 
6,111 crore but we were given a lumpsum of Rs. 2,470 
crore and we were asked to distribute among our 
different schemes."  
 
3.9  They further deposed as under :- 
"It is about the process because we do not have financial 
resources. But we want to go ahead but we are not able 
to find resources. The choice is either you have small 
number of schemes and do it perfectly or you have large 
number of schemes and find resources for that. This is 
our problem. I will give a very small example. Certain 
schemes have now been sanctioned. When we ask for the 
staff, the staff is reduced to one-third. How will you run a 
scheme when the staff is reduced to one -third? Our 
Minister is now writing to the Finance Minister saying 
that please do not do this.  If you are giving a scheme, 
please give the resources so that it is run." 
 
3.10  Regarding the problems faced by the Ministry in 
 dealing with the State Governments they informed as under :- 
"The major problem that we have is not necessarily our 
deficiency but it is something which we have to deal with 
when we are dealing with the State Governments. As you 
know, labour is a Concurrent Subject. In this subject, 

19 
 
most of the legislation is implemented through the State 
Governments. Most of the plans and schem es are 
implemented through the State Governments. The 
majority of our employment and training schemes and 
the major portion of financial allocation goes to the State 
Governments for implementation. As you know, we have 
different States in the country and each State has its own 
culture of how fast they can do things, how slow they can 
do things, how much they respond; what happens when 
people are called for review. There are very major 
schemes on which we call for meetings. When the 
meeting is chaired by the  hon. Minister, we find that out 
of the 28 States and the Union Territories totalling 35, 
only nine or ten Ministers who will come from the States 
and others are represented by other officers. Sometimes I 
call for meetings to review schemes and in one of m y 
meetings I suddenly found that a very major State was 
represented by a Principal of an ITI. The principal of an 
ITI represents one ITI. How will he know about what are 
the schemes in that State? This is something which we 
are still grappling because ther e is no response. Some 
States simply do not respond." 
 
3.11  On implementation of new Scheme of “Modular 
Employable Skills‟, the Committee were informed by the 
representatives of the Ministry during evidence as under :- 
“We have introduced a new Scheme namely MES.   We 
have tried to get it carried out through the Central 
Government asking them that they should release the 
funds through Regional Apprenticeship  Training 
Centres.  They will see as to whether the  work is going 

20 
 
on or not.  They will also super vise the registration work 
of vocational training providers.  We do not have staff in 
every State.  We have our RDAT at six places.  If one 
RDAT covers five to six major States then it is very 
difficult to carry out the  work directly with limited staff.  
Therefore, over the  last two years, we have started 
giving funds to the  concerned State.  Even the State 
Government is  interested that the work of skill 
development in their State is carried out with their 
funds." 
 
3.12  As regards  the reason for under -utilization of funds 
under the sub-head 2230.02.101.03–Employment  Exchanges, the 
Ministry informed as under :- 
 “In principle approval from the Planning Committee for 
 the project was received in August, 2009. The project was 
 considered twice by EFC and once by pre-EFC but could 
 not be approved so far.  The funds were provided with the 
 expectation that the project will get cleared. As the 
 project could not get cleared, funds could not be utilized 
 during 2011-12 and 2012 -13. However, expenditure has 
 been made for the preparation of DPR and other reports 
 as required for finalization of the report of the project.” 
 
3.13  When asked about the surveys conducted by the Labour 
Bureau on impact of Economic slowdown on employment in India, 
the Ministry informed as under :- 

21 
 
“Labour Bureau has been conducting quarterly quick 
 employment surveys in the selected labour -intensive and 
 export-oriented sectors in the eight selected sectors, 
 namely i)  textiles including apparels, ii) metals, iii) gems 
 & jewellery, iv)  automobiles, v) transport, vi) IT/BPO, vii) 
 leather and viii) handloom/powerloom to assess the 
 effect of economic slowdown on employment in India 
 since January, 2009. So  far sixteen such surveys have 
 been conducted by Labour Bureau an d reports 
 thereon released”. 
 
3.14  Regarding the comparison of the data provided by  the 
Labour Bureau vis -a-vis data collected by private agencies/NGOs, 
the Ministry informed as under :- 
"No comparison has been made with the data collected by 
 private agencies / NGO‟s”. 
 
 (B) CENTRAL BOARD OF WORKERS EDUCATION (CBWE) 
 
3.15  The Scheme of Workers Education aims at achieving the 
objective of creating and increasing awareness  and educating the 
workforce for their effective participation  in the socio -economic 
development of the Country.  To achieve these objective, various 
training programmes are conducted by the Board for the workers of 
organized, unorganized, rural and informal sector at National, 

22 
 
Regional  and Unit levels through a network of 50 Regional  and 9 
Sub- Regional Directorates spread all over the country. 
 
3.16  When asked about the evaluation study of the 
performance of CBWE carried out by the V.V. Giri National Labour 
Institute and the status of its recommendations, the Ministry 
informed as under :- 
“The evaluation study of performance of CBWE was 
 carried  out during December, 2012 by V.V. Giri 
 National Labour  Institute.  The report was also 
 submitted to the Ministry.  The  recommendations 
 are  presently under examination in the  Ministry and 
 CBWE”. 
  
3.17  When asked about the manpower available with the 
CBWE and whether it is sufficient to meet the requirement,  the 
Ministry informed as under :- 
“Manpower available is not sufficient to meet the 
 requirement. Immediate recruitment of Educ ation 
 Officers  and Staff members of various categories is 
 required. Higher level vacant posts are proposed to be 
 filled up through promotion”. 
3.18  The Board has been organizing short duration 
programmes for the workers of weaker sections of the society  also.  
When asked whether the Ministry have any information  regarding 
the industries/individuals engaging child labour and whether they 

23 
 
have reported the matter to concerned authorities, the Ministry 
informed as under :- 
 “The Central Board for Worker s‟ Education (CBWE) has 
 been  organizing short duration programmes, inter-
 alia, for workers engaged in industries/individuals 
 pertaining to the unorganized sector and weaker 
 sections of the society.  While  selecting participants for 
 these training programmes,  Education Officers who 
 organize the programmes consult  Village Panchayats, 
 Block Officers, NGOs, Trade Unions, etc.  The Board has 
 no specific information about engagement of  child 
 labour in these industries or by the indi viduals.  
 Further, CBWE has not made any estimates about the 
 prevalence of child labour in these industries/ 
 individuals during the last three years”. 
 
(C) MINIMUM WAGES 
 
3.19  The Ministry of Labour and Employment are responsible 
to implement 44 labour related Acts.  When  asked about the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the norms for fixation of minimum 
wages vis-à-vis the norms for their  revision, the Ministry replied 
as under :- 
“The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 has neither defined 
 „minimum wages‟ nor has it la id down any norm/criteria 
 for  fixing the minimum wages. In the absence of any 
 standard  methodology, the norms recommended by the 
 Indian Labour  Conference, held in 1957 are taken into 

24 
 
 account while fixing  the minimum wages. These are as 
 follows: -  
 3 consumption units for one earner. 
 Minimum food requirements of 2700 calories per average 
Indian adult. 
 Clothing requirements of 72 yards per annum per family. 
 Rent corresponding to the minimum area provided for under 
Government‟s Industrial Housing Scheme. 
 Fuel, Lighting and other miscellaneous items of expenditure to 
constitute 20% of the total minimum wage. 
 
 There was a judicial pronouncement also in the year 
 1992 when the Supreme Court delivered a historic 
 judgement in the case of Reptakos & Co . Vs. its workers 
 that  the children‟s education, medical requirement, 
 minimum recreation including festivals/ ceremonies, 
 provision for old age, marriage etc. should further 
 constitute 25% of the minimum wage and be used as a 
 guide in fixation of min imum wages. The State 
 Governments are requested from time to time to keep the 
 above said norms and judicial pronouncement in view 
 while fixing/ revising the minimum wages.   
 According to the provisions contained in the Minimum 
 Wages Act, 1948, the app ropriate Governments are 
 required to revise the minimum wages in all the 
 scheduled employments under their jurisdiction at an 
 interval not exceeding five years”. 
  

25 
 
3.20  When asked about the amendments proposed in the 
Minimum Wages Act, the Ministry informed as under :- 
“The Government has proposed amendments to the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 which, inter-alia, include 
making National Floor Level Minimum Wage (NFLMW) 
statutory and making the Act applicable to all 
employments across the states. The amendment proposal 
to the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 has been approved by 
the Cabinet and the Draft bill  on the proposed 
amendments is being prepared in consultation with the 
Ministry of Law & Justice.  Besides, there are some other 
proposals to amend the Minimum Wag es Act, 1948 
relating to issue of employment cards to the workers, 
enhancement of fines, making penal provisions  more 
stringent for better compliance and enhanced 
compensation etc.” 
 
3.21  When asked regarding the penalty provision under 
different amendments, the Ministry informed as under :- 
“The Minimum Wages Act when enacted contained a 
 penal provision of Rs.500/- or imprisonment for six 
 months or both . This provision was included as a 
 deterrent to prevent violation of the Act. However, 
 with  the pa ssage of time the penal provision lost 
 much of its relevance in view of inflation. It was 
 accordingly felt to enhance fines and make penal 
 provisions more stringent  for better compliance. As 
 such a proposal has been  made to amend the penal 
 provision so that for first  contravention, the 
 penalty will be Rs.5000/- or  imprisonment up to 

26 
 
 six months or both. For subsequent  contraventions, 
 the penalty will be any amount between  Rs.5000- 
 Rs.10000/-and imprisonment of one year or 
 both.” 
 
(D) RASHTRIYA SWASTHYA BIMA YOJANA (RSBY) 
 
3.22  The „Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana‟ for BPL  families (a 
unit of five) in unorganised sector was launched on 1 st October, 
2007 and became operational w.e.f.  01.04.2008. Under the 
scheme, smart card based cashless  health insurance cover of 
Rs.30,000/- per annum on a family  floater basis is provided to the 
BPL families  in the unorganized sector. The premium is shared on 
75:25 basis by Centre and State Government.  In case of  States of 
North East region and Jammu &  Kashmir, the premium is shared 
in the ratio of 90:10.   The scheme provides for portability of smart 
card by  splitting the card value for migrant  workers. The basic 
features of the scheme are as  follows: - 
 
 Government of India contributes 75% of the annual 
premium.  State Governments contribute 25%. 
Administrative cost is borne by the State Governments. 
In case of North -East region and Jammu and Kashmir, 
the premium is shared in the ratio of 90:10. 
 Beneficiaries are issued Smart Cards. 

27 
 
 Total sum insur ed would be Rs.30,000/ - per family per 
annum on a family floater basis. 
 Cashless transaction. 
 Coverage of all pre-existing diseases. 
 Hospitalization expenses including maternity benefit. 
 Transportation cost of Rs.100/- per visit. 
 
3.23  During the course o f evidence, a power point 
presentation was given by the Ministry.  As per the  presentation, 
approximately 120 million people have been  enrolled under the 
scheme and approximately 34 million cards have been issued.  The 
Committee were also informed  that a decision has been taken for 
inclusion of weavers in  the scheme for which the card 
distribution would start by July-August, 2013. 
 
(E) ESI HOSPITAL 
  
3.24  During the course of evidence, the Committee  desired to   
know about the status of Nagda, Firozabad and Rourkela Hospitals, 
the representatives of the Ministry  informed as under :- 
"Special drive for coverage was last conducted by 
Employees‟ State Insurance Corporation during 
01.05.2012 to 18.05.2012. Regional Director, Uttar 

28 
 
Pradesh is being directe d to conduct fresh survey in the 
area. 
 
Opening up of hospital at Firozabad, Uttar  Pradesh. 
On completion of action as stated above, the  feasibility 
of setting up the ESI hospital at Firozabad  (U.P.) will 
be examined.  
 
Considering the feasibility of revival of ESI  hospital, 
Nagda (Madhya Pradesh) 
The ESI hospital at Nagda is being run by Government of 
Madhya Pradesh. The number of Insured Persons (IPs) in 
Nagda is only 4787 and  there is shortage of specialists 
and Assistant Surgeons. The bed occupancy is very low.   
  
Status of implementation of ESI scheme in Mau (U.P.) 
ESI Scheme is already implemented in Mau (U.P.) centre 
w.e.f. 21.01.1979.  There are about 601  covered 
employees there.  The ESIC dispensary is  functioning 
there. 
 
3.25  In a separate reply furnished to the Committee regarding 
the ESI Hospital in Firozabad, the ministry have informed as 
under:- 
 

29 
 
“As per provisions of Employees‟ State Insurance Act, 
1948 glass and bangle workers working in such factories 
stand covered in Firozabad.  How ever, home based 
workers are not covered.   Keeping in view the 
recommendations of Committee, ESIC has undertaken 
special drives more than once during the last six months 
and the position is as follows:- 
 
Month Number of 
Insured Persons 
in Firozabad 
Number of 
Insured Persons 
in Shikohabad 
Total Number of 
Insured persons 
March, 2012 15620 1748 17368 
April, 2012 15943 1646 17589 
May, 2012 16580 1610 18190 
June, 2012 18773 1600 20373 
July, 2012 22134 1599 23733 
August, 2012 22561 1791 24352 
 
(F) OUTSOURCING 
 
3.26  During the study visits of the Committee to different 
places all over India, while having interaction with the PSUs,  the 
Committee noticed that they have outsourced even the  perennial 
nature of jobs which otherwise  are banned under  the Contract 
Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.   When asked about 
the steps taken by the Ministry to prevent such tendencies by 
PSUs, the Ministry informed as under :- 

30 
 
 
“Several works of PSU's are done through outsourcing. 
The CLC(C) office deals with the establishments engaging 
contract/ outsource labour falling under the Central 
Sphere. As per Sec 12(1) of the Contract Labour 
(Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970, a contra ctor 
employing 20 or more workers is required to obtain a 
labour license. At present the licensed contract workers 
in the PSU's are approximately 18,44,224. The actual 
figure of outsourced contract labours in the Central 
Sphere would be even more as it exc ludes the workers of 
contractors employing less than 20 workers. Under the 
said Act any contractor, as per his requirements, may 
engage any person as contract labour in connection with 
the work of an establishment to do any skilled, semi -
skilled or unskill ed, manual, supervisory, technical or 
clerical work unless the employment of contract 
labourers is prohibited on any job, work or process in 
any establishment under Section 10(1) of the CL(R&A) 
Act, 1970. Regarding engagement of contract labour on 
the jobs  banned under the Act, the field officers of the 
CLC(C) organization during the inspection of 
establishments take cognizance of such violations and 
initiate action against the erring employers by way of 
filing prosecution in the appropriate court.  
 
 The d etails of violation under Section 10(1) of 
Contract Labour (Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970 in the 
Central Sphere Establishments during the years 2010 -
11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 is as under: - 
 

31 
 
 
Year Number of inspections Number of 
Prosecutions Number of 
convictions 
 conducted filed in Court 
2010-11  24 18 -- 
2011-12  15 20 01 
2012-Dec 12*  54 47 01 
 
 
3.27  When asked about the representation of reserved   
categories while engaging the workers by contractor, the  Ministry   
informed as under :- 
“Under the Contract Labour (Regulation and  Abolition)   
Act, 1970 there is no provision of reservation”. 
 
 
3.28  When asked how the interest of Contract Workers is 
protected beyond 12 nautical miles where Indian Laws do not apply, 
the Ministry informed as under :- 
   
  “The Mines Act, 1952 is being amended to extend its  
  applicability from existing 12 nautical miles to 200   

32 
 
  nautical miles (Exclusive Economic Zone). The  health,  
  safety and welfare aspects of all workers  including   
  contract labour would be covered under  this Act.”  
  

33 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
4.1 The Committee in their 19th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministry had 
recommended for issuance of a Status Paper depicting 
the details of the Schemes framed by the Union 
Government, contribution of the State Governments 
along with the completion status of the Schemes, the 
number of beneficiaries, total expenditure incurred , 
State-wise and the reasons for non completion etc., 
especially in the case of Schemes in PPP mode.  
However, the action taken replies of the Ministry 
stated "the observations of the Committee have been 
noted for compliance ".   The compliance report in the  
matter is still awaited from the Ministry.  The 
Committee deplore such irresponsible attitude of the 
Ministry, and therefore, reiterate that the Status Paper 
be issued within a month of presentation of this Report  
and the reasons for delay may also be int imated to 
them. 

34 
 
 
4.2  The Committee note that the Budget Estimate 
for the year 2012 -13 for plan schemes was Rs.2403.88 
crore which was revised downward at the RE stage to 
Rs.2000.00 crore.  However, the Ministry could utilise 
only Rs.1463.87 crore upto 4th  March, 2013 which is 
around 60% of the Budget Estimates and 73% of the 
Revised Estimates.  The Committee have been 
repeatedly impressing upon the Ministry to follow a 
realistic budgeting process and reiterate that Ministry 
should take corrective measures to ensure utilization 
of allocated funds so that the important schemes of the 
Ministry do not suffer. 
 
  The Committee further note that in respect of 
the important schemes of the Ministry viz. Skill 
Development Programme, Rashtriya Swasthya Bima 
Yojana and Child Labour Project, the allocated amount 
was far less than the amount sought for  by the 
Ministry.  The Secretary informed that against a 
demand of Rs.34,914 crore for the 12th Five Year Plan 
the Planning Commission has given a only Rs.13,223 
crore and asked the Ministry to distribute the same 

35 
 
among various schemes.  The Ministry also informed 
that due to such resource crunch even the major 
schemes of the Ministry could not take off and more so 
as a result the Planning Commission is even not 
approving th e new schemes due to insufficient 
allocation.  The Committee fail to understand that 
when the Ministry have the authority, flexibility and 
discretion to distribute the funds amongst different 
schemes out of the lumpsum allocation, then they 
ought to know w hich scheme is to be given how much 
weightage.  The Committee, therefore,  desire that the 
fund allocation for important schemes be given due 
weightage and the Ministry may also seek 
approval/clearance from the Ministry of Finance for 
diversion of funds fr om other heads where the funds 
are being surrendered due to one  reason or the other.  
This, in their considered opinion , would enable the 
Ministry to atleast start the most important schemes 
viz. Kaushal Vikas Yoj ana, Skill Development and 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana.   
 
4.3  The Committee  are, however, constrained to 
note that delayed approval of the Scheme s by the 

36 
 
Planning Commission in general and one of the 
Schemes namely Mission Mode Project for Upgradation 
and Modernisation of Employment Exchanges  in 
particular, announced by the Finance Minister in his 
Budget Speech for the year 2009, is still awaiting the 
requisite approval, thereby negating the very purpose 
for which the schemes were intended.    The 
Committee express their displeasure at the state of 
affairs emanating from lack of coordination between 
the Ministry, Ministry of Finance and  the Planning 
Commission and desire the Ministry to take up the 
matter once again with concerned Ministries to break 
the vicious circle and ensure expeditious  
implementation of these schemes.  The Committee also 
desire the Ministry to review the plethora of Schemes 
being operated by them, as to analyze the efficacy 
thereof with a view to reorganize and consolidate them 
to cover manageable broad areas.  
  
4.4  The Committee further note that shortage of 
staff is also impacting the implementation of the 
important schemes.  The Committee here would like to 
remind the Ministry that on an earlier occasion also, 

37 
 
they had recommended that the existing vacancies of 
Direct Recruitment (DR) quota be filled up through 
Employment Exchanges as a stop -gap arrangement till 
the UPSC/SSC forwards the panel for regular 
appointment which would help ease the pressure on the 
Ministry.  They, however, feel that this 
recommendation was  not given a serious thought by 
the Government.   The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their earlier recommendation and suggest that the 
existing vacancies be filled up within three months , 
through Employment Exchanges as a stop -gap 
arrangement till the UPS C/SSC forwards the panel for 
regular appointment.  They also desire that this 
process of filling up of vacancies may be strictly 
monitored and in case of delay/irregularity the 
responsibility must be fixed.   As regards the demand 
for additional staff for w hich the Minister for Labour 
and Employment had written to the Finance Minister 
for relaxed norms, the Committee suggest that the 
matter may be pursued with the Ministry of Finance 
vigorously. 
 

38 
 
4.5  The Committee find that the data 
collected/provided by th e Labour Bureau through 
different surveys about number of beneficiaries of 
various schemes is at variance with the data collected 
by private agencies/NGOs.  The Committee feel that 
the statistics collected by the Labour Bureau should 
provide a clear pictur e about the number of 
beneficiaries for each of the Schemes implemented by 
the Ministry.  They , therefore, desire that the 
methodology adopted by the Labour Bureau should be 
reviewed and further improved to make their results 
more closer to ground realities. 
 
4.6  During the examination of Demands for Grants 
2012-13, the Committee were informed that the 
Government proposed to amend various Acts like the 
Employment Exchange (Compulsory Notification of 
Vacancies) Act, 1959, the Factories Act, 1948, the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Contract Labour 
(Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970, the Employees' 
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 
etc.  However, the Committee find that Ministry have 
not been able to bring any of the amending Bills before 

39 
 
the Parliament so far.  The Committee desire the 
Ministry to expedite the examination of  all these Acts 
and bring amending Bills before the Parliament at the 
earliest.  The Committee note that the Ministry is 
administering 44 Acts for the welfare of labours  
covering both organized and un -organised sector.  
Some of these Acts touch upon only few aspects of the 
welfare activities.  The Committee desire the Ministry 
to review the Acts, particularly those which have 
remained dormant or have become outdated so as  to 
bring about a comprehensive legislation covering the 
welfare of labourers in its entirety.   
4.7  The Committee also find that neither the 
existing penalty of Rs.500/ - or imprisonment for six 
months or both nor the proposed penalty of Rs.5000/ - 
or impr isonment upto six months or both is an 
effective deterrent in the case of violation of any of the 
provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 .  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that while 
considering the amendments to the Act, the 
punishment so prescribed need to be in conformity 
with the current price index or linked with the size of 

40 
 
the establishment/profit margin of the violator to be a 
deterrent in the real sense of the term.   
 
4.8  The Committee note that the Ministry are 
facing problems in implementation of the Schemes 
which are executed by the State Governments.  Some 
of the State Governments do not even respond to 
communications/Report to Ministry or attend 
meetings etc.  The Committee desire that cases of such 
State Governments which are neither performing nor 
utilizing central funds properly, must be reported to 
the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission so that 
annual grant of suc h States be commensurate with 
their performance in respective schemes.  
 
4.9  The Committee note that Modular Employable 
Skills (MES) Scheme, earlier implemented by the 
Ministry, is now proposed to be implemented by the 
State Governments for which funds are to be provided 
by the Ministry.   Given the past performance of some 
State Governments, it is doubtful , if the States would 
be able to do justice in implementation of this scheme. 

41 
 
The Committee, therefore, desire that a n effective 
monitoring mechanism must be put in place to ensure 
the implementation of the scheme to achieve its 
intended objectives.   The Committee are deeply 
concerned about the irregularities reported in the 
implementation of the scheme, particularly in Uttar 
Pradesh, and would like the  matter to be enquired into 
and report in respect thereof be submitted to them. 
 
4.10 The Committee note that an evaluation study 
of the performance of Central Board of Workers 
Education (CBWE) was carried out by the V.V. Giri 
National Labour Institute, NO IDA in December, 2012 
and the report is under examination by the Ministry.   
The Committee find that a number of 
recommendations made by them would necessitate 
mindful consideration. The Committee strongly feel 
that recommendation s made by the Institute fo r 
evaluation of the training programme s must be 
implemented in letter and spirit within a specified time 
and a study be also conducted to assess the impact of 

42 
 
such training  programmes on the workers' 
performance/productivity. 
 
4.11 The Committee find that  the Central Board of 
Workers Education (CBWE) has a network of 50 
Regional, 9 Sub -Regional Directorates and 6 Zonal 
Directorates.  Going through the data provided by the 
Ministry, they observe that there are 183 vacancies 
against sanctioned staff strength  of 686.  Keeping in 
view the significance of the CBWE, it becomes 
imperative to provide at least the sanctioned staff if 
not the additional staff.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that all the vacancies in CBWE be filled up 
urgently, by resorting to the method indicated by them 
elsewhere in this Report.  The Committee also 
recommend that the Centre of CBWE in Srinagar which 
was closed 22 years back due to extraordinary 
circumstances, be re -opened immediately and 
simultaneously a feasibility report may also be obtained 
for establishment of a CBWE Centre in Leh. They desire 
to be apprised of the action taken in this matter at an 
early date. 
 

43 
 
4.12 The Committee note that the CBWE has a 
reach to all categories of workers.  The Committee 
opine that during the c ourse of providing training, 
CBWE might have come across some incidents of 
engagement of Child Labour and Bonded Labour by 
industries/individuals.  The Committee desire that 
such incidents must be reported to the concerned 
authorities which would help the Government in 
eliminating such stigma from the society.   They would 
like to be apprised of incidents so reported to the 
concerned authorities during the last five years. 
 
4.13 The Committee note that the Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) was launched i n the year 
2008 to provide health insurance to the lowest strata 
of the society viz. the BPL families.  Since its 
inception, it has become one of the largest health 
insurance scheme in the world in terms of numbers.  
The Committee find that approximately 1 20 million 
people have already been enrolled in the Scheme but 
the Ministry have been able to provide cards to 34 
million people only.  They are of the firm opinion that 
issuance of cards to the beneficiaries is the precursor 

44 
 
to implement the scheme, which  is getting delayed.  
They, therefore, desire that the process of issuance of 
cards needs to be accelerated so as to enable the 
beneficiaries to avail the benefits of the scheme 
without undue delay. The Committee also desire the 
Ministry to explore the pos sibility of including  more 
and more categories of workers in the ambit of the 
Scheme.   
 
4.14 The Committee, in their earlier report on 
Demands for Grants, desired that the shortcomings / 
lacunae / deficiency / weakness pointed out in the 
evaluation studie s of RSBY be taken up seriously and 
course corrected.   The Committee, reiterate their 
recommendation and desire that fresh evaluation 
studies be conducted for examination of   
shortcomings/lacunae/ deficiency/weakness, of the 
Scheme. 
 
4.15 The Committee note that an ESI Hospital was 
set up in Nagda Junction of Madhya Pradesh which 
remained functional for about two -three years and, 

45 
 
thereafter, was closed.  The Committee find that 
closing this hospital has not only hampered the 
medical facilities to the local IPs but also the assets so 
created are idling.  They, therefore, desire that the ESI 
hospital at Nagda be re-started without further delay. 
 
4.16 The Committee were further informed that on 
the recommendation of the Committee, ESIC had 
undertaken special drives for fresh IP mapping more 
than once during the last six months for opening of ESI 
Hospital at Firozabad, Uttar Pradesh.  As per the latest 
figures, the last drive was undertaken in August, 2012 
with total of 24352 IPs in and around F irozabad.  As 
per the guidelines of ESIC, a minimum of 25000 IPs are 
required to open a ESI Hospital.  In the given 
circumstances, the Committee are sure that the 
number of IPs by this time would have crossed 25,000 
mark and now does meet the criteria for opening an 
ESI Hospital in Firozabad .   They, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should start the process 
of setting up of an ESI Hospital at Firozabad without 
any further delay.  The Committee also desire to be 
apprised of the latest status of a propo sal of setting up 

46 
 
of ESI Medical College and hospital at Rourkela, Odisha 
and the time by which a final decision is likely to be 
taken. 
 
4.17 The Committee were informed that at present 
the number of contract workers in the PSUs is 
approximately 18,44,224 engaged through licensed 
contractors, excluding the workers of contractors 
employing less than 20 workers.  The Committee find 
that while engaging contract workers, the 
Government’s policy on prescribed representation to 
SC/ST/OBC is not applicable. The Co mmittee are 
concerned that since a huge workforce is now being 
engaged through outsourcing, the lack of stipulated 
representation to deprived sections of the society 
amounts to denial of their legitimate rights.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Gov ernment 
may explore the feasibility of issuing instructions/ 
guidelines to all concerned for giving due regard to 
representation of these  categories while 
outsourcing/engaging Contract Labour.  
 

47 
 
4.18 The Committee were informed that t he 
Government ha ve proposed amendments to the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 which, inter-alia, include 
making National Floor Level Minimum Wage (NFLMW) 
statutory and applicable to all employments across the 
states.  The amendment  proposal to the Minimum 
Wages Act, 1948 has  been approved by the Cabinet and 
the Draft Bill on the proposed amendments is being 
prepared in consultation with the Ministry of Law & 
Justice.  The Committee find that at present 'The 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948' neither defines 'minimum 
wages' nor lays down any norm/criteria for fixing the 
minimum wages.  In the absence of any standard 
methodology, the norms recommended by the Indian 
Labour Conferenc e, held in 1957 are taken into 
account.  The Committee desire that parameters must 
be so fixed that the Act should define the criteria for 
fixation of minimum wages.  They, therefore, desire 
that the proposed amendments may be expedited.  The 
Committee opi ne that a concept of "Fair Wages" 
simultaneously be evolved and it may be ensured that 
these fair wages are paid by all the profit earning PSUs/ 

48 
 
organizations/ Autonomous Bodies to contract/ 
casual/outsourced workers employed by them.  
 
4.19 The Committee in their Twenty-Second Report 
on 'The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011' had approved 
the proposal of the Ministry to amend Section 1 of the 
Principal Act to include the territorial waters, 
continental shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other 
Maritime Zones Act , 1976.  The Committee find that 
presently the Indian Laws are applicable upto 12 
nautical miles. Hence, the interests of the contract 
workers engaged by the some oil exploring companies 
having their setups beyond this limit, are not 
protected.  When the C ommittee raised their concern, 
the  Ministry informed that the Mines Act, 1952 is 
being amended to extend its applicability from existing 
12 nautical miles to 200 nautical miles (Exclusive 
Economic Zone) thereby covering the health, safety and 
welfare aspects of all workers including contract labour.  
The Committee opine that since the workers are out of 
the purview of the present laws, the amendment to the 
Mines Act, 1952 becomes imperative to safeguard 

49 
 
them.  They therefore, desire that the amendments to 
the Act may be expedited. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                    DARA SINGH CHAUHAN 
18    April,  2013                                                CHAIRMAN,            
28   Vaisakha, 1935(Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.  
 
  

50 
 

51 
 
 


52 
 

53 
 
 


54 
 


55 
 


56 
 
 


57 
 

58 
 
 


59 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 4th April, 2013 from 1130 hrs. to 1400 
hrs. and 1500 hrs. to 1740 hrs. in Committee Room `074', Ground 
Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.  
   PRESENT 
    Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
   MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
3. Shri Narahari Mahato 
4. Shri Hari Manjhi 
5. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
6. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
7. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
8. Shri K. Sugumar 
9. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
10. Shri Ashok Argal 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
12. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
13. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
15. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
16. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 

60 
 
 17. Shri Rajaram 
 18. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 19. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy   - Director 
3. Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
  
 
2.   XX    XX    XX 
3.  XX    XX    XX 
4.  XX    XX    XX  
5.  XX    XX    XX  
6.  XX    XX    XX 
7.  XX    XX    XX 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 
 
The Committee again sat from 1500 hrs. to 1740 hrs.  
  REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & 
EMPLOYMENT 
Sl.No. Name of the Officer Designation 
 
1. Dr. Mrutyunjay Sarangi Secretary (L&E) 
2. Shri Anil Swarup Additional  Secretary (DGLW) 
3. Shri P.K. Pujari Additional Secretary &  FA 
4. Shri Sharda Prasad Additional Secretary (DGE&T) 
5. Shri Anil Kumar Agarwal Director General, Employees‟ 
State Insurance Corporation   
6. Shri S.B. Mathur Director General, DGFASLI 
7. Shri Rahul Guha Director General, Mines Safety 
8. Dr. D.S. Kolankar DG, Labour Bureau 
9. Shri Chandra Prakash Joint Secretary 
10. Shri A.C. Pandey Joint Secretary 
11. Shri V.P. Yajurvedi DG, V.V. Giri, NLI 
12. Shri K.M. Gupta Economic Adviser 
13. Shri Sanjay Kumar Financial Adviser, CPFC 
14. Shri T.K. Basu Deputy Director General 
 
 

62 
 
8. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
the Ministry of  Labour and Employment and invited their attention 
to the provisions contained in Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by 
the Speaker.   
 
9. The Chairman, thereafter, asked the Secretary to brief the 
Committee regarding the Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
 
10. The Secretary briefed the Committee on the budgetary 
allocations, revised estimates and the actual expenditure for the 
last year vis-à-vis for the year 2013 -14 on various 
schemes/programmes undertaken by the Ministry.  A power point 
presentation was also given. 
 
11. The Members, thereafter, asked questions and sought specific 
clarifications from the representatives of the Ministry on the various 
Schemes of the Ministry among others on the following 
issues/Schemes:-    
 (a) General Performance of the Ministry. 
(b)  Under utilization of funds under various heads vis-à-vis 
allocation made. 
 (c)  Effect of economic slow down. 
 (d) Skill Development Initiatives.  

63 
 
 (e)  Kaushal Vikas Yojana  
 (f) Rashtriya Swasthiya Bima Yojana. 
 (g) Industrial Training Institutes. 
 (h)  Modular Employable skills. 
 (i) Vocational Training Providers. 
 (j) Child Labour. 
 (k)  Central Board of Workers Education. 
 (l) ESI Hospitals.    
  (m) Employment Exchanges 
 (n) Outsourcing. 
 (p) Bonded Labour. 
 (q) Minimum Wage. 
12. The Chairman, thereafter, directed the Secretary to send 
written replies to the unanswered queries to the Secretariat within 
three days. 
 
13. The Chairman thanked the Secretary and other officials for 
giving valuable information to the Committee on various 
subjects/schemes. 
 

64 
 
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX Do not pertain to this Report 
 
 
 
 

65 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on 16th April, 2013 from 1200 hrs. to 1235 
hrs. in Room No.62, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
  PRESENT 
    Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
   MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
3. Shri Narahari Mahato 
4. Shri Hari Manjhi 
5. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
6. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
7. Shri K. Sugumar 
8. Shri Ashok Argal 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
10. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
11. Shri P. Kannan 
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
13. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 15. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy   - Director 
3. Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
  

66 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about t he draft Reports on Demands for Grants for 
the year 201 3-14 of the Ministry of Labour and Employment and 
Ministry of Textiles respectively.  
 3.  The Committee first took up the draft Report on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Labour and Employment for consideration.  
After detailed deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report 
with minor modifications.   
4.  XX    XX   XX  
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
Reports in view of the consequential changes arising out of factual 
verification and to present the same to both the Houses of 
Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX Do not pertain to this Report 