 
46 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the 
Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ` 
weavers of Mau and adjoining areas 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
March,  2014/Phalguna , 1935 (Saka) 
1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the  Thirty-Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on `  Welfare of small 
weavers of Mau and adjoining areas - A case study’ ] 
 
FORTY- SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
March,  2014/Phalguna , 1935 (Saka)  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/  
Report of the Standing 
Welfare of small 

 
STANDING 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the 
Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ` 
weavers of Mau and adjoining areas 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on  15.03.2014  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
March,  2014/Phalguna , 1935 (Saka) 
2 
 
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the  Thirty-Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on `  Welfare 
weavers of Mau and adjoining areas -A case study’] 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on  15.03.2014  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
March,  2014/Phalguna , 1935 (Saka)  
  
COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/  
Eighth Report of the Standing 
Welfare  of small 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on  15.03.2014   

3 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                   PAGE(s)  
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv)  
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of th e  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration…………………………………………………  
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect o f   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Eighth   
  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
   

4 
 
   
  
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2013-14)  
 SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN - CHAIRMAN 
 MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Ashok Argal  
3.  Shri Ismail Hussain  
4.  Dr. Manda Jagannath  
5.  Dr. Virendra Kumar  
6.  Shri Nara Hari Mahato  
7.  Shri Hari Manjhi  
8.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel  
9.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy  
10.  Smt. J. Shantha  
11.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh [Lalan]  
12.  Shri Ratan Singh  
13.  Shri Dinu Solanki  
14.  Shri Makansingh Solanki  
15.  Shri K. Sugumar  
16.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai  
17.  Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware  
18.  Shri Om Prakash Yadav  
*19 .  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
20.  Vacant  
21.  Vacant  
             Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Smt. T. Ratna Bai  
23.  Shri D. Bandyopadhyay  
24.  Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot  
25.  Shri P. Kannan  
26.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan  
27.  Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati  
28.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
29 .  Shri Rajaram  
30.  Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
31.  Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
*  No           * Nominated w.e.f 17 th  December, 2013 
 

5 
 
 
                     SECRETARIAT  
 
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy - Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour  having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on  their behalf, 
do present this Forty-Sixth Report on the action ta ken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-
Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour ( Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Welfare of small weavers of Mau and adjo ining areas- A 
case study’. 
 
2. The Thirty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sa bha and also 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 
th  August, 2013.  The Ministry of Textiles 
furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 06 th  December, 2013.  
The Standing Committee on Labour at their sitting h eld on 04 th  
March, 2014 considered and adopted the draft report  and 
authorized the Chairman to finalise the same and pr esent it to the 
Hon’ble Speaker/Parliament.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on  the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-Eighth Repo rt of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed 
in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                DARA SING H CHAUHAN, 
04 th  March, 2014                                                        CHAIRMAN,   
Phalguna ,1935 (Saka)             STANDING COMMITTE E ON LABOUR  
 
 

7 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Gov ernment on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirt y-Eighth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on `Welfare of small weavers of Mau and adjoining areas- 
A case study’. 
 
1.2 The Thirty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok S abha and also laid on 
the Table in Rajya Sabha on 13 
th  August, 2013. It contained 13 
recommendations/ observations. Replies of Governmen t in respect of all the 
recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government –  
Para Nos. 30,31, 33 and 36 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Para Nos. 32,34,35,37, 38, 39  and 41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which  
replies of the Government are interim in nature -
  
 

8 
 
Para Nos. 29 and 40 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes in  respect of 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final ac tion taken notes in 
respect of recommendations contained in Chapter-V f or which only 
interim replies have been furnished by the Governme nt may be given to 
them at the earliest.  
 
A.  Powerloom Survey   
(Recommendation at Para 29) 
 
1.4  The Committee observed that the last Powerloom  survey was conducted 
in 1955 and therefore the Ministry were not able to  provide the figures relating 
to the number of powerlooms, powerloom weavers/work ers and status of 
powerlooms and size of powerloom units in Azamgarh,  Ghazipur, Mau and 
Balia. The Committee felt that without having the l atest data in respect of 
targeted population, neither the welfare schemes ca n be implemented 
successfully, nor the budgetary allocations justifi ed. The Committee desired 
that the ongoing All India Powerloom Survey should strive to address the 
concerns raised by the Committee and once that surv ey is completed, the 
identified weavers could be issued I-cards so that the schemes meant for them 
could be implemented and monitored in a better way.  The Committee desired 
that the decision to continue the office of Textile  Commissioner at Kanpur may 
be expedited which the Committee also recommended i n their 36 
th  Report on 
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Tex tiles so that benefits of 
various schemes to the poor weavers of that area co uld be ensured without 
further delay. 
 
1.5 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Te xtiles replied as under: 
   “The office of the Textile Commissioner has assigne d a baseline 
survey of powerlooms to an Agency viz. M/s.AC Niels en ORG-MARG Pvt. Ltd in 
the year April 2012. 

9 
 
  The terms of reference of the survey was enlarged  and it includes 
various parameters like number of powerloom weavers, size, condition  and 
installed capacity, working capacity, average earni ngs of powerloom weavers / 
workers, raw material consumption, consumption of power  etc. The Agency 
has submitted a draft report on the baseline survey of  powerlooms on 
25.07.2013. The draft report was examined and some  deficiencies were 
observed therein. 
 The deficiencies observed in the draft report were  conveyed to the 
 Surveying Agency to rectify the same and incorpora te necessary details 
 in the draft report. The Agency is yet to submit i ts revised report. After 
 receipt of the baseline survey report from the Age ncy, the Ministry will be 
 in a position to assess the actual number of power loom weaver/workers.   
 With regard to the continuation of the office of T extile 
Commissioner at Kanpur, it is to inform that this M inistry has already issued 
necessary office order for the continuation of the sub office of the Regional 
Office of the Textile Commissioner, Noida at Kanpur  and the sub- office has 
started functioning in Kanpur w.e.f. 1 st  August, 2013.” 
 
1.6  The reply of the Ministry states that the draf t Report on baseline 
survey of Powerlooms was submitted by the designate d agency on 
25.7.2013 which was returned for rectification of c ertain deficiencies and 
incorporation of necessary details and that the age ncy has not submitted 
their revised Report as yet. The Committee desire t hat the submission of 
the Report by the agency may be expedited so that M inistry are able to 
initiate measures including issuance of I-cards to the identified weavers. 
The Committee further desire that once the final Re port of baseline 
survey is received and examined in the Ministry, th e upgradation of 
Kanpur sub-office to a regional office may be considered. 
 
 
B.  Extension Centre of Weavers Service Centre, Mau  
 
(Recommendation at Para 32) 

10 
 
1.7 The Committee noted that only 920 handloom weav ers of Azamgarh, 
Ghazipur, Mau and Balia have been trained by Weaver s’ Service Centre, 
Varanasi and only 3 workshops have been organized i n the last three years.  
The Committee felt that given the plight of weavers  in the area this is far too 
less an effort to make any impact.  The Committee w ere of the opinion that 
extension centre of Weavers Service Centre, Varanas i, may be opened in Mau 
so as to cater to the needs of the weavers in the a rea.  The Committee also 
desired that separate training programmes may be or ganized by the extension 
centre of women weavers/ workers and allied workers. 
 
1.8 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Te xtiles replied as under: 
 
 “Mau is hardly 150 km away from Varanasi where a We avers Service 
 Centre already exists.  More importantly, Mau is b asically a powerloom 
 dominated area. Therefore, a WSC in Mau may not be  viable solution.  
 However, Ministry of Textiles has undertaken   ski ll development 
 programmes under its Integrated Skill Development Scheme for the 
 weavers in entire country.   Training & other tech nical requirements of 
 the weavers in Mau and adjoining area   are being taken care of   by the 
 WSC, Varanasi.”    
 
1.9  The Committee observe from the reply of the Ministr y that a 
Weaver Service Centre (WSC) in Mau may not be a via ble solution since 
Mau is a Powerloom dominated area and training and other technical 
requirements of the weavers of the area are being t aken care of by the 
WSC, Varanasi. The Committee are not convinced with  the reply of the 
Ministry since the reach of the training programmes  have been dismal in 
the last three years and the poor weavers in the ar ea cannot afford to go 
to Varanasi for basic technical requirements/inputs . The Committee had, 
therefore, recommended that only an extension centr e of WSC, Varanasi 
may be opened in the area and not a full fledged ce ntre. The Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that extensi on centre of WSC, 
Varanasi may be opened in Mau to cater to the needs  of the weavers of 
the area which may also organize separate training programmes for 
women weavers and allied workers. 
 
 

11 
 
 
 
 
C. Revamping of courses at ITI, Mau   
(Recommendation at Para 34) 
 
1.10 The Committee, during their study visit to ITI , Mau, found that the looms 
installed for training purposes were very old and traditional. The Committee felt 
that the looms installed at the ITI and other centr es in the area need to be 
upgraded at the earliest.  The Committee were of th e opinion that the courses 
in trades relating to textile industry being offere d in ITI, Mau need to be 
strengthened in order to make them market oriented.   The Ministry of Textiles 
besides offering such courses themselves in the are a under the ‘Skill 
Development Initiative’ may also take up the matter with the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment and the State Government to improve the courses and 
facilities in ITI, Mau. 
 
1.11 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of T extiles replied as under: 
 
 “The Integrated Skill Development Scheme (ISDS) is implemented by 
 Ministry of Textiles since 2011-12 for skill upgra dation of textile workers. 
 Office of the Textiles Commissioner is one of the Implementing Agencies 
 (IAs) under the Scheme for imparting skill upgrada tion training to 
 powerloom weavers through its 14 Powerloom Service  Centres (PSC) of 
 which PSC, Mau is one among them. So far, PSC, Mau  has trained a 
 total of 40 candidates under ISDS. There are other  IAs like, Textile 
 Research Associations TRAs, State/Private Sector A gencies etc. which 
 are implementing the ISDS in various States includ ing Uttar Pradesh. 
 Hence, it may be possible for ITI, Mau to get them selves designated as IA 
 under the Scheme for which they can directly appro ach the Ministry of 
 Textiles. The Cabinet Committee on Skill Developme nt (CCSD) has 
 approved the proposal for continuation and expansi on of ISDS to train 
 15 lakh persons with an outlay of Rs. 1900 crore d uring 12 
th  Plan. The 

12 
 
 Government is providing assistance of Rs.10,000 /-  per trainee for the 
 skill development under the scheme for the 12 th  Five Year Plan. 
  As well as Handlooms Sector is concerned the matt er has been 
 taken up with Ministry of Labour and Employment to  improve courses 
 and facilities relating to handloom in ITI, Mau.”   
1.12   The Committee note from the reply that the Ministry would like ITI, 
Mau to approach the Ministry and get themselves des ignated as 
Implementing Agency (IA) under the Integrated Skill  Development 
Scheme (ISDS) of Ministry of Textiles. They are of the view that courses 
offered in Mau related to textile industry, particu larly, Powerloom 
industry need to be aligned with the requirements o f the industry for 
which the Ministry of Textiles should instead take the initiative and 
approach ITI, Mau and apprise them of the details o f the scheme and do 
the needful. The Ministry has to be pro-active in t heir approach 
considering the training needs of the poor Powerloom weavers in the area. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommend ation that the 
Ministry of textiles take up the matter with the Mi nistry of Labour and 
Employment and the State Government to improve the courses and 
facilities in ITI, Mau without any further delay in the matter. 
 
D. Appointment of designers   
(Recommendation at Para 35) 
1.13   The Committee felt that giving on-line infor mation to poor weavers who 
are not even sure of their daily earnings and hardl y have any access to 
computers/internet, does not serve purpose and is o f no use for them.  The 
Committee were of the view that designers should al so be available at the 
Weaver Service Centre and Powerloom Service Centre who must visit 
households in the vicinity periodically to help the  weavers produce marketable 
products.  Further, the offices of DC(Handlooms) an d Textile Commissioner 
should take steps to groom talented designers among st the weaver community 
by giving them requisite training and exposure and thus work towards making 
the clusters self sufficient.  
 
 

13 
 
 
 
1.14 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of T extiles replied as under: 
 
 “Weavers Service Centres (WSCs) have separate desi gn section with 
 qualified and experience designers & most of the W SCs have been 
 provided computer aided design software (CAD) syst em also. 
 Further, under cluster development projects of Com prehensive 
 Handloom Development Scheme (CDHS), designers are being appointed 
 in clusters for product development/diversificatio n with design inputs, 
 training of local designers, documentation of desi gns/products and to 
 establish market linkages.  These designers intera ct with the Weavers’ 
 Service Centres & other stakeholders from time to time.  The designers 
 are now proposed to be trained through National In stitute of Fashion 
 Technology to make them aware about contemporary d esigns as per 
 market trends, color forecast etc.”  
1.15 The Committee note from the reply of the Minis try that Weavers 
Service Centre have separate design centre with qualified and experienced 
designers and that designers are appointed at clust er level under 
Comprehensive Handloom Development Scheme (CHDS) wh o also interact 
with the WSCs and stakeholders. The Committee had r ecommended that 
in-house talent may be identified out of the weaver s and may be groomed. 
Further, the reply is silent in regard to facility of designers for poor 
Powerloom weavers. The Committee, therefore, reiter ate their 
recommendation that the designer should be made available at Powerloom 
Service Centre who must visit the households and talented designers from 
within the weavers of the area may be groomed. 
 
E. Housing Scheme for weavers   
(Recommendation at Para 37) 
 
1.16 The Committee during their visit to Mau in Jan uary, 2013 found that the 
female family members of the weavers work whole nig ht in extreme conditions 

14 
 
to make yarn ready for weaving.  The Committee were  of the opinion that the 
common worksheds will not make much of a difference  in ameliorating the 
plight of the female family members of weavers who have to ultimately work in 
their homes.  They, therefore, desired the Ministry  to take steps for betterment 
of their working conditions alternately by introduc ing a housing scheme for 
these poor weavers. 
1.17 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of T extiles replied as under: 
 
 “In order to provide working place; the Government  of India is providing 
 financial assistance for construction of worksheds  under cluster 
 development projects of Comprehensive Handlooms De velopment 
 Scheme (CHDS).  Financial assistance of Rs.25,000/ - is provided to the 
 weavers who are below the poverty line (BPL) and f or non-BPL weavers,  
 financial assistance of Rs.18,750/- is provided an d the remaining is to be 
 borne by the State Government/beneficiary.    For construction of 
 houses, weavers may avail assistance towards under  Indira AwasYojana 
 of the Ministry of Rural Development.” 
1.18 The Committee note from the reply of the Minis try that financial 
assistance for construction of worksheds is provide d under 
Comprehensive Handloom Development Scheme (CHDS). T he Committee 
observe that the female family members referred to in their earlier 
recommendation are the female members of the poor f amilies who are 
engaged in Powerloom sector, mostly from their hous eholds, who cannot 
derive any benefit from the schemes meant for handl oom weavers. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendatio n that Ministry may 
take steps for betterment of the working conditions  of poor Powerloom 
weavers by introducing a housing scheme for them. 
 
F. Exploitation of weavers by the contractors and middlemen  
(Recommendation at Para 38) 
 
1.19  The Committee during their visit also saw that the poor weavers were 
being exploited by the contractors who finance the looms and then pay meager 
rates for the products.  The Committee desired that  a scheme for financing the 

15 
 
looms for these weavers be considered by the Minist ry so that these weavers 
don’t have to depend on and get exploited by the contractors.  
 The Committee were also of the view that the Minis try should help these 
poor weavers in sustaining their livelihoods and sa ving them from the 
exploitation at the hands of contractors by fixing minimum price for each 
product on the lines of the MSP as is fixed for oth er commodities.  The 
Committee further felt that if the weavers do not f ind buyers at these prices, 
the Ministry may in close coordination with State G overnments arrange buyers 
for these products amongst the government departmen ts/government aided / 
funded organizations and PSUs to help the weavers sell their products.  
 
1.20 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of T extiles replied as under: 
 
 “Under Comprehensive Handloom Development Scheme, financial 
 assistance is provided for basic inputs i.e. purch ase of new looms @ 
 Rs.15000/- per loom, dobby @ Rs.4000/-, jacquard @  Rs.6000/- and 
 accessories @ Rs.3000/- per weaver.  Further, Gove rnment has approved 
 working capital loan at 6% interest for handloom s ector with margin 
 money assistance of Rs.10,000/- per weavers and Cr edit Guarantee 
 for three years through Credit Guarantee Trust fun d for Micro Small 
 Enterprises  (CGTMSE).  The objective of these int erventions is to make 
 weavers self sustainable so that weavers are not d ependent on 
 contractors and get exploited by them.”   
1.21 The Committee note from the reply of the Minis try that financial 
assistance is provided for basic inputs under Compr ehensive Handloom 
Development Scheme (CHDS) and working capital loan is also available for 
handloom workers with margin money assistance and C redit Guarantee 
for three years. According to Ministry’s own admiss ion elsewhere in the 
Report that the area is Powerloom dominated. In tha t backdrop, they are 
unable to comprehend as to why the Ministry has rep etitively responded 
only in respect of handloom weavers and has ignored  the 
recommendations of the Committee which are more concerned about poor 
Powerloom weavers. The Committee reiterate their re commendation that 
the Ministry should help such weavers in sustaining  their livelihoods and 
save them from the exploitation at the hands of con tractors by fixing 
minimum price for each product on the lines of the MSP as is fixed for 

16 
 
other commodities and the Ministry may in close coo rdination with State 
Governments arrange buyers for these products among st the Government 
Departments/Government aided / funded organizations  and PSUs etc to 
help the weavers sell their products.  
G. Setting up of marketing complex at Mau 
(Recommendation at Para 39) 
 
1.22 The Committee had further desired that the off ice of the Textile 
Commissioner having the jurisdiction over the area should be pro-active in its 
approach and train the weavers in latest trends, he lp the weavers in procuring 
orders from the buyers and in producing the required quality and quantity. 
The Committee were also of the opinion that a marke ting complex may 
be set up at Mau to help the weavers to buy, sell a nd market their products at 
competitive prices without any involvement of middlemen. 
 
1.23 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of T extiles replied as under: 
 
 “ As has already been stated in reply to Para 34, PSC , Mau is providing 
 training for skill upgradation under ISDS and so f ar, the Centre has 
 trained 40 persons to acquire knowledge in latest trends in production. 
 The  powerloom weavers in the economically weaker clusters using 
 technology  below par are not exposed to other are as using higher level of 
 technology to produce diversified textile products  or value added fabrics 
 due to limited knowledge and financial constraints  etc. With a view to 
 overcoming such  difficulties, the powerloom weave rs in different 
 clusters, are encouraged to visit other developed clusters to get 
 familiarized with the benefit of upgraded  technol ogy, diversified 
 products and the marketing techniques adopted in  those clusters. 
 Financial assistance is provided by the Government  of India  to meet the 
 expenditure arising out of these exposure visits a s part of the 
 Integrated Scheme for Powerloom Sector Development . 51 powerloom 
 workers in the year 2007-08 and 25 workers in 2008 -09 from Mau 
 cluster  has availed the benefit of the Scheme and  visited Surat. In 
 the year 2010-11,  23 workers from Mau cluster ava iled the benefit 
 to visit Tirupur. Each of the  powerloom weavers /  workers was 

17 
 
 provided financial assistance towards  actual to-a nd-fro train fare 
 and incidental expenditure of Rs.2000/- per head.  Though setting up 
 of marketing complex is not a component of any of the  powerloom sector 
 Schemes, Buyer-Seller Meets (BSM) are regularly  o rganized for 
 enabling the powerloom units to sell their product s at  competitive price 
 without involvement of any middlemen. The BSM is o ne  of the 
 components of ISPSD and financial assistance is pr ovided for setting 
 up of stalls.  These are generally organized in de veloped powerloom 
 clusters  with reasonable marketing potential.  Ho wever, one BSM is 
 proposed to be  organized in Mau shortly in associ ation with 
 Powerloom Development and  Export Promotion Counci l (PDEXCIL).” 
 
1.24 The Committee note from the reply of the Minis try that Powerloom 
Service Centre (PSC), Mau is providing training for skill upgradation under 
ISDS and 40 persons have been trained so far, 99 wo rkers have been 
trained under Integrated Scheme for Powerloom Secto r Development 
during last 5-6 years and Buyer Seller Meets are re gularly organized. The 
Committee again observe that the Ministry has conve niently overlooked 
the recommendation of the Committee regarding setti ng up of marketing 
complex. They cannot but conclude that Ministry has  no strategy to 
improve the conditions of poor Powerloom weavers ex cept providing 
training to a miniscule number. The Committee, ther efore, reiterate their 
recommendation that the Ministry should be pro-acti ve in its approach 
and train the poor weavers in latest trends, help t hem in procuring orders 
from the buyers and in producing the required quali ty and quantity and 
actively consider setting up of a marketing complex  at Mau to help such 
weavers to buy, sell and market their products at c ompetitive prices 
without involvement of middlemen. 
 
 
H. Amendment in definition of ‘Handlooms’ 
(Recommendation at Para 40) 
 
1.25 The Committee also observed that small powerlo om weavers are 
marginalized in absence of social security schemes.   The Committee, therefore, 
reiterated their recommendation made in their 36 
th  Report on Demands for 
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Textiles, that the amendment in the 
definition of “Handlooms” may be made at the earlie st and in such a way that 

18 
 
these small powerloom weavers also get the benefits  of the schemes meant for 
handloom weavers. 
 
1.26 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of T extiles replied as under: 
 
 “In order to reduce the drudgery of handloom weave rs and improve the 
 productivity of handlooms, the Advisory Committee on Handlooms 
 (Reservation of Article for Production) Act, in a meeting held on 10 
th  
 December, 2012, under the   chairpersonship of Sec retary (Textiles), 
 discussed the definition of handloom and recommend ed modifications in 
 the  definition of handloom. As per proposed defin ition of handloom, 
 “handloom  means any loom, other than powerloom; a nd includes any 
 hybrid loom on  which at least one process for wea ving requires 
 manual intervention or  human energy for productio n” which under the 
 Handlooms (Reservation of Articles for Production)  Act, 1985 has been 
 defined as “any loom other than powerloom”. 
 
  The issue of amendment of definition was, however , opposed by 
 many handloom experts and civil society members in  the National 
 Consultation on Handloom Sector held on 1 
st  March, 2013. Keeping in 
 view  the reservations expressed to the proposed a mendment on the 
 issue, and in  particular how handlooms would then  be differentiated 
 from powerloom, the meeting of Advisory Committee was held on 12 th  
 April, 2014. The Advisory Committee then constitut ed a Sub- Committee 
 to deliberate and analyse the  concerning issues i n greater  details and 
 submit recommendations to the Advisory Committee. 
 The Sub-Committee has now submitted its report on 29 th  October, 
 2013. The Sub-Committee has not recommended any am endment in the 
 definition of handloom as mentioned in the Handloo ms (Reservation of 
 Article for Production) Act, 1985.  However, to ad dress the demand of 
 powerloom weavers to extend facilities/concessions  at par with 
 handloom  weavers, the Sub-Committee has made foll owing 
 recommendations: 
i.  The unorganised and decentralised household powerlo om weavers 
having maximum four powerlooms in a household and t he powerloom 
having motor power upto one H.P. may be categorized  into a separate 
group and the weavers of this category may be given  priority under the 
existing powerloom schemes. The schemes under imple mentation for 

19 
 
powerloom sector offer the similar facilities/concessions being extended 
to handloom weavers.  
 
ii.  Powerloom Mark may be introduced to give a brand va lue to powerloom 
products so that weavers are not tempted to trade u nder disguise of 
handloom products.  This will also ensure that cons umers get genuine 
products at reasonable prices.   
 
iii.  Since the powerloom units require larger working ca pital and term 
loan, a scheme for making concessional credit to th is category of 
powerloom weavers may be introduced. 
 
  The recommendations of the Sub-Committee would no w be 
 considered by the Advisory Committee under Ministr y of Textiles.” 
 
1.27 The Committee note from the reply of the Minis try that the Sub-
Committee has not recommended any amendment in the definition of 
‘Handloom’ as mentioned in the Handlooms (Reservati on of Article for 
Production) Act, 1985, however, to address the dema nd of powerloom 
weavers to extend facilities/concessions at par wit h handloom weavers, 
the Sub-Committee has recommended that the unorgani sed and 
decentralised household powerloom weavers having ma ximum four 
powerlooms in a household and the powerloom having motor power upto 
one H.P. may be categorized into a separate group a nd the weavers of this 
category may be given priority under the existing p owerloom schemes. 
The recommendations of the Sub-Committee would now be considered by 
the Advisory Committee under Ministry of Textiles. The Committee are of 
the view that merely prioritising this category of workers may not serve 
the purpose unless the schemes for them are at par with those for 
handloom weavers or alternatively these poor Powerl oom weavers are 
covered under the schemes meant for handloom weaver s. They would like 
to be apprised of the decision of the Advisory Comm ittee on the Report of 
the Sub-Committee at the earliest. 
   
I.  Umbrella health insurance scheme   
(Recommendation at Para 41) 
 

20 
 
1.28 The Committee also reiterated the recommendati on made in their 36 th  
Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Minis try of Textiles, that 
instead of implementing separate schemes for health  insurance, the Ministry 
should endeavour to operate one umbrella scheme for  all the weavers/ workers 
in the textile industry and the Ministry need to ta ke up the issue of extension 
of RSBY with Ministry of Labour and Employment earn estly for all the weavers 
/ workers of the industry and not for the handloom weavers alone. 
 
1.29 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of T extiles replied as under: 
 
 “ In 12 
th Plan period, the Health Insurance Scheme (HIS) is p roposed to 
 be  implemented on RashtriyaSwasthyaBimaYojana (RS BY) pattern 
 with an  added facility of OP treatment for handlo om weavers by 
 Ministry of  Labour & Employment (MoLE).  At prese nt the HIS scheme 
 provides  coverage of Rs.15,000/- per annum (out o f  which Rs.7500/- 
 is for OPD) for  a family of four members, while i n RSBY the total 
 coverage per family  would be of Rs.37,500/- (Rs.7 500/- and 
 Rs.30,000/- for OP & IP treatment  resp.) for a fa mily of five members. 
 The scheme would be implemented incorporating OP t reatment 
 facility, by MoLE of Ministry of Textile except in  Andhra Pradesh & Tamil 
 Nadu as RSBY is currently not being implemented in  these states.  
 Therefore, for Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, the scheme will be 
 implemented by the Office of the Development Commi ssioner for 
 Handlooms on the lines of RSBY.  The modified HIS is proposed to be 
 merged with RSBY of Ministry of Labour& Employment  (MoLE) after a 
 period of two years i.e. after 2014-15.” 
 
1.30 The Committee note from the reply of the Minis try that the Health 
Insurance Scheme (HIS) is proposed to be implemente d on Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) pattern with an added f acility of OP 
treatment for handloom weavers by Ministry of Labou r& Employment 
(MoLE) and the modified HIS is proposed to be merge d with RSBY after a 
period of two years i.e. after 2014-15. The Committ ee again find that the 
Ministry has altogether ignored the recommendation the Committee for 
operating an umbrella scheme for all the weavers/ w orkers. The 

21 
 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that instead 
of implementing separate schemes for health insuran ce, the endeavour 
should be to operate one umbrella scheme i.e RSBY f or all the weavers/ 
workers and the Ministry need to take up the issue of extension of RSBY 
with Ministry of Labour and Employment earnestly fo r all the weavers / 
workers of the industry and not for the handloom weavers alone. 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No. 30)  
 The Committee are also of the view that the Powerl oom Service Centre in 
Mau has not been able to contribute anything substa ntial towards 
improvement of the working conditions of Powerloom Weavers of the area. The 
Committee desire that the officers deputed in Power loom Service Centre, Mau 
should visit the area periodically to have firsthan d knowledge of the problems 
being faced by these weavers and also disseminate t he information about the 
various schemes of the Ministry and the training pr ogrammes being conducted 
by the Powerloom Service Centre to the weavers personally. 
Reply of  the Government  
 
 Powerloom Service Centres are set up at various pl aces including one at 
Mau with the objective of providing Consultancy / T rouble Shooting Services, 
imparting technical training for skill upgradation,  providing textile testing for 
assessing the quality parameters of raw material an d finished products like 
yarn and fabrics, developing new samples for produc t diversification, creating 
awareness about Technology Upgradation and moderniz ation of the existing 
powerlooms. To accomplish these targets, Powerloom Service Centres are 
equipped with various types of looms like plain loo m with dobby, jacquard and 
drop box, Shuttleless (Rapier) Loom etc. and give p ractical training to the 
trainees in skill development and also for sample d evelopment. Similarly, 
testing laboratory has been set up for providing te sting of various parameters 
of yarn and fabrics. Apart from the above, the Powe rloom Service Centre (PSC) 
is also periodically organising and conducting various Seminars / Workshops / 
Awareness Meetings etc for disseminating various sc hemes and initiatives of 

22 
 
Govt. of India for exclusive development of powerlo om units in decentralized 
sector. PSC, Mau is also involved in conducting periodical powerloom survey so 
as to assess the working condition of the cluster, enrolling the powerloom 
weavers under Group Insurance Scheme implemented by  the Ministry of 
Textiles in association with Life Insurance Corpora tion of India. The 
performance of the PSC, Mau for the last two years against the prescribed 
activities is as under: 
 S.No. 
 Particulars 2011-
12 
2012-13 
1. No. of samples tested 261 168 
2. No. of samples developed 91 86 
3. No. of consultancy/trouble shooting 
attended 
135 259 
4. No. of units surveyed  828 905 
5. No. of seminars/workshop conducted 18 16 
6. No. of workers enrolled in the Group 
Insurance Scheme 
794 1152 
 
As desired by the Standing Committee on Labour in i ts 13 
th  Report, the 
officers/staff posted in Powerloom Service Centre, Mau will be asked to make 
more number of periodical visits and interact with the powerloom weavers to 
disseminate the information on various developmenta l and welfare schemes of 
the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 28.11.2013) 
 
 
 (Recommendation No. 31) 
 
 The Committee observe that there is a sharp decline  in the number of 
handloom weavers in Azamgarh, Ghazipur, Mau and Bal ia in last two decades 
which indicates the failure of the schemes of the Ministry to sustain handlooms 
in these areas.  The Committee are shocked to note that in Balia, Uttar Pradesh 
not even a single handloom weaver exists as per the  latest handloom census.  
The Committee note that Ministry have not conducted  any detailed / 
household survey in the area and has no information  about the status of 

23 
 
handlooms in the area.  The Committee are of the fi rm view tht the Ministry 
should take extra interest in these areas where the  skill is dying and desire 
that a comprehensive survey of the area may be cond ucted and reasons for 
dwindling number of handloom weavers be ascertained  and area specific 
solutions be applied instead of a general approach as is being done by the 
Ministry at present. 
 
Reply of  the Government  
 There has been a continuous decline in the number of handloom weavers 
across the country the over last few years.   The d ecline is due to various 
reasons such as changing consumer preferences, low productivity, stiff 
competition with powerloom etc. To arrest the trend , the Ministry of textiles 
has introduced various schemes / programmes to   su pport the weavers. There 
have been reports that during last census in some o f the pockets in UP   
weavers were not   fully covered for ID cards. The State government has been 
requested to identify those pockets and issue fresh  ID   cards after survey to 
the left out weavers.   An All India Handloom Censu s is also planned in the in 
XII five year plans when fresh survey of handloom sector will be taken up.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 28.11.2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 33)  
 The Committee further note that most of the powerlo oms in the area are 
shuttle plain looms which are 10 to 30 years old an d, at present, Technology 
Upgradation Fund Scheme is the only scheme availabl e for upgradation of 
these looms.  The Committee also observe that in respect of restructured TUFS, 
there were only 5 cases out of a total 3741 approve d cases where investment 
was less than 5 lakhs.  The Committee, therefore, a re of the firm opinion that 
small weavers have not been able to get any benefit  under TUFS. The 
Committee desire that an alternative scheme for upg radation of looms in the 
area may be chalked out and a part of the TUFS allo cation be kept exclusively 
for the benefit of the weavers of the areas where p oorest of poor weavers reside 
and annual targets may also be fixed thereof. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 

24 
 
 In order to provide financial assistance to econom ically weaker low-end 
powerloom units to whom the benefits of the TUFS ha s not reached, the 
Ministry of Textiles has approved the Scheme for In -situ Upgradation of Plain 
Powerlooms for SSI Powerloom Sector during the 12 th  Five Year Plan. The In-
situ Upgradation Scheme is launched initially in 6 powerloom clusters 
including Tanda in Uttar Pradesh. It has also been recommended to include 
Mau Powerloom Cluster for initial launch of the Sch eme. The Scheme will be 
extended to other powerloom clusters in due course of time.  The total financial 
outlay including 1% towards administrative expenses  for the 12 th  Five Year 
Plan is Rs.150.00 crore which is exclusively year-m arked for In-situ 
Upgradation of Plain Powerlooms. Annual target is a lso fixed for In-situ 
Upgradation which is as shown below: 
Target 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 Total 
No. of plain 
looms to be 
covered 
21,120 25,960 25,960 25,960 99,000 
Subsidy to be 
released 
Rs.3168 
lakh 
Rs.3894 
lakh 
Rs.3894 
lakh 
Rs.3894 
lakh 
Rs.14850 
lakh 
 
Besides, in the Revised Restructured Technology Upg radation Fund 
Scheme (RRTUFS) launched for the 12 
th  Plan period, 10% allocation has been 
reserved for MSME Sector which will also benefit th e weavers of powerloom 
sector falling under MSME category. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 27.11.2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 36)  
 The Committee perused low coverage of the insurance  schemes of the 
Ministry viz. health insurance scheme for handloom weavers and Group 
Insurance Schemes for powerloom workers.  The Commi ttee were surprised to 
note that not a single eligible application was rec eived for scholarship which is 
a part of the Group Insurance Scheme for the worker s.  Further, on the 
training segment, only 406 powerloom weavers have b een trained in the last 5 

25 
 
years.  The Committee would like to point out that implementation of schemes 
in respect of powerloom weavers has been pathetic a nd attribute this to 
absence of concerted efforts at field level coupled  with lack of awareness 
amongst the beneficiaries for whom the schemes are meant.  The Committee 
view such lack of awareness about the schemes as th e major reason for low 
coverage.  The Committee desire that Ministry gear up their efforts to spread 
awareness about the schemes.  The Committee may als o be apprised of the 
steps taken in this regard. 
 
Further, the Committee are of the view that wheneve r the Ministry 
launches any welfare scheme, an orientation session  for Members of 
Parliament, Members of Legislative Assemblies and o ther elected 
representatives be invariably organised by the Mini stry through its regional 
offices as they are the public representatives and can better publicize the 
welfare schemes to the grass-root level of workers.   The Committee also desire 
that brochures, preferably in local languages in re spect of the schemes, be 
made available at the local post offices, gram panchayats and schools.  
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
 As far as handloom weavers are concerned, Governme nt of India has 
been implementing Handloom Weavers Comprehensive We lfare Scheme 
(HWCWS)  across the country with the components of (a) Health Insurance 
Scheme (HIS) to provide health care facilities and (ii) Mahatma Gandhi  
BunkarBimaYojana (MGBBY) to provide life insurance cover to handloom 
weavers in case of natural & accidental death and a lso for disability under 
MGBBY. 
 In 12 
th  plan, the Health Insurance Scheme (HIS) is propose d to be 
implemented on RashtriyaSwasthyaBimaYojana (RSBY) p attern with an added 
facility of  Out patient (OP) treatment for handloo m weavers by Ministry of 
Labour& Employment (MoLE).   
 At present the HIS scheme provides coverage of Rs. 15,000/- per annum 
(out of which Rs.7500/- is for OPD) for a family of  four members, while in 
RSBY the total coverage per family would be of Rs.3 7,500/- (Rs.7500/- and 
Rs.30,000/- for OP & IP treatment resp.) for a fami ly of five members.  During 
2012-13 the total 17.49 lakh beneficiaries were enrolled under HIS. 

26 
 
 The Ministry appreciates the suggestions given by the Committee that 
whenever the Ministry launches any welfare scheme, an orientation session 
should be organized through its regional offices an d also to distribute 
brochures at the local level.  The Ministry of Text iles will take such steps while 
introducing welfare scheme in handloom sector. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 28.11.2013) 
CHAPTER-III  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation at Para 32) 
1.6 The Committee note that only 920 handloom weave rs of Azamgarh, 
Ghazipur, Mau and Balia have been trained by Weaver s’ Service Centre, 
Varanasi and only 3 workshops have been organized i n the last three years.  
The Committee feel that given the plight of weavers  in the area this is far too 
less an effort to make any impact.  The Committee a re of the opinion that 
extension centre of Weavers Service Centre, Varanas i, may be opened in Mau 
so as to cater to the needs of the weavers in the a rea.  The Committee also 
desire that separate training programmes may be org anized by the extension 
centre of women weavers/ workers and allied workers. 
 
1.7 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Te xtiles replied as under: 
 
 “Mau is hardly 150 km away from Varanasi where a We avers Service 
 Centre already exists.  More importantly, Mau is b asically a powerloom 
 dominated area. Therefore, a WSC in Mau may not be  viable solution.  
 However, Ministry of Textiles has undertaken   ski ll development 
 programmes under its Integrated Skill Development Scheme for the 
 weavers in entire country.   Training & other tech nical requirements of 
 the weavers in Mau and adjoining area   are being taken care of   by the 
 WSC, Varanasi.”    
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.9 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 28.11.2013) 
 
 

28 
 
(Recommendation at Para 34) 
 
1.8 The Committee, during their study visit to ITI,  Mau, found that the looms 
installed for training purposes were very old and t raditional. The Committee 
feel that the looms installed at the ITI and other centres in the area need to be 
upgraded at the earliest.  The Committee are of the  opinion that the courses in 
trades relating to textile industry being offered i n ITI, Mau need to be 
strengthened in order to make them market oriented.   The Ministry of Textiles 
besides offering such courses themselves in the are a under the ‘Skill 
Development Initiative’ may also take up the matter with the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment and the State Government to improve the courses and 
facilities in ITI, Mau. 
 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Te xtiles replied as under: 
 
 “The Integrated Skill Development Scheme (ISDS) is implemented by 
 Ministry of Textiles since 2011-12 for skill upgra dation of textile workers. 
 Office of the Textiles Commissioner is one of the Implementing Agencies 
 (IAs) under the Scheme for imparting skill upgrada tion training to 
 powerloom weavers through its 14 Powerloom Service  Centres (PSC) of 
 which PSC, Mau is one among them. So far, PSC, Mau  has trained a 
 total of 40 candidates under ISDS. There are other  IAs like, Textile 
 Research Associations TRAs, State/Private Sector A gencies etc. which 
 are implementing the ISDS in various States includ ing Uttar Pradesh. 
 Hence, it may be possible for ITI, Mau to get them selves designated as IA 
 under the Scheme for which they can directly appro ach the Ministry of 
 Textiles. The Cabinet Committee on Skill Developme nt (CCSD) has 
 approved the proposal for continuation and expansi on of ISDS to train 
 15 lakh persons with an outlay of Rs. 1900 crore d uring 12 
th  Plan. The 
 Government is providing assistance of Rs.10,000 /-  per trainee for the 
 skill development under the scheme for the 12 th  Five Year Plan. 
  As well as Handlooms Sector is concerned the matt er has been 
 taken up with Ministry of Labour and Employment to  improve courses 
 and facilities relating to handloom in ITI, Mau.”   
 

29 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.12 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 27.11.2013) 
 
(Recommendation at Para 35) 
1.10 The Committee observe that the National Centre  for Textile Design 
provides design support to handloom weavers online and contemporary designs 
and technical details are available on their websit e.  The Committee feel that 
giving on-line information to poor weavers who are not even sure of their daily 
earnings and hardly have any access to computers/in ternet, does not serve 
their purpose and is of no use for them.  The Commi ttee also note from the 
reply of the Ministry that designers are appointed at cluster level.  The 
Committee are of the view that designer should also  be available at the Weaver 
Service Centre and Powerloom Service Centre who must visit households in the 
vicinity periodically to help the weavers produce marketable products.  Further, 
the offices of DC(Handlooms) and Textile Commission er should take steps to 
groom talented designers amongst the weaver communi ty by giving them 
requisite training and exposure and thus work towar ds making the clusters 
self sufficient.  
 
1.11 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of T extiles replied as under: 
 
 “Weavers Service Centres (WSCs) have separate desi gn section with 
 qualified and experience designers & most of the W SCs have been 
 provided computer aided design software (CAD) syst em also. 
 Further, under cluster development projects of Com prehensive 
 Handloom Development Scheme (CDHS), designers are being appointed 
 in clusters for product development/diversificatio n with design inputs, 
 training of local designers, documentation of desi gns/products and to 
 establish market linkages.  These designers intera ct with the Weavers’ 
 Service Centres & other stakeholders from time to time.  The designers 
 are now proposed to be trained through National In stitute of Fashion 

30 
 
 Technology to make them aware about contemporary d esigns as per 
 market trends, color forecast etc.”  
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.15 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 28.11.2013) 
 
(Recommendation at Para 37) 
 
1.12 The Committee during their visit to Mau in Jan uary, 2013 found that the 
female family members of the weavers work whole nig ht in extreme conditions 
to make yarn ready for weaving.  The Committee were  moved to see the 
pathetic living conditions of those female members.   During the evidence the 
Committee were informed that the Ministry are proposing to provide worksheds 
to the weavers. The Committee are of the opinion th at these common 
worksheds will not make much of a difference in ame liorating the plight of the 
female family members of weavers who have to ultima tely work in their homes.  
They, therefore, desire the Ministry to take steps for betterment of their 
working conditions alternately by introducing a hou sing scheme for these poor 
weavers. 
1.13 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of T extiles replied as under: 
 
 “In order to provide working place; the Government  of India is providing 
 financial assistance for construction of worksheds  under cluster 
 development projects of Comprehensive Handlooms De velopment 
 Scheme (CHDS).  Financial assistance of Rs.25,000/ - is provided to the 
 weavers who are below the poverty line (BPL) and f or non-BPL weavers,  
 financial assistance of Rs.18,750/- is provided an d the remaining is to be 
 borne by the State Government/beneficiary.    For construction of 
 houses, weavers may avail assistance towards under  Indira AwasYojana 
 of the Ministry of Rural Development.” 
 
 

31 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.18 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 28.11.2013) 
 
 
(Recommendation at Para 38) 
 
1.14  The Committee during their visit also saw that the poor weavers are 
exploited by the contractors who finance the looms and then pay meager rates 
for the products.  The Committee desire that a sche me for financing the looms 
for these weavers be considered by the Ministry so that these weavers don’t 
have to depend on and get exploited by the contractors.  
 The Committee are of the view that the Ministry sh ould help these poor 
weavers in sustaining their livelihoods and saving them from the exploitation at 
the hands of contractors by fixing minimum price fo r each product on the lines 
of the MSP as is fixed for other commodities.  The Committee further feel that if 
the weavers do not find buyers at these prices, the  Ministry may in close 
coordination with State Governments arrange buyers for these products 
amongst the government departments/government aided  / funded 
organizations and PSUs to help the weavers sell their products.  
 
1.15 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of T extiles replied as under: 
 
 “Under Comprehensive Handloom Development Scheme, financial 
 assistance is provided for basic inputs i.e. purch ase of new looms @ 
 Rs.15000/- per loom, dobby @ Rs.4000/-, jacquard @  Rs.6000/- and 
 accessories @ Rs.3000/- per weaver.  Further, Gove rnment has approved 
 working capital loan at 6% interest for handloom s ector with margin 
 money assistance of Rs.10,000/- per weavers and Cr edit Guarantee 
 for three years through Credit Guarantee Trust fun d for Micro Small 
 Enterprises  (CGTMSE).  The objective of these int erventions is to make 

32 
 
 weavers self sustainable so that weavers are not d ependent on 
 contractors and get exploited by them.”   
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.21 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 28.11.2013) 
 
 
(Recommendation at Para 39) 
 
1.16 The Committee further desire that the office o f the Textile Commissioner 
having the jurisdiction over the area should be pro -active in its approach and 
train the weavers in latest trends, help the weaver s in procuring orders from 
the buyers and in producing the required quality and quantity. 
The Committee are also of the opinion that a market ing complex may be 
set up at Mau to help the weavers to buy, sell and market their products at 
competitive prices without any involvement of middlemen. 
 
1.17 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of T extiles replied as under: 
 
 “ As has already been stated in reply to Para 34, PSC , Mau is providing 
 training for skill upgradation under ISDS and so f ar, the Centre has 
 trained 40 persons to acquire knowledge in latest trends in production. 
 The  powerloom weavers in the economically weaker clusters using 
 technology  below par are not exposed to other are as using higher level of 
 technology to produce diversified textile products  or value added fabrics 
 due to limited knowledge and financial constraints  etc. With a view to 
 overcoming such  difficulties, the powerloom weave rs in different 
 clusters, are encouraged to visit other developed clusters to get 
 familiarized with the benefit of upgraded  technol ogy, diversified 
 products and the marketing techniques adopted in  those clusters. 

33 
 
 Financial assistance is provided by the Government  of India  to meet the 
 expenditure arising out of these exposure visits a s part of the 
 Integrated Scheme for Powerloom Sector Development . 51 powerloom 
 workers in the year 2007-08 and 25 workers in 2008 -09 from Mau 
 cluster  has availed the benefit of the Scheme and  visited Surat. In 
 the year 2010-11,  23 workers from Mau cluster ava iled the benefit 
 to visit Tirupur. Each of the  powerloom weavers /  workers was 
 provided financial assistance towards  actual to-a nd-fro train fare 
 and incidental expenditure of Rs.2000/- per head.  Though setting up 
 of marketing complex is not a component of any of the  powerloom sector 
 Schemes, Buyer-Seller Meets (BSM) are regularly  o rganized for 
 enabling the powerloom units to sell their product s at  competitive price 
 without involvement of any middlemen. The BSM is o ne  of the 
 components of ISPSD and financial assistance is pr ovided for setting 
 up of stalls.  These are generally organized in de veloped powerloom 
 clusters  with reasonable marketing potential.  Ho wever, one BSM is 
 proposed to be  organized in Mau shortly in associ ation with 
 Powerloom Development and  Export Promotion Counci l (PDEXCIL).” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.24 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 28.11.2013) 
 
(Recommendation at Para 41) 
 
1.28 The Committee also reiterated the recommendati on made in their 36 
th  
Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Minis try of Textiles, that 
instead of implementing separate schemes for health  insurance, the Ministry 
should endeavour to operate one umbrella scheme for  all the weavers/ workers 
in the textile industry and the Ministry need to ta ke up the issue of extension 
of RSBY with Ministry of Labour and Employment earn estly for all the weavers 
/ workers of the industry and not for the handloom weavers alone. 
 

34 
 
1.29 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of T extiles replied as under: 
 
 “ In 12 
th Plan period, the Health Insurance Scheme (HIS) is p roposed to 
 be  implemented on RashtriyaSwasthyaBimaYojana (RS BY) pattern 
 with an  added facility of OP treatment for handlo om weavers by 
 Ministry of  Labour & Employment (MoLE).  At prese nt the HIS scheme 
 provides  coverage of Rs.15,000/- per annum (out o f  which Rs.7500/- 
 is for OPD) for  a family of four members, while i n RSBY the total 
 coverage per family  would be of Rs.37,500/- (Rs.7 500/- and 
 Rs.30,000/- for OP & IP treatment  resp.) for a fa mily of five members. 
 The scheme would be implemented incorporating OP t reatment 
 facility, by MoLE of Ministry of Textile except in  Andhra Pradesh & Tamil 
 Nadu as RSBY is currently not being implemented in  these states.  
 Therefore, for Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, the scheme will be 
 implemented by the Office of the Development Commi ssioner for 
 Handlooms on the lines of RSBY.  The modified HIS is proposed to be 
 merged with RSBY of Ministry of Labour& Employment  (MoLE) after a 
 period of two years i.e. after 2014-15.” 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.30 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 27.11.2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation No. 29)  
 
 The Committee observe that the last Powerloom surv ey was conducted in 
1955 and therefore the Ministry are not able to pro vide the figures relating to 
the number of powerlooms, powerloom weavers/workers  and status of 
powerlooms and size of powerloom units in Azamgarh,  Ghazipur, Mau and 
Balia. The Committee fail to understand the basis o n which the Ministry are 
making budgetary allocations for the powerloom weavers/workers in absence of 
any up-to-date information about actual number of b eneficiaries etc. The 
Committee feel that without having the latest data in respect of targeted 
population, neither the welfare schemes can be impl emented successfully, nor 
the budgetary allocations justified. The Committee desire that to gauge the real 
situation prevailing on the ground, the regional of fices of Textile Commissioner 
should conduct detailed periodical surveys for collecting information relating to 
number of powerloom weavers; size, condition and ca pacity of powerlooms and 
powerloom units; average earnings of the powerloom weavers and ancillary 
workers; availability of raw  material and infrastr uctural facilities; peculiar 
problems of the area; and the number of weavers migrating to other professions 
etc. The Committee desire that the ongoing All Indi a Powerloom Survey should 
strive to address the concerns raised by the Commit tee and once that survey is 
completed, the identified weavers could be issued I -cards so that the schemes 
meant for them could be implemented and monitored i n a better way. The 
Committee desire that the decision to continue the office of Textile 
Commissioner at Kanpur may be expedited which the C ommittee also 
recommended in their 36 th  Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the 
Ministry of Textiles so that benefits of various sc hemes to the poor weavers of 
that area could be ensured without further delay. 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
Reply of  the Government  
 
 The office of the Textile Commissioner has assigned  a baseline survey of 
powerlooms to an Agency viz. M/s.AC Nielsen ORG-MAR G Pvt. Ltd in the year 
April 2012.  
 The terms of reference of the survey was enlarged and it includes various 
parameters like number of powerloom weavers, size, condition and installed 
capacity, working capacity, average earnings of pow erloom weavers / workers, 
raw material consumption, consumption of power etc.  The Agency has 
submitted a draft report on the baseline survey of powerlooms on 25.07.2013. 
The draft report was examined and some deficiencies were observed therein. 
The deficiencies observed in the draft report were conveyed to the 
Surveying Agency to rectify the same and incorporat e necessary details in the 
draft report. The Agency is yet to submit its revis ed report. After receipt of the 
baseline survey report from the Agency, the Ministr y will be in a position to 
assess the actual number of powerloom weaver/worker s. Till then, it may be 
necessary to continue with the practise of estimati ng the number of powerloom 
weavers / workers engaged in the decentralized powe rloom sector on the basis 
of number of looms installed / registered.  
As per the available records, there are 23.55 lakh powerlooms in 
decentralized sector. The employment in this sector  is estimated to be 58.87 
lakh which includes both direct and indirect employ ment (1:1 for direct 
employment and 1:1.5 for indirect employment). This  is also kept in view while 
preparing the budget proposal for any welfare schem es like Group Insurance 
Scheme, Health Insurance Scheme and other developmental scheme like Group 
Workshed Scheme, Exposure Visit and Buyer Seller Meets etc.  
With regard to the continuation of the office of Te xtile Commissioner at 
Kanpur, it is to inform that this Ministry has alre ady issued necessary office 
order for the continuation of the sub office of the  Regional Office of the Textile 
Commissioner, Noida at Kanpur and the sub- office h as started functioning in 
Kanpur w.e.f. 1 
st  August, 2013. 
 
 
 

37 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.6 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 28.11.2013)  
  
(Recommendation No. 40)  
  The Committee also observe that small powerloom wea vers are 
marginalized in absence of social security schemes.   The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation made in their 36 th  Report on Demands for 
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Textiles, that the amendment in the 
definition of “Handlooms” may be made at the earlie st and in such a way that 
these small powerloom weavers also get the benefits  of the schemes meant for 
handloom weavers. 
 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
 In order to reduce the drudgery of handloom weavers  and improve the 
productivity of handlooms, the Advisory Committee on Handlooms (Reservation 
of Article for Production) Act, in a meeting held o n 10 th  December, 2012, under 
the   chairpersonship of Secretary (Textiles), disc ussed the definition of 
handloom and recommended modifications in the defin ition of handloom. As 
per proposed definition of handloom, “handloom mean s any loom, other than 
powerloom; and includes any hybrid loom on which at  least one process for 
weaving requires manual intervention or human energ y for 
production”whichunder the Handlooms (Reservation of  Articles for Production) 
Act, 1985 has been defined as “any loom other than powerloom”. 
 
 The issue of amendment of definition was, however,  opposed by many 
handloom experts and civil society members in the N ational Consultation on 
Handloom Sector held on 1 
st  March, 2013. Keeping in view the reservations 
expressed to the proposed amendment on the issue, a nd in particular how 
handlooms would then be differentiated from powerlo om, the meeting of 
Advisory Committee was held on 12 th  April, 2014. The Advisory Committee 
then constituted a Sub-Committee to deliberate and analyse the concerning 
issues in greater details and submit recommendation s to the Advisory 
Committee. 

38 
 
The Sub-Committee has now submitted its report on 2 9 th  October, 2013. 
The Sub-Committee has not recommended any amendment  in the definition of 
handloom as mentioned in the Handlooms (Reservation  of Article for 
Production) Act, 1985.  However, to address the dem and of powerloom weavers 
to extend facilities/concessions at par with handlo om weavers, the Sub-
Committee has made following recommendations: 
i)  The unorganised and decentralised household pow erloom weavers 
having maximum four powerlooms in a household and t he powerloom 
having motor power upto one H.P. may be categorized  into a separate 
group and the weavers of this category may be given  priority under the 
existing powerloom schemes. The schemes under imple mentation for 
powerloom sector offer the similar facilities/concessions being extended 
to handloom weavers.  
 
ii) Powerloom Mark may be introduced to give a bran d value to powerloom 
 products so that weavers are not tempted to trade under disguise of 
 handloom products.  This will also ensure that con sumers get genuine 
 products at reasonable prices.   
 
iii) Since the powerloom units require larger worki ng capital and term 
 loan, a scheme for making concessional credit to t his category of 
 powerloom weavers may be introduced. 
 
 The recommendations of the Sub-Committee would now  be considered 
by the Advisory Committee under Ministry of Textiles. 
   
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.27 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/30/2013-Parl. dated 28.11.2013) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                 DARA SIN GH CHAUHAN, 
  March, 2014 
                                                                   CHAIRMAN,  
   Magha ,1935 (Saka)                     STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
 
 

39 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-EIGHT REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
        Total Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations      13   
II. Recommendations/Observations which have  04           30.77%   
 been accepted by Government 
 
 (Rec. Para. Nos.  30, 31, 33 and 36) 
 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the   NIL      NIL 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s reply  
               
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  07    53.85% 
 which replies of Government have not been 
 accepted by the Committee            
  
 ( Rec.  Para. Nos. 32, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39 and 41) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   02     15.38% 
 final replies of Government are of interim in  natu re 
  
 (Rec. Para Nos. 29 and 40 )             
                                           
           ---------- 
              100% 
                                      ------------ 
  
 
 
 
 