 
 
 
  
16 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 (FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF JUTE SECTOR 
 
 
            SIXTEENTH  REPORT 
 
 
       
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
            March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 
  


2 
 
  
  SIXTEENTH  REPORT 
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2010-11) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
  
DEVELOPMENT OF JUTE SECTOR 
 
 
 
  
 Presented to Lok Sabha on  8th March, 2011 
 
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2011 
 
 
 
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
       
            March, 2011/ Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)   


3 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee      (iii) 
 
Introduction         (iv) 
 
        Report          
 
CHAPTER I -     Strengthening the farm sector     
 
       (i) Crop Insurance 
   (ii) Minimum support price 
 
 CHAPTER II-     Problems of the Jute mill workers 
 
   (i) Safety equipments 
   (ii) Statutory Dues 
   (iii) Dwelling Space 
   (iv) Textile Worker‟s Rehabilitation Fund Scheme  
   (v) Identity cards  
 
 
CHAPTER III  -   Industrial growth vis-à-vis implementation of jute      
          Technology Mission 
 
  (i) Modernization of Jute Mills 
  (ii) Jute Technology Mission 
  (iii) Research and Development Activities 
  (iv) Trade Mark for Jute Products 
  (v) Revival of NJMC Mills 
  (vi) Revival of sick Private sector Jute Mills 
                  (vii) Jute packaging materials (compulsory use in 
packaging commodities) Act, 1987 
  
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(i) Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 
18.1.2010, 28.1.2010, 8.2.2010, 17.2.2010  and 
4.2.2011. 
 
(ii)     Summary of Recommendations/Observations.

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2010-11) 
 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Shri  Raj Babbar 
4. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
       **5. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
7. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
8. Shri Hassan Khan 
9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
10. Shri P. Lingam 
11. Shri Hari Manjhi 
12. Shri P. Balram Naik 
13. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
14. Smt. Mausam Noor 
15. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
16. Dr. P.L. Punia 
17. Shri Ramkishun 
18. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
19. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
20. Shri Murarilal Singh 
    ***21. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
23. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
24. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
25. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
26. Shri Rajaram 
27. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
       *28. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose 
       *29. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
       *30. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
31. Vacant 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
   
 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director  
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 4.    Shri Suresh  Kumar  - Senior Executive   
        Assistant 
  
 
 
       
______________________________________________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f 21st September, 2010 
** Change in nomination from Committee on Labour to 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas w.e.f  8th December, 
2010 
*** Nominated w.e.f  8th December, 2010 
  
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
                               
 
I,  the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour (2010 -
11) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report 
on their behalf, present this Sixteenth Report on „Development of 
Jute Sector.‟ 
 
2. The Committee selected this subject for detailed examination 
for the year 2009 -10 and continued it in 2010 -11.  The Committee 
found that entire Jute sector is marred with multiple problems, 
such as, non-payment of provident fund dues to the workers, non-
payment of ESI deductions of the workers to the ESIC, poor safety 
conditions in the mills, varied wage structure   and non protection 
to the industry in view of its environment -friendliness, besides, 
absence of any research and development  to enhance productivity 
in the industry.  More so, to get their legitimate dues, irate jute mill 
workers resort to frequent strikes which not only hamper the 
growth of the Jute Industry but affect the livelihood of poor and 
hapless workers badly. In fact,  the 61 day strike by 52 jute mill 
workers in December, 2009 was the whistleblower for the 
Committee and which convinced the Committee that all was not 
well with Indian jute sector.  The Committee, in order to examine 
the matter in depth and to know what r eally ails this sector and 
why there are repeated strikes, held interactions with the Ministry 
of Textiles on 18 th January, 2010 and with Ministry of Labour and 

7 
 
Employment on 28 th January, 2010. The Committee also called a 
joint meeting of both the Ministr ies on 8 th February, 2010 to 
examine the issues threadbare.  The Committee noted that though 
the issues pertained to both the Ministries yet neither of them 
accepted direct responsibility in the matter. The Committee also 
understood the limitations of both  the Ministries in resolving the 
issues of this sector vis-à-vis jute mill workers.  
 
3.  The Committee further heard the views of the representatives of 
the major Central Trade Unions and Indian Jute Mill Association, 
separately on 17.2.2010.  The Committee also undertook an on-the-
spot visit to Kolkata on 16 th and 17 th June, 2010 and held 
interactions with all the stakeholders there. Not only this, the 
Committee even visited two privately run Jute mills in Kolkata to 
take first hand information and gauge the real problems being faced 
by the jute mill workers.    
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Ministry of Textiles and Ministry of Labour 
and Employment  for placing before them their views and also for 
providing detailed written notes and information on the subject. 
 
5. The Committee also thank the representatives of the Central 
Trade Unions and Indian Jute Mill Association who expressed their 
views in the matter freely and in an unhesitating  manner.    
 

8 
 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep 
sense of appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered to them 
at every stage of examination of the subject by the officials of the 
Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
7. The Co mmittee considered and adopted the draft Report at 
their sitting held on 4.2.2011. 
 
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee have been printed 
in bold type in the body of the Report and have also been 
reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix of the Report.                
                  
   
New Delhi,            HEMANAND BISWAL,   
4th February, 2011,             CHAIRMAN,                                             
15 Magha 1932 (Saka)   STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
       
 
 
  

9 
 
REPORT 
Chapter-1 
 
 The Indian jute industry is an integral part of the India‟s 
textile industry.  The first jute mill in India was established in the 
year 1855.  The jute industry witnessed remarkable growth in the 
first century of its existence.  After independence India lo st a major 
chunk of jute growing areas to Bangladesh.  Cultivation of raw jute 
was stepped up as a measure to compensate for this loss.  Today, 
the jute industry is one of the major industries in the eastern 
region, particularly in West Bengal.  Jute, is a  lingo and cellulosic 
golden fibre, meets all the standards for „safe‟ packaging being a 
natural, renewable, biodegradable and eco -friendly product.  It 
supports the livelihood of about 40 lakh farm families and provides 
direct and indirect employment to about 4 lakh workers. 
 
1.2 Jute is an important cash crop which is an intercrop before 
paddy transplantation. Production of jute is concentrated in 36 
districts of West Bengal, Orissa, Bihar, Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura 
and Andhra Pradesh.  In the jute growin g States, the share of jute 
crop is nearly 1.4 per cent of the total crop area.  There are 33 odd 
districts spanning West Bengal, Orissa, Bihar and Assam, which 
account for 98.41 per cent area under jute cultivation and 98.43 
per cent of total raw jute pro duction in the country.  Nadia, 
Murshidabad, Purnea, Cooch Bihar, West Dinajpur, Jalpaiguri, 
North 24 -Pargana, Hoogly and Malda districts in West Bengal 
account for 71 per cent of area under jute cultivation in India and 
73.09 per cent of total raw jute production in the country.   
 
1.3 The total area under jute cultivation in India varies between 
8.96 lakh hectares to 10.49 lakh hectares, which is the highest in 
the world. 
 
The area under jute cultivation and crop size from 2001 -02 
onwards is as under:- 
 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Crop size 
(Lakh MT) 
16.2 19.8 16.2 13.5 15.3 18.0 17.82 14.76 16* 
Area 
(Lakh Ha) 
10.49 10.21 9.59 9.16 8.96 9.49 9.71 9.25 9.25* 
(*)Tentative 

10 
 
1.4 The above table shows that the total  area under jute 
cultivation in the country has slightly decreased since the year 
2001-02 onwards.  The crop size has also shown significant 
fluctuations during the same period. 
 
1.5 Why there is a continuous decrease in the area under 
cultivation of jute from 2001 -02 onwards despite increase in 
domestic as well as international demand, the Ministry stated as 
follows: 
 „There is always significant fluctuation in the area under jute 
cultivation in India. The year to year fluctuations arise out of 
three facto rs namely, (i) fluctuation in rainfall during the 
sowing season, (ii) the average raw jute prices realized during 
the previous jute season, and (iii) the returns realized from 
competing crops during the previous season. A significant area 
under jute competes with Aus paddy during the same season. 
Hence, year to year fluctuations in the prices of jute relative to 
the prices of Aus paddy would generally influence the relative 
allocation of land between the two crops.‟ 
 
1.6 As regards  fluctuation in crop size  per hectare every year 
since 2001 -02 onwards despite advancement in technology and 
other cultivation/farming methods, the Ministry stated as under: 
  
„The reasons for fluctuation in the crop size per hectare every 
year from 2001-02 onwards are mainly:-  
 
a) Fluctuation in rain -fall during the sowing season and variable 
weather conditions.  
b) Inadequate and imbalanced use of fertilizer at the appropriate 
stage, 
c) Non adoption of plant protection measures 
d) Non availability of labour and increasing cost of mechanization 
e) Lack of irrigation facilities; and 
f) Inadequate availability, supply and distribution of good quality 
seeds.’  
 
 

11 
 
Most of the jute and mesta farmers belong to the small and 
marginal farming community. Their capacity to undertake modern 
commercial agriculture on large scale is limited despite the plethora 
of promotional and subsidy schemes. As the jute and mesta crops 
are cultivated mostly by small and marginal farmers, they do not 
have the resources to adopt modern technologies.‟ 
 
1.7  Regarding the steps taken by the Government to arrest 
the fluctuations/decline and to ensure regular increase in the crop 
size as well as area under cultivation, the Ministry informed as 
under: 
 
„The Government of India   launched  Jute  Technology Mission 
with an outlay of Rs 35555.82 lac which is under 
implementation during 2007-12. 
 
 
The break-up of each of the four Mini Missions is as follows: 
Mini Mission (MM) Amount 
 (Rs. In lakhs) 
Nodal Ministry 
MM –I 705.78 M/o Agriculture 
MM-II 4990.04 M/o Agriculture 
MM-III 5660.00 M/o Textiles 
MM-IV 24200.00 M/o Textiles  
Total 35555.82  
 
(i) Under MM -I, Schemes have been undertaken relating to 
Agricultural Research on Jute, Mesta and allied fibre  crops. 
The objective is to raise productivity by 25% and to develop 
new varieties with desirable qualitative characteristics as well 
as genetic up-gradation.  
(ii) Under MM -II, steps are being taken to harness the best 
production and management of technol ogies for jute, mesta 
and allied fibre crops and their post -harvest technology to 
accelerate the production and quality improvement of the 

12 
 
crops. It would introduce new initiatives in transfer of 
technology of production and improving retting practices.  
(iii) Under MM -III, JCI is organizing demonstration for retting 
technology of jute to various places.  The market yards and 
purchase centres of JCI are also being developed with various 
facilities like purchase platform, assortment shed, storage go -
downs, information centre with daily display of market rates, 
jute testing instruments, banking and others for benefit of 
farmers. 
(iv) Under MM -IV, one of the objectives is to create demand for 
jute fibre through modernization, technological upgradation, 
improved productivity, diversification and human resource 
development for the jute industry.‟ 
(v) The MSP of raw jute is also gradually being increased and it is 
ensured by JCI that growers get above the MSP price. The 
growers are getting good prices that are almo st double the 
MSP from last two years. 
(vi) Continuation of Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in 
Packing Commodities) Act, 1987 to generate more demand 
keeping in view the interest of raw jute growers and workers 
involved in the jute industry.‟ 
 
1.8 Regarding reasons for not being able to yield any positive 
outcome despite launch of Jute Technology Mission (JTM), the 
Ministry stated as under: 
 „...The success / failure of the Mini Missions under JTM will be 
assessed through a Mid-term evaluation which is to be shortly 
undertaken. Necessary steps for improvement of the mission 
and schemes thereunder will be taken on the basis of feedback 
received from the mid-term evaluation report.‟ 
 
1.9 The Ministry provided the following details regarding 
production of jute per hectare in India as well as the other jute 
producing countries: 
Table-I       (Area: ‘000 Hec), (Crop: ‘000’ bales) & (Yield: Bales/Hec) 
 India Bangladesh 
Year Area Crop Yield Area Crop Yield 
1998-99 1025 9811 9.57 477 4733 9.88 
1999-00 973 9950 10.22 415 4064 9.77 

13 
 
 
 
Table-II 
(Area: ‘000 Hec), (Crop: ‘000’ bales) & (Yield: Bales/Hec) 
 Nepal Thailand Myanmar 
Year Area Crop Yield Area Crop Yield Area Crop Yield 
1998-
99 
12 84 6.8 30 262 8.7 37 186 5.0 
1999-
00 
12 84 7.2 18 165 8.8 33 147 4.4 
2000-
01 
14 84 5.8 18 165 8.9 31 154 5.0 
2001-
02 
11 91 8.0 18 164 8.8 31 156 5.0 
2002-
03 
11 94 8.0 33 311 9.2 58 233 3.9 
2003-
04 
12 94 8.0 25 230 9.2 44 233 5.2 
2004-
05 
12 94 8.0 20 198 10.0 35 187 5.2 
2005-
06 
12 98 8.0 20 200 9.7 41 205 5.0 
2006-
07 
12 95 7.9 20 200 9.7 51 242 4.7 
2007-
08 
12 95 7.9 20 200 9.7 50 222 4.4 
 
1.10 The Ministry informed that they have made the following 
efforts to make jute  farming viable and remunerative for the 
farmers: 
„The declaration of Minimum Support Price (MSP) every year of 
raw jute and purchase operation made by JCI in this regard 
2000-01 1018 10556 10.36 448 4000 8.94 
2001-02 1047 11678 11.15 464 4870 10.50 
2002-03 1040 11336 10.90 426 4316 10.11 
2003-04 1002 11173 11.15 499 5350 10.72 
2004-05 916 10272 11.21 418 4500 10.77 
2005-06 898 10840 12.07 466 5361 11.50 
2006-07 934 11272 12.06 500 5500 11.00 
2007-08 960 11209 11.68 500 5500 11.00 
2008-09 926 10846 11.71    

14 
 
are aimed to provide remunerative prices to the farmers and to 
make the jute farming a viable proposition.  
Under MM -I, and II of JTM, steps are being taken by the 
Agriculture Ministry to improve quality and productivity of jute 
fibre by development and distribution of new varieties of seeds, 
developing and dissemination of modern agronomical practices 
through R & D and reduction cost of production of raw jute 
which will be beneficial for the jute farmers and make jute 
farming economically viable and remunerative for the farmers.  
Under MM -III, schemes are underway for setting up of more 
number of Market Yards, Departmental Purchase Centres, 
Development of ribbon retting technology, construction of 
retting tanks and dissemination of technology to farmers.‟ 
 
1.11 The Ministry further informed that u nder MM -II of JTM, 
demonstration of producti on and retting technology of jute are 
being carried out. Further, training on agronomical practices using 
nutrient minikit, foliar spray of urea, post harvest operation, 
integrated pest management etc. are also being undertaken. 
Distribution of implements for raw jute production like multi row 
seed drill, wheel – hoe, ribboner, sprayer are also being made. 
 
1.12 The Committee have been informed that no study has been 
undertaken in the recent years to ascertain the real causes 
responsible for losing interest by farmers in jute cultivation. 
 
 
1.13 The Committee desired to know the provisions incorporated in 
JTM to enable the small and marginal farmers to adopt modern 
technology for Jute cultivation and how far the Government have 
been successful in their effor t in this direction.  The Ministry 
informed as under:   
„The MM-II of JTM was launched from 2007 -08 with the main 
objective of increasing production and productivity.  For 
increasing production and productivity, various components 
like seed, implements, de monstration, training etc. have been 
included in MM-II of JTM.  In the Jute growing areas, majority 
of the farmers belong to Small and Marginal category and, as 

15 
 
such, they are getting the maximum benefit of JTM to adopt 
improved production technology with the support of JTM.‟ 
 
1.14 The Committee desired to know the provisions incorporated in 
JTM to enable the small and marginal farmers to adopt modern 
technology for Jute cultivation and how far the Government have 
been successful in their effort in this direction.  The Ministry 
informed as under:   
„The MM-II of JTM was launched from 2007 -08 with the main 
objective of increasing production and productivity.  For 
increasing production and productivity, various components 
like seed, implements, demonstration, training etc. have been 
included in MM-II of JTM.  In the Jute growing areas, majority 
of the farmers belong to Small and Marginal category and, as 
such, they are getting the maximum benefit of JTM to adopt 
improved production technology with the support of JTM.‟ 
 
 
1.15 The Committee have also been informed that the Government 
procures raw jute from the farmers through Jute Corporation of 
India.  JCI has 171 purchase centres all over the jute growing area.  
JCI procures jute at MSP rates announced by the Government every 
year.  The p revailing market rate vis-à-vis the MSP for raw jute 
during the last three years are given below: 
 
 
1.16 The Committee when enquired about the reasons for procuring 
only one quality of jute i.e. TD -5 under MSP operations, the 
Ministry replied that there are two varieties of jute namely TD and 
W produced in the country.  Each variety has eight grades i.e. 1 to  
8.  JCI procures whatever quality of raw jute offered by the farmers 
at MSP. 
 
Year MSP of TD -5 grade 
of raw jute  
(Rs/quintal) 
Market rate of TD -5 
grade 
(Rs./Quintal) 
2007-08 1055 1140 
2008-09 1250 1598 
2009-10 1375 2450 

16 
 
1.17 Regarding reasons for import of jute despite India being the 
largest producer, the Ministry informed that import of raw jute, 
primarily higher grade jute, is made by privat e parties mainly for 
producing diversified jute products. 
 
1.18 With regard to providing insurance coverage to jute growing 
farmers, the Ministry stated as under: 
„Yes, Jute growing farmers of Notified Blocks are covered 
under National Agricultural Insuran ce Schemes (NAIS) since 
Kharif, 2007 season as per Notifications issued by Govt. of 
West Bengal from time to time.‟ 
 
 
1.19 The performance of National Agricultural Insurance Scheme 
(NAIS) during last three years, as stated by the Ministry, is as 
under:- 
„In principle, NAIS is an Area Yield Guarantee Scheme 
launched by Govt. of India, being implemented in the State 
with active support and participation by Govt. of West Bengal. 
Unit of Insurance i.e. notified area is selected Blocks. 
Comprehensive risk insurance is provided to cover yield losses 
due to non preventable risks i.e. almost all natural calamities. 
Farmers availing loans from Banks for raising the crop are 
compulsorily insured but optional to non -loanee farmers. If 
the Actual Yield per hectare of the insured crop for the notified 
area in the insured season falls short of the specified 
Threshold Yield, all the insured farmers growing that crop in 
the Notified area are deemed to have suffered shortfall in their 
yield. In such case compensation is paid against the shortfall 
in yield as per scheme provisions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
1.20 Regarding the coverage of farmers under NAIS in West Bengal 
during the last three years, the Committee were informed in a 
written reply as under: 
 
Season No. of 
Notified 
Area 
i.e.Block
s 
Cover 
age 
recd. 
From 
no of 
notifie
d areas 
Farm
ers 
Insur
ed  
Area 
Insur
ed in 
hecta
re 
Sum 
Insured 
(in Rs.) 
Level 
of 
Inde
mnity 
% 
Prem 
Rate 
% on 
sun 
Insur
ed 
Prem. Recd 
(Rs.) 
Not
ifie
d 
Are
a 
Ben
efit
ed 
Claims 
paid (Rs.) 
Farmer
s 
benefite
d 
Kh-2007 134 46 3213 1343 21170802 80 3.05 645709.51 3 97823.06 401 
Kh-2008 134 35 2636 1527 23990247 80 1.65 395839.11 2 227217.45 322 
Kh-2009 134 85 6645 3830 64400468 80 1.60 1030407.49 Season Cont…….. 
 
  

18 
 
 
Crop Insurance for Jute growing Farmers:- 
1.21 The Committee find that the National 
Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) launched by 
Government of India is being implemented through the 
State Government of West Bengal for providing crop 
insurance coverage to the jute growing farmers.  This 
Scheme is, h owever, limited to certain blocks only, 
selected by the State Government. The total number of 
beneficiaries during the years 2007, 2008 and 2009 
were 3213, 2636 and 6645 respectively in West Bengal 
whereas there are more than 40 lakh jute growing 
farmers i n the country.  The jute farmers of other 
States are not provided any crop insurance coverage as 
on date.  The Committee are aware that, apart from 
natural calamities, jute crop is also prone to certain 
diseases which adversely affect its overall productio n.  
Considering the fact that the jute crop is prone to 
natural calamities and certain diseases and the fact 
that Jute is environment friendly and biodegradable 
fibre, it is imperative that crop insurance protection be 
given to Jute cultivators.  The Commi ttee, therefore, 
recommend that the NAIS be extended to all Jute 

19 
 
growing areas or a new central scheme be launched at 
the earliest to extend crop insurance coverage to jute 
growing farmers in all jute growing States so as to 
cover the damage caused to the jute crop either by 
natural calamities or by any disease.  The Committee 
desire that the modalities of such a Scheme be 
finalized and implemented well before the next sowing 
season of the jute crop. 
 
Minimum Support Price (MSP):- 
 
1.22 The Committee observe that in the past five 
years, the total area under jute cultivation and the per 
hectare yield have decreased despite launch of various 
schemes by the Government. Strangely, the 
Government have, so far, not conducted any study to 
ascertain the factors responsible for decline in the 
production of the jute crop.  During the last three 
years, the gap between MSP and the market price has 
constantly widened significantly.  The trend further 
exacerbated when market prices shot up to the tune o f 
Rs. 458 and Rs. 852 during the years 2008 -09 and 
2009-10 respectively whereas the MSP, during the 

20 
 
same period was increased marginally, to the tune of 
Rs. 200/ - and Rs. 125/ -.  The Committee find that 
decrease in area is mainly due to the fact that the 
farmers are not getting remunerative price and hence 
losing interest in jute cultivation.  It is a hard fact that 
the figures shown as market prices are meant for the 
best quality produce and the comparatively lower 
grades do not get profitable prices.  Tho ugh the 
Government announces MSP only for TD -5 grade but 
claims that every grade of jute is purchased through 
Jute Corporation of India at MSP.  Since each category 
of jute has eight grades, the farmers are likely to be 
exploited in the absence of declared  MSP for other 
grades.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Government should not only declare MSP for each 
grade every year but the price so declared should also 
be profitable enough to motivate the farmers to 
continue jute cultivation. Also, the  MSP announced 
before sowing season be reviewed when the crop comes 
to market and it should be appropriately hiked so as to 
keep it in consonance with the market price.  The 
Committee further recommend that in order to 
promote jute farming in other States wherever it is 

21 
 
feasible, the Government must adopt certain policy 
measures under which special incentives/facilities be 
provided to the farmers for growing jute.  The measures 
may include subsidy on farm equipments, cheaper 
power tariffs, well devised proc urement policy, opening 
of nearby purchase centres, making 
certified/subsidized seeds easily available through JCI 
centres, providing training to farmers at regular 
intervals, disseminating advanced technology to them 
etc.  The Committee also desire that t he proposal for 
construction of canals, on the lines of irrigation system 
in the States of Punjab and Haryana, be considered and 
taken up with the concerned State Governments for its 
early execution.  The Committee are optimistic that 
such a step will defi nitely help in overcoming the 
problems of low rain/dry monsoon which, at present, is 
a disturbing factor affecting the production of jute 
crop. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
Chapter-II 
 
Problems of workers of Jute Mills:- 
 
 The Committee find that the entire jute sector is plagu ed with 
myriad problems due to which workers resort to repeated strikes.  
The main demands of the workers relate to non -payment of 
statutory dues, non -issue of Identity Cards, and refusal to show 
service records to them.  During the last three years, the w orkers 
have gone on strike every year. Recently, the jute workers of 52 
mills in West Bengal went on strike on December, 14, 2009 for a 
period of 61 days in support of their demands which mainly 
included stoppage of the unfair labour practices, payment of 
statutory dues, clearance of arrears of DA, regularization of contract 
workers and deduction of provident fund and ESI contribution on 
actual wages. 
 
2.2 The Committee took the matter of repeated strikes by jute mill 
workers very seriously and held interactions with the Ministry of 
Textiles, Ministry of Labour and Employment, Central Trade Unions 
and representatives of Indian Jute Mills Association (IJMA). 
 
2.3 The Committee first examined the representatives of Ministry 
of Textiles in the matter.  A ccording to the Ministry, the main 
demands of striking jute workers are as under: 
 
1. (i) All workmen are legally entitled to ESI and P.F. benefit 
from the day one he joins the work of the Mill.  The legal 
protections must be implemented. 
(ii) There are instances where P.F and ESI contributions are 
deducted on low rate of wages than what is actually paid.  This 
unfair and illegal practice should also be stopped immediately.  
Workers are also entitled for Bonus. 
(iii) Unfair Labour practice in the matter of engagement of 
worker in the name of so called casual, Badli, Contract Labour 
at low rate of wages( i.e. below agreed minimum pay and 
current rate of D.A.) in the Regular and permanent nature of 
work be stopped.  There are instances in many cases where no 

23 
 
records of such workers are maintained and their payments 
are made in the separate sheets or vouchers. 
(iv) All workers working in the mill must be provided with 
Identity Card at the cost of the company and provided with 
service books which should be maintained regularly. 
 (v) Engagement of Contractor workers in perennial and 
regular nature of work and outsourcing be stopped. 
(vi) All workmen be paid statutory benefits i.e. Bonus and 
Gratuity, Annual leave with wages. 
(vii) The ratio of 90% permanent and 20%  Special Badli on 
the basis of existing total complement be maintained in each 
mill. 
(viii) All arrears of D.A. due to workmen over CPI No.2427 be 
paid without any delay. 
(ix) D.A. neutralization rate be increased to Rs.2.50 per point 
rise/fall of Consumer Price Index (Base 1960). 
(x) Grades and Scales of Pay including rate of annual 
increment which was fixed long time back be revised and 
upgraded through negotiation subject to minimum 20% 
increase in  case of each individual at the time of fitment, over 
and above, the existing pay. 
 (xi) There should not be any discrimination in the matter of 
retirement age of male and female workers. 
All retirements are at the age of 58 years. Gratuity to the 
retired employees be paid within one month of the date of 
retirement. 
 (xii) All workers who have already retired but not paid  
gratuity due to them, be immediately paid their gratuity with 
interest. 
 (xiii) P.F. contribution be raised to 12% and Central Govt. be 
requested to take immediate step in this regard. 
 (xiv) All workers should be provided quarters with proper 
sanitation, water supply and electricity. 

24 
 
2.4 As regards conciliation proceedings initiated to avert the strike 
after receiving the notice for strike by the workers, the Ministry 
replied as under: 
„As per the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the 
jute mills fall within the ambit of State sphere and concerned 
State Governments are the “Appropriate Governments” vested 
with legal powers to settle the issues concerning jute mills. 
It has been learnt that the Trade Unions operating in jute Mills 
especially in West Bengal have reported to have given notice to 
go on indefinite strike from December 14, 2009, in support of 
their demands.  The State Government of West Bengal being 
the appropriate gover nment has already initiated conciliation 
proceedings in this matter to avert the strike. 
The Ministry of Textiles had taken up the matter on November 
30, 2009 with Secretary Ministry of Labour & Employment 
and Chief Secretary, Government of West Bengal at Secretary 
Level to immediately start conciliation process and redress the 
grievances of jute mills workers to avert the strike.  
Subsequently the Minister of Textiles took up the matter on 
December 02, 2009, with Minister for Labour & Employment 
as well as  Chief Minister of West Bengal to take measure to 
avert impending strike. Subsequently, the Minister of Textiles 
had requested the Minister of Labour and Employment on 
January 14, 2010, to associate with the State Government and 
resolve the crisis in the jute mills.  
The Government of West Bengal had called a Tripartite 
Meeting on December 03, 2009, December 08, 2009, and 
December 11, 2009 and last on December 13, 2009 to resolve 
the issue.  The negotiations reached a deadlock and an 
indefinite strike in 52  jute mills located in West Bengal, had 
started from 6.00 A.M. of December 14, 2009.Tripartite 
meetings were held on 19 th December2009, 29th December, 
2009, 4 th January 2010, 22 nd January, 24 th January, 29 th 
January and 31 st January to resolve the issue. I n addition to 
that CLC also took meeting on 23rd December 2009. 
The Minister of Finance,  also convened a meeting on January 
27, 2010, with the Minister of Textiles and the Minister for 
Agriculture, Food and Consumer Affairs to discuss issues 

25 
 
which had led  to an indefinite strike in jute mills.  In the 
meeting, the Labour Commissioner, Government of West 
Bengal sought the intervention of Ministry of Labour and 
Employment to resolve the issues. In pursuance of the 
decision taken in the meeting, the Ministry of Textiles asked 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment, at Secretary Level, on 
January 29, 2010 to intensify conciliation measures in 
coordination with State Government to resolve the dispute 
between the striking unions and mills management.‟ 
2.5 On the i ssue of whether the demands of the jute workers are 
likely to be acceded to, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
„…As per provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the 
jute mills fall within the ambit of State sphere and the 
concerned State Governments are the “Appropriate 
Governments” vested with legal powers to settle the issues 
concerning Jute mills. Therefore, the onus to resolve the 
demands of the workers is on the mill owners and the State 
Government.‟ 
 
2.6 The Committee, thereafter, held interacti on with the 
representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment to 
ascertain the efforts made by them to resolve the strike.  According 
to the Ministry of Labour and Employment, the major issues of the 
workers are as under: 
 (i) Revision of grades/pay  scales including rates of annual 
increment. 
 (ii) Payment of DA with outstanding arrears. 
 (iii) Enhancement of neutralization rate of DA from Rs. 1.90 
to Rs. 2.50 per point rise in CPI. 
 (iv) No engagement of contract workers in perennial and 
regular nature of work. 
 (v) Regularization of contract workers. 
 (vi) Rate of PF contribution be raised from 10 per cent to 12 
per cent. 
 (vii) All NJMC sick mills be reopened with proper revival 
package. 
 (viii) Import of raw jute/finished products should be 
monitored to protect the market of indigenous products. 

26 
 
 (ix) Payment of Gratuity arrears.  
2.7 On the question of concrete efforts made by the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment to avert the strike, the Ministry stated that 
“After receiving strike notice dated 2 6.11.2009, the Labour 
Commissioner of West Bengal convened conciliation meetings on 
27.11.09, 08.12.09, 12.12.09 and 13.12.09 in presence of Hon‟ble 
Minister-in-Charge, Labour Department, Government of West 
Bengal with a view to averting the strike.  Separ ate discussions 
were also held before the Minister in-Charge of Labour Department, 
Government of West Bengal on 09.12.09.” 
 
2.8 With regard to the resolution of the demands of the workers by 
the Government, the Ministry of Labour and Employment stated 
that the State Government considered that the demands should be 
resolved amicably through conciliation machinery.  The State 
Government held 13 conciliation meetings on different dates with a 
view to resolving the matter amicably.  A meeting was also held 
before the Hon‟ble Chief Minister, West Bengal on 08.01.2010 with 
the representatives of the Central Trade Unions. 
 
2.9 The reasons for such frequent strikes by the jute mill workers, 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment stated that non -
implementation of earl ier agreements, including agreement dated 
05.01.2002, regarding payment of DA on the basis of rise and fall of 
CPI @ Rs. 1.90 per point; Non -payment of Gratuity to large number 
of retired workers by the Employers due to paucity of funds, were 
some of the main reasons. 
 
2.10 Whether Central Labour Commissioner of his own or in 
consultation with Jute Commissioner also holds meetings with jute 
workers and jute mills owners at regular intervals so that jute 
workers do not go on strikes so often, the Ministry of  Labour and 
Employment stated as under: 
„The State Government/Labour Commissioner held a number 
of meetings with the Trade Unions and representatives of 
IJMA.  The management, however, pleaded their inability to 
pay the increased DA to the workers due to n on-
implementation of the Report of the Tariff Commission on all 
occasions.  The State Government sought the intervention of 

27 
 
the Ministry of Finance in this matter and requested the 
Ministry of Textiles to expedite a decision on the 
recommendation of Tariff  Commission which could help 
resolve the present impasse in a big way. 
With a view to expediting the issue the Minister in Charge 
Labour, Government of West Bengal alongwith the Secretary 
Labour, Government of West Bengal, Labour Commissioner, 
West Bengal,  Addl. Labour Commissioner, West Bengal met 
the Union Finance Minister, Union Textile Minister and the 
Union Minister of State Labour & Employment.  The Chief 
Minister of West Bengal has also written to the Union Finance 
Minister in this regard.‟ 
 
2.11 The Committee observe that as per the tripartite agreement of 
December, 2008 to end the strike which took place on 1 December, 
2008, a tripartite expert Committee was formed. The report of this 
Committee is with the Ministry of Textiles. The representatives o f 
the Trade Unions, during their deposition before the Committee, 
were strongly in favour of implementation of the recommendations 
of this expert committee. As regards recommendations of the expert 
Committee, the Ministry of Textiles informed as under:- 
„The Expert tripartite Committee on jute industry formed three 
sub-committees to look into three terms of reference as 
follows:- 
(i) To study the implementation of laws relating to wages 
and social security in jute industry, including existing 
collective agreements. 
(ii) To study demand for skills and improvement of skill level 
of workers in jute industry for enhanced productivity; and  
(iii) Analysis of wage structure in the context of costing of 
various items of expenditure and profitability of jute mills. 
 
A. Recommendations made by the tripartite committee on 
jute on the observation of sub -committee no. 1 is as 
follows. 
Enforcement machinery of the State Government as 
well as PF Commissioner and ESIC should take 
immediate steps for strict implementation of  the 
provisions of different applicable acts in the jute industry 

28 
 
and take every step so that the intended benefits under 
the provisions of the law should reach to the jute workers 
without any hassle. 
 
B. Recommendations made by the tripartite committee on 
jute on the observation of sub -committee no. 2 is as 
follows. 
   The committee felt that, in recent past due to 
gradual retirement, natural waste, capacity addition, 
increasing attrition rate, lack of tra ining 
facilities/infrastructure, the industry as a whole has 
been facing serious shortage of skilled manpower. Hence, 
there is a need for training facilities to the workers and 
staff of the jute mills to increase the skill of the workers 
and employees for enhancing productivity.   
The implementation of this recommendation is within the 
purview of the Ministry of Labour. 
 
C. Recommendations made by the tripartite committee on 
jute on the observation of sub -committee no. 3 is as 
follows. 
 The majority of the jute mills made profit in the 
recent years.  More so, for the increase in wage on 
account of DA increase, at best 45% of the production of 
jute Mills is compensated by the Government due to 
inbuilt system of the price formula as recommended by 
the Tariff Commission in pricing of B.Twill jute bags. 
 
  The members of the tripartite expert committee are 
of the view that the acceptance of the recommendations 
of the TC -Report 2009 may go a long way in overcoming 
most of the problems plaguing jute industry includ ing 
the problems of jute workers namely payment of wages 
fixed DA with arrears on account of rise in CPI index, 
payment of gratuity, payment of bonus and arrears of 
employers contribution in respect of PF/ESI etc.  
  The recommendation regarding the accept ance of 
the Tariff Commission Report -2009 relates to the 
Ministry of Textiles. The report was examined by the 

29 
 
Ministry.  Certain discrepancies in the report were found.  
Accordingly it has been d ecided to undertake a fresh 
study with Tariff Commission.‟ 
 
2.12 When asked to furnish the reasons for not accepting any of 
the recommendations of this tripartite Committee report, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
 
„Recommendation Nos. 1 and 2 are within the purview of 
Ministry of Labour.  As regards recommendation no. 3,  the 
Tariff Commission formula is a dynamic formula, and the 
Govt. is fully compensating the jute mills any wage revision 
that accrues to the workers.  Thus, any rise in CPI index, 
payment of gratuity, bonus etc. are fully paid/compensated 
to the jute mills. 
 
          The Ministry, on examination of Tariff Commission 
Report 2009 found certain discrepancies in their 
calculations and assumption.  Adoption of the report would 
have led to extra burden on public exchequer, and would 
have further disincentiv es the mills to modernize and 
diversify.  Thus, Ministry has decided to make a fresh 
reference to the Tariff Commission, and undertake fresh 
study‟.           
  
2.13 The Ministry of Textiles, being the nodal Ministry to ensure 
overall growth of the jute se ctor, was asked by the Committee 
regarding regular strikes in jute mills, the Ministry replied as 
under: 
„As per the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 the trade union, 
industrial and labour disputes fall under Ministry of Labour.  
Ministry of Textiles att empts to improve the economics and 
viability of jute mills through its various schemes.‟ 
 
2.14 The Committee then held interactions with the representatives 
of trade unions of jute Mill workers to know what really ails jute 
sector and why strikes in jute m ills are perennial.  The Committee 
also took up this matter during their study visit at Kolkata in June, 
2010.  While apprising the Committee regarding the problems of 

30 
 
Jute workers, the representatives of Central Trade Unions 
submitted that the 61 day long  strike in jute sector in December, 
2009 was called off after reaching a tripartite agreement on 12 th 
February, 2010. They stated that this was an interim kind of 
settlement and the real issues are still pending before State 
Government/ Union Government and the mill owners.  According to 
Trade Unions, the major issues on which the Jute workers were 
compelled to go on strike are as follows: 
 
1.  The Jute workers are practically deprived of their 
wages.  The current rate of minimum wages as fixed 
by the tripartite committee is Rs. 220/ - but it is not 
practically paid. 
   
2.  The workers do not have identity cards due to which 
they cannot prove that they are the employees of a  
particular Mill and hence cannot claim the rights and 
privileges due to them as per law. 
 
3.  The workers are deprived of gratuity benefits since 
many years.  The estimated number of such workers 
is 40,000. 
   
4.  As per the tripartite agreement signed on 18 th 
December, 2008, a tripartite expert committee was 
formed.  The recommendations of the tripartite expert 
committee have not been accepted by the 
Government till date.  These recommendations 
should be implemented. 
   
 

31 
 
 
5.  The workers are deliberately not  made permanent.  
They are forced to continue as contract/temporary 
workers despite the fact that an agreement was 
signed according to which 90% of total working staff 
would be made permanent and the remaining will be 
provided minimum 220 days work. 
   
6.  The Mills under public sector are lying closed from 
last 4 -5 years.  Therefore, the very purpose of 
nationalizing some of the jute Mills in order to end 
monopoly of private mill owners has failed.  The fate 
of these nationalized jute mills is yet to be known. 
   
7.  The service records of the workers are not being given 
to them.  The Mill owners deprive the workers of their 
statutory dues by not providing the service records. 
   
 
8. 
  
A large number of workers are not covered under PF 
and ESI Scheme.  The more alarming situation is that 
the contribution of those workers who are covered 
under PF Scheme are regularly deducted from their 
salaries by the Mill owners but the amount so 
collected is not forwarded to the Central PF 
department.  This amount is approximately Rs. 150 
crore.  
   
9.  Non disbursement of D.A. as per the current 

32 
 
Consumer Price Index and also the long pending 
arrears of D.A.  This is the main reason of workers‟ 
strike in jute industry.  The matter is under the 
purview of State Government. 
 
2.15 The Committee also held interaction with the representatives 
of the Indian Jute Mills Association in the matter.  The following 
submissions were made by them before the Committee: 
(i)  The focus of the Ministry of Textiles for Jute sector 
in the last 20 to 25 years has basically changed 
from the organized sector to decentralized sector. 
 
There is need for the Government to focus on the 
organized jute industry for its overall development. 
   
(ii)  Out of the total production of 16 to 17 lakhs 
tonnes of jute products every year, diversification is 
not more than 15,000 tonnes.  The Ministry of 
Textiles is focusing more on diversification which is 
a small part of the total production. 
 
Jute should be protected as a packaging material. 
   
(iii)  There has not been any big modernization in the 
Jute sector since long by the Government. 
 
 
A  consolidated  approach from the Government of 
India is needed with regard to modernization of 
Jute Mills so that this organized sector which feeds 
about 40 million farmers and 2.5 lakh mill workers 

33 
 
prospers. 
  
 
 
(iv)  The Indian Jute Mills Association finds it very 
difficult to negotiate with more than 20 trade 
unions at a time, more so, when they have different 
views/opinions.  This unnecessarily delays the 
negotiation process. 
 
There is a need to appoint a sole bargaining agent 
so that issues of workers can be sett led quickly 
and strikes are not stretched for so long. 
   
(v)  The funds under Government Schemes are not 
fully utilized and these funds are also not sufficient 
for the development of entire jute sector. 
 
The financial targets under various schemes being  
implemented by the Government need to be revised 
accordingly. 
   
(vi)  The Jute sector is still under the purview and 
control of Labour department of the State 
Government.  This sector contributes Rs. 7,000 
crores to the entire packaging system of the 
country, but is not given the status of an 
„Industry‟. 
 
There is an urgent need to declare „Jute sector‟ as 
an Industry. 

34 
 
   
(vii)  The entire Jute sector is damaged by futures 
trading of raw Jute/Jute products.  This affects the 
spot pricing of Jute. 
 
There is a need to ban futures trading in Jute . 
sector as this is still not an ideal commodity for 
stocks due to less profitability and comparatively 
low production.  
   
(viii)  There is a need to increase investment by the State 
Governments to enhance seed quality and 
production of raw Jute. 
   
(ix)  There is a need for intensive research and 
development activities in Jute sector for 
technological advancement. 
   
(x)  Adequate funds should be provided to Mills under 
Jute Technology Mission for modernization of 
plants and machinery. 
   
(xi)  Workers should be provided training by the 
Government for their skill development. 
   
(xii)  Direct intervention of the Government is required 
to increase the productivity of farmers as well as 
the Mills.  Government should also make efforts for 

35 
 
increasing market size, both, domestic as well as 
international. 
 
2.16 The Committee during their study visit to Kolkata in June, 
2010 noticed that the jute workers were living in very pitiable 
conditions where even the basic amenities like drinking water, 
electricity, toilets etc. were lacking and the workers are forced to 
live in shifts.  The Committee enquired as to how the Government 
propose to address the issue of poor and unhygienic dwelling space 
of jute workers.  The Ministry responded as under: 
 
„The matter of working conditions of labour force is under the 
jurisdiction of State Government/ Labour Ministry.  However,  
in order to assist the industry in improving the working 
condition, a new scheme under the Non-Plan funding has been 
put into operation with effect from 1 st April, 2010, as per 
approval of the Ministry of  Textiles, Govt. of India, for the 
benefit of the workers of the jute industry: 
The “Schemes for Workers‟ Welfare in Jute Sector”, as 
approved, are appropriately oriented towards overall welfare 
and benefit of the workmen employed in Jute Mills and in 
Small Units producing jute diversified products. The schemes 
contain (i) sanitation, health facilities and working conditions 
in the mill sector (i i) provision of incentives to the small and 
medium jute diversified products units for compliance with 
social audit including prescribed working conditions and (iii) 
health facilities by way of extension of health insurance 
benefits for the mill sector on the same lines as the Rajiv 
Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana and to the registered 
workers of the small and medium scale units employing a 
minimum of 25 workers each.‟   
 
2.17 The Committee during their visit also found that the jute 
workers have not bee n issued any identity card by the mill owners.  
Even the service records of workers, particularly those working on 
contract basis, have also not been maintained and the workers were 
not shown any records for their service since long. 
 

36 
 
2.18 When enquired ab out the reasons for not including issuance 
of identity cards to jute cultivators/farmers/mill workers and other 
associated workforce, as a component under Jute Technology 
Mission, the Ministry responded as under: 
„Under JTM (MM III), Jute farmers‟ Register s are being 
prepared at Departmental Purchase Centers of JCI covering 
villages in the catchments.  The issuance of identity cards to 
mill workers is not considered an appropriate 
mechanism/intervention required to meet the objectives of 
JTM.  Hence, it has not been included.‟ 
 
2.19 With regard to maintaining of all records of the base level 
workforce of implementation of schemes with realistic targets and 
for ensuring harmonious industrial relations as well, the Ministry of 
Textiles submitted that as per the Allocation of Business Rules, 
1961 records of the base level workforce fell under the Ministry of 
Labour. 
 
2.20 The Committee also noticed that the workers of closed jute 
mills are covered under Textile Workers Rehabilitation Fund 
Scheme (TWRFS).  The Committee find that though nine private jute 
mills are lying closed in different States, yet not a single jute worker 
has been benefited, under the Scheme so far.  When the matter was 
taken up with the Textiles Ministry, it stated in a very casual 
manner t hat „no application has been received from the office of 
Textile Commissioner so far‟. 
 
2.21 Since TWRFS is a central scheme, the Committee enquired as 
to why the Textile Commissioner did not suo-motu enroll the 
workers after the jute mills were declared c losed. The Ministry 
replied as under: 
„Under the TWRF Scheme, the eligibility of mills of textile units 
is defined as below: 
1. This Scheme applies to such textile unit which is either 
licensed under industries (Development & Regulation) 
Act, 1951, or registered with the Textile Commissioner as 
medium scale unit. 

37 
 
2. Such unit should have been completely closed, meaning 
that its production had come to a complete grinding halt 
after 05.06.1985. 
 
3. In addition, such a unit should have been declared as 
closed unit unde r Section 25(O) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947, or alternatively, an Official 
Liquidator should have been appointed under Companies 
Act, 1956, for the purpose of winding up of the unit. 
 
4. An illegal strike by workmen, as defined in the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947, leading to the closure of the mills 
either Section 25(O) of the said Act, 1947, or by an Order 
of the High Court upon which an Official Liquidator 
should have been appointed, would not entitle the 
workmen to relief under the Scheme. 
 
As may  be seen from the above, jute mills can be 
considered under TWRF Scheme.  However, in order to 
provide relief to the workers, they need to be declared closed 
under Section 25(O) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 by 
the State Governments.  At present non e of the mills have 
been declared closed under Section 25(O) of the  Industrial 
Disputes Act and hence the information is Nil. 
  The question of proactive functioning of the Office of 
Textile Commissioner does not arise as the initial step is 
required to be  undertaken by the State Government under 
the ID Act before the Office of the Textile Commissioner 
comes into the picture.‟ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
 
 
 
Use of Safety Equipments by Workers:- 
 
2.22 In the course of their study visit to some 
private jute mills in Kolkata , the Committee were 
shocked to see hazardous and stifling working 
conditions of the workers. The age old machinery, used 
in the mills, that rattle noise crossing standard decibel 
norms, apart from creating deafening noise, pose a 
serious threat to the liv es of poor and hapless workers 
in absence of any proper safety equipments.  Yet, 
another more hazardous aspect of the working 
condition of the Jute workers is that the jute fibre 
particles present in the air and inhaled by the workers 
affect their lungs ba dly.  The Committee were 
astounded to find that in such extremely hazardous 
condition not a single worker was found using any 
safety equipment viz., helmet, mask, handgloves, 
safety jackets etc. The workers even informed the 
Committee that they `have not been provided any 
safety equipments by the mill management’. 

39 
 
 
 
The Committee find that the jute mill owners are 
blatantly violating the statutory norms on safety and 
health of the workers due to inaction on the part of the 
Regional Labour Commissioners and  apathetic attitude 
of the Government.   
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that all the Regional Labour Commissioners of the 
States where jute mills are situated, be asked to 
carryout inspections in each jute mill with immediate 
effect and prep are a fact finding report in the matter 
within a month and  submit the same to the Chief 
Labour Commissioner recording clearly the nature of 
violations.  The Committee further recommend that all 
the RLCs undertake inspections of each jute mill under 
their jurisdiction to ensure proper use of safety 
equipments by the workers followed by periodic visits 
so as to ensure that the prescribed safety norms are in 
place and strictly adhered to.  The Committee further 
feel that there is an urgent need to review and amend 
the Labour Laws so as to ensure effective 

40 
 
implementation of the statutory safeguards extended 
to the labour.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the concrete action taken and progress made in the 
matter. 
 
Payment of Statutory Dues of Workers:- 
2.23 The Committee are pained to note that the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment have virtually and 
time and again failed in extending social security 
benefits to the workers of jute mills in West Bengal due 
to which they have to take recourse to strikes  per force 
every year. Crores of rupees of workers are pending 
recovery from jute mill owners/management under PF 
and ESIC.  The position regarding payment of gratuity 
and DA to workers is  all the more shocking as more 
than 200 crore rupees are pending as  old dues.  The 
more unfortunate part is that even the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment do not have exact records of 
these statutory dues of workers, some of which are 
even 10 years old.  This raises a serious question over 
the efficacy of the functioning  of the offices of the 
Chief Provident Fund Commissioner, DG, ESIC and 
Chief Labour Commissioner.   Obviously, the workers 

41 
 
are forced to go on strikes every now and then when 
the law enforcement machinery abdicates its 
responsibility or fails to uphold the  law.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a mill -
wise assessment of the dues of workers be undertaken 
with immediate effect and the recovery process, 
wherever applicable, be started simultaneously.  To 
overcome the paucity of funds with the mill owners, if 
any, a mechanism could be devised to provide soft 
loans to the mills strictly for the purpose of settling 
dues of the workers.  The entire exercise must be 
completed within a definitive time -frame but not 
exceeding six months. 
 The Committe e also recommend that all the 
departments/agencies of Central Government, viz,   
Jute Commissioner, Textile Commissioner, Chief 
Provident Fund Commissioner, DG, ESIC and Chief 
Labour Commissioner (Central) should compulsorily 
meet, along with the officials  of State labour 
departments, atleast in every six months, to discuss 
and resolve the issues pertaining to the jute growing 
farmers, workers engaged in the Jute mills and the mill 
owners. A report on issues raised, discussion held and 

42 
 
the action taken/ pro posed to be taken in every such 
meeting should invariably be furnished to and 
monitored by both the Ministries at highest level 
regularly till the problems of Jute Industry persist.   
 
Problems of Dwelling Space for Workers:- 
 
2.24 The Committee observe th at jute workers are 
living in very pitiable conditions.  They are even 
deprived of basic amenities like drinking water, 
electricity, toilets etc. and their living areas are 
unhygienic and grossly unfit for human habitation.  
More so, the workers are forced  to live in shifts due to 
space constraint.  Though several developmental 
schemes for jute sector have been launched by the 
Government from time to time yet the issue of dwelling 
space for jute mill workers has never been addressed.  
After Committee’s inte rvention in the matter, the 
Government, however, furnished details of a scheme, 
implemented from 1 st April, 2010, which covers 
‘Sanitation, health facilities and working conditions in 
the mill sector’ as one of its components.  The 
Committee find that even  this scheme does not  

43 
 
address pinpointedly the issue of providing dwelling 
space to the workers.  The Committee, therefore,  
strongly recommend that specific guidelines be issued 
to each mill owner/management asking them to 
provide space for construction of dwelling units for 
their workers out of the surplus land available with the 
mills.  To help the mill owners in their endeavour to do 
so, a well devised central scheme could be launched 
with a suitable component of financial assistance to 
the mill owners  who undertake construction of  
dwelling units for the workforce. By constructing 
suitable multi storey dwelling units, the problem of a 
clean and hygienic living area for the workers can be 
addressed to a large extent.  Such a step will also 
benefit the mill owners as well as it would minimize the 
cases of absenteeism, late coming and illness of the 
workers.    
 
Textile Workers’ Rehabilitation Fund Scheme (TWRFS):- 
 
2.25 The Committee observe  that not even a single 
worker of the closed jute mills has been provided with 
any financial benefit under the Textile Workers 

44 
 
Rehabilitation Fund Scheme.  The insipid explanation 
furnished by the Ministry was that no application had 
been received in this regard from the office of Textile 
Commissioner.  Further, when the Committee sought 
to know why suo-motu action was not taken by the 
office of Textile Commissioner in the matter, the 
Ministry replied that ‘at present none of the jute mills 
have been declar ed closed under sector 25(O) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act and hence no relief has been 
extended under the scheme’.  The Committee find such 
an attitude of the Ministry irresponsible and anti 
worker.  It is a hard fact that a large number of jute 
mills ha ve undergone closure since the launch of the 
scheme and the workers have been rendered jobless.  
The Committee feel that the very purpose of launching 
TWRFS is defeated if workers do not get the intended 
relief under it.  The Committee strongly feel that r elief 
to workers ought to be provided immediately after the 
closure of a mill so as to enable them to feed their 
families without any difficulty.  The Committee, 
recommend that guidelines of the TWRFS be amended 
and the requirement of permission under sect ion 25(O) 
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 be done away with.  

45 
 
The Committee are of the view that senior officers from 
the office of Textile Commissioner should visit the mill 
which is declared closed and after due verification, the 
approval for disbur sement of relief to its eligible 
workers must be given expeditiously but preferably 
within three months positively.  The Committee 
further recommend that for any undue delay in 
disbursement of relief, personal responsibility of the 
concerned officer must b e fixed.  The steps taken in 
this direction and the  progress made be intimated to 
the Committee within a period of six months.  
 
Issuance of Identity Cards:- 
 
2.26 The Committee find that the jute mill workers 
have not been provided any identity proof by the mill 
owners.  Further, the workers are also not shown their 
service records and details of their contributions to the 
social security funds viz., PF and ESI.   By doing so, the 
workers are kept in the dark thereby depriving them of 
their statutory dues after retirement. The Committee 
believe that this is done deliberately by the mill owners 
so as not to pay their statutory contribution to the 

46 
 
social security funds.  The Committee, therefore,   
recommend strongly that this be enquired into without 
any loss of time by the office of Chief Labour 
Commissioner.  While making mill -wise assessment of 
PF and ESI dues, it should simultaneously be ensured 
that each worker, whether permanent o r casual or on 
contract, is issued identity card by the respective mill 
owner.  The office of the Chief Labour Commissioner 
should also give specific instructions to all the mill 
owners that the service records of every worker be 
shown and verified by the individual at least once in a 
year.  Further, in order to ensure strict compliance, 
penal action must be taken against defaulting mill 
owners.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken indicating the details of the mills who 
have taken s atisfactory corrective action and the 
defaulter mills. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-III 
 
Industrial Growth vis -à-vis implementation of Technology 
Mission on Jute:- 
 
 The Committee have been informed that a total number of 15 
Jute mills are lying closed as on date including six mills of JMDC.  
The term “closed” here means discontinuance of operation and Not 
declared closed under Sec. 25 of ID Act. 
 
3.2. State wise list of the closed jute  mills as furnished by the 
Textiles Ministry is as under: 
 
A. MILLS IN WEST BENGAL   
      
 
 
 
 
SL. NO. NAME OF THE JUTE 
MILL 
DATE OF 
CLOSURE 
1 NJMC-NATIONAL 17.02.2003 
2 NJMC- KINNISION 26.03.2004 
3 NJMC-KHARDAH 26.03.2004 
4 NJMC-ALEXANDRA 01.09.2002 
5 NJMC-UNION 11.03.2003 
6 KANORIA 25.04.2004 
7 SOORAH 29.03.2004 
8 GOURIPORE 04.09.1998 
9 NUDDEA JUTE  22.01.2005 
10 North Brove June 2010 

48 
 
 
 
 
B. MILLS IN UTTAR PRADESH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. MILLS IN ANDHRA PRADESH 
 
SL.NO NAME OF THE JUTE 
MILL 
DATE OF 
CLOSURE 
13 CHITTAVALSHAH JUTE 
MILL 
19-04-2009 
 
D. MILLS IN BIHAR 
       
SL.NO NAME OF THE JUTE 
MILL 
DATE OF 
CLOSURE 
14 RBHM NJMC 24-03-2004 
 
E. MILLS IN CHHATTISGARH 
       
SL.NO NAME OF THE JUTE 
MILL 
DATE OF 
CLOSURE 
15 MOHAN JUTE MILL 20-12-2008 
    
3.3 Out of the total mills closed, 11 mills are permanently closed 
for more than five years, four mills have been closed within the last 
two years, one in 2008, two in 2009 and one in June, 2010.  
 
3.4 Whether the Ministry of Textiles have conducted any survey 
regarding viability of the closed jute mills, the Ministry stated that 
„no viability study in respect of private mills have been conducted‟. 
 
SL. 
NO. 
NAME OF THE 
JUTE MILL 
DATE OF 
CLOSURE 
   
11 KANPUR Udyog  13.04.1987 
12 KANPUR JK Nov/ 
Dec.2009 

49 
 
 
 
 
3.5 The Committee observe that out of six mills in public sector, 
under NJMC, there is a proposal to revive 2 mills in west Bengal i.e 
Kinnision and Khardah and one jute mill viz. RBHM, Katihar in 
Bihar.  The Cabinet approved the revival plan of the three mill s viz. 
Kinnision, Khardah and RBHM through NJMC and closure of the 
remaining three mills. 
 
3.6 The Committee when sought views of the Ministry on taking 
over of closed private viable units by the Government under public 
sector for their revival, the Ministry replied as under: 
„Under the present liberalized regime, industrial units need to 
run on economic and viability criteria. The private mills 
wherever viable are being revived by their private owners. 
Considering the resource constraints with the Governme nt, it 
is not feasible to nationalize private mills.  As far as 
Government mills are concerned, the Government is 
attempting to revive the viable mills‟. 
 
3.7 The Committee also desired to know the percentage utilization 
of installed capacity in each of th e 78 functional jute mills in the 
country.  The Ministry furnished the following information:- 
SL.No. Name of the Mills Capacity Utilization in % 
1.  Agar para 91.2 
2.  Alliance 93.8 
3.  Ambica 60.9 
4.  Anglo India 60.2 
5.  Angus 80.5 
6.  Aruna 62.5 
7.  Assam Co-op 59.8 
8.  Auckland 88.9 
9.  Bally 74.1 
10.  Baranagar 65.8 

50 
 
11.  Bharat 83.0 
12.  Birla 89.1 
13.  Bobbilli 59.9 
14.  Bowreah 69.6 
15.  Budge Budge 87.2 
16.  Calcutta 55.9 
17.  Caledonian 88.2 
18.  Champdany 87.8 
19.  Cheviot 116.7 
20.  Dalhousie 106.5 
21.  Delta 63.5 
22.  East Coast  67.1 
23.  East India 86.0 
24.  Eastern 80.8 
25.  Empire 71.6 
26.  Ganges 87.8 
27.  Ganges Jute Pvt. 72.6 
28.  Gloster 109.2 
29.  Gondolpara 72.8 
30.  Hastings 89.3 
31.  Hooghly 60.6 
32.  Howrah 96.6 
33.  Hukumchand 66.6 
34.  India 70.5 
35.  J.K. 57.3 
36.  Jagatdal 87.7 
37.  Kamarhatty 61.7 
38.  Kanknnarrah 62.7 
39.  Kamakshi 
(new composite mill) 76.0 
40.  Katihar (Sun Bio Lid) 58.2 

51 
 
41.  Kelvin 81.9 
42.  Konarak 52.0 
43.  Ludlow 76.9 
44.  Mahabir 57.4 
45.  Mangalpur 65.0 
46.  Megna 73.2 
47.  Naffarchandra 74.2 
48.  Naihati 96.0 
49.  Nellimarla 62.9 
50.  New Central 50.2 
51.  Northbrook 95.6 
52.  Prabartak 84.4 
53.  Premchand 79.8 
54.  Rameswara 99.8 
55.  Reliance 97.4 
56.  Samnnuggar 109.3 
57.  Sree Bajrang 95.2 
58.  Mahadeo 68.4 
59.  Gouri Shankar 96.2 
60.  Tepcon 68.3 
61.  Tirupati 68.0 
62.  Titaghur 69.3 
63.  Tripura 11.3 
64.  Victoria 89.5 
65.  Vijaishree 70.9 
66.  Waverly 61.1 
 
3.8 On the question of any proposal regarding monitoring 
mechanism of its own to detect sickness in jute mills at incipient 
stage, the Ministry replied in the negative. 
 

52 
 
3.9 As regards the reasons for not having any monitoring 
mechanism to detect sickness in jute mil ls, the Ministry replied as 
under:- 
„Under the present liberalized regime, industrial units need to 
run on economic and viability criteria.  The private mills 
wherever viable are being revived by their private owners.  The 
Government on the other hand can intervene only at the 
macro level, i.e. creation and development of market, 
improving the efficiency and reduction of costs.  For this 
purpose, the Government of India has launched a large 
number of Schemes/policy initiatives for jute mills to run in a 
viable manner.  Under the Jute Packaging (Compulsory Use in 
Packing Commodities) Act, 1987 the reservation of certain 
commodities for packaging in jute is mandated to sustain 
demand.  Under Jute Technology Mission, the mills are being 
provided assistance for modernization, processing 
improvements, improving efficiency as well as market 
development.  It is not feasible for the Government to 
handhold individual private jute mills to operate in an 
economically viable manner.‟ 
 
3.10 The Committee find that obsolet e technology, old machinery, 
lack of optimum utilization of installed capacity, defunct 
procurement policies of the Government, poor industrial relations 
etc are some major agents obstructing the growth of entire jute 
sector in the country.   
In this conne ction, the Committee enquired about the steps 
taken/proposed to be taken by the Government to overcome these 
problems so as to ensure sustainable and inclusive growth of jute 
sector.  The Ministry replied that several schemes were launched by 
the Government to overcome the problems grappling the jute sector. 
However, most of these schemes either failed or were dropped due 
to their slow progress.  The details of these schemes including the 
schemes which are currently being implemented in jute sector are 
as under:- 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme & 
Objective 
Year 
of 
origin 
Fund 
allocated 
 
Fund 
Utilized 
 
Reasons for failure / 
slow uptake 
 Past Schemes     
 Jute Modernization 
Fund Scheme (JMFS)  
Scheme objective : 
Long Term loans for 
Renovation, 
Modernization, 
rehabilitation and 
Diversification.  
1985 Rs.150 
Cr. 
51.73 
Cr. 
(i) The jute   
industry’s pre -
occupation with 
traditional products 
like sacking and 
Hessian had little 
scope for search of 
any modern 
spinning a nd 
weaving 
machinery. 
 
(ii)The accumulated 
financial losses of 
many jute mills 
made them 
ineligible for 
banking finance till 
such time a 
rehabilitation-cum-
modernization 
package was 
approved by the 
BIFR. 

54 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme & 
Objective 
Year 
of 
origin 
Fund 
allocated 
 
Fund 
Utilized 
 
Reasons for failure / 
slow uptake 
2 Special Jute 
Development Fund 
(SJDF) 
OBJECTIVE : 
 Development of 
raw jute sector 
 Promotion of jute 
industry 
 Labour welfare 
 R&D efforts for 
modernization 
 Promotion of jute 
diversification. 
 
 
1985 Rs. 100 
Cr. 
35.21 
Cr. 
IJIRA and other 
Textile R& D 
institutions have 
been assisted 
under the scheme 
to take up jute 
related R&D 
activities relevant 
in the context of 
Government’s 
Multi Fibre Policy. 
The SJDF has 
helped in the 
promotion of the 
use of Jute Yarn 
and Jute Fabric in 
the 
Handlooms/Power 
looms/Small Scale 
Sectors for 
production of jute 
based textile items 
and a wide range 
of consumer utility 
items.  

55 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme & 
Objective 
Year 
of 
origin 
Fund 
allocated 
 
Fund 
Utilized 
 
Reasons for failure / 
slow uptake 
3 UNDP Assisted 
National Jute 
Development 
Programme 
The programme was 
approved by GOI with 
counterpart funding of 
Rs. 58 Cr. Altogether 
26 projects were 
sanctioned under this 
programme, 
pertaining to R & D for 
new JDP, HRD, 
retting & ribboner 
development, market 
development strategy 
and development of 
NCJD to run the Jute 
Entrepreneurs 
Assistance Scheme 
(JEAS).  
1992 US$ 23 
million 
(GOI – 
58.0 cr.) 
US$ 
18.23 
million 
(GOI-
44.8 
Cr.) 
The UNDP 
programme 
suffered from 
several 
weaknesses like:  
(i) Absence of 
scheme for 
genetical 
engineering 
including gene 
tagging, ribboning 
m/c design, 
enzyme treatment 
etc, 
 
(ii)Inadequate 
expansion of JEAS 
credit facility, and 
 
(iii) Lack of proper 
information network 
and other 
dissemination 
mechanisms to 
improve 
institutional 
linkages and 
information flows 
among participant 
in the jute industry.   

56 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme & 
Objective 
Year 
of 
origin 
Fund 
allocated 
 
Fund 
Utilized 
 
Reasons for failure / 
slow uptake 
4 Sub-programme on 
jute under fibres and 
handicrafts 
programme of CCF-1.  
The activities under 
this programme have 
been formulated to be 
built with a thrust on 
small –scale 
entrepreneurship and 
micro-enterprises.  
2000 Rs. 9.12 
crores 
 
Rs. 4.42 
Cr. 
The CCF -1 
programme was a 
small programme 
with a meager 
allocation of Rs. 
9.12 crores. The 
programme was 
confined to the 
decentralized 
sector leaving 
aside the organized 
sector entirely. 
5 JMDC Incentive 
scheme for the 
modernization of the 
Jute Industry (ISMJI): 
Objective: To speed 
up modernization and 
up-gradation of 
technology in jute 
mills. 
2002 No fund 
allocated 
specifica
lly for 
the 
scheme 
21.64 
Cr. 
Low ceiling of 
incentive hampered 
progress. Further, 
lack of availability 
of modern 
technology 
machinery is 
another reason. 
 
  

57 
 
 
PRESENT SCHEMES: 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme Year of 
origin 
Fund 
allocate
d 
 
Fund 
Utilized Reasons for failure / 
slow uptake 
 Present Scheme   
6 Technology Up -
gradation Fund 
Scheme (TUFS): 
Introduced to 
provide an interest 
subsidy of 5% on 
borrowed capital 
from financial 
institutions and 
banks for selective 
machinery intended 
for modernization of 
textile and jute 
industry.  
1999-
2000 
No fund 
allocated 
specifica
lly for 
the 
scheme 
19.38 
Cr. 
Most banks do not 
exhibit an interest in 
extending loans to the 
jute industry for 
historically poor 
financial credibility. 
However, the matter 
has been taken up 
with the banks and 
mills having requisite 
financial s trength are 
taking up the 
incentives being 
offered under the 
scheme.  
7 Scheme Acquisition 
of Machinery & 
Plant of Jute 
Technology Mission 
2007 
onward
s 
80 Cr 23.9 
Cr. 
Reason for slow 
uptake was that the 
low ceiling on subsidy 
of Rs 75 lakh  per mill 
imposed a restriction 
in modernization 
projects of individual 
mill. The ceiling is 
now raised to Rs 3.5 
Cr per mill and 
encouraged large 
scale modernization 
initiatives. 

58 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme Year of 
origin 
Fund 
allocate
d 
 
Fund 
Utilized Reasons for failure / 
slow uptake 
8 Scheme for 
Development of Jute 
Machinery 
10 new technology 
machines are to be 
developed by 
Centre for Jute 
Machinery 
Development 
(CJMD) and through 
individually 
sponsored 
machinery 
development 
programme. 
2007 
onwards 
28 Cr 13.5 
Cr 
The individually 
sponsored machinery 
development 
programme has not 
taken off due to lack 
of response from the 
machinery 
manufacturers/ 
developers. New 
initiatives are being 
taken to directly 
approach globally 
renowned 
manufacturers of 
textile machinery to 
take up necessary 
developments in jute 
machinery. 
 
3.11 The Committee further asked as to why the entire jute sector 
is still plagued with obsolete technology and old machinery despite 
the launching of aforesaid schemes for its modernization since the 
year 1985.  The Ministry replied as under: 
 
 „The jute sector has improved in recent years as more than Rs 
600 crore has been invested for modernization in last 10 years 
through GOI sponsored schemes. Under the JTM, the process 
is being accelerated and in coming years more such 
investments are likely to take place. The reason for slow 
adoption and failure of past schemes has already been 
provided.  One major reason for lackluster response to 
modernization incentive is due to the Government policy of 
protected market (by way of 100% reservation given in the 
past) and Administered price system for Gov ernment supplies, 
which has created a monopolistic situation with no incentive 
to modernize.‟   

59 
 
  
Jute Packaging Materials (compulsory use in packing 
commodities)  JPM Act, 1987 
 
3.12 The Committee find that Jute Packaging Materials 
(compulsory use in packing commodities) Act, 1987 was enacted by 
the Government to provide protection to the jute industry.  Under 
the Act, packaging of certain commodities for export has been 
exempted.  Small, consumer packs of 25 kilograms and below and 
bulk packaging of more than 100 kilograms have also been 
exempted keeping in view the consumer preference.  In the current 
jute year, 100% reservation has been mandated for packaging of 
only foodgrains and sugar.  The Committee also notice that earlier 
packaging of cement and fe rtilizer were also compulsory under the 
JPM Act.  Cement and Fertilizer were removed from Compulsory 
Packaging item list in the years 1998 and 2001 respectively due to 
complaints of manufacturers of cement and fertilizers.  The 
manufacturers of cement and fertilizers were facing problems of 
seepage and moisture absorption due to packaging in jute bags. 
 
3.13 The Committee desired to know the difficulties being faced by 
the Government in ensuring 100% replacement of the 
synthetic/poly packs by jute.  The Min istry informed that price and 
supply bottleneck are the main difficulties in replacement of 
synthetic by jute. At present price of a jute bags is Rs. 28/ - against 
Rs. 16/- per synthetic bag. Demand from the foodgrains, sugar and 
other sectors have increase d substantially. The production of the 
jute industry has remained more or less stagnant.  
 
3.14 The Committee came to know that the orders issued under 
clause 3(1) of the JPM Act, 1987 with regard to the coverage of 
commodities to be considered for compuls ory packaging are 
reviewed annually.  The Committee desired to know the objective 
behind reviewing these orders annually.  The Ministry informed as 
under: 
„Clause 5 of the Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in 
Packaging Commodities) Rule, 1987 stipula tes that Standing 
Advisory Committee shall meet at least once a year to review 
the commodities or class of commodities or percentage thereof 

60 
 
required to be packed in jute packaging material under section 
3 of the JPM Act, 1987. 
The Standing Advisory Commit tee constituted under section 
4(1) of the JPM Act submits its recommendations to the 
Central Government, after considering the following matters:- 
 (a)  the existing level of usage of jute material; 
 (b)  the quantity of raw jute available; 
 (c)  the quantity of jute material available; 
 (d) the protection of interests of persons engaged 
in the jute industry and in the production of 
raw jute; 
 (e) the need for continued maintenance of jute 
industry; 
 (f) such other matters as the Standing Advisory 
Committee may think fit. 
 
The objective behind the annual review is to examine the 
demand, supply position of each year, and to determine level 
of reservation that on one hand protects the interest of 
farmers and per sons engaged in jute industry, and on the 
other hand, does not adversely impact the economy and 
supply chain of commodities.‟ 
 
3.15 Regarding inclusion of certain items like foodgrain, sugar etc. 
for compulsory packaging on permanent basis under the JPM Ac t, 
1987 in order to boost the confidence of Jute manufacturers, the 
Ministry responded as under: 
„Under the liberalized regime, jute manufacturers should not 
expect perpetual protection. Annual review is mandated by the 
Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in Packaging 
Commodities) Rule, 1987 and going on since inception of the 
Act. Over the last 23 years protection has been given to the 
jute sector under the Act.  A permanent reservation would be 
counter-productive as it would give permanent monopoly to  
the jute industry, which in turn may harm the economy of the 
commodities so packed compulsorily in jute.‟ 
 
 

61 
 
3.16 The Committee desired to know whether any R&D activities 
are being undertaken by the Government to improve the quality of 
„Jute‟ as a packagin g material so as to make it suitable for 
packaging of cement, fertilizers and other such commodities.  The 
Ministry stated that „Government does not directly carryout R&D.  It 
funds through its agencies.  No R&D project for improving the 
quality of jute has been undertaken through this Ministry.‟   
 
3.17 The reasons for not conducting any R&D activities, the 
Ministry replied as under: 
„Packaging is the mainstay of Jute. As per provisions of the 
Mandatory Jute Packaging Materials (MJPM) Act, a certain 
percentage foodgrains and sugar decided every year are to be 
packed in jute packaging material manufactured in India from 
jute produced in India.  During the last few years, it is seen 
that the demand of jute packaging material from the currently 
reserved commod ities (foodgrain & Sugar) is sufficient to 
consume the jute produced.  Therefore, further expansion of 
packaging products is not a priority.‟ 
 
3.18 Regarding the monitoring mechanism in place to ensure 100% 
compliance of the Act, the Ministry replied that in exercise of the 
powers conferred by Section 13 of the JPM Act, 1987, it has issued 
an Order dated 02-07-2002 delegating powers under sections 6, 7 & 
8 of the JPM Act to the Jute Commissioner and other officers of his 
office, Joint Secretary (Policy), MC AF&PD and Chief Director 
(Sugar), Department of Food. Section 6 provides – Power to call for 
information and samples, Section 7 - Power to enter and inspect & 
Section 8- Power to search and seize. 
 
3.19 At present, jute industry, which is a schedule industr y under 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, generates 
funds around Rs. 7000 crore annually through packaging material 
sales.  Further, this sector has huge potential in the wake of jute 
diversification. 
 
 
 
 

62 
 
3.20 The Committee note  that the Government is focusing on the 
diversification part of jute since last few years and relevant 
components are being suitably incorporated into the developmental 
schemes pertaining to the jute sector.  At present around 1600 
thousand metric tonnes of jute goods are produced every year.  The 
Committee were informed by the Ministry that major areas of 
diversification in the jute sector are small -capacity carry bags (for 
mass consumption), Home-textiles (Floor Coverings, Wall Hangings, 
etc.), Jute and J ute blended fabrics (serving mainly as decorative 
fabrics), Food Grade Jute bags, Jute Geotextiles, Jute Composites 
and Particle Board.  Production of all these diversified products in 
volume works out to 176 thousands metric tone.  This works out to 
11% of total jute goods production.  
 
TRADE MARK:- 
 
3.21 In response to a query regarding developing a trade mark for 
quality jute products, the Committee were informed that „the 
Government of India intends to develop Eco -labelling for jute 
products, namely : ( i) Yarn  (ii) Hessian (iii) Hydrocarbon -free 
quality Jute Hessian Bag iv) Floor Covering, (v) Jute Geotextiles 
(woven & non-woven) and (vi) Shopping Bags.‟ 
3.22 The Ministry further stated that to establish eco -labeling and 
disposal protocols of jute produ cts, National Jute Board is in the 
process of engaging competent Agencies / Consultants who will 
facilitate development of suitable protocols, practices to be adopted 
by the jute industry for their jute products to be labeled as “Eco -
friendly (Eco-labelled)”. 
The Terms of Reference (TOR) for engagement of such Agencies 
/ Consultants have already been prepared and a global tender has 
been floated inviting suitable offers from the international agencies 
/ consultants. The terms of reference include: 
1: Valida tion of the existing criteria document against 
existing international protocols 
2: Establishment of an Eco -labelling Body to apply and 
register Eco-label 
3: Establishment of testing facilities for Eco -labelling the 
Jute products 

63 
 
4: Sensitizing Indian Jute goods manufacturers about 
Eco-label, licensing process and benefits 
5: Sensitizing national and international institutional 
Jute goods buyers about Eco -labelled Indian jute goods 
and their disposal protocols. 
 The Ministry further stated that the matter fo r selection 
of agency is in the process. 
 
Technology Mission on Jute 
 
3.23 The Government, on June 2, 2006, approved the Jute 
Technology Mission (JTM) keeping in view the growing contribution 
of the industry to the economy.  JTM is likely to benefit jute 
growers, the workers engaged in this sector, jute entrepreneurs and 
other employed in related activities.  JTM has four mini -missions 
constituents.  The Department of Agricultural Research & 
Education, Ministry of Agriculture, launched the Mini Mission I of  
the JTM on November 9, 2006.  Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, launched the Mini -Mission II 
of JTM on December 21, 2006.  The Mini Mission III & IV of JTM 
were launched by the Ministry of Textiles on February 6, 2007. 
 
 The Jute Technology Mission (JTM) will be executed during the 
XIth five year Plan with an overall outlay of Rs. 355.56 crore.  The 
objectives of JTM are: 
 To improve yield and quality of jute fibre; 
 To strengthen existing infrastructure for development and 
supply of quality seeds; 
 Improvement of quality of fibre through better methods of 
retting and extraction technologies; 
 To increase the supply of quality raw material to the jute 
industry at reasonable prices and to develop efficient market 
linkage for raw jute; 
 To modernize, technologically upgrade, improve productivity, 
diversify and develop human resource for the jute industry 
and  

64 
 
 To develop and commercialise innovative technology for 
diversified use of jute and allied fibres. 
 
The objectives and outlay  of Jute Technology Mission are  
given below:- 
  
Mini 
Missions 
Objectives Executing 
Ministry 
Proposed 
Outlay 
(Rs. in 
crores) 
Mini Mission -
I 
To strengthen agricultural 
research and technology 
achievements 
Ministry of 
Agriculture 
7.06 
Mini Mission -
II 
Development/extension of 
raw jute and transfer of 
improved technology 
Ministry of 
Agriculture 
49.90 
Mini Mission -
III 
To develop efficient market 
linkages for raw jute 
Ministry of Textiles 56.60 
Mini Mission -
IV 
To modernize, 
technologically upgrade, 
improve productivity, 
diversify and develop 
human resource for the 
jute industry 
Ministry of Textiles 242.00 
 TOTAL  355.56 
 
3.24 The Committee enquired about the details of financial and 
physical targets, their actual achievements and the reasons for 
shortfall.  The Ministry submitted as under: 
„The Government of India launched Jute Technology Mission 
JTM) spanning a period of 5 years, during the 11 th Five Year 
Plan period (2007 -08 to 2011 -12).  The initial year 2007 -08 
was required mainly to frame the  rules, procedures and 
guidelines for implementing the nine schemes under the MM 
IV. The implementation effectively commenced in 2008 -09 
onwards, but the progress was again hindered by the strike in 
the Jute industry in 2009 -10. NJB is in the process of 
engaging an independent agency to make a mid-term appraisal 
of the implementation‟. 
 

65 
 
FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS 
SCHEME-WISE EXPENDITURE OF JTM MM-IV FUNDING  
Sl.No. SCHEMES Approved Fund for 
Total Mission Period  
(2007-12) 
FUND UTILISED 
    Total             
2007-08 
Total             
2008-09 
Total 2009-10 Cumulative 
TOTAL 
    Rs./Crore Rs./Crore Rs./Crore Rs./Crore Rs./Crore 
6 SCHEMES FOR MODERNISATION OF ORGANISED JUTE MILLS 
6.1 Training of Workers & 
Supervisors 
4.50 2.00 0.77 0.50 3.27 
6.2 Machinery Development 28.00 0.08 5.75 7.62 13.45 
6.3 Productivity Improvement & 
TQM Facilitation 
6.00 0.04 0.12 1.00 1.16 
6.4 Acquisition of Machinery and 
Plant (subsidy)  
80.00 5.86 7.46 11.24 24.56 
  TOTAL (6) 118.50 7.98 14.10 20.36 42.44 
7 SCHEMES FOR PROMOTION OF JUTE DIVERSIFICATION 
7.1 Design and Development of 
JDP 
14.00 2.20 2.56 1.52 6.28 
7.2 For helping the NGOs and 
WSHGs for developing JDPs 
17.00 0.38 1.52 1.79 3.69 
7.3 Scheme for Promotion of Jute 
Diversification: 
23.52 1.97 5.21 4.91 12.09 
7.4 Scheme for 
Commercialization of 
Technology 
1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
7.5 Scheme for setting up Jute 
Parks for the Diversified 
sector 
60.00 0.06 0.83 1.50 2.39 
  TOTAL (7) 115.52 4.61 10.12 9.72 24.45 
  

66 
 
  Total Mini Mission -IV 
(Schemes) 
234.02 12.59 24.22 30.08 66.89 
  Administrative / Monitoring 
Expenses 
          
  JMDC   0.11 0.46 0.65 1.22 
  NCJD   0.24 0.51 0.93 1.68 
  Total Mini Mission-IV  234.02 12.94 25.19 31.66 69.79 
 
3.25 The Jute Technology Mission documents do not prescribe 
scheme-wise annual physical targets. However, the Mission aims at 
raising the modernization of the Jute mills from its existing 30% 
level to 55% by the end of the JTM period. The Mission also aims at 
15% rise in productivity level resulting in decrease of the man 
power requirement for the standard B Twill (665 gm) bags from the 
existing norms of 38.33 to 35 man days per MT. Status of 
implementation of schemes under Mini Mission IV of JTM and 
functional bearing of the schemes implemented on the Jute 
Industry and the Jute Sector is furnished below: 
PHYSICAL ACHIEVEMENTS 
Sustainable Human Resource Development in Jute Mill 
Sector (Scheme 6.1) 
(i) Since inception training has been imparted to 2691 Master 
trainers and Supervisors in 28 jute mills, 191 Maintenance 
Workers in 14 jute mills and 7856 Workers in 21 jute mills, 
i.e. 10,738 trained in all. These Master Trainers and 
Supervisors have already trained a further 8957 workers; by 
the end of the Mission period a total of 25,000 MTs, 
Supervisors, etc. will have been directly trained and a 
sustainable cycle of training established. 
 
Development of Jute Mill Machinery (Scheme No.6.2) 
(ii) A Centre for Jute Machinery Development (CJMD) under PPP 
mode has been  established to develop 3 identified machines 
viz. Carding, Drawing and Spinning for jute industry.  
Productivity Improvement & TQM Facilitation (Scheme 
No.6.3) 
(iii) The scheme to improve productivity and to establish Total 
Quality Management (TQM) facilities in the jute industry has 
been provided under Mini Mission – IV of the JTM with NJB as 
facilitating agency of the scheme. The identified areas of 
operation (i) Productivity Improvement & TQM Facilitation (ii) 

67 
 
Total Quality Management, (iii) Energy Management  (iv) Waste 
Management (v) Maintenance Management (vi)  Work Study & 
Ergonomics. To facilitate these studies, NJB has engaged 4 
National level reputed Agencies / Institutions to conduct the 
studies under the scheme and implement recommendations in 
selected 6 jute mills.  
Modernisation and Upgradation of Technology in Jute Mills – 
Capital Subsidy (Scheme No.6.4): 
 The upper limit of the subsidy has been raised to Rs. 350 lakhs 
per mill for the existing units and Rs.400 lakhs for mills at North 
Eastern States and for setting up new unit. 
 
 Since inception (1 st March, 2007), 107 claims were settled and 
subsidy of Rs.25.30 crores has been released against investment 
for modernization of Rs.126.54 crores all over India. 
 
 76.87% % of the investments hav e been for Mill -side machinery 
meant for preparatory to spinning and winding processes. 
20.51% of the investments have been for weaving to finishing 
processes of manufacturing. Remaining 2.62 % was for Material 
handling and other miscellaneous machinery.  
 
 
 56 units have so far availed the benefits under the scheme, 
which included 41 composite jute mills, 21 yarn & twine mills, 1 
diversified jute product unit and 3 units in NER. 
 
Design and Development of JDPs (Scheme No.7.1) 
(iv) Total 18 R&D Studies on di fferent aspects have been awarded 
to the following institutions  
 Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur – 5 studies 
 South India Textile Research Association, Coimbatore – 2 
studies 

68 
 
 National Institute of Research on Jute and Allied Fibre  
Technology, Kolkata – 1 study. 
 Indian Jute Industries Research Association, Kolkata – 6 
studies 
 Institute of Jute Technology, Kolkata – 4 studies 
 
Helping NGOs and Women Self Help Groups (WSHGs) for 
developing jute diversified products (Scheme No.7.2): 
(v) 
 22 NGOs have been identified  
 80 Clusters developed 
 530 Women Self Help Groups in 40 districts of 11 states 
imparted training to 6300 artisans on production of JDPs 
 182 Nos. machines were distributed to 87 Women Self 
Help Groups at total cost of Rs.14.03 lakh. 
 
Scheme for Promotion of Jute Diversification (Scheme No.7.3) 
(vi) 
 29 Jute Service Centres have been established 
 40 Jute Raw Material Banks have been established 
 794 training programmes were organized by Jute Service 
Centre benefiting 17000 artisans. 
 262 JDP, SHG units were setup.  
 
Setting up of Jute Park (Scheme No.7.5) 
(vii) In-principle approval has been accorded to 11 Jute Parks 
including 2 in NER. 1 st installment of funds has been released 
to 3 Parks where construction has started. Proc edural 
formalities for other Parks are in the final stages. 
  The reply related to Mini Mission – III is stated below:  

69 
 
Sl No Scheme Target Achieved 
Physical 
(Nos) 
Financial 
(Rs. in 
Lakh) 
Physical 
(Nos) 
Financial (Rs. in Lakh) 
1 
Scheme- I, 
Development of 
Market Yard 
12 1220 7  700 
2 
Scheme- II, 
Construction of  
Departmental 
Purchase Centers 
40 4400 20  2200 
3 Scheme- III, 
Construction of 
Retting Tank 
50+ 500 34 154 
4 Scheme- IV, 
Demonstration of 
Retting 
Technology 
200 200 120 126 
5 Scheme- V, 
Development of 
improved/ high 
speed Ribboner 
Projects 160 2 projects 
in 
progress 
94.50 
 TOTAL  6480  3274.50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 
Modernization of jute mills:-  
3.26 The Committee observe  that the jute industry 
makes significant contribution to the country’s 
economy and has good potential to propel it further.  
However, the jute industry is gripped with numerous 
problems.  Some of the causes attributed are obsolete 
technology, old machiner y, low productivity of both 
machine and labour due to lack of modernization, 
underutilization of installed capacity, poor or no 
Research & Development; absence of any brand image 
for jute, non-formulation of need based wage structure, 
large scale sickness, increase in the cost of inputs, poor 
industrial relations etc.  The Committee find that, as 
on date, there are 78 jute mills in the country, out of 
which the Government could furnish details of capacity 
utilization of only 66 mills.  The data regarding the rest 
is said to be under collection on the query of the 
Committee.  The capacity utilization in most of these 
66 mills is between 50 to 83 per cent only.  The 
Committee further find that though modernization of 
mills is one of the issues incorporated in Jute 
Technology Mission, yet implementation part of the 
JTM is so dismal as nothing significant has actually 

71 
 
been done so far for modernization of jute mills.  As a 
large number of mills have been closed year after year 
for one reason or the other, it is i mperative to ensure 
that the mills which are functional and are in 
production, utilize their optimum capacity.  The 
Government cannot shrug off its responsibility for 
under-utilization of production capacity by the mills 
whether in public or private sector . The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the hurdles in the 
development of jute sector be removed and a multi -
pronged strategy be formulated for modernization of 
jute mills under JTM.  Further, the norms under JTM 
be relaxed to the extent that maximum fu nds are 
availed of by the mill owners under JTM for 
modernization of their mills.  The Committee further 
recommend that a mill -wise study be conducted to 
ascertain the actual requirement of funds by the mill 
owners for modernization.  The Government may, 
thereafter, make available the required funds for the 
purpose under JTM, if need be.  The Committee are 
quite optimistic that such efforts would not only go a 
long way in ensuring enhanced profitability of the jute 

72 
 
mills but also enable the mill owners to c lear all the 
statutory dues of the workers in time. 
 
Implementation of Jute Technology Mission (JTM):- 
3.27 The Committee observe that the Government 
launched Jute Technology Mission in the year 2007 
with the aim of modernization, diversification and 
overall development of the jute sector. The scheme is 
operationalised through four mini missions.  Mini 
Mission I and II are executed through the Ministry of 
Agriculture whereas Mini Mission III and IV are 
implemented by the Ministry of Textiles.  The 
Committee note that Rs. 64.80 crore and Rs. 234.02 
crore under MMI and MMN respectively were approved 
for implementation of various projects/ Schemes 
during the entire XIth Plan period.  The Committee 
find that the Ministry have not been able to achieve 
even 50 per  cent of the physical and financial targets 
under both the Missions despite completion of three 
and half years of the XIth Plan period.  The Committee 
find it quite shocking that under some schemes of Mini 
Mission IV viz., commercialization of technology, 
setting up jute parks for the diversified sector, 

73 
 
productivity improvement etc., the expenditure of 
funds is either nil or below 10 percent.  The Ministry 
are now in the process of engaging an independent 
agency to make a midterm appraisal of the 
implementation status of various schemes under JTM.  
The Committee recommend that after getting the said 
appraisal report, the existing targets should be 
reviewed and set afresh in a realistic manner covering 
maximum number of beneficiaries in the remaining 
plan pe riod. The Committee, while considering the 
significance of the Mission for the revival of jute 
sector, recommend that JTM be further extended to 
the 12 th Five Year Plan and instead of setting 
cumulative targets for five years, yearly targets be fixed 
under each scheme for their effective implementation.  
Taking note of the poor implementation of the Mission,  
the Committee strongly recommend that a high level 
Monitoring Committee be set up to keep a strict and 
constant vigil over the implementation so that the 
targets stipulated are achieved within time. 
 
 
 

74 
 
Promotion of R&D Activities:- 
3.28 The Committee observe that Research and 
Development in the Jute Sector is a sine-qua-non for 
quality improvement, particularly in the diversification 
zone. The Committee  find that no R&D project has 
been undertaken so far, either by the Ministry 
themselves or through any expert agency.  Moreover, 
the Ministry have not even incorporated R&D as a 
component under Mini Mission III and IV of JTM.  The 
Committee find it quite s trange as to how in the 
absence of any R&D, the Ministry can expect any 
tangible growth in the jute sector loaded as it is with 
obsolete technology.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that R&D be introduced as one of the 
essential components under Mini Mission IV of the JTM 
with immediate effect and sufficient funds be allocated 
for the purpose.  The Committee further recommend 
that proactive steps be taken by the Ministry for 
engagement of reputed institutions like Indian 
Institutes of Technology to find  out ways and means 
for the development of jute sector.  The Committee 
also desire that IITs and other technical institutions of 
repute may be approached to introduce ‘Jute 

75 
 
Development Technology’ as one of the chapters in the 
already run textiles courses keeping in view the huge 
potential of this eco friendly and biodegradable fibre. 
 
Trade Mark and quality assurance:- 
3.29 The Committee also observe that the Ministry 
propose to develop eco -labelling for jute  products  
namely (i) yarn (ii) Hessian (iii) H ydrocarbon-free 
quality jute hessian bag (iv) Floor covering (v) jute Geo -
textiles and (vi) Shopping bags.  For the purpose, 
selection of competent agency/consultants is in 
process with the National Jute Board.  The Committee 
appreciate the vision of the M inistry as such a step 
would definitely enable jute products to carve a niche 
in domestic as well as international market.  However, 
the Committee find limiting the criteria of the eco -
labelling to the aforesaid six categories of items 
unjustified.  Also the marking of ‘quality assurance’ has 
not been included in the terms of reference of the eco -
labelling body.  The Committee, therefore, impress 
upon the Ministry that the scope for inclusion of new 
items introduced as a result of the R&D activities in 
diversification of jute products be kept open for eco -

76 
 
labelling and all the labelled jute items be given subsidy 
to promote quality production  and sale.                     
The Committee also urge the Ministry to include 
marking of ‘quality assurance’ as part  of the label.  The 
Committee expect the Ministry to complete all the 
procedural formalities expeditiously but within a 
stipulated timeframe.  
 
Revival of NJMC Mills:- 
3.30 The Committee observe that out of the six 
closed jute mills of the National Jute Ma nufacturers 
Corporation (NJMC), the Government propose to revive 
three of them and necessary approval has since been 
obtained in the matter.  However, the Committee do 
not find any valid reason as to why the rest of the mills 
under NJMC cannot be survived.   Obviously, with the 
best of intention and dogged determination, the revival 
of six closed jute mills, on the lines of revival of sick 
mills of NTC (which has revived 40 of them) is not an 
uphill task.  The Committee are of the considered view 
that openin g of more NJMC mills will not only boost 
the growth of the jute sector but will also generate 
employment in the sector.  The Committee would 

77 
 
therefore, like that a fresh revival plan be mooted for 
the remaining three NJMC mills on urgent footing.  As 
regards, paucity of funds for revival of these mills, the 
Government may consider generation of funds through 
sale of surplus land and old machinery as has been 
done by the NTC.  If more funds are required for the 
purpose, the Ministry of Finance could be appro ached 
for term loans. The Committee also desire that the 
entire process of revival/modernization of the already 
approved three mills be completed in a time bound 
manner and in no case dragged beyond XIth Plan 
period.  The Committee also desire that the tar get may 
also be set for revival of the remaining three mills 
which have not been included in the ongoing revival 
scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

78 
 
 
 
 
Revival of sick private jute mills:- 
3.31 The Committee find  that nine private jute 
mills are temporarily lying closed as on date besides 29 
mills which have gone for permanent closure during 
the last five years.  The major reasons attributed are 
financial sickness and workers unrest.  The Ministry of 
Textiles launched eight schemes from 1985 onwards for 
the development of the sector, including TUFS.  
However, all these schemes resulted in complete failure 
and had to be withdrawn by the Government at 
different stages.  Even the popular scheme like TUFS 
could not mak e any headway in the Jute sector as not 
a single rupee has been utilized under it. The 
Committee believe that all these schemes failed due to 
lack of focused approach and calibrated efforts on the 
part of the Government.  The zero performance of TUFS 
which is one of the signature schemes of the Ministry 
itself speaks volumes about the Ministry’s efforts in 
strengthening the jute industry.  The Committee note 
that the Government neither have any mechanism to 

79 
 
detect sickness in the mills at incipient stage no r any 
viability study has ever been conducted for the purpose 
of reviving them.  The Committee deprecate such 
languid approach of the Ministry towards such an 
important sector and recommend that the Jute 
Commissioner be entrusted with the task of conductin g 
a viability study of all the nine mills in a time bound 
manner.  Further, the mill -wise quantum of funds 
required for revival be assessed and accordingly a 
specific scheme be devised under which financial 
assistance on soft terms be provided to all the m ill 
owners who come forward to revive/modernize their 
mills.  The Committee also recommend that a 
monitoring mechanism be set -up in the office of Jute 
Commissioner to detect sickness in jute mills at initial 
stage and to suggest remedial measures.  The ste ps 
taken and progress achieved in the matter be intimated 
to the Committee within six months. 
 
 
 
 
 

80 
 
 
Widening the purview of JPM Act:- 
 
3.32 The Committee observe that jute packaging 
materials (compulsory use in packaging commodities) 
Act, 1987 was enacted by the Government to provide 
protection to the jute industry.  At present, only 
foodgrain and sugar are under the purview of the Act.  
The Committee note that the orders issued under the 
clause 3(1) of the Act with regard to the coverage of 
commodities to be considered for compulsory 
packaging are reviewed annually by the Government.  
On one hand, the Committee have been apprised by the 
representatives of the industry that reviewing these 
orders every year leads to uncertainty about protection 
under the Act , while the Ministry feel that under the 
liberalized regime, jute manufacturers should not 
expect perpetual protection.  The Ministry further 
stated that permanent reservation would be 
counterproductive as it would give permanent 
monopoly to the jute industry, which in turn may harm 
the economy of the commodities so packed 
compulsorily in jute.  The Committee are not 

81 
 
convinced with the reason put forth by the Ministry 
that the jute manufacturers should not expect 
permanent protection since, in Committee’s v iew, the 
very purpose of JPM Act is to protect ‘Jute’ as a 
packaging industry. The Committee also could not  
comprehend the contention of the Government 
regarding monopoly  by the Jute Industry due to 
permanent reservation, keeping in view the fact that 
the Government themselves are the biggest buyers of 
the jute bags/sacks for packaging purposes and the 
prices are controlled and announced by the Jute 
Commissioner every year.  The Committee deplore 
such a lopsided approach of the Ministry and 
recommend that  at least packaging of food grain and 
sugar be made compulsory under the JPM Act so as to 
put an end to any speculation of volatility and to 
create an atmosphere of confidence in the jute sector.  
The Committee also recommend that keeping in view 
the huge potential and further scope for growth in 
production of jute, more commodities be brought under 
the purview of the JPM Act.  The Committee also 
recommend the Ministry of Textiles to undertake R&D 

82 
 
activities to improve the quality of jute as a packaging 
material. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                        HEMANAND BISWAL, 
 4 February, 2011                                             CHAIRMAN,                          
15 Magha , 1932 (Saka)       STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR. 
 
 
  

83 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 18TH JANUARY, 2010.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs in Committee 
Room `E‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to have briefing by 
the representatives of the Ministry of Textiles on `Development of 
Jute Sector‟. 
   PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri M. Anandan 
3.      Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4.      Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5.      Shri Hassan Khan 
6.      Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7.      Shri Hari Manjhi 
8.      Shri P.R. Natarajan 
9.      Shri S. Pakkirappa 
10.    Shri Ramkishun 
11.    Shri Murari Lal Singh 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
12.   Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
13.   Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
14.   Shri Rajaram 
15.   Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
16.   Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 
 

84 
 
Witnesses 
 
Ministry of Textiles 
 
1. Smt. Rita Menon, Secretary 
2. Shri Bhupendra Singh, Joint Secretary (Jute) 
3. Shri Binod Kispotta, Jute Commissioner 
4. Shri Atri Bhattacharya, Secretary, JMDC 
5. Dr. R.C. Tiwari, CMD, JCI 
6. Shri Manish Kumar Gupta, Director (Jute) 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
the Ministry of Textiles and invited their attention to the provisions 
contained in Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha. The Chairman, thereafter, expressed concern of the 
Committee over the dissatisfactory performance of entire jute sector 
and the inability of the Government to address the issues of 
workers in right earnest. He also observed that the ongoing strike in 
52 jute mills in West Bengal had further worsened the situation. 
The Chairman then asked the Secretary to brief the Committee 
about the problems prevailing in jute sector and the steps taken by 
the Government for ensuring overall development and growth of the 
jute sector and for resolving the legitimate demands of the workers 
of the jute mills in West Bengal who are on strike.   
 
3. The Secretary then briefed the Committee on the subject.  A power 
point presentation was also given highlighting various facts about 
the jute sector and steps taken/proposed to be taken by the 
Government for growth of jute sector.    

85 
 
 
4. The  Chairman and other members of the Committee, thereafter, 
sought clarifications on several points which inter-alia included: 
 (i)  To bring out some workable solution to end the ongoing strike 
in 52 jute mills in West Bengal. 
(ii) To promote the use of jute products and  simultaneously ban 
the synthetic/polythene material/items in the country. 
(iii) To provide subsidy to jute sector as a whole. 
(iv) Need for revival of the mills of National Jute Manufacturers 
Corporation. 
(v) To popularize Technology Upgradation Fund Sche me 
specifically in the jute sector. 
(vi) Need for concerted efforts by the Government to increase area 
under jute cultivation and per hectare yield. 
(vii) Need to boost the exports by finding new markets worldwide. 
(viii) To address all the issues/demands of workers of jute sector in 
totality and in right earnest. 
(ix) Need to produce high yielding varieties of seeds of jute and to 
ensure sufficient supply of raw jute to the mills. 
(x) To constitute the National Jute Board at the earliest. 
(xi)I To explore the use/consumption of jute products in other 
areas also apart from their conventional use. 
(xii) To bring more products under the JPM Act, 1987. 
 
5. The Secretary and other officials then responded to the 
aforesaid queries of the Chairman/Members. 

86 
 
6. The Chairman expressed his thanks to the representatives of 
Ministry for giving free and frank replies on the subject.  The 
Chairman also directed the Secretary to furnish written replies to 
the queries raised by the members which could not be replied 
during the meeting and also to the List of Points handed over to her 
during the meeting, at the earliest. 
7. The Committee decided to have their next sitting on 28 th 
January, 2010, to have briefing by the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment on  `Welfare of Beedi Workers‟ 
and also on the `Ongoing strike in 52 jute mills in West Bengal‟. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept for record. 
 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

87 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 28TH JANUARY, 2010.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs in Committee 
Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to have briefing by 
the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment on 
the subjects `Welfare of Beedi Workers‟; and „Ongoing strike in Jute 
Mills in West Bengal‟. 
  
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3.    Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
4.    Shri Hassan Khan 
5.    Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6.    Shri Hari Manjhi 
7.    Shri Ramkishun 
 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 8.    Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
 9.    Shri Rajaram 
 10.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
11.  Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 

88 
 
Witnesses 
 
Ministry of Labour & Employment 
 
1. Sh. Prabhat Chandra Chaturvedi Secretary 
2. Shri S.K. Srivastava Additional Secretary  
3. Dr. C.S. Kedar Director General, ESIC 
4. Shri Sharda Prasad JS & Director General 
Employment & Training 
5. Shri S.K. Dev Verman Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Anil Swarup JS & Director General 
Labour Welfare 
7. Shri N.K. Prasad Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner (C ) 
8. Shri Suraj Bhan Economic Advisor  
 
9. Shri B.K. Sanwaria Welfare Commissioner 
(HQ) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri P.C. Chaturvedi , 
Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and invited their attention to the provisions contained 
in Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. The 
Chairman expressed concern of the Committee on the „ongoing  
strike in 52 jute mills in West Bengal‟.  The Chairman then 
informed that the Committee has also taken „welfare of beedi 
workers‟ as a subject for detailed examination and report 
considering the gross inadequacy of the welfare schemes run by the 
Government for ameliorating the conditions of the beedi workers.  

89 
 
The Chairman then asked the Secretary to brief the Committee on 
`ongoing strike in jute mills in West Bengal‟ first and the steps 
taken by the Ministry of Labour and Employment in resolving the 
problem.   
 
3. The Secretary then briefed the Committee on the ongoing strike by 
jute mills workers in West Bengal and the steps taken by the 
Government to address their demands and also efforts being made 
to bring out a workable solution to end the strike.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairman and other members of the Committee, 
sought clarifications on several points concerning the strike by jute 
mill workers which were replied to by the representatives of the 
Ministry to some extent.   
 
5. The Secretary then briefed the Committee on the subject „welfare of 
beedi workers‟ and also made a power point presentation 
highlighting various facts and the schemes for the welfare of beedi 
workers and steps taken/proposed to be taken by the Government 
for their welfare.  
6. The C hairman and other members of the Committee, thereafter, 
sought clarifications on several points which were replied to by the 
representatives of the Ministry. 
 
7. The Chairman thanked the representatives of Ministry for 
giving free and frank replies on the subject.  The Chairman also 

90 
 
directed the Secretary to furnish written replies to the queries 
raised by the members which could not be replied during the 
meeting and also to the List of Points handed over to him during the 
meeting, at the earliest. 
 
8. Since the Committee found the deposition of the Secretary, 
Ministry of Labour and Employment in contradiction with the 
deposition made by the Secretary, Ministry of T extiles before the 
Committee on 18 th January, 2010, in certain vital aspects with 
regard to the ongoing strike in jute mills in West Bengal, the 
Committee decided to hear the representatives of both the 
Ministries at their next sitting on 8 th February, 201 0.  The 
Chairman accordingly directed for issue of notice. 
 Verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

91 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 8TH FEBRUARY, 2010.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs in Committee 
Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to have further 
briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and Ministry of Textiles on `Ongoing strike b y workers 
in Jute Mills in West Bengal‟. 
  
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri M. Anandan 
3.  Shri P. Balram 
4.  Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
5.     Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6.     Shri Hassan Khan 
7.     Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8.     Shri P. R. Natarajan 
9.  Shri S. Pakkirappa 
10.   Shri Ramkishun 
11.   Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
12.   Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 13.  Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
 14. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 15. Shri Rajaram 
 16. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 17. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
   
 SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 2.  Shri Ashok Sajwan - Additional Director 
 
 

92 
 
Witnesses 
 
Ministry of Labour & Employment 
1. Sh. Prabhat Chandra Chaturvedi Secretary 
2. Shri S.K. Srivastava Additional Secretary  
3. Dr. C.S. Kedar Director General, ESIC 
4. Shri Uday Kumar Verma Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner 
5. Shri Sharda Prasad JS & Director General 
Employment & Training 
6. Shri Anil Swarup JS & Director General 
Labour Welfare 
7. Shri S.K. Dev Verman Joint Secretary 
8. Shri S. K. Mukhopadhyay Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central) 
9. Shri S. K. Verma Director (SS) 
10. Shri Rajiv Dutt Financial 
Commissioner, ESIC 
11. Shri Arun Kumar Director (Revenue), 
ESIC 
12. Shri Shankar Pathak Director (HQ), EPFO 
 
 
Ministry of Textiles  
1. Shri Bhupendra Singh Joint Secretary (Jute) 
2. Shri S. S. Gupta Joint Secretary (Parl.) 
3. Shri Binod Kispotta Jute Commissioner 
4. Shri Manish Kumar Gupta Director (Jute) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Dr. Kakoli Ghosh 
Dastidar, on her nomination by the Speaker, Lok Sabha to the 
Labour Committee for the remaining period of the term 2009-10. 
 

93 
 
 
3. The Chairman, then, welcomed the representatives of the 
Ministries of Labour & Employment and Textiles and invited their 
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  The Chairman observed that 
the ongoing strike by Jute Mill workers in West Bengal over the last 
52 days had been engaging the serious attention of the Committee 
for quite some time past. He also observed that the Committee were 
greatly concerned and agitated and wanted early resolution o f the 
problem so as to safeguard the interest of workers and the jute 
industry.  The Chairman expressed the serious concern of the 
Committee over the approach of both the Ministries as they 
accepted only limited responsibility in ascertaining the causes an d 
resolution of the strike and did little concrete except exchanging 
letters between them with the result the problem of jute workers 
and jute industry continued to elude solution.  The Chairman 
further clarified that the Committee were interested in resol ving the 
problems of jute industry and protecting the statutory rights of jute 
workers.  He cautioned the Ministries that the Committee wanted 
their replies and action plan based on the principle of collective 
responsibility of the Government to Parliament. 
 
4. The Chairman, thereafter, asked Joint Secretary, Ministry of 
Textiles to apprise the Committee regarding the  specific action 
taken by them to resolve the problem of Jute mill workers in 
coordination with the Ministry of Labour.  

94 
 
 
5. The Joint Secret ary, Ministry of Textiles informed the 
Committee about the current demands of Jute mill workers and 
action taken on the demands pertaining to his Ministry.  He 
explained that majority of these issues needed to be addressed by 
the State Government of West B engal being the appropriate 
Government and the Ministry of Labour & Employment at the 
centre. 
 
6. The Chairman then asked the Secretary, Ministry of Labour to 
brief the Committee on the action taken by his Ministry on the 
demands of Jute mills workers and particularly the role played by 
the Chief Labour Commissioner in resolving the issue in the last 5 0 
days.  
 
7. The Secretary, Ministry of Labour then informed the 
Committee that several rounds of tripartite conciliation meetings 
have been arranged by the Chief Labour Commissioner in the 
matter. He further informed that the Ministry have already taken 
steps to resolve the issues within their domain. He also stated that 
certain issues which came under the jurisdiction of Ministry of 
Textiles still needed to be addressed.   
 
8. The Chairman and members of the Committee, thereafter, 
sought further pointed c larifications from both the Ministries 
regarding steps proposed to end the strike. 

95 
 
 
9. The representatives of both the Ministries replied to the 
queries of the Chairman and other members.  The Secretary, 
Ministry of Labour & Employment also informed the Co mmittee 
that the Chief Labour Commissioner and the Joint Secretary (Jute) 
in the Ministry of Textiles proposed to go to Kolkata on 9 th 
February, 2010 to discuss the issues at the tripartite forum with a 
view to ending the strike. 
 
10. The Chairman expressed thanks to the representatives of both 
the Ministries for their submissions before the Committee on the 
subject.  He conveyed best wishes of the Committee to the 
representatives of both the Ministries for the proposed meeting on 
9th February, 2010 with a view to call off the strike. The Chairman 
also directed them to furnish written replies to the queries raised by 
the members which could not be replied during the meeting and 
also to the List of Points handed over to them, at the earliest. 
 
11. The Committ ee then decided to hear the representatives of 
Indian Jute mills association and Trade Unions in the matter at 
their next sitting. 
  
        The verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

96 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 17TH FEBRUARY, 2010.  
 
 The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1715 hrs in Committee 
Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to hear the views of 
the representatives of central Trade unions and Indian Jute Mills 
Association on the „Development of Jute Sector‟ with particular 
reference to the strike by workers in Jute Mills in West Bengal. 
  
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
      2. Shri M. Anandan 
 3. Shri P. Balram 
 4. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
     5. Shri Hassan Khan 
    6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
     7. Shri P. Lingam 
  8. Shri Shri Hari Manjhi 
      9. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
  10. Shri Raj Babbar 
 11. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
  
 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 12. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 13. Shri Rajaram 
 14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
   
 SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 3. Shri Ashok Sajwan        - Additional Director 
 
 
 

97 
 
Witnesses 
 
Representatives of Trade Unions 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation Name of Trade 
Union 
1. Shri Abani Roy General Secretary United Trade 
Union Congress 
2. Shri  D.L. Sachdev Secretary All India Trade 
Union Congress 
3. Shri Debasish Dutta General Secretary Federation of 
Chatkal Mazdoor 
Union 
4. Shri Dilip Dasgupta Secretary Bengal Chatkal 
Mazdoor Union 
5. Shri Subarao Vice President Bhartiya 
Mazdoor Sangh 
 
 
 
 
Indian Jute Mills Association 
1. Shri Sanjay Kajaria Chairman 
2. Shri Nirmalya Mukherjee Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the 
sitting of the Committee and informed them that the strike in jute 
mills in West Bengal has been called off. He congratulated the 
Members for the same. He, however, emphasized the need for 
finding the real c auses of strikes which have become a perennial 
feature in jute industry. Thereafter, he informed the Members that 
the representatives of the Central Trade Unions and the Indian Jute 
Mills Association have been invited to express their views on the 
causes o f such frequent strikes, the demands of the jute mills 
workers and mill owners and overall development of jute sector. 

98 
 
 
3. The Committee then took up the draft action taken Report  on 
the recommendations contained in 39 th  Report (14th Lok Sabha) on 
„Employees‟ Provident Fund Organisation -Employees Pension 
Scheme 1995‟ for consideration and adoption and adopted the same 
without any  modification/ amendment. The Committee authorized 
the Chairman to present the same in the ensuing session of 
Parliament. 
 
5.  The Committee, thereafter, called in the  representatives of 
Central Trade Unions. The Chairman welcomed the representatives 
to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to the 
provisions contained in Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the  
Speaker, Lok Sabha. He observed that the pitiful condition of 
workers engaged in the Jute Industry is a matter of great concern to 
the Committee and the Government have done little to ensure 
payment of fair wages and protection of various social security 
measures of the workers due to which the workers are forced to 
resort to strikes every now and then demanding their rightful 
claims and dues.  
5. The Chairman then invited the representatives of Trade unions 
to offer their views regarding the real problems  of the jute workers 
and the efforts that need to be made for their  welfare. The 
representatives of Trade unions then expressed their views on the 
various problems of jute mill workers. The suggestions given by 
them inter-alia included: 

99 
 
 
(i) Need to issue identity cards to workers. 
(ii) Need to ensure appropriate wages to the workers. 
(iii) Need to implement all the statutory provisions enacted  for 
the welfare of workers in order to ensure social  security to 
them, including PF, ESI, gratuity and DA  benefits. 
(iv) Need to prepare a data base of the workers with regard  to 
their total strength, nature of service viz; contract,  casual, 
permanent etc., details of PF and ESI  contributions, service 
records etc. 
 
(v) Need for pre-emptive measures to be taken by  Ministries of 
Labour and Textiles  to avert strikes/  lockouts in jute mills. 
(vi) Regularization of contract workers. 
(vii) Modernization of old and dilapidated machinery of  mills. 
(viii) Implementation of the recommendations of Tripartite 
 Expert Committee Report. 
(ix)  Need for audit of the financial position/ records of  all the 
jute mills on a regular basis. 
6. Thereafter, the Chairman and members of the Committee, sought 
clarifications on several points concerning the strike by jute mill 
workers and the other core issues related to the subject which were 
replied to by the representatives of the Trade unions. 
7. The Chairman thanked the representatives of Trade Unions for 
deposing before the Committee and replying to the points raised by 
the Member s in a candid manner. The Chairman also requested 

100 
 
them to furnish written replies to the List of Points handed over to 
them within fortnight. 
  {The witnesses then withdrew.} 
 
8. Thereafter, the representatives of Indian Jute Mills Association 
were called in. The Chairman welcomed them to the sitting of the 
Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained in 
Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. The 
Chairman observed that the condition of workers as well as jute 
Industry is deteriorating day by day mainly due to lack of focused 
schemes and programmes of the State Governments as well as the 
Union Government. He also observed that there is a huge potential 
for the growth of Jute sector considering its nature friendly qualities 
and increasing demand worldwide.  
 
9. The Chairman then invited the views of the representatives of 
Indian Jute Mills Association specifically on the real problems 
plaguing the entire Jute sector and the efforts required for its 
sustainable and inclusive growth. The  representatives  of  Indian  
Jute  Mills  Association expressed their views. The suggestions 
given  by them inter-alia included: 
 
(i) Need of Government support for modernization of jute  mills 
under Jute Technology Mission. 

101 
 
(ii) Need to elect sole bargaining agent to smoothen the 
 negotiations with IJMA on issues pertaining to the jute  mill  
workers. 
(iii)  Need to give the status of „Industry‟ to Jute sector. 
(iv) Need for framing specific policies/ schemes for Jute  sector 
particularly with regard to diversification of  Jute products. 
(v) Need for giving greater protection to Jute as a  packaging 
material. 
 
10. Thereafter, the Chairman and members of the Committee, sought 
clarifications from them and asked them to see that the m ill owners 
implement without exception all the social security provisions 
guaranteed to the mill workers by law and to clear all their dues 
within a  stipulated time. 
 
11. The representatives of the Indian Jute Mills Association then replied 
to the points raised by the Chairman and members. They also  
submitted a copy each  of the four reports which pertain to review/ 
study carried out on the status/position of entire jute sector in the 
Country.  
 
12. The Chairman thanked the representatives for deposing be fore 
the Committee on the subject and replying, in a free and frank 
manner, to the points raised by the Members. The Chairman also 
requested them to furnish written replies to the List of Points 
handed over to them within fortnight. 

102 
 
 
       The verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

103 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 4TH FEBRUARY, 2011.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to  1530 hrs in Room no. 
116, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt 
the draft Report on „Development of Jute Sector‟ of the Ministry of 
Textiles.  
 
PRESENT 
 
    Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. Balram Naik 
3. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4. Shri Raj Babbar  
5. Shri Hassan Khan 
6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar  
8. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
9. Shri Ramkishun 
10. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
11.   Shri P. Lingam 
12.   Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13.   Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 14.  Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
15. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
16. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
17.   Shri Rajaram 
    
  SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
   
  
 

104 
 
2.   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the draft Report on „Development of Jute 
Sector‟ of the Ministry of Textiles.  
 
3.  The Committee took up the draft Report for consideration.  
The Committee, after detailed delib erations, adopted the same 
without any modification.   
 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the 
same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

105 
 
APPENDIX 
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
No. 
Recommendations/Observations 
1. 
 
1.21 Crop Insurance for Jute growing Farmers: -The 
Committee find that the National Agricultural 
Insurance Scheme (NAIS) launched by Government 
of India is being implemented through the State 
Government of West Bengal for providing crop 
insurance coverage to the jute growing farmers.  
This Scheme is, h owever, limited to certain blocks 
only, selected by the State Government. The total 
number of beneficiaries during the years 2007, 
2008 and 2009 were 3213, 2636 and 6645 
respectively in West Bengal whereas there are more 
than 40 lakh jute growing farmers i n the country.  
The jute farmers of other States are not provided 
any crop insurance coverage as on date.  The 
Committee are aware that, apart from natural 
calamities, jute crop is also prone to certain 
diseases which adversely affect its overall 
production.  Considering the fact that the jute crop 
is prone to natural calamities and certain diseases 
and the fact that Jute is environment friendly and 

106 
 
biodegradable fibre, it is imperative that crop 
insurance protection be given to Jute cultivators.  
The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that the 
NAIS be extended to all Jute growing areas or a new 
central scheme be launched at the earliest to 
extend crop insurance coverage to jute growing 
farmers in all jute growing States so as to cover the 
damage caused to the jute crop either by natural 
calamities or by any disease.  The Committee desire 
that the modalities of such a Scheme be finalized 
and implemented well before the next sowing 
season of the jute crop. 
 
  

107 
 
2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minimum Support Price (MSP):- 
The Committee observe that in the past five 
years, the total area under jute cultivation 
and the per hectare yield have decreased 
despite launch of various schemes by the 
Government. Strangely, the Government 
have, so far, not conducted any study to 
ascertain the factors responsible for decline 
in the production of the jute crop.  During 
the last three years, the gap between MSP 
and the market price has constantly widened 
significantly.  The trend further exacerbated 
when market prices shot up to the tune o f 
Rs. 458 and Rs. 852 during the years 2008 -
09 and 2009 -10 respectively whereas the 
MSP, during the same period was increased 
marginally, to the tune of Rs. 200/ - and Rs. 
125/-.  The Committee find that decrease in 
area is mainly due to the fact that the 
farmers are not getting remunerative price 
and hence losing interest in jute cultivation.  
It is a hard fact that the figures shown as 

108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
market prices are meant for the best quality 
produce and the comparatively lower grades 
do not get profitable prices.  Tho ugh the 
Government announces MSP only for TD -5 
grade but claims that every grade of jute is 
purchased through Jute Corporation of India 
at MSP.  Since each category of jute has 
eight grades, the farmers are likely to be 
exploited in the absence of declared  MSP for 
other grades.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should not 
only declare MSP for each grade every year 
but the price so declared should also be 
profitable enough to motivate the farmers to 
continue jute cultivation. Also, the  MSP 
announced before sowing season be reviewed 
when the crop comes to market and it should 
be appropriately hiked so as to keep it in 
consonance with the market price.  The 
Committee further recommend that in order 
to promote jute farming in other States 
wherever it is feasible, the Government must 

109 
 
 
 
3. 
 
 
2.22 
 
 
 
adopt certain policy measures under which 
special incentives/facilities be provided to 
the farmers for growing jute.  The measures 
may include subsidy on farm equipments, 
cheaper power tariffs, well devised 
procurement policy, opening of nearby 
purchase centres, making 
certified/subsidized seeds easily available 
through JCI centres, providing training to 
farmers at regular intervals, disseminating 
advanced technology to them etc.  The 
Committee also desire that t he proposal for 
construction of canals, on the lines of 
irrigation system in the States of Punjab and 
Haryana, be considered and taken up with 
the concerned State Governments for its 
early execution.  The Committee are 
optimistic that such a step will defi nitely 
help in overcoming the problems of low 
rain/dry monsoon which, at present, is a 
disturbing factor affecting the production of 
jute crop. 

110 
 
Use of Safety Equipments by Workers:- 
In the course of their study visit to some 
private jute mills in Kolkata, the Committee 
were shocked to see hazardous and stifling 
working conditions of the workers. The age 
old machinery, used in the mills, that rattle 
noise crossing standard decibel norms, apart 
from creating deafening noise, pose a serious 
threat to the lives  of poor and hapless 
workers in absence of any proper safety 
equipments.  Yet, another more hazardous 
aspect of the working condition of the Jute 
workers is that the jute fibre particles 
present in the air and inhaled by the workers 
affect their lungs badl y.  The Committee 
were astounded to find that in such 
extremely hazardous condition not a single 
worker was found using any safety 
equipment viz., helmet, mask, handgloves, 
safety jackets etc. The workers even 
informed the Committee that they `have not 
been provided any safety equipments by the 

111 
 
mill management’. 
The Committee find  that the jute mill 
owners are blatantly violating the statutory 
norms on safety and health of the workers 
due to inaction on the part of the Regional 
Labour Commissioners and apathetic 
attitude of the Government.   
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that all the Regional Labour 
Commissioners of the States where jute mills 
are situated, be asked to carryout 
inspections in each jute mill with immediate 
effect and prepare a fact finding report in the 
matter within a month and  submit the same 
to the Chief Labour Commissioner recording 
clearly the nature of violations.  The 
Committee further recommend that all the 
RLCs undertake inspections of each jute mill 
under their jurisdiction to ensure proper use 
of safety equipments by the workers followed 
by periodic visits so as to ensure that the 

112 
 
prescribed safety norms are in place and 
strictly adhered to.  The Committee further 
feel that there is an urgent need to review 
and amend the Labour Laws so as to ensure 
effective implementation of the statutory 
safeguards extended to the labour.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the 
concrete action taken and progress made in 
the matter. 
4. 2.23 Payment of Statutory Dues of Workers:- 
The Committee are pained to note that the 
Ministry of Labour and Employ ment have 
virtually and time and again failed in 
extending social security benefits to the 
workers of jute mills in West Bengal due to 
which they have to take recourse to strikes 
per force every year. Crores of rupees of 
workers are pending recovery from j ute mill 
owners/management under PF and ESIC.  
The position regarding payment of gratuity 
and DA to workers is  all the more shocking 
as more than 200 crore rupees are pending as 

113 
 
old dues.  The more unfortunate part is that 
even the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
do not have exact records of these statutory 
dues of workers, some of which are even 10 
years old.  This raises a serious question over 
the efficacy of the functioning of the offices 
of the Chief Provident Fund Commissioner, 
DG, ESIC and Chief L abour Commissioner.   
Obviously, the workers are forced to go on 
strikes every now and then when the law 
enforcement machinery abdicates its 
responsibility or fails to uphold the law.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that a mill -wise assessmen t of the dues of 
workers be undertaken with immediate effect 
and the recovery process, wherever 
applicable, be started simultaneously.  To 
overcome the paucity of funds with the mill 
owners, if any, a mechanism could be devised 
to provide soft loans to the  mills strictly for 
the purpose of settling dues of the workers.  
The entire exercise must be completed 

114 
 
within a definitive time -frame but not 
exceeding six months. 
 The Committee also recommend 
that all the departments/agencies of Central 
Government, viz,   Jute Commissioner, 
Textile Commissioner, Chief Provident Fund 
Commissioner, DG, ESIC and Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central) should compulsorily 
meet, along with the officials of State labour 
departments, atleast in every six months, to 
discuss and reso lve the issues pertaining to 
the jute growing farmers, workers engaged in 
the Jute mills and the mill owners. A report 
on issues raised, discussion held and the 
action taken/ proposed to be taken in every 
such meeting should invariably be furnished 
to and monitored by both the Ministries at 
highest level regularly till the problems of 
Jute Industry persist.   
 
  

115 
 
5. 
 
2.24 Problems of Dwelling Space for Workers:- 
The Committee observe that jute workers are 
living in very pitiable conditions.  They are 
even deprived of basic amenities like 
drinking water, electricity, toilets etc. and 
their living areas are unhygienic and grossly 
unfit for human habitation.  More so, the 
workers are for ced to live in shifts due to 
space constraint.  Though several 
developmental schemes for jute sector have 
been launched by the Government from time 
to time yet the issue of dwelling space for 
jute mill workers has never been addressed.  
After Committee’s i ntervention in the 
matter, the Government, however, furnished 
details of a scheme, implemented from 1 st 
April, 2010, which covers ‘Sanitation, health 
facilities and working conditions in the mill 
sector’ as one of its components.  The 
Committee find that e ven this scheme does 
not  address pinpointedly the issue of 
providing dwelling space to the workers.  The 

116 
 
Committee, therefore,  strongly recommend 
that specific guidelines be issued to each mill 
owner/management asking them to provide 
space for constructi on of dwelling units for 
their workers out of the surplus land 
available with the mills.  To help the mill 
owners in their endeavour to do so, a well 
devised central scheme could be launched 
with a suitable component of financial 
assistance to the mill own ers who undertake 
construction of  dwelling units for the 
workforce. By constructing suitable multi 
storey dwelling units, the problem of a clean 
and hygienic living area for the workers can 
be addressed to a large extent.  Such a step 
will also benefit th e mill owners as well as it 
would minimize the cases of absenteeism, 
late coming and illness of the workers.    
 
  

117 
 
6. 
 
2.25 Textile Workers’ Rehabilitation Fund Scheme 
(TWRFS):- 
The Committee observe  that not even a 
single worker of the closed jute mills has 
been provided with any financial benefit 
under the Textile Workers Rehabilitation 
Fund Scheme.  The insipid explanation 
furnished by the Ministry was that no 
application had been received in this regard 
from the office of Textile Commissioner.  
Further, when the Committee sought to 
know why suo-motu action was not taken by 
the office of Textile Commissioner in the 
matter, the Ministry replied that ‘at present 
none of the jute mills have been declar ed 
closed under sector 25(O) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act and hence no relief has been 
extended under the scheme’.  The 
Committee find such an attitude of the 
Ministry irresponsible and anti worker.  It is 
a hard fact that a large number of jute mills 
have undergone closure since the launch of 

118 
 
the scheme and the workers have been 
rendered jobless.  The Committee feel that 
the very purpose of launching TWRFS is 
defeated if workers do not get the intended 
relief under it.  The Committee strongly feel 
that r elief to workers ought to be provided 
immediately after the closure of a mill so as 
to enable them to feed their families without 
any difficulty.  The Committee, recommend 
that guidelines of the TWRFS be amended 
and the requirement of permission under 
section 25(O) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947 be done away with.  The Committee are 
of the view that senior officers from the 
office of Textile Commissioner should visit 
the mill which is declared closed and after 
due verification, the approval for 
disbursement of relief to its eligible workers 
must be given expeditiously but preferably 
within three months positively.  The 
Committee further recommend that for any 
undue delay in disbursement of relief, 

119 
 
personal responsibility of the concerned 
officer must be fixed.  The steps taken in this 
direction and the  progress made be 
intimated to the Committee within a period 
of six months.  
7. 2.26 Issuance of Identity Cards:- 
The Committee find that the jute mill 
workers have not been provided any identity 
proof b y the mill owners.  Further, the 
workers are also not shown their service 
records and details of their contributions to 
the social security funds viz., PF and ESI.   
By doing so, the workers are kept in the dark 
thereby depriving them of their statutory 
dues after retirement. The Committee 
believe that this is done deliberately by the 
mill owners so as not to pay their statutory 
contribution to the social security funds.  
The Committee, therefore,   recommend 
strongly that this be enquired into without 
any loss of time by the office of Chief Labour 
Commissioner.  While making mill -wise 

120 
 
assessment of PF and ESI dues, it should 
simultaneously be ensured that each worker, 
whether permanent or casual or on contract, 
is issued identity card by the respective mill  
owner.  The office of the Chief Labour 
Commissioner should also give specific 
instructions to all the mill owners that the 
service records of every worker be shown and 
verified by the individual at least once in a 
year.  Further, in order to ensure strict  
compliance, penal action must be taken 
against defaulting mill owners.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken indicating the details of the 
mills who have taken satisfactory corrective 
action and the defaulter mills. 
8. 3.26 Modernization of jute mills:-  
The Committee observe that the jute 
industry makes significant contribution to 
the country’s economy and has good 
potential to propel it further.  However, the 
jute industry is gripped with numerous 

121 
 
problems.  Some of the causes att ributed are 
obsolete technology, old machinery, low 
productivity of both machine and labour due 
to lack of modernization, underutilization of 
installed capacity, poor or no Research & 
Development; absence of any brand image for 
jute, non -formulation of nee d based wage 
structure, large scale sickness, increase in 
the cost of inputs, poor industrial relations 
etc.  The Committee find that, as on date, 
there are 78 jute mills in the country, out of 
which the Government could furnish details 
of capacity utiliza tion of only 66 mills.  The 
data regarding the rest is said to be under 
collection on the query of the Committee.  
The capacity utilization in most of these 66 
mills is between 50 to 83 per cent only.  The 
Committee further find that though 
modernization o f mills is one of the issues 
incorporated in Jute Technology Mission, yet 
implementation part of the JTM is so dismal 
as nothing significant has actually been done 

122 
 
so far for modernization of jute mills.  As a 
large number of mills have been closed year 
after year for one reason or the other, it is 
imperative to ensure that the mills which are 
functional and are in production, utilize their 
optimum capacity.  The Government cannot 
shrug off its responsibility for under -
utilization of production capacity by the 
mills whether in public or private sector. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
hurdles in the development of jute sector be 
removed and a multi -pronged strategy be 
formulated for modernization of jute mills 
under JTM.  Further, the norms under  JTM 
be relaxed to the extent that maximum funds 
are availed of by the mill owners under JTM 
for modernization of their mills.  The 
Committee further recommend that a mill -
wise study be conducted to ascertain the 
actual requirement of funds by the mill 
owners for modernization.  The Government 
may, thereafter, make available the required 

123 
 
funds for the purpose under JTM, if need be.  
The Committee are quite optimistic that 
such efforts would not only go a long way in 
ensuring enhanced profitability of the ju te 
mills but also enable the mill owners to clear 
all the statutory dues of the workers in time. 
 
9. 3.27 Implementation of Jute Technology Mission 
(JTM):- 
The Committee observe that the Government 
launched Jute Technology Mission in the 
year 2007 with the aim of modernization, 
diversification and overall development of 
the jute sector. The scheme is 
operationalised through four mini missions.  
Mini Mission I and II are executed through 
the Ministry of Agriculture whereas Mini 
Mission III and IV are implemented by the 
Ministry of Textiles.  The Committee note 
that Rs. 64.80 crore and Rs. 234.02 crore 
under MMI and MMN respectively were 
approved for implementation of various 

124 
 
projects/ Schemes during the entire XIth 
Plan period.  The Committee find that the 
Ministry have not been able to achieve even 
50 per cent of the physical and financial 
targets under both the Missions despite 
completion of three and half years of the 
XIth Plan p eriod.  The Committee find it 
quite shocking that under some schemes of 
Mini Mission IV viz., commercialization of 
technology, setting up jute parks for the 
diversified sector, productivity improvement 
etc., the expenditure of funds is either nil or 
below 10 percent.  The Ministry are now in 
the process of engaging an independent 
agency to make a midterm appraisal of the 
implementation status of various schemes 
under JTM.  The Committee recommend that 
after getting the said appraisal report, the 
existing ta rgets should be reviewed and set 
afresh in a realistic manner covering 
maximum number of beneficiaries in the 
remaining plan period. The Committee, while 

125 
 
considering the significance of the Mission 
for the revival of jute sector, recommend 
that JTM be further extended to the 12th Five 
Year Plan and instead of setting cumulative 
targets for five years, yearly targets be fixed 
under each scheme for their effective 
implementation.  Taking note of the poor 
implementation of the Mission,  the 
Committee strongly recommend that a high 
level Monitoring Committee be set up to 
keep a strict and constant vigil over the 
implementation so that the targets 
stipulated are achieved within time. 
10. 3.28 Promotion of R&D Activities:- 
The Committee observe  that Research and 
Development in the Jute Sector is a sine-qua-
non for quality improvement, particularly in 
the diversification zone. The Committee find 
that no R&D project has been undertaken so 
far, either by the Ministry themselves or 
through any exper t agency.  Moreover, the 
Ministry have not even incorporated R&D as 

126 
 
a component under Mini Mission III and IV of 
JTM.  The Committee find it quite strange as 
to how in the absence of any R&D, the 
Ministry can expect any tangible growth in 
the jute sector l oaded as it is with obsolete 
technology.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that R&D be introduced as one 
of the essential components under Mini 
Mission IV of the JTM with immediate effect 
and sufficient funds be allocated for the 
purpose.  The Committee further recommend 
that proactive steps be taken by the Ministry 
for engagement of reputed institutions like 
Indian Institutes of Technology to find out 
ways and means for the development of jute 
sector.  The Committee also desire that IITs 
and other techn ical institutions of repute 
may be approached to introduce ‘Jute 
Development Technology’ as one of the 
chapters in the already run textiles courses 
keeping in view the huge potential of this 
eco friendly and biodegradable fibre. 

127 
 
11. 3.29 Trade Mark and quality assurance:- 
The Committee also observe that the 
Ministry propose to develop eco -labelling for 
jute  products  namely (i) yarn (ii) Hessian 
(iii) Hydrocarbon-free quality jute hessian bag 
(iv) Floor covering (v) jute Geo -textiles and 
(vi) Shopping bag s.  For the purpose, 
selection of competent agency/consultants is 
in process with the National Jute Board.  The 
Committee appreciate the vision of the 
Ministry as such a step would definitely 
enable jute products to carve a niche in 
domestic as well as int ernational market.  
However, the Committee find limiting the 
criteria of the eco -labelling to the aforesaid 
six categories of items unjustified.  Also the 
marking of ‘quality assurance’ has not been 
included in the terms of reference of the eco -
labelling b ody.  The Committee, therefore, 
impress upon the Ministry that the scope for 
inclusion of new items introduced as a result 
of the R&D activities in diversification of 

128 
 
jute products be kept open for eco -labelling 
and all the labelled jute items be given 
subsidy to promote quality production  and 
sale. The Committee also urge the Ministry 
to include marking of ‘quality assurance’ as 
part of the label.  The Committee expect the 
Ministry to complete all the procedural 
formalities expeditiously but within a 
stipulated timeframe.  
12. 3.30 Revival of NJMC Mills:- 
The Committee observe  that out of the six 
closed jute mills of the National Jute 
Manufacturers Corporation (NJMC), the 
Government propose to revive three of them 
and necessary approval has since been 
obtained in the matter.  However, the 
Committee do not find any valid reason as to 
why the rest of the mills under NJMC cannot 
be survived.  Obviously, with the best of 
intention and dogged determination, the 
revival of six closed jute mills, on the lines of 
revival of sick mills of NTC (which has 

129 
 
revived 40 of them) is not an uphi ll task.  
The Committee are of the considered view 
that opening of more NJMC mills will not 
only boost the growth of the jute sector but 
will also generate employment in the sector.  
The Committee would therefore, like that a 
fresh revival plan be mooted f or the 
remaining three NJMC mills on urgent 
footing.  As regards, paucity of funds for 
revival of these mills, the Government may 
consider generation of funds through sale of 
surplus land and old machinery as has been 
done by the NTC.  If more funds are re quired 
for the purpose, the Ministry of Finance 
could be approached for term loans. The 
Committee also desire that the entire 
process of revival/modernization of the 
already approved three mills be completed in 
a time bound manner and in no case dragged 
beyond XIth Plan period.  The Committee 
also desire that the target may also be set for 
revival of the remaining three mills which 

130 
 
have not been included in the ongoing 
revival scheme. 
13. 3.31 Revival of sick private jute mills:- 
The Committee find  that nine private jute 
mills are temporarily lying closed as on date 
besides 29 mills which have gone for 
permanent closure during the last five years.  
The major reasons attributed are financial 
sickness and workers unrest.  The Ministry of 
Textiles laun ched eight schemes from 1985 
onwards for the development of the sector, 
including TUFS.  However, all these schemes 
resulted in complete failure and had to be 
withdrawn by the Government at different 
stages.  Even the popular scheme like TUFS 
could not mak e any headway in the Jute 
sector as not a single rupee has been utilized 
under it. The Committee believe that all 
these schemes failed due to lack of focused 
approach and calibrated efforts on the part of 
the Government.  The zero performance of 
TUFS which is one of the signature schemes 

131 
 
of the Ministry itself speaks volumes about 
the Ministry’s efforts in strengthening the 
jute industry.  The Committee note that the 
Government neither have any mechanism to 
detect sickness in the mills at incipient stage 
nor any viability study has ever been 
conducted for the purpose of reviving them.  
The Committee deprecate such languid 
approach of the Ministry towards such an 
important sector and recommend that the 
Jute Commissioner be entrusted with the 
task of conducting a viability study of all the 
nine mills in a time bound manner.  Further, 
the mill -wise quantum of funds required for 
revival be assessed and accordingly a specific 
scheme be devised under which financial 
assistance on soft terms be provided to all 
the m ill owners who come forward to 
revive/modernize their mills.  The 
Committee also recommend that a 
monitoring mechanism be set -up in the 
office of Jute Commissioner to detect 

132 
 
sickness in jute mills at initial stage and to 
suggest remedial measures.  The ste ps taken 
and progress achieved in the matter be 
intimated to the Committee within six 
months. 
14. 3.32 Widening the purview of JPM Act:- 
The Committee observe that jute packaging 
materials (compulsory use in packaging 
commodities) Act, 1987 was enacted by  the 
Government to provide protection to the jute 
industry.  At present, only foodgrain and 
sugar are under the purview of the Act.  The 
Committee note that the orders issued under 
the clause 3(1) of the Act with regard to the 
coverage of commodities to be considered for 
compulsory packaging are reviewed annually 
by the Government.  On one hand, the 
Committee have been apprised by the 
representatives of the industry that 
reviewing these orders every year leads to 
uncertainty about protection under the Act, 
while the Ministry feel that under the 

133 
 
liberalized regime, jute manufacturers should 
not expect perpetual protection.  The 
Ministry further stated that permanent 
reservation would be counterproductive as it 
would give permanent monopoly to the jute 
industry, which in turn may harm the 
economy of the commodities so packed 
compulsorily in jute.  The Committee are not 
convinced with the reason put forth by the 
Ministry that the jute manufacturers should 
not expect permanent protection since, in 
Committee’s vie w, the very purpose of JPM 
Act is to protect ‘Jute’ as a packaging 
industry. The Committee also could not  
comprehend the contention of the 
Government regarding monopoly  by the Jute 
Industry due to permanent reservation, 
keeping in view the fact that the 
Government themselves are the biggest 
buyers of the jute bags/sacks for packaging 
purposes and the prices are controlled and 
announced by the Jute Commissioner every 

134 
 
year.  The Committee deplore such a 
lopsided approach of the Ministry and 
recommend that a t least packaging of food 
grain and sugar be made compulsory under 
the JPM Act so as to put an end to any 
speculation of volatility and to create an 
atmosphere of confidence in the jute sector.  
The Committee also recommend that 
keeping in view the huge po tential and 
further scope for growth in production of 
jute, more commodities be brought under the 
purview of the JPM Act.  The Committee also 
recommend the Ministry of Textiles to 
undertake R&D activities to improve the 
quality of jute as a packaging material. 
 
 
 