 
18 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2010-11) 
 (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF EMPLOYMENT & 
TRAINING - A REVIEW 
  
                  EIGHTEENTH  REPORT 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
           August, 2011/Bhadrapada, 1933 (Saka) 


  
         EIGHTEENTH  REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2010-11) 
 
(FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF DIRECTORATE 
GENERAL OF EMPLOYMENT & TRAINING - A REVIEW 
  
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.8.2011    
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on  30.8.2011 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
                 August, 2011/Bhadrapada, 1933 (Saka) 
    
          


      COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (2010-11) 
 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Shri  Raj Babbar 
4. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
         **5. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
          *****7. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
8. Shri Hassan Khan 
9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
10. Shri P. Lingam 
11. Shri Hari Manjhi 
12. Shri P. Balram Naik 
13. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
14. Smt. Mausam Noor 
15. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
16. Dr. P.L. Punia 
17. Shri Ramkishun 
18. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
19. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
20. Shri Murarilal Singh 
    ***21. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
23. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
24. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
25. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
26. Shri Rajaram 
27. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
        *28. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose 
        *29. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
        *30. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
****31. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 
___________________________________________________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f 21st September, 2010 
** Change in nomination from Committee on Labour to Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas w.e.f  8th December, 2010 
*** Nominated w.e.f  8th December, 2010 
****   Nominated w.e.f 30th May, 2011. 
***** Appointed as Minister w.e.f 12th July, 2011 

   SECRETARIAT 
        1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri B.S. Dahiya    - Director  
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
 4.    Smt.Bharti S. Tuteja  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
  
        
 

CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (iii)  
      
      INTRODUCTION          (v)  
   CHAPTER – I              
CHAPTER – II DIRECTORATE OF EMPLOYMENT 
A. Employment Exchanges  G. Career Counselling  
B. Amendment to Employment 
Exchange (Compulsory Notification 
of Vacancies) Act, 1959 
 H. Self-Employment  
C. Poor Performance  I. Employment Exchanges Mission Mode 
Project 
 
D. Computerisation  J. Unemployment Allowance/Financial 
Assistance 
 
E. Criteria for setting up of 
Employment Exchanges 
 K. Employment Market Information 
(EMI)Programme 
 
F. Registration of job seekers 
 
 L. Delay in Publishing Reports  
.  
 
   M. Private Placement Agencies  
CHAPTER – III DIRECTORATE OF TRAINING 
A. Schemes  L. Formation of TCPCs  
B. Skill Development Initiatives (SDIs)  M. Trainers' Training  
C. New Schemes of DGE&T for Skill 
Development 
 N. Payment of DA to Instructors  
D. Training  O. Utilization of training seats  
E. Upgradation of ITIs   P. Simplification of procedure  
F. Time period for upgradation  Q. Vacancies of Instructors & Principals  
G. Monitoring Mechanism  R. Skill base of Indian Economy  
H. Dropout estimates and reasons  S. Unorganised Sector  
I. Steps for checking drop outs  T. Skill upgradation  
J. Payments of stipends  U. Financial assistance to trainees  
K. Review of placement cells  V. Career Literature  
CHAPTER – IV OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS 
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the sittings of   the Standing Committee on Labour held on 1.7.2010, 
1.10.2010, 30.6.2011 and 25.7.2011.    
A. Functions of DGE&T   
B. Employment Directorate   
C. Training Directorate   

INTRODUCTION 
                               
I, the Chairman , Standing Committee on Labour (2010 -11) 
having been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf 
this 18th Report to Parliament on „D irectorate General of 
Employment & Training – A Review.‟ 
 
2. The Committee selected this subject for detailed examination 
for the year 200 9-10 and continued it in 2010-11.  The Directorate 
General of Employment & Training (DGE&T) under the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment is the apex organ ization for development 
and coordination at national level for the programmes relating to 
vocational training including women‟s vocational training and 
employment services.  Employment service is operated through a 
countrywide network of Employment Exchang es. The vocational 
training is imparted through the Industrial Training Institutes.  The 
Industrial Training Institutes are under the administrative and 
financial control of State Governments or Union Territory 
Administrations.  DGE&T also operates Vocatio nal Training 
Schemes in some of the specialized areas through field institutes 
under its direct control.  The Committee observed that t he 
unorganized sector constitute s about 94% of the work force in the 
country and most of the employment opportunities in future will 
occur in the unorganized sector and a strategy for training the 
unorganized sector would need to be worked out.   The Government 

7 
 
have not made any comprehensive study on the working of the 
Employment Exchanges, the number of jobseekers and the number 
of persons who have got jobs through the Employment Exchanges.  
The Committee also found that plenty of placement agencies have 
mushroomed and some of them release misleading advertisements 
and exploit the jobseekers.  The Committee further noticed that 
there is mismatch between the requirements of the industry and 
the skilled work force.  
 
3.  The Committee took the evidence  of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment  on 01.07.2010 and further 
evidences on 01.10.2010 and 30.06.2011.    
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at 
their sitting held on 25.07.2011. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment for 
placing before them their views and also for providing detailed 
written replies and information  as desired by the Committee in 
connection with examination of the subject. 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep 
sense of appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered to them 
at every stage of examination of the subject by the officers of the 
Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee have been printed 
in bold in the body of the Report.                
                  
   
New Delhi,                                   HEMANAND BISWAL,   
25th July, 2011,                           CHAIRMAN,                                                
3 Sravana, 1933 (Saka)              STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER- I 
 
 The Directorate General of Resettlement and Employment 
(DGR&E) was set up in July, 1945 for the purpose of resettling 
demobilized Defence Service personnel and discharged war workers 
in civil life.  After Independence, the Directorate was also called 
upon to handle work relating to displaced persons from Pakistan. 
Subsequently, the scope of the Directorate was extended to cover, 
employment services to all categories of job seekers in early 1948, 
and the training services to all civilians in 1950. The Directorate 
General of Resettlement and Employment is now known as 
Directorate General of Employment & Training (DGE&T).  In 
pursuance of the re commendations of the Training and 
Employment Service Committee, namely Shiva Rao Committee (set 
up in 1952) the day -to-day administrative control of the 
Employment Exchanges  and Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) 
was transferred to the State Governments /Union Territory 
Administrations with effect from 1.11.1956.  Cost sharing by the 
Centre with the State Government to the extent of 60% of the cost 
of the organization was continued up  to 31.03.1969 after which the 
scheme was discontinued based on the deci sion taken by the 
National Development Council in May, 1968.  Thus full financial 
responsibility for manpower and employment schemes and the 
Craftsmen Training Scheme (Industrial Training Institutes) was 

10 
 
transferred to the State Governments/Union Territory  
Administrations with effect from 01.04.1969.  With each successive 
Five Year Plan there had been considerable expansion of the 
activities of the Employment Service and Training Service in the 
Centre and in the States.   
1.2. The Directorate General of Emp loyment & Training (DGE&T) 
under the Ministry of Labour is the apex organization for 
development and coordination at national level for the programmes 
relating to vocational training including women‟s vocational training 
and employment services.  Employment service is operated through 
a countrywide network of Employment Exchanges . Industrial 
Training Institutes are under the administrative and financial 
control of State Governments or Union Territory Administrations.  
DGE&T also operates Vocational Training  Schemes in some of the 
specialized areas through field institutes under its direct control. 
Development of these programmes at national level, particularly in 
the area concerning common policies, common standards and 
procedures, training of instructors an d trade testing is the 
responsibility of the DGE&T. 
A. Functions of  DGE&T 
1.3. The Directorate General of Employment and Training is mainly 
responsible for (i) Developing and implementing National Vocational 
Training System (NVTS) which includes programme s of training for 
Craftsmen, Apprentices and Instructor Trainees; (ii) Organizing 
training at advanced levels of skills for Industrial Workers, 

11 
 
Supervisors, Foremen, as also training in hi -tech areas; and (iii) 
Laying down policies and standards of trainin g, preparing training 
curricula, conducting trade tests and awarding of certificates. 
 To give special focus on the skill training development of 
women, the DGE&T has set up a Women‟s Training Directorate, 
which aims at promoting participation of women in skill training.  
Various courses have been designed and introduced under different 
schemes for target group of young women with basic education of 
class X or XII. 
1.4. The major functions of the DGE&T are:- 
(i)  To frame overall policies, norms, and standards for vocational 
training; 
(ii) To diversify, update and expand training facilities to terms of 
craftsmen and crafts instructors‟ training; 
(iii) To organize and conduct specialized training and research at 
the specially established training Institutes; 
(iv) To implement, regulate and increase the scope of training of 
apprentices under the Apprentices Act, 1961; 
(v) To organize vocational training programmes for women; 
(vi) To provide vocational guidance and employment counseling; 

12 
 
(vii) To assist scheduled castes/scheduled tribes and persons with 
disabilities by enhancing their capabilities for wage 
employment and self employment; 
(viii) To conduct regular training programmes for Employment 
Officers and develop staff material for use by the Employmen t 
Service Personnel; and  
(ix) To collect and disseminate information concerning 
employment and unemployment and prescribe uniform 
reporting procedures.   
 
1.5 The statutory provisions enforced by DGE&T are:- 
1. Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of 
Vacancies)  Act, 1959 and Rules made there under. 
2. Apprentices Act, 1961 & Rules made there under. 
 
1.6. The Committee note that the following statutory and non -
statutory bodies came under the jurisdiction of DG&T.   
(a) Statutory Body: 
1. Central Apprenticeship Council (CAC) is a statutory tripartite 
advisory body under the Apprentices Act which meets 
annually under the Chairmanship of the Minister of Labour to 
advise the Government.  

13 
 
(b) Non statutory bodies:  
1. National Council for  Vocational Training (NCVT) is another 
tripartite advisory body which also meets annually under the 
Chairmanship of the Minister of Labour. 
2. Working Group on National Employment Service.   
Directorate General of Employment and Training has two wings, 
viz., Directorate of Employment and Directorate of Training.    
 
B. Employment Directorate  
1.7. The functions of the Employment Directorate are to (i) plan 
and formulate programmes for expansion and development of 
National Employment Service in consultation wit h State 
Government; (ii) Coordinate the work of Employment Service in 
States / UTs; (iii) Conduct regular training programmes and develop 
staff training material for the Employment Service personnel; (iv) 
Carry out continuous programme of evaluation of pol icies, 
procedures and working practices of Employment Exchanges in the 
States with a view to assessing and advising the State Governments 
on the progressive development of service and to ensure that 
National Policies, Standards and Procedures are effective ly 
implemented; (v) Provide a central agency for adjusting surpluses 
and shortages in certain specified areas where recruitment requires 
wider circulation; (vi) Collect and disseminate Employment Market 
Information and prescribes uniform reporting procedur es for the 

14 
 
organized sector and Employment Exchanges ; (vii) Coordinate 
Vocational Guidance and Career Counseling Services rendered 
through Employment Exchanges  and University Employment 
Information and Guidance Bureaux  (UEIGBX) to the unemployed 
youth for choosing and planning their career suited to their abilities 
and skills; (viii) Evaluate residual capabilities of physically 
challenged persons and to provide them adjustment training in 
order to facilitate their econo mic rehabilitation; (ix) Establish 
coordination and consultation with the Ministries of the 
Government of India whose activities affect the employment 
situation in the country; and (x) Provide vocational guidance and 
training in confidence building to SC/ST job seekers.   
 
C. Training Directorate 
1.8. DGE&T is responsible for implementation of Vocational 
Training Programme in the country.  The major schemes being 
implemented by DGE&T are Craftsmen Training Scheme (CTS), and 
Apprenticeship Training Scheme (A TS).  The CTS products are 
deemed to be semi -skilled and the ATS is expected to produce 
skilled workers.  In ATS, there is a provision for rebate in training 
period to the extent of successfully undergone institutional training 
under CTS in the correspondi ng trade.  Under the above vocational 
training programmes, DGE&T: 

15 
 
(i) Develops training programme at the national level, 
particularly in the area concerning common policies, 
common standards and procedures; 
(ii) Deals with training of instructors and trade testing  and 
certification; 
(iii) Conducts vocational training in some of the specialized 
areas, including training of women through the field 
institutes under its direct control; 
(iv) Conducts research in vocational training and development 
of instructional material; and  
(v) Implements the Apprentices Act, 1961 in respect of trade 
apprentices. 
A new scheme namely, Skill Development Initiatives (SDI) 
has been operationalized from the year 2007 -08.  SDI Scheme 
is a five year project during which one million persons would 
be train ed or their skills tested and certified by organizing 
short term courses on modular pattern.   
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER- II       
DIRECTORATE OF EMPLOYMENT 
 
A. Employment Exchanges 
 
2.1 The Committee note that as per information furnished by the 
Government, the main functions carried through the Employment 
Exchanges are:- 
(i) Registration and placement of job seekers so as to ensure 
proper balance between demand and supply; 
(ii) Collect comprehensive Employment Market Information on 
a quarterly basis for creation of database for use in effective 
management of demand and supply of labour, preparing 
career literature for counseling and vocational guidance; 
(iii) Career counseling and vocational guidance; 
(iv) Conduct area specific study / surveys to have an 
assessment of skills available and the marketable skills 
required for encouraging the job seekers for self 
employment in rural informal sector; 
(v) Vocational rehabilitation of persons with disabilities - 
Twenty Vocational Rehabilitation Centres for handicapped 
are at present functioning in the country and out of these, 
Vocational Rehabilitation Centre at Vadodara has been set 
up exclusively for handicapped women.  These centres 

17 
 
evaluate the residual capacity of th e handicapped and 
provide them with adjustment training facilitating their 
early rehabilitation both in wage paid and self -employment; 
and  
(vi) Coaching-cum-Guidance to SC and ST jobseekers - In order 
to provide employment related coaching -cum-guidance to 
SCs/STs jobseekers, 2 3 Coaching-cum-Guidance Centres 
are at present functioning in the country.  These centres 
also provide information on job requirements and types of 
tests/interviews they are likely to undergo when called by 
the employers.   
B. Amendment to Employment Exchange (Compulsory 
Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 
2.2 The Committee were also apprised that the Government 
propose to amend the Employment Exchange(Compulsory 
Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959  and that the  Cabinet note was 
under finalization in consultation with Law Ministry for 
amendments. The Committee were informed that Employment 
Exchanges will be renamed as „Employment Guidance and 
Promotion Centres‟ as the focus will be now on vocational guidance 
and career counseling besides registration, placement etc. 
 
 
 

18 
 
2.3 Asked to furnish the reasons that necessitated amendment to 
the Act, the Ministry stated as follows: 
“The reasons for amendment in the EE (CNV) Act, 1959 are 
(i) Diversification in the activities of National Em ployment 
Service; (ii) Provisions contained in the Act and the rules 
framed thereunder became obsolete in the present complex 
employment scenario and (iii) Enhancing the scope and 
coverage to cover other establishments which are not within 
the purview of t he Act having substantial impact on 
employment situation…We found that the data which was 
collected through this Act only covered the establishments 
having 25 or more workers. All the establishments in the 
public sector are covered irrespective of the manp ower size 
of these establishments. But in the private sector 
establishments having 10 -24 workers are not covered 
mandatorily in the Act. It was voluntary. The response from 
these organizations is not very good.  We know the ground 
situation. There are a la rge number of establishments 
which have come up with 24 or less employees only.  This 
was a sector which was getting excluded out of the EMI 
data which calls the basis for calculating the employment in 
the organized sector. Today, the organized sector 
employment is only six per cent. The remaining workers are 
in the unorganized sector. So, this was necessary to 
enhance the scope and coverage of the Act so that the data 

19 
 
which we get is close to the reality and is more meaningful, 
especially when we want to have it in policy formulation.”   
C. Poor Performance 
2.4 When the Ministry‟s attention was drawn towards the poor or 
non- functioning of the Employment Exchanges  and asked about 
the steps taken or proposed to improve them, the Committee were 
informed as under:- 
“Sir, the Employment Exchanges are totally under the State 
sector today. Since it is totally under the State sector, we 
have not been directly monitoring the working of the 
Employment Exchanges. This has been one of the reasons 
for poor functioning of the Employment Exchanges because 
the States were not taking interest for various reasons. That 
is why the Ministry have decided to take up  Employment 
Exchanges Mission Mode Project (EEMMP) for modernizing 
the Employment Exchanges , and under that, we are 
connecting all the Employment Exchanges  through a 
network in the whole country and a centralized web portal. 
It is on public private partnership mode.  
D. Computerisation 
2.5 Regarding computerization of Employment Exchanges , how 
will it be done, when the computerization process will be completed, 
how these will be centralized and what are its likely advantages, the 
Ministry informed as under:-  

20 
 
“Sir, present state of computerization is a total stand -alone 
type of computerization without any linking. Approximately, 
447 Employment Exchanges have been computerized so far. 
We are now trying to centralize it. We are identifying the 
deficiencies/shortcomings of hardware, hum an resources 
etc in the exchanges. These shortcomings will be taken care 
of by private entrepreneur. We all know there is a shortage 
of staff. Today the biggest problem is how to get a post 
sanctioned from the Government and how the recruitment 
is to be ma de. Whatever deficiencies these Employment 
Exchanges have, it will be looked after by a private player, 
we will pay him and this will be linked to a  common 
network and one centralized web portal will be formed 
which will have all employment related informa tion. 
Supposing if I want to become a carpenter and want to do 
some training in this trade and want to know where in my 
area, I can get such training, the web portal will contain all 
such information. Today if I need an electrician and want to 
know from where I can get a trained electrician, the names 
of those electricians will also be there. So, it is a 
comprehensive employment service that we will be 
providing. Since all Employment Exchanges  will be 
connected through a network, everything will be 
automatically updated and will benefit all. This project is at 
final stage of approval  and shall be operational in about 2 
years after approval . After that the main objective of 

21 
 
Employment Exchanges will be achieved. The cost share of 
the project between Union Gov ernment and State 
Governments is 75% and 25% respectively. Since States will 
have to bear 25% of the cost, they will take it seriously. We 
also had meeting with them before initiating this project. 
They are very enthusiastic about this project.”  
2.6 Whether any review of the performance of the computerized 
Employment Exchanges has been made, the Ministry informed “No 
sir, however, based on the status of computerization of Employment 
Exchanges observed during the evaluation and inspection of 
Employment Exch anges undertaken every year new initiative as 
EEMMP has been initiated.” 
E. Criteria for setting up of Employment Exchanges 
2.7 As regards the criteria for setting up of Employment 
Exchanges in any town or city, the Ministry informed as under:- 
“As per the  instructions laid down in the National 
Employment Service Manual (NESM), the District will 
normally  constitute the basic unit for implementing and 
coordinating programmes of National Employment 
Service. Town Employment Exchanges will be set up in 
all towns having a labour force of 10,000 or a population 
of 25000 or above.  Rural Employment Bureau the lowest 
formation of the employment service will be set up in 
areas where there is a concentration of Scheduled Caste 

22 
 
or Scheduled Tribe population and where rural works 
programmes and other employment oriented projects are 
under implementation. Setting up of Employment 
Exchanges in metropolitan areas depends upon the size 
of population, number of employment seekers and the 
sophisticated nature of jobs availabl e in that area.  
Normally for the population of 4,00,000, one employment 
exchange in the Metro cities can be set up.” 
F. Registration of job seekers 
2.8 On the question of making it mandatory for 
graduates/professional degree holders/diploma holders, who wish 
to apply for jobs, to get registered with employment exchange so as 
to have realistic figures regarding the number of job seekers, the 
Ministry responded as follows:- 
“This issue was raised and discussed in the 35 th meeting of 
Working Group on Nationa l Employment Service (NES) in 
September, 2008. The House did not agree to the proposal. 
It may also be stated that as per Article 10 of ILO 
convention 88, ratified by India in June,1959, the NES is to 
be provided on voluntary basis. Making it compulsory is  
likely to create a lot of repercussions.” 
 
 
 

23 
 
G. Career Counselling 
2.9 As regards the system in place with Employment Exchanges 
for career counseling, the Ministry in their written reply stated that 
the "Vocational Guidance and Employment Counseling Progr amme 
is implemented through the network of 969 Employment Exchanges 
in general and 420 Vocational Guidance Units at Employment 
Exchanges and 83 University Employment Information & Guidance 
Bureaux (UEI&GBx) functioning under the administrative control 
and supervision of the State Directorates of Employment, in 
particular. The jobseekers and students of the terminal classes in 
the schools, colleges and universities are rendered assistance in 
planning, choosing and shifting their occupations, fields of traini ng 
and courses of study best suited to their abilities, aptitudes, 
interests, and potentialities.  Assistance is also provided to the 
youth in solving their unemployment, educational and vocational 
problems arising out of the current anticipated market demand and 
supply conditions.  The information relating to job opportunities, 
training facilities, scholarship facilities and self -employment 
programme and facilities are disseminated to the students, 
teachers, parents and jobseekers, individually as well as in group 
through career talks, individual counseling sessions, group 
discussions, career exhibitions and film shows, etc." 
 

24 
 
2.10 As regards the qualifications prescribed for appointment of a 
Career Counselor in an employment exchange, the Ministry stated 
as follows:- 
“No set educational qualification is being followed for the 
Career Counselor as career counseling in Employment 
Exchanges is being provided by Employment Officers having 
different qualifications and recruited as per recruitment rules 
prevailing in different States/UTs.” 
H. Self-Employment 
2.11 As regards functioning of „Self Employment Promotion Cells‟ 
(SEPCs) in Employment Exchanges and the main objectives of these 
cells, the Ministry informed that:- 
“Presently, 22 SEPCs are functioning in 18 States/UTs 
under the direct administrative and financial control of 
respective State/UTs with the main objectives to (i) 
motivate the job seekers to take up self -employment 
ventures, (ii) assist them in obtaining necessary inputs 
required for setting of se lf-employment ventures from 
different sources, (iii) maintain co-ordination with various 
agencies for promotion and self -employment, and (iv) 
provide necessary follow -up assistance to the self 
employed youth for sustaining them in their market.” 
 
 

25 
 
 
I. Employment Exchanges Mission Mode Project  
2.12 According to the Ministry of Labour and Employment, a 
Mission Mode Project, at the approximate cost of Rs. 2 167 crore, 
under National e-governance, has been taken up for modernization 
of Employment Exchanges. Under the project, a national web portal 
has been proposed which will contain all data regarding availability 
of skilled persons and requirement of skilled persons by the 
industry. Implementation of this project will help job -seekers to 
register online f rom anywhere and approach any Employment 
Exchanges for assistance.   
2.13 The Ministry further informed the Committee that the project 
aims to progressively support all the State Governments and 
Employment Exchanges in the country to make effective use of IT 
and enable Employment Exchanges  for better delivery of their 
mandated services to the job seekers and employers. The EEMMP 
on Employment Exchanges  ideates achieving the following 
objectives after its successful implementation:-  
(i) Enable Employment Exchanges for better delivery of 
its mandated services to the citizens through IT. 
(ii) Provide quality guidance on talent assessment, 
counseling and vocational guidance and training 
related information to the job seekers. 

26 
 
(iii) Develop a national web portal to be a storeh ouse of 
information on skilled persons required by industry 
through networking with ITIs/Centres/other 
Vocational Training providers with common 
software for uniform adoption by all 1128 
Employment Exchanges throughout the country. 
(iv) Provide timely and relia ble labour market 
information, and, 
(v) Maintain close interaction and networking with 
industry. 
2.14 On the question of how through EEMMP, Employment 
Exchanges will be able to provide speedy and easy access to the 
employment related information to job seekers , the Ministry replied 
as under:-  
“Employment Exchanges  Mission Mode Project‟s 
(EEMMP) strategic objective and vision is to increase the 
employability of the youth through effective employment 
counseling and automated skill matching exercise to be 
offered through Employment Exchanges . Some of the 
States have already started a project on the 
computerization and portalization of Employment 
Exchanges. However, the same are not inter -connected 
with the Centre and other States, and the scope of the 
work in most of the States is still limited to digitizing the 
current Live Register of the State. Also, the geographical 

27 
 
reach of the services to the citizens of the country is 
confined to the State boundaries only. EEMMP on this 
front intends to promulgate the exerci se of providing the 
core essential services of an employment exchange on the 
platform of ensuring e -governance standards (Open 
Standards) and interoperability of the developed portals. 
In addition, EEMMP envisages following direct benefits to 
the jobseekers, employers and policy makers:- 
(i) Online registration services across the country 
(ii) Online information on local vacancies and skill 
requirements required by the employers 
(iii) Online skill match exercise or placement 
services across the country 
(iv) Vocational guidance  and employment 
counseling services all over the country to job 
seekers, and 
(v) Online collection of Employment Market 
Information(EMI) from the employers.” 
2.15 Whether DGE&T proposes to ensure private sector to notify its 
vacancies in the Employment Exchang es once the National Portal 
becomes operational, the Ministry stated that, “Once the 
Employment Exchanges are upgraded and modernized having inter-
connectivity through National Web portal, the private sector will be 
attracted as it will get the services fr om Employment Exchanges by 

28 
 
making easy access to online profile of job seekers as per their 
requirement”. 
J. Unemployment Allowance/ Financial Assistance 
2.16 The Ministry informed the Committee that they have not made 
any provision for payment of unemployment allowance to the 
persons registered with Employment Exchanges . The Ministry 
further informed that, „as per the information available the States of 
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Punjab and J&K are 
paying unemployment allowance to certain specific categories of 
unemployed persons registered with Employment Exchanges.‟   
 
2.17 When asked to intimate the category of persons eligible for 
unemployment allowance in these States and the rate at which 
allowance is paid by each of these States, the Ministry stated as 
under: 
 “Chhattisgarh Government pays Rs. 500/-p.m., Haryana 
between Rs. 100 to Rs. 1500/- p.m. depending upon the 
qualification of men and women, Kerala Rs. 120/ - p.m., 
Punjab Rs. 150  to Rs. 600/- p.m.,  Tamil Nadu Rs. 
100/- to Rs. 450/- p.m. and J&K Rs.600/- to Rs.1250/- 
p.m.” 
  

29 
 
2.18 On any proposal of giving unemployment allowance to 
specified categories of unemployed youth throughout India and also 
by all the States / UTs, the Ministry stated: 
“The payment of unemployment allowance to all the 
unemployed youth till they get gainful employment would 
constitute a huge liability on the scarce financial 
resources.  The country is not in a position to incur huge 
expenditure involved on the payment of unemployment 
allowance.  The Central Government is, therefore, of the 
view that the payment of unemployment allowance to all 
unemployed youth would divert substantial resources 
from develo pment programmes to a non -developmental 
activity. The resources of such a magnitude should better 
be used for developmental activities which would 
generate substantial productive employment rather than 
be used on unproductive activities like unemployment 
allowance.  Therefore, the Central Government is not in 
favour of payment of unemployment allowance to the 
unemployed as a matter of policy.” 
2.19 The Committee were further informed by the Ministry that 
„there is no provision of providing financial assista nce to the 
persons interested in self -employment at the level of DGE&T.  
However, schemes like Prime Minister Employment Generation 
Programme, Swarn Jayanti Grameen Swarozgar Yojna and Swarna 

30 
 
Jayanti Shahri Rozgar Yojna do pro vide financial assistance, as per 
provisions.‟   
 
2.20 As regards the reasons for not providing financial assistance 
by DGE&T directly or indirectly to the persons who desire to be in 
self-employment and whether any serious thought has been given 
or likely to be given in the matter as it will certainly help reducing 
the number of job seekers in the country, the Ministry stated as 
under: 
“During Sixth Five Year Plan, a scheme of strengthening of 
Employment Exchanges /UEIGBx for promotion of self -
employment was formulated by DGE&T, Ministr y of Labour & 
Employment under Central Plan which was supported by 
DGE&T by providing manpower support for its implementation 
by the respective State Governments. The scheme was 
transferred to the State Government s in 1990.  As such 
presently, DGE&T does n ot run any self -employment scheme 
and it does not have any proposal for formulation of self -
employment scheme containing direct financial assistance.  
However, there are employment generation programmes run 
for the benefit of various target groups by other Ministries.  
Employment Exchanges  function under the direct financial 
and administrative control of respective State Governments/ 
UT Administrations and as such provision for providing direct 

31 
 
or indirect financial assistance to job -seekers rests with the 
respective State Governments.” 
 
K. Employment Market Information (EMI) Programme 
2.21 The Committee were informed that the employment data in the 
organized sector is collected under the Employment Market 
Information (EMI) programme.  Under the provisions of Employment 
Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 and 
Rules framed there under, th e EMI programme covers all 
establishments in the public sector and non -agricultural 
establishments employing 25 or more workers in the private sector.  
This Act makes it obligatory on the part of the employers to render 
Employment Return (ER -I) and Occupat ional Return (ER -II) at 
quarterly and biennial intervals respectively. EMI programme, 
however, does not cover employment in the agricultural 
establishments (other than plantation and agricultural machine 
operations), self -employed and independent workers, Defence 
Forces, Indian Missions abroad, establishments employing less 
than 25 workers in metropolitan cities of Mumbai and Kolkata and 
tiny sector establishments employing 10 -24 workers. After 
collection, data is compiled, analyzed and reports at national level; 
are finalized highlighting employment trends in various sectors.   
 

32 
 
2.22 Whether the Government have ever made any survey or 
obtained information from State Governments regarding employers 
who have informed the Employment Exchanges the result of 
selection within 15 days from the date of selection in respect of the 
vacancies falling under the purview of EE(CNV) Act, 1959, the 
Ministry in their reply stated that: 
“The placements shown by the Employment Exchanges 
after submissions are the end result of the intimation 
received by Employment Exchanges about the selection of 
the candidates within the prescribed period. Follow -up is 
also done by the employment officer to know the results of 
submissions made by the exchange after having reviewed 
the status of  the pendency from time to time, but no such 
study / survey has been carried out.  However, in order to 
get this information from employers on mandatory basis, 
the relevant provision in the Act is proposed to be made 
rather than keeping this provision under Rules.” 
 
2.23 The Ministry informed the Committee that the Government 
have not made any study/survey as to how many establishments in 
public and private sector have notified their vacancies to the 
respective Employment Exchanges in the last 10 years.   
 

33 
 
2.24 When asked by the Committee that, in the absence of any 
such study / survey, how the proposed penal provisions would yield 
positive results and be effective and why cannot the Central 
Government be the enforcement agency as far as implementation of 
provisions of EE(CNV) Act are concerned, the Ministry replied as 
follows: 
“The National Employment Service Manual (NESM) 
prepared by DGE&T is responsible for matters 
concerning policy procedure and coordination of the 
Employment Service.  There is in -built m echanism in 
NESM to keep track of the vacancies notified by the 
employers to the local Employment Exchanges  through 
reports and returns prescribed thereunder. Quarterly 
area market report is prepared by the local employment 
exchange incorporating the vacan cies notified by the 
employers for public and private sector separately.  As 
per sections 6,7, & 8 of EE (CNV) Rules 1960, local 
Employment Exchanges  and Director of Employment of 
the respective State Governments / UT Administrations 
are the implementation  and enforcement agencies 
respectively as per the federal spirit of the constitution.  
Hence, Central Government can not act as 
implementation agency because all the functions 
beginning from registration to submissions placements 
etc. are carried out under  the overall supervision and 
guidance of the respective Director of Employment of the 

34 
 
State Government/UT Administrations. Penalty 
provisions would be applied and made effective by the 
respective State Governments/UTs. DGE&T has no role 
to play in this regard.”  
L. Delay in Publishing Reports 
2.25 The Committee found that as per Annual Report (2009 -10) of 
the Ministry, the Occupational and Educational pattern in India for 
the year 2003 has been finalized.   Bulletin on job opportunities in 
India for the year 200 7 has been finalized and released.  The Trade 
Apprenticeship Training in India under Apprenticeship Training 
Scheme for the year 31.12.2007 has been finalized and released. 
Further, in the Annual Rep ort itself, it has been mentioned by 
the Ministry that the Trade Apprenticeship Training in India under 
Apprenticeship Training Scheme, is an annual publication.   
 
2.26 When asked the reasons for a long delay in publishing these 
reports, the Ministry stated as under:- 
“Information relating to some of the Chapters of the 
Report collected from UPSC, State Public Service 
Commission, Indian Council of Scientific and Agricultural 
Research etc. supplied, only when this information is 
released and published by th eir respective Ministries.  
Information pertaining to discipline -wise out turn of 
doctorate degree awardees and discipline -wise turn of 

35 
 
Graduates/Post Graduates is delayed by University 
Grants Commission because UGC gets the information 
from the Universiti es only after finalization and 
declaration of results during the respective years.  Delay 
in the publication of Trade Apprenticeship Training in 
India is due to collection of data from Regional 
Directorates of Apprenticeship Training (RDATs) and 
State Apprenticeship Advisors (SAAs).” 
M. Private Placement Agencies 
 
2.27 When the Ministry's attention was drawn towards the 
mushrooming of plenty of private placement agencies and asked 
about the steps taken by the Ministry to regulate these agencies, 
the Committee were informed as under: 
'The issues relating to regulation of Private Placement Agencies 
has been discussed in several meetings with the State 
Governments and based on the deliberations of these 
meetings, a Committee on Private Placement Agencies was 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Principal Secretary, 
Labour a nd Employment, Gujarat with representatives from 
the State Governments of Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Punjab 
and Directorate General of Employment & Training (DGET&T) 
to evolve guidelines on operations of Private Placement 
Agencies.  Accordingly, guidelines on  regulation of Private 
Placement Agencies were finalized in the meeting of the said 

36 
 
Committee held on 26.9.2003 and the Committee 
recommended for its adoption and thereafter these guidelines 
were issued to all the S tates/UTs by DGE&T on 30.10.2003.  
Therefore, it is left to the respective State Government to frame 
regulation and/or guidelines for monitoring the working of 
private placement agencies keeping in view the current 
scenario and their local needs.'  
2.28 Regarding misleading advertisements that ca use job seekers 
great deal of hardship s and difficult ies, and how such 
advertisements could be checked, the Secr etary, responded as 
follows: 
`About outside employment and the advertisements that are 
released, the agencies that are sending people for employment 
outside, that subject is handled by the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs and all these agencies have to obtain licence 
from them.  But we read in the newspapers reports that there 
are many cases things are not being done properly, proper 
information is not being given to those who are seeking 
employment.  The agencies collect money and then these 
people are sent.  At the moment, this is handled under the 
normal criminal laws of the country and under the 
Immigration Act, such agencies have to seek a licence and this 
comes under the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs.  This is 
the present situation …..Generally, the police and the law 
enforcing agencies do not take suo motu notice of such things.  

37 
 
They wait for somebody to make a complaint.  Then they go for 
investigations.  In most of the cases the amount involved is 
huge.  Such people collect crores of rupees.  We have not seen 
any such case being taken to the logical conclusion.  I am not 
aware of any suc h case where somebody is punished.  The 
people get acquitted in the court easily.  So, there is a 
necessity to formulate a law to regulate such advertisements.' 
 
 
  

38 
 
CHAPTER- III 
DIRECTORATE OF TRAINING 
 
3.1 The Committee note  that providing vocational training is one 
of the main functions of the Directorate of Training under DGE&T.  
The following activities are carried under vocational training:-  
(i) The primary purpose of vocational training is to prepare 
individuals especially the youth in the age group of 15 -25 
years and make them employable for a broad group of 
occupation. The main vocational training schemes comprise 
craftsman training, apprenticeship training, training for 
skilled workers, crafts instructions, supervisors, etc.; 
(ii) Development of training programmes at the national level, 
particularly in the area concerning common policies, 
common standards and procedures; 
(iii) Training of instructors; 
(iv) Trade testing and certification; 
(v) Vocational training in some of the specialized ar eas, 
including training of women through the filed institutes 
under its direct control; 
(vi) Research in vocational training and development of 
instructional material and 
(vii) Implementation of Apprentices Act, 1961 in respect of trade 
apprentices in the Central Government Establishments. 

39 
 
The Government is advised by two tripartite bodies at the 
national level, namely, National Council for Vocational 
Training (NCVT) and Central Apprenticeship Council (CAC) for 
the purpose of laying down policies and training standard s, 
trade testing and certification.   
 
A. Schemes 
3.2 The following schemes have been launched and measures 
taken by the Government to provide vocational training to the 
skilled and semi-skilled workers:- 
1.      Craftsman Training Scheme(CTS) -  CTS is implemented 
through Industrial Training Institutes / Centres (ITIs/ITCs) is 
one of the major schemes for school leavers. Those who 
successfully complete craftsman training are developed as 
semi-skilled workers. There are 9025 ITIs/ITCs(as on 
30.06.2010) out of which 2 228 are in Government sector and 
remaining 6797 are in private sector.  These institutes have a 
total seating capacity of 12.6 9 lakh.  Training is imparted in 
116 engineering and non -engineering trades. Duration of 
courses varies from trade to trade and ranges from 6 months 
to 3 years. A person above the age 14 years and above can 
take admission in these ITIs /ITCs. Multi skill courses  with 
multi entry and multi exit provision are also being offered in 
those ITIs upgraded as Centres of Excellence (COEs).  So far 

40 
 
531 ITIs have opted for multi skill courses and are upgrading 
infrastructure with central assistance.   
 
2.       Apprenticeship Training Scheme (ATS) -Under the 
provisions of the Apprentices Act, 1961, the apprenticeship 
training is provided on the job in industry to school leavers 
and ITI pass outs with an objective to provide skilled workers 
for the industry in 235 designated tra des.  3.06 lakhs seats 
have been located for the trade apprentices.  There are four 
categories of apprentices, namely, trade apprentice, graduate, 
technician and technician (vocational) apprentice.  
Qualifications of trade apprentices vary from Class VIII to 
Class XII and the  period of training varies from 6 months to 4 
years.  
 
  
3.    Upgradation of 100 ITIs to Centres of Excellence with 
domestic funding and Upgradation of 400 ITIs through 
World Bank assistance – As per the advice of Ministry of 
Finance, upgradation of 100 ITIs was taken up from domestic 
resources and 400 ITIs through World Bank assistance.  To 
produce workforce of world standard, the ITIs are being 
upgraded into „Centres of Excellence(COE)‟ that includes 
providing infrastructural facilities  for introduction of multi -
skill courses catering to the need of a particular cluster of 
industry around an ITI. 

41 
 
4. Upgradation of 1396 Government ITIs through Public -
Private Partnership - The scheme „Upgradation of 1396 
Government ITIs through Public -Private Partnership‟ was launched 
in 2007-08 with a total outlay of Rs. 3550 crore (Rs. 3490 crore for 
upgradation of 1396 Government ITIs @ Rs. 2.50 crore per ITI and 
Rs. 60 crore for management, monitoring and evaluation of the 
scheme). The objective is to i mprove the employment outcome of 
graduates from the vocational training system, by making design 
and delivery of training more demand responsive.   
 
B. Skill Development Initiatives (SDIs) 
3.3  The Ministry, in close consultation with industry, State 
Governments and experts, have initiated a five year project under 
which one million persons would be trained or their existing skills 
tested and certified under Modular Employable Skills (MES) 
framework. The objectives of the scheme are (i) To provide 
vocational training to school leavers, existing workers, ITI 
graduates, etc. to improve their employability by optimally utilizing 
the infrastructures available in Govt., private institutions and the 
industry. Existing skills of the persons can also be tested and 
certified under this scheme (ii) To build capacity in the area of 
development of competency standards, course curricula, learning 
material and assessment standards in the country.   

42 
 
3.4 The Ministry further informed the Committee that key features 
of the SDI scheme are as follows:- 
(i) Demand driven short term training courses based 
on Modular Employable Skills (MES) decided in 
consultation with Industry.  MES is „ Minimum 
Skills for Set‟ which is sufficient for gainful 
employment; 
(ii) Central Government facilitates and promote training 
while industry, private sector and State 
Governments will train the persons; 
(iii) Optimum utilization of existing infrastructure to 
make training cost effective; 
(iv) Flexible delivery mechanism (part time, weekends, 
full time, onsite/offsite) to suit needs of various 
target groups; 
(v) Different levels of programmes (Foundation level as 
well as skill upgradation) to meet demands of 
various target groups; 
(vi) The services of existing or retired faculty or guest 
faculty to be utilized; 
(vii) Courses are availa ble for persons having completed 
5th standard; 
(viii) Testing and certification of skills acquired 
informally; 

43 
 
(ix) Testing of skills of trainees by independent 
assessing bodies, which are not involved in training 
delivery, to ensure that it is done impartially; 
(x) The essence of the scheme is in the certification that 
is nationally and internationally  recognized; 
(xi) In-built incentive for both trainees and vocational 
training providers (VTP) – Reimbursement of fee is 
given only to those candidates who pass the tests.  
VTP has to initially bear part of training cost which 
is reimbursed when trainee pass the tests; 
(xii) Rating is given to VTPs so that prospective trainees 
can take informed decision.     
 
C. New Schemes of DGE&T for Skill Development 
3.5 The following schemes have been initiated by the Government 
for skill development:- 
(i) Setting up of 1500 Industrial Training Institutes 
and 5000 Skill Development Centre in PPP mode 
under Kaushal Vikas Yojna at a total estimated cost 
of Rs. 12846.28 crore; 
(ii) Skill Development Plan for 34 districts affected by 
Left Wing Extremism (LWE) at a total estimated cost 
of Rs. 232.95 crore for one year; 

44 
 
(iii) Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure in 
North-Eastern States and Sikkim at a total 
estimated cost of Rs. 57.39 crore for 2 years; 
(iv) Expansion of Training of Trainers within DGE&T 
Institutes at a total estimated cost of Rs. 24.59 
crore.   
D. Training 
3.6 As regards setting up of an ITI and number of ITIs at present, 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment intimated that „a ccording to 
Training Manual for ITIs /ITCs, an institute should be opened near 
the industrial clusters.  Now setting up of ITIs is under the purview 
of State Governments.  Normally, State Government selects a place 
for setting up of an ITI where land with basic amenities such as 
road, power, water supply and communication etc.  are available or 
any area which is deficient in training infrastructure.  The present 
vocational training capacity is estimated to be around 3.1 million 
while 12.8 million persons, a s per 61 st round of National Sample 
Survey Organisation, 2004 -05 enter the labour force every year.  
There are 9025 Industrial Training Institutes/Centres with seating 
capacity of 12.09 lakh in the country.   
 
 
 
 

45 
 
E. Upgradation of ITIs 
3.7 On the issue of upgradation of ITIs  and criteria adopted while 
selecting the ITIs for their upgradation and by what time all the ITIs  
are likely to be upgraded, the Ministry informed the Committee as 
under:- 
“DGE&T is implementing schemes for upgradation of 11896 
Government ITIs, out of which 100 ITIs are to be upgraded 
through domestic funding, 400 through financial assistance 
from the World Bank and remaining 1396 ITIs through 
Public Private partnership.  100 ITIs upgraded from domestic 
funding were distributed in 22 S tates/UT (other than J&K, 
Sikkim and NE States) in proportion to the number of 
Government ITIs in these States.  The scheme has come to a 
close on 31.03.2010.  400 ITIs being upgraded with World 
Bank assistance, have been selected from 33 States / UTs 
based on the proposals received from each State. This 
scheme would close by December, 2012. Since funds are 
released to State Governments and are valid for one year, it 
is, therefore, expected that all ITIs would be upgraded by 
2013.  Most of the first 100 ITIs have already been upgraded. 
The remaining 1396 Government ITIs have been taken up for 
upgradation through Public Private Partnership mode in a 
phased manner. Under this scheme, so far 1079 ITIs have 
been covered and funds have been released from 2007 -08 to 

46 
 
till date.  For the remaining 496 ITIs funds will be released 
upto March, 2012.” 
F. Time period for upgradation 
3.8 The Ministry further informed that a period of five years for 
upgradation is proposed after release of funds and, therefore, the 
upgradation process will be completed in a phased manner as 
shown below:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Batch Year of 
coverage 
Status of fund 
release 
By what 
time ITIs 
are likely to 
be upgraded 
1 1st  Batch of 300 ITIs 2007-08 Rs. 750 Crore 
released  
March, 2013 
2 2nd Batch of 300 ITIs 2008-09 Rs. 750 crore 
released 
March, 2014 
3 3rd Batch of 300 ITIs 2009-10 Rs. 750 crore 
released 
March, 2015 
4 4th Batch of 300 it is* 2010-11 Rs.300 crore 
released 
March, 2016 
5 5th Batch of 196 it is** 2011-12 Rs.147.50 crore 
released till date 
March, 2017 
*      120 ITIs were covered 
**    59 ITIs are covered till date 
G. Monitoring Mechanism 
3.9 : Whether any monitoring mechanism is available to review the 
performance of the upgraded ITIs through all the modes, the 
Ministry stated as under:- 
 

47 
 
“Under VTIP Scheme, regular monitoring is done to review the 
monthly expenditure.  Also from time to time, review meetings 
are being held including visits to various states and field 
institutes.  During 2009 -10, review meetings were hel d in 
August 09/Nov.09/Dec.09/Feb.10/March 10/April 10 for 
centrally funded institutes (CFIs) of DGE&T.  Bi -annual Joint 
Review Meetings (JRM) are held for State Governments and 
CFIs with active participation from the World Bank, 
Department of Economic Affa irs, Planning Commission and 
Industry Associations.  So far three JRMs have been held in 
September 06 -Oct.03, 2008 in Maharashtra (Pune), West 
Bengal (Kolkata) and Rajasthan (Jaipur); 2 nd JRM was held in 
June 16-30, 2009 in Goa and Shimla and 3 rd JRM was held in 
Jan. 2006 -Feb.09, 2010 in Bhopal and Bangalore.  In 
addition, high level meetings with State Labour Ministers, 
Principal Secretaries of State Government, meetings of 
National Steering Committee, Video Conferencing with State 
Governments are also hel d at regular intervals.  Follow up 
action is being taken through letters from Joint Secretary and 
Secretary to respective Principal Secretaries and Chief 
Secretaries.  For the upgradation of 1396 ITIs scheme, 
monitoring of performance is being done through  quarterly 
progress reports (QPRS).  The QPRS are being sent by IMCs of 
ITIs to the State Steering Committees (SSC).  SSCs compile the 
report of all ITIs covered in a particular year and send it to 
National Steering Committee (NSC).”  

48 
 
H. Dropout estimates and reasons 
3.10 As per the information furnished by the Ministry, broadly an 
average of 25-30% dropout is estimated in the ITIs/ITCs across the 
country.  When asked to provide State -wise figures of dropout rates 
and pass rates in the ITIs of the last thre e years and whether the 
reasons for this dropout have been evaluated, the Ministry replied 
that:- 
“ITIs are under the administrative control of respective State 
Directorates.  Therefore, State -wise figures relating to dropout 
rates in the ITIs are being ma intained by the respective State 
Governments.  There is no formal evaluation on reasons of 
dropout but broadly reasons for dropout are (i) Duration of 
some of the courses in Craftsmen Training Scheme (CTS) and 
Apprenticeship Training Scheme (ATS) are large i.e. 1 year to 3 
years.  Due to poor financial background of the youth taking 
up skill training programme are not able to afford to be away 
from earning activity for such a long time (ii) Skill training 
programme are considered to be laborious and blue co llared 
jobs, thus social acceptability of these courses is poor.  
Students join these courses as last resort and leave the 
courses as and when they get admission in polytechnics or in 
any academic institutions (iii) Shortages of instructors also put 
a pres sure on students which discourages them to continue 
the course.”   
 

49 
 
3.11 When asked about the reasons behind high drop out ratio 
from ITIs, the Secretary replied: 
"If you will see our reply and on the basis of the information 
that we have, about 70 per cen t of the students pass in the 
first attempt.  If you count second and third attempt, 100 per 
cent students pass.  There is certainly a percentage which 
drops out, which cannot pass.  It happens because of some 
other economic reasons.  We know that they are  poor people.  
Sometimes they feel that instead of doing two years training 
course, they will as well work somewhere.  Now with the 
evolution of these MES, small courses, many people would like 
to go to three or four months crash courses." 
I. Steps for checking dropouts  
3.12  As regards the steps taken by DGE&T to check the 
dropout rate in ITIs, the Ministry informed as under:- 
“Modular and multi skilled courses have been 
introduced in Centre of Excellence Scheme (CoE).  
Therefore, trainees can complete  training in phases.  
Infrastructures in Govt. ITIs are being upgraded in 
various scheme to increase the relevance. Short term 
programmes based on Modular Employable Skills have 
been introduced under Skill Development initiative.  The 
programmes are conduc ted by registered Vocational 
Training Providers (VTPs) and assessment after 
completion of training is done by third party thereafter 
certificate is awarded by the NCVT. Now-a-days, normally 
courses are revised after 3 -5 years. Sometimes it may 

50 
 
take more th an 5 years also, if the technology in the 
trade is not varying very much. In the last five years 
courses curricula of 25 trades have been revised and 18 
new trades have been introduced.” 
 
3.13  According to the first Joint Review Mission Report „Many 
of th e State departments concerned with providing stipends to 
SC/ST students are paying the stipends at the end of the financial 
year (i.e. February / March), which is close to the end of the 
academic year.  The stipends are also usually paid in one lump -
sum ra ther than monthly.  Hence the purpose of the stipends, 
which is to assist the students to meet their academic expenses, is 
defeated.‟   
J. Payments of stipends 
3.14 On being asked bout the steps taken by the DGE&T to ensure 
that stipends are paid monthly, the Ministry stated as follows:- 
“The stipends to students of SC/ST are paid generally by 
Department of Social Welfare of respective States. The concern 
of the Parliamentary Committee has been conveyed to State 
Governments suggesting them to take remedial measures and 
pay stipend on monthly basis.” 
 
 
 

51 
 
K. Review of placement cells 
3.15 As regards the number of ITI‟s training, career counseling and 
placement cells established or are functioning and if any review of 
the functioning of these TCPCs has been done , the Ministry 
informed as under:- 
“On the recommendation of NCVT, all the State Governments 
have been requested to set up Placement Cell in every ITI/ITC 
to help the graduates in getting placed in different industries.  
Placement Cells are functioning in all Government ITIs.  
DGE&T has not reviewed the functioning of these placement 
cells as they are functioning under the administrative control 
of respective State Governments.” 
L. Formation of TCPCs 
3.16 When attention of the Ministry was drawn towards the  
findings of the Second Joint Review Mission (June 16 -30, 2009 ) on 
VTIP wherein it was stated that „TCPCs are yet to be 
established/made operational in most ITIs despite their importance 
in reducing dropouts, increasing transition to the Advanced 
Modules and Specialised Modules and enhancing employment on 
this issue, the Ministry replied that:- 
“During the 3 rd Joint Review Mission held during January -
February, 2010, State Governments informed that Training 
Counseling and Placement Cell (TCPC) have been established 
in each project ITI. During the said review, it was observed 

52 
 
that TCPCs are functioning well in ma ny States.  However, all 
the State Governments have been advised to make concerted 
efforts to strengthen TCPCs primarily with the support & 
guidance from Institute Management Committees (IMCs) of 
respective ITIs, State Project Implementation Units and also  
from the Central Level to make it fully functional and deliver 
the desired results.” 
M. Trainers' Training 
3.17  On the issue of any provision for trainers‟ training, its time 
schedule /duration and the number of institutes available for them, 
the Ministry informed as under:- 
“Trainers‟ training is provided under Craft Instructors‟ 
Training Scheme (CITS).  Instructors/Trainers Training is 
provided through five Advanced Training Institutes (ATIs) one 
each at Kolkata, Kanpur, Ludhiana, Mumbai, and Hyderabad,  
one Central Training Institute (CTI) at Chennai, one National 
Vocational Training Institute (NVTI) at Noida and seven 
Regional Vocational Training Institutes (RVT Is) for women.  
Training in 23 engineering trades and 07 non -engineering 
trades is offered in  these institutes. Total seating capacity in 
all the institutes is 1600 per annum at the time.  Objective of 
the trainer training is to train instructors in the techniques of 
transferring hands -on-skills, in order to train semi -skilled / 
skilled manpower f or industries / establishments.  The 
academic session starts from August every year and ends in 

53 
 
July.  On recommendation of NCVT from the academic session 
August, 2009 onwards, modular pattern of trainers‟ training 
for engineering trades has been introduce d in the ATIs & CTI 
replacing the one year instructor training programme.  There 
are four modules each of three months duration for 
engineering trades.  At the end of each module, NCVT 
conducts trade tests.   After successful completion of all the 
modules, the trainee is awarded a Craft Instructor Certificate 
under the aegis of NCVT.” 
 
3.18 The Committee noted that according to „Second Joint Review 
Mission Aide-Memoirs‟, „each State prepares an annual instructors 
training plan and submits it to AHI and DGE& T every year by the 
end of May. AHI will work with the States to help them prepare 
such a plan. The Mission was pleased to learn that based on the 
previous Mission‟s recommendation, the DGE&T has proposed to 
pay a uniform Daily Allowance (DA) to the traine es, which will be 
paid by the training institution. The Mission strongly urges that a 
final decision be taken on the proposal at the earliest.‟  
N. Payment of DA to Instructors 
3.19 In the above context, when the Ministry were asked whether 
the rates of DA , to be paid to the trainees, have been finalized, the 
Ministry replied as follows:- 

54 
 
“It is submitted that DGE&T had proposed payment of 
uniform DA to the sponsored Instructors from various States 
by the central institutes. However, the Integrated Finance 
Division of this Ministry has, in consultation with the Ministry 
of Finance, agreed for payment of TA/DA as per State 
Government norms. Accordingly, Central Institutes are making 
payment of TA/DA to the sponsored instructor trainees as per 
their entitlement certified by the respective State Government.” 
O. Utilization of training seats 
3.20 The Committee observed that against 96,759 training seats 
allocated for graduate and technician apprentices, only 57,991 have 
been utilized as on 30.3.2009 and as against 2,78, 123 training 
seats available on 30.6.2009 for trade apprentices, only 1,95, 703 
apprentices were undergoing training.  When asked the reasons for 
such underutilization of seats, the Ministry stated as under:- 
“Some seats remain vacant in the public sector due to lengthy 
procedure for engagement of apprentices, while in some trades 
in some establishments, very few trainees are available despite 
their best efforts through advertisement in newspaper, sending 
requisition to employments exchanges, etc.”  
P. Simplification of procedure 
3.21 Regarding the steps taken to simplify the procedure for 
engagement of apprentices, whether stipend rates have been revised 
in the recent past and on what basis these rates have been 
revised/fixed, the Ministry replied as follows:- 

55 
 
“According to the Apprentices Act, 1961, it is obligatory on the 
part of the employer to engage apprentices as per statutory 
notice.  Hence, the selection and engagement of apprentices 
rests with the establishments.  The rates of stipe nd were last 
revised in March, 2007 for the trade Apprentices and in 
January, 2008 for Graduate, Technician and Technician 
(Vocational) apprentices.  The rates of stipend are decided on 
the basis of the Consumer Price Index (CPI).  In the 33 rd 
Meeting of t he Central Apprenticeship Council (CAC) [ the 
tripartite body advising the Govt. on implementation of the 
Apprentices Act, 1961], it was approved that the rates of 
stipend be revised as per the latest CPI.” 
3.22 The Ministry further informed that the revis ed rates of stipend 
would be as follows:- 
Trade Apprentices 
 
Rs. p.m. 
During  1st year of training  1490 
During  2nd year of training 1700 
During 3rd year of training 1970 
During 4th year of training 2220 
 
Other Apprentices Rs. p.m. 
 
Graduate apprentices 3560 
Sandwich course students from degree 
institutions 
2530 
Technician apprentices 2530 
Sandwich course students from degree 
institutions 
2070 
Technician (Vocational) apprentices 1970 

56 
 
Q. Vacancies of Instructors & Principals 
 3.23  The Committee found that there are large number of 
vacancies of Instructors and Principals lying vacant in ITIs.  When 
the Ministry were asked the reasons as to why so many vacancies of 
Instructors/Principals in the ITIs in the States are lying vacant and 
the steps taken to fill up these vacancies , the Ministry stated that, 
„the issue of vacant posts was discussed in the Labour Ministers‟ 
Conference held on 22 January, 2010 in Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi 
and also with Chief Secretaries/Secretaries of States t hrough a 
video conference by Secretary (L&E) and during review meetings of 
Vocational Training Improvement Project. State Governments have 
been asked to fill up the vacant posts by appointing guest/contract 
faculty till these are filled with regular appointment through various 
letters addressed by the Hon‟ble Minister for Labour & Employment 
and Union Labour Secretary to Chief Ministers and Chief 
Secretaries.‟ 
R. Skill base of Indian Economy 
3.24 The Committee observed that at present, skills base of the 
Indian economy is quite low as compared to other developed 
economies of the world.  It is estimated that, based on NSSO data 
for 2004-05, only 2% persons in the age group  of 15 -29 years have 
received formal vocational training and around 8% are reported to 
have received non -formal vocational training, indicating thereby 
that higher proportion of youth population actually enter the world 
of work without formal vocational training.     

57 
 
S. Unorganised Sector 
3.25 The Committee are also aware that the unorganize d sector 
constitutes about 94% of the work force in the country.  The formal 
skill development system is not taking care of skills requirement of 
the unorganized sector while the demand of skills in the 
unorganized sector is huge.  Skills in the unorganize d sector are 
acquired through informal apprentice system. There are large 
number of traditional skills which are passed down from one 
generation to another through informal training and many of them 
are well recognized and of international standards. Howev er, they 
need to be brought in the formal system of skill development. The 
overwhelming majority of the work force, not only in rural areas but 
also in urban areas, does not possess any identifiable marketable 
skill. In urban, only about 19.6% of male and 11.2% of female 
workers possessed marketable skills. Whereas, in rural areas only 
about 10% of male and 6.3% of female workers possessed 
marketable skills.   
T. Skill upgradation 
3.26 In the above context, when the Committee enquired from the 
Ministry, whe ther the Central Government / State Government 
have formulated any scheme for the skill upgradation of the 
workers in the unorganized sector, the latter replied that:- 
“Central Government has formulated Skill Development 
Initiatives Scheme based on Modular Employable Skill training 

58 
 
courses under this scheme are conducted at various levels 
from beginners to moderately at high level.  Under this scheme 
workers of the unorganized sector can undertake training in 
different modules for their skill upgradation. T hey can also 
seek testing and certification of competencies of their skills 
acquired informally,   this scheme is under operation from 24th 
May, 2007.” 
U. Financial assistance to trainees 
3.27  On the nature of financial assistance available to the trainees 
for different courses under the aegis of DGE&T, the Ministry stated 
as under:- 
“Provision has been made by NCVT for payment of stipend of 
Rs. 100/- per month per trainee to all the trainees.  However, 
the State Government is at liberty to increase  the rate of 
stipend.  In addition to the normal stipend mentioned above, 
merit scholarships at the rate of Rs. 125/ - per month per 
trainee may also be awarded to 4% of the total number of 
trainees on the rolls (both engineering and non -engineering 
trades) on the basis of internal examination conducted at each 
Industrial Training Institute.” 
V. Career Literature 
3.28 The Committee were informed that career literature which is 
brought out by the CIRTES under DGE& T is published only in 
English and in Hindi and is provided to Directorate of Employment 

59 
 
of various States / UTs for their use.  The Committee when asked 
the Ministry why the career literature is not published in local 
languages so as to cater the local ne ed, the Ministry replied as 
under:- 
“The career literature is brought out in English and Hindi 
by CIRTES (DGE&T) and the same is provided to 
Directorate of Employment of different States/UTs for its 
subsequent use. Some of the concerned State 
Directorates also prepare the literature in local language 
based on the local needs.”  

60 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
According to the report of the Committee on 'India Vision 
2020' constituted by the Planning Commission, as  population 
growth slows to replac ement levels over the next two decades, 
India's greatest challenge will be to provide employment 
opportunities for all job -seekers.  The working age population 
will expand by about 45 per cent, spurring rapid growth of the 
labour force and the number of jo b-seekers. Major changes in 
economic policy and strategy will be needed to eliminate the 
current backlog of more than 34 million unemployed job -
seekers and assure employment opportunities for all additions 
to the labour force.  India needs to generate around 200 million 
additional employment opportunities over the next 20 years.  
At the same time, the total proportion of the workforce 
involved in agriculture is likely to decline from 56 per cent to 
40 per cent or even lower, thus increasing the pressure for  
rapid multiplication of non-farm employment opportunities. 

61 
 
The Committee endorse  the view that access to gainful 
employment is an essential condition for citizens to exercise 
their economic rights in a market democracy.  The capacity to 
pay is the economic equivalent of the right to vote. 
 
4.1  One of the functions of DGE&T is to carr y out 
continuous programme of evaluation of policies, procedures 
and working practices of Employment Exchanges within States 
and to establish coordination and consultations with the 
Ministries whose activities affect the employment situation in 
the country.  The Committee observe that the administration 
of Employment Exchanges was passed on to the State 
Governments w.e.f . 01 April, 1969 thereby transferring its 
entire responsibility of running the Employment Exchanges to 
the States resulting in their poor functioning. The Committee 
observe that t he Union Government have not made a ny 
comprehensive study on the working of the Employment 
Exchanges, response of the employers, the number of persons, 
trade wise, who got jobs through the Employment Exchanges 

62 
 
and the number of job seekers .  The Committee were informed 
that the Government proposes to amend the Employment 
Exchanges (CNV) Act, 1959 with a view to diversify the 
activities of the National Employment Service and to enhance 
the scope and by covering  other  activities/establishments 
which are not within the purview of the Act as of now. The 
Committee are not able to comprehend that without making 
any survey/study, how the Government brought the draft 
EE(CNV) Amendment Bill, 2010.  The Committee take a serious 
note of the deteriorating condition  of the Employment 
Exchanges in the country and recommend that Union 
Government take proactive action to revamp the functioning of 
the Employment Exchanges  and make them efficacious and 
useful.   
4.2  The Com mittee note  that out of 969  employment 
exchanges in the country, 467 have been computerized by the 
Government till date and the Government have also initiated a 
mega project, namely, Employment Exchange Mission Mode 
Project (EEMMP) involving  crores of rupees under which all the 

63 
 
employment exchanges of the country are to be interlinked. 
The Committee find that the Government have not evaluated 
the performance of the employment exchanges which have 
been computerized . On the other hand, the Government 
propose to compute rize all employment exchanges and inter-
link them too. How, without first having assessed the technical 
limitations of the employment exchanges so computerized,  the 
Government intend to inter -link them,  is beyond the 
comprehension of the Committee? The Com mittee recommend 
that the Government should also undertake a comprehensive 
review of the computerized employment exchanges so as to 
detect the possible shortcomings and nitty-gritty in the system 
and rectify them at initial stages itself so that EEMMP does not 
face any technical glitches later on. 
4.3  The Committee outright reject  the reply of the 
Ministry that making it mandatory for graduates/professional 
degree holders/diploma holders , who wish to apply for jo bs to 
register with Employment Exchanges, is likely to create lot of 
repercussions being against the spirit of Article 10 of ILO 

64 
 
Convention 88, relating to employment service, which India 
has ratified.  The Committee are of the view that      Article 10 
should be seen in a positive light, i.e. that all interested parties 
should take all possible measures to encourage full use of 
employment service facilities and making registration 
mandatory would only help job  seekers to make full use of 
employment service facilities. The Committee strongly feel 
that making registration compulsory will be beneficial for the 
job seekers as it would not only enable them to get the alerts 
about job opportunities once the Exchanges are computerized 
but also make them eligible for unemployment allowance in the 
States where it is paid. Not only this, mandatory registration 
will also benefit Employment Exchanges as their data about the 
unemployment situation in the country would be automatically 
updated and , in turn , boost the Government’s Employment 
Market Information (E MI) Programme. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that it should be made mandatory for 
graduates/degree holders/diploma holders/certificate holders 
to register  themselves with their nearest Employment 
Exchanges, or alternatively possibility of on line reg istration 

65 
 
may be explored  wherein the students appearing in their final 
examination may be given an option by their respective 
educational institution to register themselves.  The 
Government may also consider the option of opening service 
branches/centres of the Employment Exchanges in every 
district post office where the pass outs can register themselves 
easily.  The Committee feel that Career Counsellors may also 
be available in these service branches.   The Committee also 
desire that job melas be organized at regular intervals and such 
melas may also be organized for the backward classes 
exclusively.  The Committee further desire that Members of 
Parliament of the region may also be informed  of these job 
melas. 
4.4  The Committee note that the Vocational Guidance 
and Employment Counse lling Progra mme is implemented 
through 969 Employment Exchanges, 420 vocational Guidance 
units at Employment Exchanges  and 8 3 University 
Employment Information and Guidance Bureaus all ov er the 
country to help the youths in career counselling and vocational 

66 
 
guidance.  The Committee are surprised to note that there is 
no prescribed qualification s for the recruitment of Career 
Counsellors.  In Committee’s view, a Career Counse llor is 
supposed to be an expert and should not only possess the 
specific qualification but also be well conversant with the 
educational patterns, local language, culture and societal 
values of the State in which he is posted. The Committee are of 
the firm vie w that in the absence of these essential pre-
requisites, a Career Counse llor would not be in a position to 
guide the candidates appropriately. The Committee , therefore, 
recommend that the Government prescribe a set of appropriate 
qualifications for appointment as Career Counse llors.  The 
Committee also recommend that the career literature should 
also be made available in vernacular languages. 
4.5  The Committee find that the Ministry has not made 
any provision for payment of unemployment allowance to the 
persons registered with Employment Exchanges .  However, 
some States  (Chhattisgarh, Haryana , Kerala, Tamil Nadu, 
Punjab, Puducherry and Jammu & Kashmir are paying 

67 
 
unemployment allowance to the registered unemployed youth. 
Such incentives, though small,  encourage unemployed youth 
to come forward and register themselves with the Employment 
Exchanges, which in turn, enables States to analyse the correct 
employment situation an d find ways and means for providing 
employment to these youths. The unemployment allowance 
also helps the youth  to complete their education .  The 
Committee strongly feel that payment of unemployment 
allowance not only helps unemployed youth to sustain in d ire 
situations but also facilitates the Government in getting a 
realistic data of unemployment situation in the country .   
Though the Union Government is not in favour of providing any 
unemployment allowance, the Committee, however, desire that 
it may, at least persuade the rest of the States to emulate the 
States giving unemployment allowance.   
4.6  The Committee note that the Government has not 
prepared any definite strategy to attract private employers to 
notify their vacancies in the Employment Exchanges once the 
National Portal is operational. In the present scenario, private 

68 
 
establishments are much more than the government 
establishments.  In Committee’s view, to make Employment 
Exchanges attractive to job seekers, it is necessary that private 
employers notify their vacancies in the Employment 
Exchanges. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a 
comprehensive strategy to attract private employers should be 
formed which may include, private employers to advertise their 
vacancies on the portal, giving them access to the profile of the 
candidates across the country, allowing them to screen, test 
and interview the candidates in the Employment E xchange 
campus, etc.  
4.7  The Committee observe that there is no provision for 
providing financial assistance to the persons interested in self -
employment at the level of DGE&T. The Committee  note that 
23 self-employment promotion cells have been set up to 
motivate, guide and assist the jobseekers in taking up self -
employment. The Committee are of the view that when the job 
seekers are motivated to take up self -employment they may 
also be made aware of the benefits available under the Centrally 

69 
 
Sponsored Schemes like Prime Minister Employment 
Generation Programme (PMEGP), Swarn Jayanti Grameen 
Swarozgar Yojana (SJGSY) and Swarn Jayanti Grameen Shahri 
Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) which promise financial assistance so 
that these job seekers can avail the financial benefit under 
these schemes. The Committee recom mend that these self -
employment promotion cells be set up in every district where 
the job seekers can be given guidance regarding career 
opportunities and be informed about the financial assistance 
available under PMEGP, SJGSY and SJSRY schemes. 
4.8 The Committee note that a plethora of private placement 
agencies catering to the recruitment needs of the private 
employers including those providing domestic helps  have 
mushroomed in the recent past .  Some of these private 
placement agencies mislead the unemployed youth, collect 
money from them and vanish into the air .  The Committee  
strongly recommend that such unscrupulous agencies must be 
regulated and checked  so that the unsuspecting unemployed 
youth are not fleeced .  The Committee also note that 

70 
 
guidelines on regulation of private placement agencies were 
issued to all the States/UTs by DGE&T on 30.10.2003 and 
thereafter, it has been left to the respective State Government 
to frame regulation and/ or guidelines for monitoring the 
working of private placement agencies keeping in view the 
current scenario and their local needs.  The Committee impress 
upon the Government to revi ew the regulations/guidelines 
issued for monitoring the working of the placement agencies by 
the respective State Governments and also ensure their proper 
implementation so that the unwitting unemployed youth are 
not exploited. 
4.9 The Committee note that misleading jobs advertisements 
cause jobseekers a great deal of hardship an d difficulty.  Some 
spurious advertisements dressed up as job opportunities have 
cost job seekers dearly in the past.  More so, such 
advertisements are day -to-day feature of many newspapers.  
The Committee also note  that the issues relating to agencies 
that are sending people for employment outside the coun try 
are handled by Ministry of O verseas Indian Affairs. The 

71 
 
Secretary during evidence stated that he would call a meeting 
of the Ministries of Overseas Indian Affa irs and Information & 
Broadcasting and see what system could be put in place to 
ensure that at least advertisements which go in the electronic 
media, in the All India Radio were screened before being 
published/released.  The Committee are of the view that there 
is an urgent need for a Central Enforcement Machinery and 
also for formulation of a comprehensive law for regulating 
these agencies.  Besides, publishers and broadcasters of such 
advertisements may also be made accountable in case a  
fraudulent advertisement is published/broadcast by them.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the response of the 
Ministries of Overseas Indian Affairs and Information & 
Broadcasting. 
  

72 
 
4.10  The Committee are of the considered view that in the 
present scenario the re is an urgent need for redrafting of the 
National Employment Policy so that the public and the job 
seekers could have fair knowledge or idea  of the availability of 
jobs in the market.  The representatives of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment stated t hat they had formulated the 
National Employment Policy in consultation with all the 
concerned Ministries.  The Committee were informed that the 
National Employment Policy was almost in the final stages  of 
formulation.  The Committee hope  that the Ministry will come 
forward with a comprehensive National Employment Policy 
once the 12th Plan is finalized. 
  

73 
 
4.11  The Committee observe that a s per reports, a large 
proportion of the educated unemployed are first time work -
seekers.  It appears that the aspirations of the educated are not 
being met and there could be a number of reasons for this.  On 
the one hand, there is higher unemployment amongst the 
educated and on the other, employers are complaining of lack 
of skilled manpower.  The Commit tee note that unorganized 
sector constitutes about 94% of the workforce in the country. 
The Committee are of the view that most of the employment 
opportunities will occur in the unorganized sector and a 
strategy for training the unorganized sector would ne ed to be 
worked out. The Committee feel that an extensive survey on 
the employment opportunities, the skills required, present 
status, training needs, etc. of the unorganized sector be made 
and on the basis of the findings, courses and training centres 
be opened otherwise merely providing training under the MES 
programme, which is meant for skill upgradation of workers, 
will not serve the purpose of catering the training needs of the 
ever-growing informal sector. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that a  comprehensive study of the unorganized 

74 
 
sector and its needs be made and evaluated first and thereafter, 
steps taken to enhance their employable skills.   
 
4.12  The Committee find that on comparing with other 
developed economies of the world, the skill base of the Indian 
economy is far below.  As per the data released by NSSO for the 
year 2004 -05, only 2% aspirants in the age group of 15 -29 
years have undergone formal vocational tr aining.  About 8% 
aspirants have had non -formal vocational training.  Hence, it 
clearly shows that out of the workforce actually entering the 
world of work, major chunk is captured by higher proportion of 
un-trained youth.  The Committee are therefore, of the view 
that it has become essential to enhance the infrastructure 
providing skill development trainings so that all those entrants 
acquire relevant skills beforehand.  
The Committee also are of the view that the training 
centres should be accessible to t he would -be-workforce like 
STD Booths and Internet Cafes which are easily reachable for 
delivering low -cost, high quality training to majority of the 

75 
 
workers every year. The Committee feel that besides getting 
trained workforce, this initiative would gener ate more 
employment in these small businesses.  The Committee also 
find the Australian Government have a well defined system for 
enhancing the employability through their 'Skills Vouchers 
Programme'.  The Scheme offers the eligible aspirants apply for 
a voucher which helps them cover the cost of specific types of 
training.  There are two different vouchers on offer : a Business 
Skills Voucher and a Work Skills Voucher.  A prospective 
trainee has to find out if he or she fits the eligibility criteria for 
either a Business Skills Voucher or a Work Skills Voucher.  To 
apply for the applicable voucher, the person can search for an 
eligible course as well as for the training organizations 
approved to deliver it.  The system is integrated through the 
internet for universal access and ease of operations. 
The Committee , therefore, recommend that a n effective  
system on the above lines should be developed so that the 
existing as well as prospective youth of the country be trained 
before their actual entrance in the world of work. 

76 
 
 
4.13  The Committee note that the State -wise position of 
vacancies of principals/instructional staff in the ITIs is grim. 
According to the Ministry the matter of vacant posts was 
discussed in Labour Minister’s Conference and during review 
meetings of Vocational Training Improvement Project.  State 
Governments have also been asked to fill up the vacant posts 
by appointing gues t/contract faculty till these are filled with 
regular appointments.  The Committee are surprised to note 
that a large number of vacancies still exist.  The Committee 
recommend that steps be taken to fill  up these vacancies 
preferably by the end of the year  2011 and they be apprised 
about the progress achieved in this regard.  
 
4.14  The Committee are dis tressed to note that there is 
around 30% dropout rate in the ITIs. The Ministry admitted 
that there was a certain percentage of students who could not 
pass and quit the courses . Though the Government ha s not 
formally evaluated the reasons for this dropout rate  yet the 

77 
 
reasons were stated to be the long duration of  courses in  
Craftsman Training Scheme  and Apprenticeship Training 
Scheme, poor social acceptabil ity of the course s covered in 
skill training programme and shortage of instructo rs.  The 
Committee note that the Government has taken various steps 
such as introduction of modular and multiskilled courses in 
centre of Excellence Scheme introduction of shor t term 
programmes based on modular employable skills.  They are of 
the considered view that a lot still needs to be done in the form 
of proactive and preemptive action with a view to checking the 
drop out rate.  The Government should also consider making 
stipends given to the trainees lucrative enough so that they are 
able to complete the  course. The Government may also 
consider providing soft loans, through public sector banks to 
the poor and potential trainees so as to enable them to not 
only pursue specialized courses but also complete them as well.  
The Committee also recommend that hostel facility be 
provided to the rural, tribal students studying in these 
institutions.  Further, the DGE&T need to coordinate with the 
State Governments, Ministry of Tribal Affairs etc. to explore 

78 
 
the possibility of providing funds for construction of these 
hostels. 
4.15  The Committee observe that refresher courses for 
trainers are not being held periodically in the absence of which 
they are unable to update themselve s with advancements of 
changing technologies  and availability of information. The 
Committee strongly recommend that refresher courses for 
trainers should be held at regular intervals and highly 
specialized trainings, in public and private institutions  and 
other educational institutions may also be organized for them. 
The Committee also desire that the Government consider 
giving  incentives to these trainers for attending and 
successfully completing the training programme. The 
Committee further impress upon the Government that while 
framing Instructors Training Programme, industry  should also 
be consulted so that their requirements could be addressed and 
the programmes suitably retailored.   
 

79 
 
4.16  The Committee observe that the Central Training 
Institutes are making payment of TA/DA to the sponsored 
instructor train ees as per their entitlement certified by their 
respective State Governments.  According to the Ministry , 
DGE&T had proposed payment of uniform DA to the sponsored 
instructor trainees from various States by the Central Training 
Institutes.  The Integrated Finance Division of th e Ministry of 
Labour and Employment i n consultation with the Ministry of 
Finance agreed for payment of TA/DA as per State Government 
norms. The Committee  strongly feel that uniform rate of 
TA/DA be paid to all the instructor trainees so as to avoid any 
dissatisfaction and frustration in the minds of those trainees 
who get less TA/DA. The Committee desire that Integrated 
Finance Division of the Ministry should again  take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance to reconsider their earlier 
decision by conveying the concern of the Committee in the 
matter.  The Committee may be apprised of the final decision 
in the matter. 
 

80 
 
4.17  As per the Apprentices Act, 1961 it is  obligatory on 
the part of the employer to engage apprentices as per statutory 
notice.  The Committee’s examination reveals that as on 30 th 
March, 2009 , as against 96759 training seats allocated for 
graduate and technician apprentices , only 57,991 seats had 
been utilized.  The position regarding trade apprentices is no 
better.  As on 30 th June, 2009 as against 2,78,123 training 
seats available 1,95,703 apprentices were undergoing training.  
The reasons for seats remaining vacant are stated to be lengthy 
procedure for engagement of apprentices in public sector.  The 
Committee also note that the rate of stipend given to the 
apprentices is paltry considering the present cost of Inflation 
Index. The Committee recommend that wide publicity may be 
given to these vacancies and procedure for appointment of the 
apprentices be simplified and the Government may consider 
inviting applications from the prospective Apprentices when 
they are in their last session of the theoretical course.  They 
also recommend that the ra te of stipend be revised keeping in 
view the rising trend in Consumer Price Index. 

81 
 
4.18  The Committee find that State Governments are 
paying stipend to SC/ST students in lump -sum that too at the 
end of the academic year. The Committee are  of the firm view 
that paying stipend in lump -sum and at the end of academic 
year, defeats the very purpose of the stipend which is to assist 
the students  to meet their academic expenses. The Ministry 
has asked the State Governments to take remedial measur es 
and pay stipend to the SC/ST students on monthly basis . The 
Committee would like to be informed whether the State 
Governments have started paying stipends to SC/ST students 
on monthly basis. The Committee desire that yearly report also 
be obtained from States in the matter.  The names of States 
who have so far not started paying monthly stipend to SC & ST 
students be given in the Annual Report of the Ministry.  
  
 
 
 

82 
 
4.19  The Committee find that several reports of the 
DGE&T, some of them being annual pub lications pertaining to 
the year 200 7 are being released now . According to the 
Ministry, the reason  for the delay is the time involved in  
collection of data from other sources.  Such a specious 
argument is not acceptable to t he Committee.  The Committee 
believe that these publication contain data and figures for a 
particular year, which if not brought out in time, lose their 
relevance and become redundant. The Committee , therefore,  
recommend that  the Government should concentrate on the 
latest data and old reports now be compiled and brought out in 
one single consolidated edition  to serve academic 
interest/future reference needs  and made available on the 
Ministry's website.   
 
4.20  The Committee note that the DGE&T is in the 
process of upgradation of 1396 Government ITIs, some through 
domestic funding, others through World Bank assistance and 
remaining through Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode.   The 

83 
 
Committee expect that all the ITIs will be upgraded as per the 
schedule worked out.  Besides upgradation of the existing ITIs, 
the Committee impress upon the Government that new 
ITIs/ITCs may also be opened in remote areas of the Country 
with more emphasis on courses catering to local needs. The 
Committee desire that needs of the market may also b e 
considered while finalizing the courses to be taught in ITI s 
/ITCs and in doing so Public Sector Undertakings may also be 
involved/consulted.  The Committee also desire that these 
courses may be reviewed/upgraded every two years.  
  The Committee are als o of the view that more 
autonomy should be given to ITIs in their day -to-day 
functioning.  The Committee desire that the Union Government 
also need to advise the State Governments that they should 
instead take a more active role in disseminating relevant 
information, viz., type of training provided, fees, and 
particularly the dropout, course completion and placement 
rates of different training institutes/Centres.   The Committee 
feel that to reach maximum number of aspirants All India 

84 
 
Radio and Vernacular pr ess may be used to publicize various 
training programmes. 
 The Committee also find that no attention is paid to using 
financing as an innovative means to encourage quality training.  
The same levels of finance are allocated to poorly performing 
institutions with high dropout rates vis-a-vis those that 
maintain a high quality of teaching and performance.  The 
Committee are of the view t hat incentives , based on the 
number of students completing course, the pass rate, the 
average number of years taken to complete the courses and the 
placement rate, may be given to well-performing institutes to 
encourage them. 
  

85 
 
 
4.21  The Committee note that the Employment Exchanges 
and Industrial Training Institutes are under the administrative 
control of the State Governments but the development 
programmes at national level, particularly the areas concerning 
common policies, common st andards and procedures, training 
and trade testing is the responsibility of DGE&T.  The 
Committee feel that the DGE&T should come out with a status 
paper at the end of the  year on the implementation of the 
schemes, projects and programmes that required par ticipation 
of State Governments and Private Entrepreneurs.  The Status 
paper may include the details of the schemes, the targets, 
achievements, whether implemented effectively by the State 
Governments/Private entrepreneurs, grading of their 
participation interest.  The Status paper may also be laid in the 
Parliament. 
 
New Delhi,                                   HEMANAND BISWAL,   
25th July, 2011                            CHAIRMAN,                                                
3 Sravana, 1933 (Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
       

86 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 1ST JULY, 2010.  
 
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs in Committee 
Room `C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to have evidence of  
the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment on 
the subject ` Directorate General of Employment and Training 
(DGE&T)‟.  
PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri K. Murugesan Anandan 
3. Shri P. Balram 
4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6. Shri Hassan Khan 
7. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8. Shri P. Lingam 
9.  Shri Hari Manjhi 
10. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
11. Smt. Mausam Noor 
12. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 13. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 15. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
  
   
         
 
 

87 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND 
EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer   
Designation 
1. Shri Prabhat C. Chaturvedi Secretary 
2. Shri  Sharda Prasad  
DG/JS 
3. Shri R.K. Chugh 
DDG (T) 
4. Shri A.S. Kesai 
DDG (AT) 
5. Shri V.K. Singh Dir. (Admn.) 
6. Shri R.L. Singh Director (Training) 
7. Shri  A.K. Ganguly 
Director Training 
(Personnel) 
8. Dr. Rumal Singh Director (Exchanges) 
 
 
 
 
 

88 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment to the 
sitting of the Committee convened to hear the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment on ` Directorate General of 
Employment and Training (DGE&T)‟.  
2. The Secretary then briefed the Committee on the subject 
through a power-point presentation highlighting the facts and the 
schemes for the employment and training  of workforce  and steps 
taken/proposed by the Government thereon.  
3. The concerns and questions raised by the Members centered 
mainly on the following:- 
 (i) Monitoring mechanism for different schemes being 
 implemented for upgradation of ITIs.   
 (ii) Payment of unemployment allowance by some States. 
 (iii) Financial assistance to unemployed who wish to be in 
 self employment. 
 (iv) Functioning of training, career counselling and 
 placement cells (TCPCs). 
 (v) Employment of trained personnel of the North -Eastern 
 region and J&K. 
 

89 
 
4. The Committee also discussed the plight of construction 
workers/contract labourers.  Some Members suggested that the 
Committee should visit some commonwealth games sites to have 
first hand information of the condition of those workers 
5. The Chairman, then, pointed out that the Ministry had not 
furnished the action taken replies on the 40 th Report of the 
preceding Committee on the subject „Problems being faced by the 
workers due to sickness of HMT Units‟ and expressed his 
annoyance over the delay on the part of the Ministry to furnish the 
action taken replies and asked the Ministry to expedite the same 
without further delay. 
6. The Chairman thanked the representatives of Ministry for  free 
and frank replies to the queries of the Members on the subject.  The 
Chairman also asked the Secretary to furnish written replies to the 
queries raised by the members which could not be replied during 
the meeting and also to the Supplementary List of  Points handed 
over to him during the meeting, at the earliest. 
 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
       The verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

90 
 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON LABOUR HELD ON  1ST OCTOBER, 2010.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1630 hours in 
Committee Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi to take 
further evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment on `Directorate General of Employment & Training‟. 
 
 PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri M. Anandan 
3.   Shri Raj Babbar 
4.      Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5.   Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6.   Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
7.      Shri P. Lingam 
8.      Shri Hari Manjhi 
9.      Shri P. Balram Naik  
10.  Shri P.R. Natarajan 
11.  Smt. Mausam Noor 
12.  Shri Ramkishun 
13.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
 
 
   RAJYA SABHA  
14. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
15. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
16. Shri Rajaram 
17. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 

91 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 
  

92 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND 
EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer   Designation 
1. Shri Prabhat C. Chaturvedi Secretary 
2. Shri  Anil Swarup  Director General/JS 
3. Smt. Amarjeet Kaur Deputy Director 
General (Exchanges) 
4. Shri R.K. Chugh Deputy Director 
General (Training) 
5. Shri A.S. Kesai Deputy Director 
General (Advance 
Training) 
6. Shri V.K. Singh Director (Admn.) 
7. Shri R.L. Singh Director Training  
(Personnel) 
8. Shri  A.K. Ganguly Director (Training)  
9. Dr. Rumal Singh Director (Exchange) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri G.N. Ratanpuri, on 
his nomination by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Labour 
Committee for the year 2010-11. 
 

93 
 
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to take further evidenc e of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment on ` Directorate General of 
Employment and Training (DGE&T)‟.  
 
4. The Secretary then briefed the Committee on the subject.  
5. The concerns and questions raised by the Members centered 
mainly on the following:- 
(i) Amendment to the Employment Exchanges (CNV) Act, 
1959. 
(ii) Computerization of Employment Exchanges and 
development of  National Portal. 
 (iii) Notification of vacancies to Employment Exchanges. 
 (iv) Setting up of Employment Excha nges in University 
Campus. 
 (v) State Employment Schemes of Gujarat, Maharashtra. 
 (vi) Rajiv Udyogasri Scheme. 
 (vii) Training of Principals of ITIs.  
 (viii) Vacancies in ITIs. 
 (ix) Reasons for dropouts in the ITI s across the country. 
 (x) Regular payment of stipend to SC/ST students. 

94 
 
  
6. The Chairman thanked the representatives of Ministry for free 
and frank replies to the queries of the Members on the subject.  The 
Chairman also directed the Secretary to furnish written replies to 
the queries raised by the members which could not be replied orally 
and also to the Supplementary List of Points handed over to him 
during the meeting, at the earliest. 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
        
The verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
 
7. XX    XX    XX 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
 
XX  Do not pertain to this report 
 

95 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 30TH JUNE, 2011.  
 
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs in Committee 
Room 'C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to have further 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment on the subject „Directorate General of Employment & 
Training-A Review'.  
PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri  K. M. Anandan, 
3. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
        4. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
  5. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7. Shri P. Lingam 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
10. Shri Ramkishun 
11. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
12. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
13. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        15. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 
    
 
 
 

96 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh   - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri B. S. Dahiya   - Director  
 3. Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
   
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND 
EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer   Designation 
1. Shri Prabhat C. Chaturvedi Secretary  
2. Shri Sharda Prasad DG/JS 
3. Smt. Amarjeet Kaur DDG(E) 
4. Shri R. K. Chugh DDG (Training) 
5. Shri A. S. Kesai DDG (Apprenticeship 
Training)  
6. Shri R. L. Singh Director (Training)  
7. Shri D. K. Nijhawan Director (Training) 
8. Shri V. K. Singh Director 
(Administration) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take further evidence on the subject  
„Directorate General of Employment & Training-A Review'.   

97 
 
  
3. The concerns and questions raised by the members centered 
mainly on the following:- 
(i) Need for mandatory registration of private placement 
agencies. 
(ii) Comprehensive data collection for job opportunities in 
public as well as private sector. 
 (iii) Ways and means to curb fraudulent advertisements  
  regarding job opportunities. 
 (iv) National Employment Policy. 
 (v) Provision of hostel facilities for tribal students. 
 (vi) Involvement of MPs in job melas. 
 (vii) Employment activities/opportunities/job melas  in West  
  Bengal, J&K and Orissa. 
 (viii) Opening of ITIs and skill development center in each of  
  39 Naxal effected Districts. 
 (ix) Job melas in Orissa. 
 (x) Quality of education in ITIs. 
 (xi) Hostel facility in North-Eastern States. 
 (xii) Findings of the Reports of Quality Council of India. 

98 
 
 
 (xiii) Applicability of Entry 23 of Concurrent List by enlarging  
the scope of Union's powers to make an umbrella 
legislation on employment. 
 (xiv) National web portal of information. 
 (xv) High drop out rate in ITIs. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of Ministry for 
free and frank replies to the queries of the Members on the subject.  
The Chairman also asked the Secretary to furnish written replies to 
the queries raised by the members which could not be replied orally  
during the meeting, within three days. 
 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
      A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for 
record. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

99 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 25TH JULY, 2011.  
 
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1230 hrs in  Room No. 
116, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt 
the draft Report on `Directorate General of Employ ment & Training 
– A Review'.  
 
PRESENT 
   Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  - In the chair 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri K. Murugesan Anandan 
3. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4. Shri Hassan Khan 
5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6. Shri Hari Manjhi 
7. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
8. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
9. Shri P.L. Punia 
10. Shri Ramkishun 
11. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
12. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
13. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 14. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 15. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 16. Shri Rajaram 
 17. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
 18. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
  
 

100 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
  2.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 3. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Under Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Members were informed that due to some 
unavoidable circumstances, the Chairman would not be able to 
attend the sitting of the Committee.  The Committee, thereupon, 
chose Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan, a Member of the 
Committee to act as  Chairman for the sitting in terms of Rule 258 
(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha.  
3. Thereafter, the acting Chairman welcomed the Members and 
invited their suggestions on the draft Report on `Directorate General 
of Employment & Training – A Review'.  
  
4.  The Committee then took up the draft Report for 
consideration and adopted the same with some minor 
modifications.   
 
 

101 
 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the report 
after making consequential changes, if  any, arising out of factual 
verification by the Ministry and present the same to both the 
Houses of Parliament in the ensuing Monsoon Session. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 