 1 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Third  Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants for the year 2009-
10 of the Ministry of Labour and Employment] 
 
 NINTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 2010/Chaitra,  1932 (Saka) 
 
 
9  
 

 2 
NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Third  Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants for the year 2009-
10 of the Ministry of Labour and Employment] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.04.2010  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.04.2010 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 April, 2010/Chaitra,  1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


 3 
CONTENTS 
      
      
                     PAGE(S)
      
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv)
         
 CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
*CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
*CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
*CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
   replies of Government have not been accepted by  
   the Committee and which require     
    reiteration………… 
 
*CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature    …………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  *I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 *II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Third  Report  
  (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----- 
  
 *Will be appended at the time of printing.  

 4 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-10) 
 
  SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL-CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
              2. Shri  M. Anandan  
              3. Shri  P. Balram   
              4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq    
              5. Shri  Sudarshan Bhagat  
              6. Shri  Hassan Khan  
              7. Shri  Kaushalendra Kumar  
              8. Shri P. Lingam  
              9. Shri  Hari Manjhi  
            10. Shri  P.R. Natarajan  
            11. Smt. Mausam Noor  
            12. Shri  S. Pakkirappa  
            13. Shri  Ramkishun  
            14. Shri  Mahendra Kumar Roy  
            15. Shri  Chandu Lal Sahu  
            16. Shri  Murari Lal Singh  
***      17. Shri Raj Babbar  
***** 18. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar     
******19. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar  
             20. Vacant  
             21. Vacant 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
             22. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy  
             23. Shri  Rudra Narayan Pany  
        **24. Shri  Pyarelal Khandelwal  
             25. Shri  Rajaram  
             26. Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
             27. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
           *28. Shri  Mohammad Adeeb  
    ****29. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal    
             30. Vacant   
             31. Vacant 
 
 
 
 

 5 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 *   Changed the nomination from Committee on Labour to Committee on  
       Commerce w.e.f. 17th September, 2009. 
 **   Expired on 6th October, 2009. 
         ***   Nominated w.e.f. 3rd December, 2009. 
        ****   Nominated w.e.f 31st December, 2009. 
      *****   Nominated w.ef 11th January, 2010. 
     ******  Nominated w.ef 26th February, 2010. 
 
 
   
  SECRETARIAT 
 
                
 1.    Shri Devender Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri B.S. Dahiya    - Director  
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
 4.    Smt. Archana Srivastava  - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
  

 6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Ninth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thir d Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment for the year 2009-10. 
 
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2009.  The Ministry of Labour and Employment 
furnished their replies indicating action taken on the recommendations 
contained in that Report on 25.2.2010.  The Report was considered and 
adopted by the Standing Committee on Labour at their sitting held on 
9th April, 2010.  
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed in 
thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
New Delhi;                 HEMANAND BISWAL 
  29th March,  2010                               CHAIRMAN, 
   8  Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)        STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR. 
     
  
 

 7 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Labour deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Thir d Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on ` Demands for Grants ’ of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment for the year 2009 -10 which was 
presented to Lok Sabha ,  and laid in Rajya Sabha , on 
17.12.2009. 
 
2. The Ministry of Labour and Employment were requested to 
furnish action taken replies to the recommendations contained in 
the T hird Report within three months from the presentation of 
the Report i.e. by 16.03.2010.  The Report contained 13 
recommendations/observations.  The action taken replies of the 
Government in respect of all the recommendations were received 
on 25.02.2010.  These have been categorized as under:-  
 
 

 8 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Governme nt - Rec. Sl.  Nos. 
1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 and 12 .  (Para Nos. 3.9,3.20,3.21, 
3.22,3.31, 3.32, 3.33, 3.34, 3.38 and 3.52)[ Total =10] 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply – Rec. Sl.No s.11  and 13 (Para No s. 3.51 and 
3.53) [Total = 2] 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require reiteration   - Rec.  
Sl. No.10 (Para No.3.50). [ Total = 1] 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature -  NIL 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken replies in 
respect of recommendations /observations contained in 
Chapter I may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any 
case not later than three months of the presentation of the 
Report.   

 9 
 
4.      The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations which merit 
comments in the succeeding paragraphs. 
A. Regional Labour Institute, Faridabad 
(Recommendation No.9, para 3.38) 
5. The Committee observed that there ha d been an inordinate delay 
in establishing the Regional Labour Institute (RLI) at Faridabad.  The 
Committee also observe d that even after handing over of the building, 
the posts ha d not been created to make the institute fully functional .  
While deploring such a lackadais ical attitude of the Government, the 
Committee desired that the proposal be finalized at the earliest to avoid 
further delay so that the Regional Institute becomes functional within the 
next three months positively.  
 
6. In their action take n reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
have stated:- 
 
“The delay in establishing the Regional Labour Institute (RLI) 
 Faridabad has been caused due to certain unavoidable reasons. 
 Identifying and allotment of a suitable plot for RLI, Faridabad took 
 considerable time.  The construction of the Building was started by 
 the CPWD from the 18 th January, 2004 after acquiring the land 
 from the Government of Haryana. The setting up of the 
 laboratories of RLI Faridabad was initiated during the 10th Five 
 Year  Plan (2002 -2007) in a phased manner. The building 

 10 
 construction was completed by the CPWD and handed over to 
 DGF ASLI from  October 2008 to December 2008. Ministry had 
 been consiste ntly taking up with CPWD to expedite the 
 completion of the building.  After setting up of the laboratories the 
 building was inaugurated on  10th February 2009 and the Institute 
 started functioning.  
 
 2. The Institute has become functional and the techn ical 
 activities have started  with the assistance of Central Labour 
 Institute (CLI), Mumbai and RLI, Kanpur. All the laboratories 
 including Industrial Hygiene, Industrial Medicine Industrial 
 Physiology / Ergonomics, Safety, Health and Environment Centr e 
 and library have been set -up. Meanwhile the setting up of 
 specialized divisions such as Micro, Small and Medium Scale 
 Enterprises Division, Chemical Safety Division etc. is also in 
 progress.  
 3. The details of the technical activities carried out till 15 th 
 January 2010 are as under: 
A. Training Programmes 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Title of Programme Level of 
Participants 
Date 
1.   Human Factors in 
Occupational Safety 
Health and Environment  
Middle Level 
Executives 
27-29th April 
2009 
2.  Management of Safety Workers 12-13th May 

 11 
Health and Environment 
at work place 
2009 
3.  Physical Hazards and 
their Management at their 
work place 
Middle Level 
Executives 
15-16th June 
2009 
4.  Management of Safety 
Health and Environment 
at work place for safety 
committee members 
Safety 
Committee 
Members 
20-21st July 
2009 
5.  Environmental Hazards 
and their Management at 
work place 
Middle Level 
Executives 
24-25 August 
2009 
6.  Basic Training 
Programme on Industrial 
Safety and Health 
(Collaborative) 
Workers and 
Supervisors 
5-8th Oct. 2009 
7.  Chemical Hazards and 
their Management at their 
work place 
Middle Level 
Executives 
16–17th Nov. 
2009 
8.  Human Factors in 
Occupational Safety 
Health and Environment  
Middle Level 
Executives 
11–13th Jan 
2010 
 
 B. Studies, Surveys and Safety Audits  
 Conducted a Safety audit in the plant of M/S Ballarpur Industries 
Ltd. Yamuna Nagar, Haryana in June 2009. 

 12 
 Conducted Safety Audit and consequence analysis in the storage 
area of M/S  Deen Bandhu Chhotu Ram Thermal Power Project 
Yamuna Nagar, Haryana, in  March 2009   
 C. Seminars / Workshops / Conferences and Technical 
Meetings 
 Organized the Annual Conference of Chief Inspectors of Factories 
at RLI, Faridabad from 10th – 12th Feb. 2009. 
 Organized the National Seminar on “Safety Education in India – 
Challenges & oppor tunities on 1 st September 2009.  The seminar 
was attended by about 250   delegates from the field of safety, 
safety professionals and other stake holders. 
 Organized the meeting of Working Group Committee (constituted 
during the CIF Conference) The meeting of this Working Group 
Committee was held 2nd to 4th September 2009 at RLI Faridabad.  
 Organized the meeting on 6 th and 7 th November, 2009 with Chief 
Inspectors of Factories, Govt. of Haryana and Haryana Safety 
Council for developing the Training Modules fo r the Trainers 
Training Programme. 
 
 D. Post Diploma in Industrial Safety (PDIS) 
 As the RLI, Faridabad falls under the jurisdiction of Board of 
 Technical Education (BTE), Haryana, the BTE was approached for 
 accreditation and approval of the PDIS course at RLI, Faridabad. 
 BTE Haryana has accorded accreditation and affiliation to RLI 
 Faridabad for conducting one year Post Diploma Course in 
 Industrial Safety w.e.f. the academic year  2009-10 onwards . 

 13 
 Selection of the candidates was made as per the guidelines 
 issued by BTE Haryana. In total 64 applications were received 
 from the candidates out of which 52 candidates were short listed 
 for the interview and finally 35 candidates were selected. 
 The inaugural  function of the 1 st Post Diploma in Industrial 
 Safety (PDIS) - Year 2009 -2010 was held in the Auditorium, 
 Regional Labour Institute, Faridabad on  1st September, 2009. 
 
 4. The matter of creation of 50 posts was taken up by the 
 Ministry with the Department of Expenditure in 2003. However, the 
 Department of Expenditure advised that the proposal for creation 
 of posts may be taken up after the construction work of the 
 building is near completion. Thereafter, the proposal for creation of 
 14 posts for RLI Faridabad was again taken up in 2006 with the 
 Department of Expenditure who advised that a workstudy be 
 conducted of DGFASLI and the existing RLIs under it so as to 
 devise a revised staffing pattern of the organisation. The pos ts in 
 the new institute will be considered on the basis of the revised 
 staffing pattern. Thereafter, the SIU report recommended 14 posts 
 for RLI Faridabad. Accordingly,14 posts have been sanctioned for 
 RLI Faridabad.  The SIU also recommended that the strength of 
 RLI, Faridabad should be at par with other RLIs.  The proposal for 
 creating the remaining posts has also been initiated. 
 
 5. Regarding observation on inadequate budget estimates, it 
 may be s tated that the recommendations of SIU for creation of 
 posts is under non -plan and expenditure on staff component will 
 be met from the consolidated non plan budget of the department.  

 14 
 Hence, there will be no need for any significant enhancement in 
 the plan budget. As such Ministry is taking measures for increasing 
 the plan outlay”. 
 
7. The Committee in their recommendation had desired that the 
proposal for creation of posts be finalized at the earliest to avoid 
further delay so that the Regional Labour Institute at Faridabad 
becomes functional within the next three months.  However, from 
the reply of the Government , the Committee find  that even after 
passage of nearly two months, the Government could only obtain 
sanction for 14 posts and the proposal for creation of the remaining 
posts has only been initiated.  As there is lot of work involved 
between creation and sanction of posts and filling up of the posts,   
the Committee desire that necessary and conclusive steps be 
initiated expeditiously to fill up the remaining posts. 
 
 
B. Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) 
(Recommendation S.No.10, para 3.50) 
 
8. The Committee observed that the coverage under the Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojana was provided for BPL workers and their family 
upto a unit of five which would comprise the family head, spouse and 
dependants upto three including children/parents of the hea d of the 
family.  The Committee were informed that the number was restricted to 
five keeping in view the similar provision in the other on -going insurance 
schemes which provide insurance to only five members of the family.  

 15 
The Committee viewed that the ag ing parents need more medical care 
than other members of the family.  The y, therefore, recommend ed that 
the limit of number five should be enhanced to at least six so as to cover 
head of the family, spouse, two parents and two children.  
 
9. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
have stated:-  
  “RSBY smart cards have been issued to more than one crore 
families as on 19.01.2010.  As per reports received the average 
family size is around 4 members. Hence, increase in the family 
size is perhaps not required at present. The Ministry is closely 
monitoring the issue and recommendation to increase in family 
size would be taken when the family size reaches to at least five”. 
10.     The Committee note that the Rashtriya Swasthy a Bima 
Yojana was meant to give coverage to five members of a family 
initially.  The Committee had recommended that the benefit of the 
Scheme be extended to at least six members of a family so as to 
include the head of the family, spouse, two parents and two 
children and where there is only one surviving parent, the size of 
the family could be restricted to five.  The Committee are happy to 
know that smart cards under RSBY have been issued to more than 
one crore families as on 19.01.2010.  The Committee, however, are, 
not satisfied with the reply of the Government that the average 
family size was around 4 members and hence increase in the family 
size was perhaps not required at present unless the family size 
reaches at least to five.  The Committee would like to remind the 
Government that the professed objective of the RSBY, is to provide 

 16 
insurance cover to below the poverty line (BPL) households in the 
country, who have no access to good healthcare.  The Committee 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the 
Government should re-consider the matter so that insurance cover 
is extended to six members each of the BPL families. 
 
(Recommendation S.No.12, para 3.52) 
 
11. The Committee were informed of certain cases of misuse of the 
Scheme by some beneficiaries as well as the treating doctors.  While 
replying to the concerns raised by the Members, the Committee were 
apprised that it is between the hospital and the insurance agency and 
the role of the Government is confined to payment of premium .  Since 
the Scheme is being run by the Government, the Committee 
recommended that effective monitoring mechanism should be evolved 
and deterrent provisions built in the Scheme so as to keep an effective  
check on such or similar incidences of abuse. 
 
 
12. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
have stated:- 
 
“The implementation of the scheme is being electronically 
 monitored on day to day basis. Apart from that Regional 
 Workshops are held to review the implementation of the scheme in 
 different states as well as sharing of experience. The scheme is 
 being concurrently evaluated by independent agencies. The 
 Ministry is in the process of setting up surveillance teams to vi sit 

 17 
 the field units and give their feedback to the Government on the 
 basis of which remedial action will be taken, if required. Similarly, 
 the  State Governments have also been advised to conduct 
 studies  and for surveillance teams to assess the ground  
 realities and take appropriate action”. 
 
13. The Committee take note of the reply of the Government  in 
implementation and monitoring of the Scheme.  The Committee   
ardently hope that the Government would keep constant vigil over 
the situation so as to prevent misuse of the Scheme. 
  

 18 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation [Para 3.9] 
 
 
 
 
 The Committee observe that though most of the Schemes 
proposed by the Ministry of Labour and Employment are continuous in 
nature and are being carried forward to the next plan, yet there is a 
scope for some of the schemes viz. (i) construction of office bu ilding, 
staff quarters and skill training Institutes, (ii) Machinery for better 
conciliation and upgradation of office infrastructure at CLC (C) and 
RLC(C)‟s etc. to be completed within the span of a particular plan period.  
The Committee desire that conce rted efforts should be made by the 
Ministry to complete the schemes within the respective plan period 
instead of dragging them on the next plan period. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
(i) Construction of office building, staff quarters and skill training 
Institutes 
 Construction of Office building, staff quarters and skill training 
institutes  for Vocational Rehabilitation Centres (VRCs) for Handicapped  
largely depends on the allotment of requisite piece of land at a suitable 
place which should be centrally located a nd well connected with public 
transport.  Wherever such land is made available to VRC by the 
concerned State Government, construction work of those VRCs is taken 
up in particular plan period. Efforts are being made to get land allotted in 
respect of remain ing States where construction work is yet to be taken 
up.           
 
(ii) Machinery for better conciliation and upgradation of office 
infrastructure at CLC (C) and RLC(C)‟s 
There are two Plan schemes approved for the Chief Labour 
commissioner (Central) org anization; namely “Improvement and 

 19 
strengthening of training wing of CLS officers” and “Machinery for Better 
conciliation Service and Preventive Mediation on more effective 
enforcement of Labour Laws/Machinery for better conciliation and 
Upgradation of Office Infrastructure of CLC(C) and RLC(C).”  
 
The thrust of scheme namely “Machinery for Better conciliation 
Service and Preventive mediation on more effective enforcement of 
Labour Laws/Machinery for better conciliation and Upgradation of Office 
Infrastructure of CLC(C) and RLC(C)” is to strengthen t he Conciliation 
machinery and to improve the infrastructure of the organization by 
providing latest technology in the form of computers, photocopiers, 
scanners etc. to facilitate e-governance and strengthen the infrastructure 
including own office buildings . This will not only improve the overall 
professional efficiency of the organization but also overcome the 
shortage of staff members Though no physical and financial targets were 
conceived for different regions but our endeavour was to distribute the 
office equipments for improving the efficiency of regional/field offices in 
consonance with the availability of budget as well as the work load of the 
regions. Accordingly, each year depending upon the availability of funds, 
office equipments were purchased and  supplied to the field offices. 
Since then significant progress has been made in improving the 
infrastructure of field offices that has resulted in improved functioning of 
Organization. However, still large number of computers purchased about 
7 to 8 year b ack need to be replaced with modern age computers i.e. 
Pentium 4 computers.    
 
In so far as construction of own office buildings are concerned, 
since the inception of the scheme office building have already been 
constructed for combined offices of Dy/Regi onal Labour Commissioner 
(C) and a CGIT Court at Kanpur, Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Dhanbad, 
Hyderabad and Bhubaneswar etc.  At present construction of projects 
are in progress/to be started at Guwahati, Asansol, Jabalpur and Dwarka 
Delhi. It is worth mentioning that the construction activities are influenced 
by many factors viz. involvement of CPWD and multiple civic agencies 
as well as availability of budgetary provision, Hence it becomes difficult 
to visualize specific time frame for completing these projects.  

 20 
 
The evaluation was conducted by the SHRI RAM CENTRE for 
Industrial Relation and the Plan Scheme was recommended to be 
continued. Hence, continuation of above said plan schemes is 
mandatory for achieving the goals of CLC(C) is organization. 
 
Recommendation [Para 3.20] 
 
 
 The Committee note that according to Census 2001, there are 
1.26 crore economically active children in the age group of 5 -14 years.  
The figure might have burgeoned with the growth in population.  Since 
poverty is the root cau se of the problem, the rehabilitation and 
mainstreaming of the children withdrawn from work cannot help solve it 
alone unless the families of these children are supported economically. 
Government have, therefore, a conscientious obligation to ensure that, 
after rehabilitation, these children do not go back to any workplace.  As 
per written reply of the Government, all the concerned Ministries have 
been requested to give priority to the child labour families in welfare 
schemes being run by or under them.  Th e Committee are of the 
considered view that mere issuance of directions to the concerned 
Ministries will not address the problem unless concrete measures are 
taken to ensure that the reclaimed children do not rejoin the workforce.  
The Committee recommend that the families of such children should be 
given preference in the parallel welfare scheme of NREGA so that 
families of these children can also be supported economically and they 
do not compel these children to resort to child labour. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
  
 Ministry of Labour &  Employment has already requested the 
Ministry of Rural Development to issue suitable guidelines to the  
concerned for giving priority to the families of Child Labour in the  
welfare schemes being run in the Ministry including NREGA.  
 
 
 

 21 
 
 
Recommendation [Para 3.21] 
 
 
 The Committee observe that V.V. Giri National Labour Institute, 
Noida was tasked in 2001 to evaluate comprehensively the 
implementation of the National Child Labour Project  (NCLP)  Scheme  
at  the cost of Rs. 93,60,000/-. The report pointed out serious drawbacks 
and bottlenecks in the implementation of the NCLP Scheme – like part 
time availability of the Project Directors, Inadequate provisioning of Field 
Officers, non-availability of Master trainers and doctors, lack of training 
for funds ma nagement at district levels, schools ill -equipped with basic 
teaching and learning materials, non -availability of adequate vocational 
material/equipments, irregular payment of stipend (as only 27% schools 
are reported to have deposited the stipend regularl y), and unsatisfactory 
infrastructure in most of the schools.  Fresh evaluation of the NCLP 
scheme was a pre -requisite for its continuance during the 11 th Plan. So, 
again an amount of Rs. 2,81,23,700/ - was incurred on re -evaluation of 
the Scheme in 2008.  The Committee also observe that two Centrally 
sponsored Schemes, viz. Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and Mid Day Meal 
Schemes are primarily giving boost to the NCLP Scheme rather than any 
measures being taken under the NCLP Scheme.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that instead of conducting repetitive studies at 
such a prohibiti ve cost, the Ministry need to take urgent measures to 
remove the shortcomings pointed out by the earlier studies conducted by 
the National Labour Institute. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 Evaluation of the NCLP scheme was pre -condition laid down by 
the Planning Commission for continuation of the scheme during 11th Five 
Year plan.  The Government has already initiated remedial steps.  A 
presentation of the evaluation report was made during the meeting of the 
Central Monitoring Committee on Child Labour.  The Commi ttee consist 
Labour Secretaries of all State /UT Governments.  It was impressed 
upon them to take corrective measures and remove the bottlenecks in 
implementing the scheme.  
  

 22 
 
Recommendation [Para 3.22] 
 
 
 The Committee do not accept the argument advanced  by the 
Government that those who are part and parcel of the NCLP Society 
cannot help in overseeing/monitoring of the Scheme. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the PRIs should also be involved in 
monitoring for better and effective implementation of  the Scheme.  
Further, the Ministry of Rural Development, Department of Panchayati 
Raj may also be requested to sensitize the Gram Panchayats so as to 
eradicate the problem of child labour and help rehabilitate such children. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
Under th e NCLP Scheme, Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs) are 
involved in the Executive Committees constituted at district level for 
implementation of the Scheme.   In some districts PRIs are running 
special schools under the Scheme. Ministry of Rural Development a nd 
Department of Panchayati Raj are being requested to take steps for 
sensitizing the Gram Panchayats enable them play active role in 
eradication of Child Labour.   
 
Recommendation [Para 3.31] 
 
 
 The Committee observe that the Government have not identifie d 
the number of beedi workers though identity cards are being issued to 
them.  The last survey for identification of beedi workers was conducted 
in Rajasthan in 2005.  Thereafter, no survey has been conducted to 
ascertain the number of beedi workers in Raj asthan and the rest of the 
States.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that all the State 
Governments, where beedi rolling is a major profession, be directed to 
conduct a survey for identification of genuine beedi workers within a 
definite time frame to facilitate issue of identity cards. 
 
 
 
 
 

 23 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
  The State Governments where beedi rolling is a major profession, 
have been requested to conduct a survey for identification of genuine 
beedi workers within a definite time frame to facilitate issue of identity 
cards.  The Welfare Commissioners working under the Labour Welfare 
Organizations have also been directed to extend the possible assistance 
as per the resources available with them to the State Government 
authorities while survey is conducted. 
 
 
Recommendation [Para 3.32] 
 
 
 The Committee observes that the minimum wages for beedi 
workers vary widely from State to State. The Committee also note that 
the rate for rolling beedis is lowest in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh.  
The Committee are aware that though the matter falls under the 
jurisdiction of respective State Governments, these States should be 
persuaded to at least adopt the National Floor Level Minimum Wage, 
which would help reduce disparity in the rates of minimum wages to a 
considerable extent.  The Committee desire that if any cases of 
discrimination of wages between men and women beedi workers come 
to Government notice, the same should be dealt with stringently so as to 
ensure equal pay for equal work. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 Employment of workers engaged in beedi making falls under the 
purview of State sphere. The State Governments, as appropriate 
Governments, have notified minimum rates of wages for beedi workers 
besides other scheduled employments under their respective jurisdiction. 
 The Central Government has revised the National floor Level 
Minimum Wages from Rs.80/ - to Rs.100/ - per day with effect from 
01.11.2009 based on the rise in Consumer Price Index Number for 
Industrial Workers. The Hon‟ble Chief Ministers of the St ate 
Governments / Union Territory Administrators have been requested on 
16th December, 2009 to fix / revise minimum wages in scheduled 
employments including beedi making not less than the National Floor 

 24 
Level Minimum Wage of Rs.100/ - per day by Hon‟ble Uni on Labour & 
Employment Minister. 
 The enforcement of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 in the State 
sphere is ensured through the State Enforcement Machinery. They 
conduct regular inspections and in the event of detection of any case of 
non-payment or under -payment of minimum wages, they advise the 
employers to make payment of the shortfall of wages.  In case of non -
compliance of advice of inspector, there are the provisions of 
prosecutions in the Act against the defaulting employers. 
 
Recommendation [Para 3.33] 
 
 
 The Committee observes that the Tripartite Central Advisory 
Committee on Beedi Workers‟ Welfare Fund have held three sittings during 
the last three years.  Amongst many points raised for the welfare of beedi 
workers, one was for waiving the outstanding loan on compassionate 
grounds which runs from a few hundreds to few thousands rupees.  The 
Ministry informed that the „matter has been taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance after obtaining the approval of the Minister for Labour and 
Employment and the prop osal is still under the examination of the Ministry 
of Finance.‟  The Committee desire that the matter may be taken up with 
the Finance Minister on priority basis so that the unrecovered interest free 
housing loan of beedi workers is waived off expeditiously. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
The proposal, for settlement of outstanding unrecovered interest -free 
loans granted to Beedi & Mine workers, has been taken up with the M/o 
Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure). Reply to clarifications / information sought-
for by the Ministry  of Finance is being furnished to it for writing off 
outstanding loan of workers. 
 
 Recommendation [Para 3.34] 
 
 
 The Committee observes that the Insurance Scheme under Social 
Security exists for beedi workers for which premium is paid from the 
welfare fund.  In the eventuality of natural death, insurance claim is Rs. 
10,000/- and for accidental death, it is Rs. 25,000/-.The Committee feel that 
the insured amount is too meagre for the bereaved family.  Since the 

 25 
welfare fund is funded through collection of cess and caters to other 
welfare schemes also, it is not possible, according to the Ministry, to 
enhance the insur ed amount.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
some alternatives should be explored to augment the corpus of the welfare 
fund so that the welfare activities carried out through this fund do not suffer 
due to paucity of funds. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for 
compliance.  
 
Recommendation [Para 3.38] 
 
 
 
 The Committee observe that there has been an inordinate delay in 
establishing the Regional Labour Institute (RLI) at Faridabad.  The 
Committee also observe that even after handing over of the building, the 
posts have not been created to make the institute fully functional as the 
proposal for creation of additional posts for RLI is still under process.  
Further during the current financial year, the Budget Estimates show a 
marginal increase which, in any case, would not be able to 
accommodate the staff once the newly created posts are filled up.  The 
Committee deplore such a lackadaisical attitude of the Government and 
desire that the proposal be finalized at the earliest to avoid further delay 
so that the Regional Institute becomes functional within the next  three 
months positively.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 The delay in establishing the Regional Labour Institute (RLI) 
Faridabad has been caused due to certain unavoidable reasons. 
Identifying and allotment of a suitable plot for RLI, Faridabad took 
considerable time.  The construction of the Building was started by the 
CPWD from the 18 th January, 2004 after acquiring the land from the 
Government of Haryana. The setting up of the laboratories of RLI 
Faridabad was initiated during the X Five Year Plan (2002 -2007) i n a 
phased manner. The building construction was completed by the CPWD 
and handed over to DGF ASLI from October 2008 to December 2008. 
Ministry had been consistently taking up with CPWD to expedite the 
completion of the building. After setting up of the la boratories the 
building was inaugurated on 10 th February 2009 and the Institute started 
functioning.  

 26 
 
2. The Institute has become functional and the technical activities 
have started with the assistance of Central Labour Institute (CLI), 
Mumbai and RLI, K anpur. All the laboratories including Industrial 
Hygiene, Industrial Medicine Industrial  
 
Physiology / Ergonomics, Safety, Health and Environment Centre and 
library have been set -up. Meanwhile the setting up of specialized 
divisions such as Micro, Small a nd Medium Scale Enterprises Division, 
Chemical Safety Division etc. is also in progress.  
3. The details of the technical activities carried out till 15 th January 
2010 are as under: 
B. Training Programmes 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Title of Programme Level of 
Participants 
Date 
9.   Human Factors in 
Occupational Safety 
Health and Environment  
Middle Level 
Executives 
27-29th April 
2009 
10.  Management of Safety 
Health and Environment 
at work place 
Workers 12-13th May 
2009 
11.  Physical Hazards and 
their Management at their 
work place 
Middle Level 
Executives 
15-16th June 
2009 
12.  Management of Safety 
Health and Environment 
at work place for safety 
committee members 
Safety 
Committee 
Members 
20-21st July 
2009 
13.  Environmental Hazards 
and their Management at 
work place 
Middle Level 
Executives 
24-25 August 
2009 
14.  Basic Training 
Programme on Industrial 
Safety and Health 
(Collaborative) 
Workers and 
Supervisors 
5-8th Oct. 2009 

 27 
15.  Chemical Hazards and 
their Management at their 
work place 
Middle Level 
Executives 
16–17th Nov. 
2009 
16.  Human Factors in 
Occupational Safety 
Health and Environment  
Middle Level 
Executives 
11–13th Jan 
2010 
 
B. Studies, Surveys and Safety Audits  
 Conducted a Safety audit in the plant of M/S Ballarpur Industries 
Ltd. Yamuna Nagar Haryana, June 2009. 
 Conducted Safety Audit and consequence analysis in the storage 
area of M/S  Deen Bandhu Chhotu Ram Thermal Power Project 
Yamuna Nagar Haryana March 2009   
C. Seminars / Workshops / Conferences and Technical Meetings 
 Organized the Annual Conference of Chief  Inspectors of Factories 
at RLI, Faridabad from 10th – 12th Feb. 2009. 
 Organized the National Seminar on “Safety Education in India – 
Challenges & opportunities on 1 st September 2009.  The seminar 
was attended by about 250   delegates from the field of saf ety, 
safety professionals and other stake holders. 
 Organized the meeting of Working Group Committee (constituted 
during the CIF Conference) The meeting of this Working Group 
Committee was held 2nd to 4th September 2009 at RLI Faridabad.  
 Organized the meet ing on 6 th and 7 th November, 2009 with Chief 
Inspectors of Factories, Govt. of Haryana and Haryana Safety 
Council for developing the Training Modules for the Trainers 
Training Programme. 
 
D. Post Diploma in Industrial Safety (PDIS) 
As the RLI, Faridabad fa lls under the jurisdiction  of Board of 
Technical Education (BTE), Haryana, the BTE was approached for 
accreditation and approval of the PDIS course at RLI, Faridabad. BTE 
Haryana has accorded accreditation and affiliation to RLI Faridabad for 
conducting one year Post Diploma Course in Industrial Safety w.e.f. the 
academic year 2009-10 onwards. 
Selection of the candidates was made as per the guidelines issued 
by BTE Haryana. In total 64 applications were received from the 

 28 
candidates out of which 52 candidates were short listed for the interview 
and finally 35 candidates were selected. 
The inaugural function of the 1 st Post Diploma in Industrial Safety 
(PDIS) - Year 2009-2010 was held in the Auditorium, Regional Labour 
Institute, Faridabad on               1st September, 2009. 
 
4. The matter of creation of 50 posts was taken up by the Ministry 
with the Department of Expenditure in 2003. However, the Department 
of Expenditure advised that the proposal for creation of posts may be 
taken up after the construction work of the building is near completion. 
Thereafter, the proposal for creation of 14 posts for RLI Faridabad was 
again taken up in 2006 with the Department of Expenditure who advised 
that a workstudy be conducted of DGFASLI and the existing RLIs under 
it so as to devise a revised staffing pattern of the organisation. The posts 
in the new institute will be considered on the basis of the revised staffing 
pattern. Thereafter, the SIU report recommended 14 posts for RLI 
Faridabad. Accordingly,14 posts have been  sanctioned for RLI 
Faridabad.  The SIU also recommended that the strength of RLI, 
Faridabad should be at par with other RLIs.  The proposal for creating 
the remaining posts has also been initiated. 
 
5. Regarding observation on inadequate budget estimates,  it may be 
stated that the recommendations of SIU for creation of posts is under 
non-plan and expenditure on staff component will be met from the 
consolidated non plan budget of the department.  Hence, there will be no 
need for any significant enhancement in the plan budget. As such 
Ministry is taking measures for increasing the plan outlay. 
 
Recommendation [Para 3.52] 
 
 
 The Committee were informed of certain cases of misuse of the 
Scheme by some beneficiaries as well as the treating doctors.  While 
replying to the concerns raised by the Members, the Committee were 
apprised that it is between the hospital and the insurance agency and 
the role of the Government is confined to payment of premium.  It is for 
the insurance agency to keep track on such incidence s as basically it is 
their loss.  The Ministry cannot shy away from their responsibility under 
the pretext that there is no loss to the Government.  Since the Scheme is 
being run by the Government, the Committee recommend that effective 

 29 
monitoring mechanism should be evolved and deterrent provisions built 
in the  Scheme so as to keep an effective check on such or similar 
incidences of abuse. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The implementation of the scheme is being electronically 
monitored on day to day basis. Apart from that Regional Workshops are 
held to review the implementation of the scheme in different states as 
well as sharing of experience. The scheme is being concurrently 
evaluated by independent agencies. The Ministry is in the process of 
setting up surveill ance teams to visit the field units and give their 
feedback to the Government on the basis which remedial action will be 
taken, if required. Similarly, the State Governments have also been 
advised to conduct studies and for surveillance teams to assess the  
ground realities and take appropriate action. 

 30 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDTIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
Recommendation [Para 3.51] 
 
 The Committee observe that as per the features of the Scheme, 
the insurance amount is Rs. 30,000/ - per family per annum on a family 
floater basis.  However, in case the amount of treatment exceeds Rs. 
30,000/-, it has to be borne by the beneficiary.  Since the Scheme is for 
the BPL workers, the Committee stro ngly feel that a BPL family cannot 
bear the extra expenditure on their treatment exceeding the insured 
amount.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that in cases of major 
illnesses where the expenditure on treatment exceeds the prescribed 
limit, some special provisions should be made for meeting the expenses 
beyond Rs. 30,000/-. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
  
   If provision of coverage beyond Rs.30,000/- is made, the premium 
would also increase for which additional funds would be required.  
However, to top up the  benefits under the RSBY, some State 
Governments have invited quotations from insurance companies‟ 
alongwith RSBY package, rates for covering critical illness. The premium 
for additional benefits is paid by the State Governments. This could be 
done by other States also. 
 
  

 31 
Recommendation [Para 3.53] 
 
 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry have not given a 
thoughtful consideration to the insurance scheme in operation in 
Karnataka at a premium of Rs. 5/- a month. The Committee also observe 
that the RSBY has a cap of Rs. 30,000/ - whereas there is no cap in the 
insurance scheme in operation in Karnataka. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Karnataka insurance model working at a premium 
of Rs.5/ - a month without any cap needs serious consideration.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of such 
examination. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
  As mentioned in the last report, the features of RSBY and 
Karnataka insurance model are totally different. The same are reiterated 
again: 
(I)  Premium under Yeshaswani Insurance Scheme is Rs. 140 per 
person per year. In addition to this the cooperative society charge 
Rs. 10 for service charges.  There is an additional amount for 
coverage of spouse and other family members. In addition, the 
State Government pays contribution approximately Rs. 107 per 
person.  Whereas, under RSBY, beneficiary pays Rs. 30 only for 
5 members. 
 
(II) Only surgical conditions are covered which excludes large 
number of medical cases for which individual may need 
hospitalization.   Also surgeries which are not in the list are not 
covered.  All procedure are limited to one incidence per year.  
Whereas under RSBY, surgical and medical procedures are 
covered. 
 
(III) Maternity coverage is restricted to one delivery per year. 
 
 

 32 
(IV) There is an age limit of 75 years.  There is no age limit in RSBY. 
 
(V) Scheme is open only to members of cooperatives and their 
families.  Most of the member of lower middle income group and 
very poor people are not members.  Since only individuals and 
not family are e nrolled.  Therefore, only ill people are enrolled. 
Under RSBY, all BPL families are being covered.  RSBY has 
been extended to Building and other Construction workers. 
 
(VI) Valid in Karnataka only.  RSBY is being implemented all over the 
country. 
 
In view of ab ove, the RSBY is more beneficial than Yasheswani 
Insurance Scheme. 
  

 33 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
Recommendation [Para 3.50] 
 
 
 The Committee observe that the coverage under the Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojana is provided for BPL workers and their family upto 
a unit of five.  A family would comprise the family head, spouse and 
dependants upto three including children/parents of t he head of the 
family.  If the family size is more than five, the head of the family would 
decide as to who should be left out.  The Committee were informed that 
the number was restricted to five keeping in view the similar provision in 
the other on -going insurance schemes which provide insurance to only 
five members of the family.  The Committee are of the view that with the 
aging parents need more medical care than other members of the family.  
Moreover, it is a statutory responsibility of the children to  take care of 
their aged parents.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the limit 
of number five should be enhanced to at least six so as to cover head of 
the family, spouse, two parents and two children.  Where there is only 
one surviving parent, the size of the family can be restricted to five. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
  
 RSBY smart cards have been issued to more than one crore 
families as on 19.01.2010.  As per reports received the average family 
size is around 4 members. Hence, increase in the family size is perhaps 
not required at present. The Ministry is closely monitor ing the issue and 
recommendation to increase in family size would be taken when the 
family size reaches to at least five.  
  

 34 
 
     CHAPTER-V 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN 
NATURE 
 
 
 
N I L 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                  HEMANAND BISWAL 
29th March,  2010                      CHAIRMAN, 
8 Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)        STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.   

 35 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON LABOUR HELD ON 9TH APRIL, 2010.  
 
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1230 hrs in 
Committee Room `D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to 
consider and adopt the draft Report on action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the Third Report (15th Lok Sabha) on `Demands for Grants’ of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for the year 2009-10.  
PRESENT 
    Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. Balram 
3. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri Hassan Khan 
6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
9. Shri Ramkishun 
10. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 11. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 12. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
13. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal   
   
 
SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
  3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
  
 

 36 
2. Before the start of the meeting, the Committee observed two 
minutes silence as a mark of respect to the CRPF jawans who 
laid their lives fighting the Mao ists at Dantewada, Chhattisgarh.  
The Chairman, then, welcomed Shri Praveen Rashtrapal, a new 
member to the Committee and hoped that he would enrich the 
deliberations of the Committee.  The Chairman, thereafter, 
apprised the members about the draft Report on action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in the Thir d Report (15th Lok Sabha) on ` Demands for Grants’ of 
the Ministry of Labour for the year 2009-10.  
3.  The Committee took up the draft Report for consideration.  
The Committee adopted the same without any modification.   
 
4.  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
5.  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
    
  

 37 
 
  
    APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
        Total 
 Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations      13  NIL 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have          
 been accepted by Government 
 (Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7, 8,9 and 12)         
 (Para Nos. 3.9,3.20,3.21,3.22,3.31,3.32,3.33,3.34,3.38 10  76.9% 
 and 3.52) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s replies- (Sl. Nos. 11 and 13) 
 (Para Nos. 3.51 and 3.53)     02  15.4%  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
 which Government’s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration – (Sl.No.10) (Para No.3.50)        01   7.7% 
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which     
 final replies of Government are of interim in  nature       
         NIL   NIL 
   
                             ------------ 
              100%
                                ------------ 
  
 
 
 
 
 