45 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-Second   Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on the  `Welfare of glass and bangle 
workers of Firozabad – A case study’]  
 
FORTY- FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
March,  2014/Phalguna, 1935 (Saka) 
 

FORTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
  
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-Second   Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on the  `Welfare of glass and bangle 
workers of Firozabad – A case study’]  
  
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on  15 March   2014 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March,  2014/Phalguna , 1935 (Saka) 
 
  
 

CONTENTS 
       
                   PAGE(s)  
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv)  
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of th e  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration…………………………………………………  
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect o f   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second   
  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
   

   
  
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2013-14)  
 SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN - CHAIRMAN 
 MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Ashok Argal  
3.  Shri Ismail Hussain  
4.  Dr. Manda Jagannath  
5.  Dr. Virendra Kumar  
6.  Shri Nara Hari Mahato  
7.  Shri Hari Manjhi  
8.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel  
9.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy  
10.  Smt. J. Shantha  
11.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh [Lalan]  
12.  Shri Ratan Singh  
13.  Shri Dinu Solanki  
14.  Shri Makansingh Solanki  
15.  Shri K. Sugumar  
16.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai  
17.  Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware  
18.  Shri Om Prakash Yadav  
*19.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
20.  Vacant  
21.  Vacant  
             Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Smt. T. Ratna Bai  
23.  Shri D. Bandyopadhyay  
24.  Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot  
25.  Shri P. Kannan  
26.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan  
27.  Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati  
28.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
29.  Shri Rajaram  
30.  Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
31.  Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh  
--------------------------------------------- 
------------------------------ 
 
*  No           * Nominated w.e.f 17 th  December, 2013 
 

 
                     SECRETARIAT  
 
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy - Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION  
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour  having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Repo rt on their 
behalf, do present this Forty-fifth Report on the a ction taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-
Second Report of the Standing Committee on Labour ( Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on `Welfare of glass and bangle workers of Firozabad –  A case 
study’.      
 
2. The Thirty-second Report was presented to Lok Sa bha and 
also laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 
th  August, 2012.  The Ministry of 
Labour and Employment furnished their replies indic ating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in that Repo rt on 12 th  
February, 2014.  The Standing Committee on Labour at their sitting 
held on 21 st February, 2014 considered and adopted the draft 
report and authorized the Chairman to finalise the same and 
present it to the Hon’ble Speaker/Parliament.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on  the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Repo rt of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed 
in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                                  
21  February, 2014
                                            DARA SI NGH CHAUHAN                        
Magha ,1935 (Saka)                         CHAIRMAN ,  
                           STANDING COMMITTEE ON LA BOUR  
 
 

CHAPTER-I 
REPORT  
 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Gov ernment on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirt y-Second Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on `Welfare of glass and bang le workers of Firozabad -  A 
case study’. 
1.2 The Thirty-Second Report was presented to Lok S abha  and also laid on 
the Table in Rajya Sabha on 30 
th  August, 2012. It contained 15 
recommendations/ observations. Replies of Governmen t in respect of all the 
recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:-  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government –  
 
Para Nos.35, 37 ,41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47,48 and    
49 
 
 
(ii) 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
reply – 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
(iv)           
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration –  
Para Nos. 36, 39 and 43 
  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature- 
 Para Nos. 38 and 40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes in  respect of 
recommendations contained in Chapter I and final ac tion taken notes in 
respect of recommendations contained in Chapter-V f or which only 
interim replies have been given by the Government m ay be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not later than  3 months of the 
presentation of this Report.   
A. Extension of ESI Scheme 
 
(Recommendation No.36)  
 
1.4 The Committee felt that social security schemes  like ESI scheme should 
be extended to these workers also. The Committee wa s of the firm view that 
Ministry should explore the possibility of extendin g the ESI scheme to glass 
and bangle workers in the unorganized sector also i f required by amending the 
ESI Act so that these poor workers have access to healthcare.  
 
1.5 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of La bour and Employment 
stated that: 
 “The Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 is appli cable to the workers 
 in the organized sector. There is separate legisla tion i.e. Unorganised 
 Workers Social Security Act, 2008 for providing so cial security and 
 welfare of the unorganised workers which includes home based workers 
 also.  
  Under this Act, Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana ha s been 
 launched, which provides health insurance coverage  for all BPL families 
 and certain other categories of unorganized worker s and their families.  
 Beneficiaries under Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana  are entitled to a 

 coverage within a limit for most health problems t hat require  
 hospitalization.”  
 
 
 
1.6 The Committee note from the reply of the Minist ry that Employees’ 
State Insurance Act, 1948 is applicable to the work ers in the organized 
sector, and Unorganised Workers Social Security Act ,2008 is applicable to 
unorganized workers which provides health insurance coverage for all BPL 
families and certain other categories of unorganize d workers and their 
families under Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana. The Committee opine 
that most of the bangle workers are out of the purv iew of ESI Scheme 
which is evident from the fact that only 25025 Insu red Persons are 
covered under the Act whereas there are more than f our lakh bangle 
workers in the region. Since only BPL families are covered under 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana, other Bangle worker s who although are 
above poverty line, do not have access to health ca re facilities. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendatio n that the ESI 
scheme be extended to all glass and bangle workers in the unorganized 
sector also, if required by amending the ESI Act so  that these poor 
workers have access to healthcare. 
B. Adoption of latest and eco-friendly techniques 
 
 

(Recommendation No. 38) 
 
1.7   The Committee noted with anguish that the Ministry have distanced 
themselves from the issues connected with the repla cement of unhealthy and 
polluting technology used by the glass and bangle w orkers. The Committee 
strongly felt that since unhealthy and polluting te chnology directly affects 
workers' health, the Ministry with the help of Stat e Governments should 
endeavour to take steps to persuade the employers/ workers to adopt latest 
and eco-friendly techniques and technology. 
 
1.8 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of La bour and Employment 
stated that: 
 “The responsibility of the enforcement of the vari ous provisions under the 
 Factories Act, 1948 lies with the Chief Inspector of Factories appointed 
 under the Act by the respective State Government.  However, the 
 Regional Labour Institute, Kanpur   under the Dire ctor General of 
 Factory Advice Services and Labour Institutes (DG, FASLI) has conducted  
 a walk through survey in Bangle & Glass Industry a t Firozabad (Uttar 
 Pradesh) in collaboration  with the  Uttar Pradesh  State Factories 
 Directorate to assess  the safety and health condi tions  and to  ascertain 
 the  compliance of various  provisions of safety , health and welfare in the 
 Factories Act, 1948  and submitted a Report of the  Survey to the 
 Ministry. 
  The Report of DGFASLI has been examined in the Mi nistry and 
 recommendations  made in the Report  have been for warded to the   
 Principal Secretary  (Labour), Government of Uttar  Pradesh for taking 
 suitable action for the implementation of the reco mmendations as made 
 in the Report. The Action taken report is awaited. ”  
 
1.9 The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the 
Regional Labour Institute, Kanpur under the Directo r General of Factory 
Advice Services and Labour Institutes (DGFASLI) has  conducted a walk 

through survey in Bangle & Glass Industry at Firoza bad to assess the 
safety and health conditions and to ascertain the c ompliance of the 
provisions of the Factories Act, 1948 and have subm itted a Report to the 
Ministry. The recommendations made in the Report ha ve been examined 
and have been forwarded to Principal Secretary (Lab our), Government of 
Uttar Pradesh for taking suitable action. The Commi ttee would like to be 
apprised of the recommendations made in the Report of the DGFASLI and 
the Action Taken Report given by the State in the due course. 
C. Dedicated Scheme for Glass and Bangle Workers  
(Recommendation No. 39) 
 
1.10 Considering the fact that there is outsourcing  of work in the glass and 
bangle industry and workers complete their work at home with the help of their 
family members and do not qualify for these schemes , the Committee 
recommended that Ministry may find ways to ensure t hat at least one member 
of each family engaged in glass and bangle industry is covered under any of the 
social security schemes so that each family can hav e some degree of social 
security in cases of distressThe Committee were of the considered opinion that 
a dedicated social security scheme for covering all  glass and bangle workers 
should be chalked out and meanwhile adequate public ity of various ongoing 
social security schemes be made so that workers can  take benefit under these 
schemes. 
 
1.11 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of L abour and Employment 
stated that: 
 “All such glass and bangle workers who fall in BPL  Category can be 
 enrolled under the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana.    

  The ESI Act, 1948 is applicable to the workers in  the organized 
 sector. There is separate legislation i.e. Unorgan ised Workers Social 
 Security Act, 2008 for providing social security a nd welfare of the 
 unorganised workers which includes home based work ers also.” 
 
1.12 The Committee note from the reply of the Minis try that the glass 
and bangle workers who fall in BPL category can enr oll themselves under 
the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana and that the ESI  Act is applicable to 
the workers in the organized sector. The Ministry have further stated that 
Unorganised Workers Social Security Act provides fo r the social security 
and welfare of the unorganized workers which includ es home based 
workers also. The Committee observe that the glass and bangle workers 
who do not fall under BPL category and are unorgani zed do not have any 
cover under any of the social security and welfare schemes of the 
Ministry. Moreover, nothing has been done under the  Unorganised 
Workers Social Security Act for the welfare of the glass and bangle 
workers as a category. The Committee, therefore, re iterate their concern 
for a social security scheme for the welfare of all  glass and bangle workers 
and desire they may be covered under RSBY as submit ted by the 
Secretary during the evidence in a time bound manner. 
D. Census of the Glass and Bangle Industry 
 
(Recommendation No. 40) 
 

1.13  The Committee noted that no census of workers engag ed in glass and 
bangle industry has been conducted by the Governmen t. The Committee 
recommended that a census and a comprehensive surve y of the industry be 
carried out every 10 years so that the Ministry is able to formulate specific 
schemes for the welfare of the glass and bangle workers. 
 
1.14 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of L abour and Employment 
stated that  
 “The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterpris es has been 
 requested to undertake a census and survey of the Industry. Report is 
 awaited.”  
1.15 The Committee note from the reply of the Minis try that the 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises has  been requested to 
undertake a census and survey of the Industry. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the findings of the Report. 
E. Revision of Minimum Wages 
 
(Recommendation No. 43) 
1.16 The Committee noted that children are working with their parents at 
home in glass and bangle making. The Committee felt  that this deprives the 
children of their childhood and ultimately affects their quality of life. The 
Committee are of the firm view that the Ministry ne ed to take up the issue of 
revision of minimum wages with the State Government  since by increasing the 
base minimum wage rates would go a long way in redu cing the incidence of 
children working with their parents if not completely eliminating child labour. 
 
1.17 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Labour  and Employment 
stated that: 
 “Under the provisions of Minimum Wages Act, 1948, State 
 Governments are the appropriate Governments to fix , review and  revise 
 the minimum wages of the workers employed in the  Scheduled 
 employments under their respective jurisdiction.” 

 
1.18 The Committee note from the reply of the Minis try that under the 
provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 State Gov ernments are the 
appropriate Governments to fix, review and revise t he minimum wages of 
the workers employed in the scheduled employments. The Committee are 
fully aware of the provisions of the Minimum Wages Act and reiterate that 
the Ministry should be pro active in their approach  and earnestly take up 
the matter of the revision of minimum wages and the  actual payment to 
the glass and bangle workers, particularly in the u norganized sector, at 
the prescribed rates with the State Governments. 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No. 35)
 
 
 The Committee note as per rough estimates, there a re four lakh glass 
and bangle workers in Firozabad out of which only 1 9,493 workers are covered 
under ESI Scheme in Firozabad (Uttar Pradesh) and t here is only one ESI 
hospital, that too in Agra, to cater to their medic al needs. During their study 
visit, the Committee was concerned to observe the p athetic condition of the 
State run ESI dispensary in Firozabad. Although, th e Government have taken 
steps to relocate the dispensary, still, a lot need s to be done to meet the 
medical requirements of the glass and bangle worker s. There is also an urgent 
need for a specialized hospital for respiratory dis eases that most of the glass 
and bangle workers suffer from. The Committee are h appy to note from the 
Secretary’s submission made during the evidence that the Ministry are eager to 
open an ESI hospital in the region. The Committee r ecommends the 
Government to undertake a fresh process of remappin g of the IPs for opening a 

new ESI hospital with specialty in the treatment of  occupational diseases 
related to working in glass and bangle industry at the earliest. They desire to 
be apprised of the latest figures and areas covered  in and around Firozabad in 
the remapping process. 
Reply of  the Government  
 Glass and Bangle workers employed in factories are  covered under the 
Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948.   However, the ESI Act does not apply to 
the home based workers.  Keeping in view the recomm endation of the 
Committee, ESIC has undertaken special survey drive  in Firozabad and 
Sikohabad and the latest position is as follows :- 
Year Number of 
Insured Persons 
in Firozabad   
Number of 
Insured 
Persons in  
Shikohabad 
Total Number 
of Insured 
Persons 
March, 2012 15620 1748 17368 
April, 2012 15943 1646 17589 
May, 2012 16580 1610 18190 
June, 2012 18773 1600 20373 
July, 2012 22134 1599 23737 
August, 2012 22561 1791 24352 
November, 
2013 
24099 926 25025 
 
 As the number of Insured Persons (IPs) in the Firo zabad area (including 
Sikohabad) fulfilled the norms of setting up of ESI  Hospital, the ESI 
Corporation in its 160 th  meeting held on 19.09.2013 has approved the proposal 
for setting up a ESI Hospital at Firozabad.  
 
(Recommendation No. 37)
 
 

 The Committee is pleased to note that following th eir examination of the 
subject, the Government has decided to bring bangle  workers under RSBY at 
the earliest. The Committee are of the view that ti ll the time an ESI hospital 
comes up in Firozabad or RSBY scheme is made applic able to the glass and 
bangle workers, the Ministry could consider providi ng Primary Health care to 
these workers by sending para-medics from ESIC to u ndertake periodic health 
surveys of these workers and provide necessary medical relief to them.  
 
Reply of  the Government  
 
 Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana is being implemente d in the Firozabad 
District for BPL Workers and last round of policy h as been completed on 
31.01.2014. Next round of Policy has already started on 01.02.2014.  
 As regards sending paramedical staff of ESIC to un dertake periodic 
health survey and for providing medical relief to h ome based glass and bangle 
workers is concerned, it is to mention that the sam e would be beyond the 
mandate of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 . However, State 
Government is being requested to provide primary he alth care to such workers 
under NRHM or through some other scheme.  
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 41)
 
 
 As per inputs received by the Committee during the ir study visit to 
Firozabad in 2011, the workers working in factories  are being denied basic 
facilities like toilets near the place of work, can teens, lunch break, recesses, 
leave and shift duties etc. The Committee are pertu rbed to find from the reply 
of the Ministry that it is the duty of the State Go vernment to ensure that the 
facilities as prescribed under the Factories Act ar e made available to the 
workers. The Committee feel that Ministry should ta ke steps to conduct 
surprise inspections of the premises frequently whi ch are covered under the 
Factories Act, 1948. The Committee also feel that i n absence of such 

inspections, the Ministry would not be able to deri ve assurance about the 
effectiveness of the various labour Acts. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that immediate steps be taken to ensure basic facil ities as required to be 
provided in the Statutes by the States who are requ ired to implement the 
provisions of the Factories Act, 1948. 
Reply of  the Government  
 
 The Directorate of Factories, Uttar Pradesh has be en advised to carry out 
frequent and regular inspections in the Glass and B angle Industries to ensure 
adequate protection to the workers exposed to such unhealthy and unsafe 
environment. 
 Further DGFASLI also proposes to organize workshop s for creating 
awareness on safety and health issues amongst emplo yers and workers 
working in the glass and bangle industries located at Firozabad, in association 
with the Directorate of Factories, Uttar Pradesh. 
 The Regional Labour Institute, Kanpur under this D irectorate  General 
has organized a Workshop titled  ‘Safety & Health i n Glass Product & Bangle 
Industry’ at Firozabad on 20.02.2013 for creating a wareness on Safety & 
Health issues amongst employers and workers working  in the Glass and 
Bangle Industries located  at Firozabad.  

 
 
(Recommendation No .42) 
 
 The Committee observe that due to lack of training  facilities in glass 
industry, workers are either drifting away to other  professions or moving back 
to bangle making. The Committee note that the decis ion for opening a new 
training institute as per local industrial need res ts with the respective State 
Governments. The Committee desire that the Ministry  should take up with the 
State Governments, the need for training of workers  and setting up of training 
institutes by the State Governments. The Committee also desire that 
Government may consider providing vocational education i.e. courses related to 
glass industry under the ISDS to the children of th ese glass workers in schools 
also so that they can compete the challenges faced by the industry.  
Reply of  the Government  
 
 Secretary (L&E) has taken up the matter with the C hief Secretary, 
Government of Uttar Pradesh vide his D.O. dated 05. 10.2012 requesting to 
explore the possibility of setting up an institute or introduce relevant courses 
in the existing local ITIs for providing training o n glass industry related trades 
to the workers of Firozabad which may improve the s kill levels of the existing 
workers and their children.  
 Director of Employment & Training, Government of U ttar Pradesh has 
also been requested to take necessary action for up gradation and expansion of 
capacity of existing ITIs in Trades relating to Gla ss Industry and setting up of 
new ITIs in PPP Mode in Firozabad.  Similarly, unde r Skill Development 
Initiatives  Scheme (SDI), State Government has bee n requested to register 
Vocational  Training Provides (VTP) in the Firozaba d where Modular 
Employable Skills (MES)  in glass sector can be int roduced  and children of 
glass workers be facilitated to take  training   in these VTPs under SDI. 
(Recommendation No. 44) 
 

  The Committee have come across a number of report s wherein it has 
been stated that children are working in the factor ies in Firozabad whereas the 
Ministry, based on the State Government replies, ha ve denied the same. There 
have also been reports that children are engaged in  godowns by the factory 
owners. The Committee desire that a fresh survey of  all the establishments in 
and around Firozabad be made in collaboration with the State Government to 
find out the existence of child labour and immediat e steps be taken to 
rehabilitate them.  
(Recommendation No 45) 
 
 The Committee feel that simply taking children out  of the employment 
may not serve the purpose. The Ministry have to stu dy the mindset of the 
parents who make their children work and after maki ng such an analysis a 
multi-pronged strategy including convincing the par ents, should be framed to 
reduce the incidence of child labour. 
Reply of  the Government  
  
 As per Section 3 of the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 
1986, children below the age of 14 are not permitte d to work in the 
occupations and processes set-forth in Para-A and P ara-B of the schedule. The 
Section further indicates that nothing shall apply to any workshop wherein any 
process is carried on by the occupier with the aid to his family or to any school 
established by, or receiving assistance or recognit ion from, Government. Since 
most of the children working in the Glass Manufactu ring Factories in 
Firozabad District are home based, working with the ir family, as such they do 
not come in the purview of the Child Labour Act.  
 For elimination of the Child Labour, the Ministry has adopted multi-
pronged strategy which includes: 
  
• Legal Action Plan, 
• Focus on general development programme for the bene fit of the 
families of the Child Labour ;and  

• Project based action in the areas of high concentra tion of Child 
Labour.  
 
 Legal action Plan is being implemented through imp lementation of the 
Child Labour Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986.  Provision under the Act is 
being implemented by the Central as well as State G overnment in the area of 
their jurisdiction. Further to make the Act more st rict, an amendment Bill has 
been introduced in the Parliament, which inter-alia , includes complete ban for 
employment of children upto the age of 14 years, ba n on employment up to the 
age of 18 years in hazardous occupations and proces ses, making the 
punishment under the Act stricter and improvement i n the mechanism of 
implementation of the Act etc.  
 The Government Policy also encourages convergence of services of 
different schemes of Ministries such as SSA, Mid-Da y meal, MGNERGA, 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana etc. for assisting t he families of these child 
workers. 
 
 The Ministry has requested the State Government of  Uttar Pradesh to 
survey the establishments in and around Firozabad t o detect the incidence of 
child labour and to take steps for their rehabilitation. 
(Recommendation No. 46)
 
 
 The Committee find that muster rolls are not mainta ined properly by the 
employers and many workers, most of them women are not shown on the rolls. 
The Committee are of the view that the Regional Lab our Commissioners should 
carry out surprise checks in the mornings and in th e evenings too at the gates 
of the establishments to ensure that the number of workers which figure on the 
muster rolls matches with the numbers found during such inspections.  
 
Reply of  the Government  
The matter has been examined and it is to inform th at State Government is 
appropriate Government under various Labour Laws in  Glass and Bangle 
Industries.  Hence, the matter does not fall under the jurisdiction of CLC(C) 

Organisation in Central Sphere.  However, Deputy Ch ief Labour 
Commissioners (Central) concerned have been advised  to keep in touch with 
the State Labour Department and if needed, visit the places with them. 
 
(Recommendation No. 47) 
 According to some reports, although the provident f und contribution is 
being deposited by some establishments in Firozabad  with the EPFOs in 
accordance with the number of workers there however , the EPF beneficiaries 
are not the actual workers. The Committee wish to c aution the Regional 
Provident Fund Commissioner to be extra cautious an d take steps to cross 
check the identity of the genuine EPF account holde rs besides random 
inspection of the registers of the establishments. 
Reply of  the Government  
 
 Observations of the Committee have been noted.  Ran dom Inspections 
would be conducted in Firozabad to cross check the identity  of the genuine  
EPF Account  holders and if any case of evasion is noticed, action as stipulated  
under the Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneo us Provisions Act, 1952  
and other legal actions as permissible  under the law  would be taken. 
(Recommendation No. 48) 
 
 The Committee are disturbed to note the reply of t he Government stating 
that “…ensuring welfare of workers and payment of m inimum wages, etc. is 
entirely the responsibility of State Governments”. This is not acceptable to the 
Committee when crore of rupees are allocated by the m every year to the State 
Governments for various welfare schemes and the Sta te Governments are 
accountable as to how the funds have been utilized.  The State Governments 
must be held responsible for not spending or for no t properly utilizing the 
funds allocated for approved purposes and schemes w ithin the given time and 
manner and this must also be taken into account whi le allocating funds to 
such States in future. The Committee, therefore, ex pect the Union Ministry of 
Labour and Employment to play a more proactive role  to safeguard the interest 
of the poor workers keeping in view the constitutio nal injunction that the State 
shall secure a just social order for the promotion of welfare of the poor people.  

 
Reply of  the Government  
  
 Under the provision of Minimum Wages Act, 1948, bo th the Central and 
State Governments are appropriate Governments to fi x and revise the 
minimum wages in the scheduled employments under th eir respective 
jurisdictions.  Glass and Bangle Sector comes under  the State sphere and the 
State/UT Governments are the appropriate Government s to fix/revise the rate 
of minimum wages for workers in this sector. The Mi nistry of Labour and 
Employment is constantly in touch with State / UT G overnments for 
implementation of minimum wages rates.  The informa tion regarding minimum 
wage rates in Glass and Bangle sector received from  the different States is 
given below:  
Statement Showing the latest minimum rates of wages of unskilled workers  of 
Glass Bangle/Glass Industry  in the Uttar Pradesh & other States. 
 
Sl. No. 
 State Employment Minimum Wages 
 in Rupees (per day) 
01 Andhra Pradesh Glass Industry 197.15 
02 Bihar Glass Industry 168.00 
03 Haryana Glass Industry 205.44 
04 Jharkhand Glass Sheet Manufactory 167.17 
05 Karnataka Glass & Glassware Industry Area I   18 7.76 
Area II  187.35 
06 Maharashtra Glass Industry 278.15 – 297.38 
07 Odisha Glass Industry 105.00 
08 Rajasthan Glass & China ware 166.46 
09 Uttar pradesh Glass Bangle (unskilled) 206.50 

10 Uttarakhand Glass Industry 
 
155.27 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER-III  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 

 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 36) 
 
 Taking serious cognizance of the steep rise in sub- contracting, 
outsourcing of work, home based work etc., the Comm ittee feel that social 
security schemes like ESI scheme should be extended  to these workers also. 
The Committee is of the firm view that Ministry should explore the possibility of 
extending the ESI scheme to glass and bangle worker s in the unorganized 
sector also if required by amending the ESI Act so that these poor workers have 
access to healthcare.  
Reply of  the Government  
  The Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 is applica ble to the workers in 
the organized sector. There is separate legislation  i.e. Unorganised Workers 
Social Security Act, 2008 for providing social secu rity and welfare of the 
unorganised workers which includes home based workers also.  
 
Under this Act, Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana has been launched, 
which provides health insurance coverage for all BPL families and certain other 
categories of unorganized workers and their familie s.  Beneficiaries under 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana are entitled to a co verage within a limit for 
most health problems that require  hospitalization.  
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.6 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H-11013/8/2 012-Coord. dated 
12.02.2014) 
 
 

 
 
(Recommendation No. 39)
 
 
 The Committee note that only 70061 workers are cov ered under the 
Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and 19,493 
workers including glass and bangle workers working in factories / 
establishments belonging to organized Sector are co vered under ESI Scheme in 
Firozabad whereas, it is estimated that there are m ore than 4 lakh glass and 
bangle workers in Firozabad. Considering the fact t hat there is outsourcing of 
work in the glass and bangle industry and workers c omplete their work at 
home with the help of their family members and do n ot qualify for these 
schemes, the Committee recommend that Ministry may find ways to ensure 
that at least one member of each family engaged in glass and bangle industry 
is covered under any of the social security schemes  so that each family can 
have some degree of social security in cases of dis tress. The Committee also 
note that there are no specific social security ben efits exclusively for glass and 
bangle workers. The Committee are of the view that it is imperative for the 
Government of a welfare State to provide these workers essential social security 
benefits i.e. medical facility, insurance, old age benefits etc. The Committee are 
of the considered opinion that a dedicated social s ecurity scheme for covering 
all glass and bangle workers should be chalked out and meanwhile adequate 
publicity of various ongoing social security scheme s be made so that workers 
can take benefit under these schemes. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
  
All such glass and bangle workers who fall in BPL C ategory can be 
enrolled under the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana.   
The ESI Act, 1948 is applicable to the workers in t he organized sector. 
There is separate legislation i.e. Unorganised Workers Social Security Act, 2008 
for providing social security and welfare of the un organised workers which 
includes home based workers also. 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.12 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H-11013/8/2 012-Coord. dated 
12.02.2014) 

 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 43)
 
 
 The Committee note that children are working with their parents at home 
in glass and bangle making. The Committee feel that  this deprives the children 
of their childhood and ultimately affects their qua lity of life. The Committee are 
of the firm view that the Ministry need to take up the issue of revision of 
minimum wages with the State Government since by in creasing the base 
minimum wage rates would go a long way in reducing the incidence of children 
working with their parents if not completely eliminating child labour. 
Reply of  the Government  
 
 Under the provisions of Minimum Wages Act, 1948, S tate Governments 
are the appropriate Governments to fix, review and revise the minimum wages 
of the workers employed in the Scheduled employment s under their respective 
jurisdiction. 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.18 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H-11013/8/2 012-Coord. dated 
12.02.2014) 
 

 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation No. 38) 
 
 The Committee are anguished to note that the Minist ry have distanced 
themselves from the issues connected with the repla cement of unhealthy and 
polluting technology used by the glass and bangle w orkers. The Committee 
wish to invite attention to the Ministry's National  Policy on Safety, Health & 
Environment at Work Place which declares Government 's commitment to 
regulate all economic activities for management of safety and health risks at 
workplace and to provide measures so as to ensure s afe and healthy working 
conditions for every working man and woman in the c ountry. The Committee 
strongly feel that since unhealthy and polluting te chnology directly affects 
workers' health, the Ministry with the help of Stat e Governments should 
endeavour to take steps to persuade the employers/ workers to adopt latest 
and eco-friendly techniques and technology. 
Reply of  the Government  
  The responsibility of the enforcement of the vario us provisions under the 
Factories Act, 1948 lies with the Chief Inspector o f Factories appointed under 
the Act by the respective State Government.  Howeve r, the Regional Labour 
Institute, Kanpur   under the Director General of F actory Advice Services and 
Labour Institutes (DG,FASLI) has conducted  a walk through survey in Bangle 
& Glass Industry at Firozabad (Uttar Pradesh) in co llaboration  with the  Uttar 
Pradesh State Factories Directorate to assess  the safety and health conditions  
and to  ascertain the  compliance of various  provi sions of safety ,health and 
welfare in the Factories Act, 1948  and submitted a  Report of the Survey to the 
Ministry. 
 The Report of DGFASLI has been examined in the Mini stry and 
recommendations  made in the Report  have been forw arded to the   Principal 
Secretary  (Labour), Government of Uttar Pradesh fo r taking suitable action for 
the implementation of the recommendations as made i n the Report. The Action 
taken report is awaited.  
 
Comments of the Committee 

 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.9 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H-11013/8/2 012-Coord. dated 
12.02.2014) 
(Recommendation No. 40) 
 
  The Committee note that no census of workers engage d in glass and 
bangle industry has been conducted by the Governmen t. The Committee feel 
that unless a census is undertaken, the Ministry ca nnot formulate and 
implement schemes for this sector in the absence of  any knowledge of the 
profile and number of the workers engaged in the in dustry. The Committee 
recommend that a census and a comprehensive survey of the industry be 
carried out every 10 years so that the Ministry is able to formulate specific 
schemes for the welfare of the glass and bangle workers. 
Reply of  the Government 
 
  The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  has been 
requested to undertake a census and survey of the Industry. Report is awaited.  
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No.1.15 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. H-11013/8/2 012-Coord. dated 
12.02.2014) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                 DARA SIN GH CHAUHAN, 
  February, 2014 
                                                                   CHAIRMAN,  
   Magha ,1935 (Saka)                     STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
 
 

 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
        Total Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations      15   
II. Recommendations/Observations which have  10           66.67%   
 been accepted by Government 
 
 (Rec. Para. Nos.  35, 37 ,41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47,48  
 and    49 
 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s reply  
         NIL    NIL  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
 which replies of Government have not been 
 accepted by the Committee       03     20% 
  
 ( Rec.  Para. Nos. 36, 39 and 43 ) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which    02    13.33% 
 final replies of Government are of interim in  natu re 
  
 (Rec. Para Nos. 38 and 40 )             
                                           
           ---------- 
           100%  
                                              ----- ------- 
  
 
 
 

 