1 
 
27 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eighteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Directorate General of 
Employment and Training – A Review'] 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 March,  2012/Chaitra,  1934 (Saka) 
 
 


2 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
  
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Directorate 
General of Employment and Training – A Review'] 
 
 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.03.2012  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.03.2012 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 


3 
 
NEW DELHI 
  
 March,  2012/Chaitra,  1934 (Saka) 
CONTENTS 
       
       
         PAGE(s)   
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report  

4 
 
  (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
  

5 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
2. Shri Raj Babbar 
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
        **5. Shri Pakauri Lal 
6. Shri Narahari Mahato 
         7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Ms. Mausam Noor 
10. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
14. Ms. J. Shantha 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
*16. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
     21. Vacant 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
25. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        28. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
        29. Shri Rajaram 
        30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri G. N. Ratanpuri 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*      Nominated w.e.f 25th November, 2011. 
**  Ceased  to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his 
nomination to Standing Committee on Coal & Steel w.e.f. 3 rd  
January, 2012. 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director  
 3.    Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Under Secretary 
 
  

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having 
been authorised  by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Twenty -Seventh Report on the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on  'Directorate General of Employment and Training –A 
Review' of the Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
 
2. The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.08.2011.  The Ministry of Textiles 
furnished their replies indicating a ction taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 29th November, 
2011. The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Labour at their sitting held on 24.2.2012.  
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed 
in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                        HEMANAND 
BISWAL 

8 
 
21st  March,  2012                                                            
CHAIRMAN, 
1 Chaitra , 1934 (Saka)                  STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR.      
  
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Directorate General 
of Employment and Training – A Review' of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment'. 
 
2. The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha an d 
also laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.08.2011. It contained 21  
recommendations.  Replies of Government in respect of all the 
recommendations have been received and have been categorized 
as under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government. 
 
Paragraph Sl. Nos.4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 4.7, 4.8, 
4.9, 4.10, 4.11, 4.12, 4.13, 4.14, 4.15, 
4.16, 4.18 and 4.19. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total-15 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government's reply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
Paragraph Sl. Nos. NIL Total-NIL 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration. 
 
 Paragraph Sl. Nos. 4.3,4.20,4.21 
 
 
 
 
 
Total-3 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature. 
 
Paragraph Sl. Nos.4.1, 4.6, and 4.17. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total-3 
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes in 
respect of recommendations contained in Chapter I and final 
action taken notes in respect of recommendations contained 
in Chapter-V for which only interim replies have been given 
by the Government may be furnished to them at the earliest 
and in any case not later than 3 months of the presentation 
of the Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken replies of 
the Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
(Recommendation at Para No.4.3) 
 
5. The Committee strongly felt that making registration 
compulsory will be beneficial for the job seekers as it would enable 
them to get the alerts about job opportunities once the Exchanges 

10 
 
are computerized, make them eligible for unemployment allowance 
in the States where it is paid, benefit Employment Exchanges as 
their data about the unemployment situation in the country wou ld 
be automatically updated and boost the Government’s Employment 
Market Information (EMI) Programme. The Committee 
recommended that it should be made mandatory for 
graduates/degree holders/diploma holders/certificate holders to 
register themselves with th eir nearest Employment Exchanges, or 
alternatively possibility of online registration may be explored 
wherein the students appearing in their final examination may be 
given an option by their respective educational institutions to 
register themselves and t he option of opening service 
branches/centres of the Employment Exchanges in every district 
post office where the pass -outs can register themselves easily may 
also be considered. 
 
6. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment stated as follows: 
"The Committee recommended that registration should be made 
mandatory for graduates/degree -holders/diploma-
holders/certificate-holders to register themselves with their nearest 
employment exchanges or alternatively online registration wherein 
the students appearing in their final examination may be given an 
option by their respective educational institutions to register 
themselves.  The Government may also consider opening of service 
branches/centres of employment ex changes in every district Post 
Office.  Career Counsellors may also be made available in the 
service branches.  Rozgar Melas organized by the employment 
exchanges, Member of Parliament of the region may also be 
informed about it.  In this connection, it is  informed that these 
issues were debated in the 35 th meeting of the Working Group on 
National Employment Service in which representatives from the 
State Governments including Ministry of Labour & Employment 
participated and after discussing the various pro s and cons, it was 

11 
 
agreed that registration should not be made mandatory.  At 
present, the online registration is being done in some of the States 
and other States are also computerizing their employment 
exchanges. As soon as the EEMMP Project is implement ed, all the 
employment exchanges in the country will be connected and all the 
employment related services will be available on just clicking a 
button service.  All the stakeholders i.e. Government, employers, 
employees, industry and youth will be benefitte d.  As far as the 
registration of job -seekers at the time of appearing in final 
examination of degree/diploma/certificate is concerned, it is not 
possible at this stage.  However, Government of Karnataka has 
initiated a new model named as HRD Centres. Thes  HRD Centres 
aim at reducing the mismatch between demand and supply of 
skilled manpower and providing job -seeker friendly environment at 
the employment exchanges. A presentation was made in the 37 th 
meeting of the Working Group on National Employment Servi ce 
recently held in Lucknow during 23 rd – 24th June, 2011.  It was 
advised to emulate this model, if  other State can replicate it with 
due concurrence of their respective Governments. The effort of the 
Government is to provide efficient online services to all Stakeholders 
so that they are attracted to the Employment Exchanges. However, 
making registration mandatory will be impossible to enforce." 
 
7. The Committee would like to know the detailed pros and 
cons of mandatory registration which were discussed in the 
35th meeting of the Working Group on National Employment 
Service. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
details of the HRD model  introduced by the Government of 
Karnataka. The Committee are still of the considered view that 
mandatory registration would help in utilizing all the facilities 
meant for the job seekers, in availing unemployment allowance 
and free career counseling, in g etting realistic figures of the 
educated unemployed in the country and in boosting 
Employment Market Information (EMI) Programme. The 

12 
 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
registration with Employment Exchanges may be made 
mandatory and at least, action may be initiated for  mandatory 
registration in the States where computerization of exchanges 
have already been completed. After doing so, the Committee 
may be apprised of the bottlenecks faced by the Government in 
the process and the steps taken to overcome them. 
 
(Recommendation at Para No.4.8) 
 
8. The Committee while recommending that  private placement 
agencies must be regulated and checked impressed upon the 
Government to review the regulations/guidelines issued for 
monitoring the working of the placement agencies by the respective 
State Governments and also to ensure their proper implementation 
so that the unwitting unemployed youth are not exploited. 
 
9. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment stated as follows: 
This is regarding private placement agencies functioning in various 
parts of the country.  The Committee recommended that these 
agencies must be regulated and checked so that unsuspecting 
unemployed youth are not fleeced.  The Com mittee also 
recommended review of regulations/guidelines issued by the 
Government of India.  In this respect, it is informed that such 
issues are being debated at various levels with much severity.  
Taking note of deliberations,  a Tripartite Committee has  been 
proposed  which will re-examine the whole  issue relating to private 
placement agencies and  how  to regulate/control their illegitimate 
activities. 
 

13 
 
10. The Committee note that that the issue of regulation of 
private placement agencies is being deba ted at various levels 
and a Tripartite Committee has been proposed to examine the 
whole array of issues relating to private placement agencies 
and ways to regulate/control their illegitimate activities. The 
Committee desire that the Tripartite Committee sh ould be 
constituted without further delay. The Committee may also be 
apprised of the composition, issues referred and the 
recommendations made by the Tripartite Committee. 
(Recommendation at Para No.4.9) 
 
11. The Committee were of the view that there was an urgent need 
for Central Enforcement Machinery and also for formulation of a 
comprehensive law for regulation of private placement agencies. The 
Committee also felt that publishers and broadcasters of spurious 
advertisements dressed up as job opportunitie s may also be made 
accountable in case such advertisements are 
published/broadcasted by them. 
 
12. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment stated as follows: 
This is regarding private placement agencies f unctioning in various 
parts of the country.  The Committee recommended that these 
agencies must be regulated and checked so that unsuspecting 
unemployed youth are not fleeced.  The Committee also 
recommended review of regulations/guidelines issued by the 
Government of India.  In this respect, it is informed that such 
issues are being debated at various levels with much severity.  
Taking note of deliberations, a Tripartite Committee has been 
proposed which will re -examine the whole issue relating to private 
placement agencies and how to regulate/control their illegitimate 
activities. 
 

14 
 
13. Taking note that a Tripartite Committee has been 
proposed by the Government to re -examine the whole issue 
relating to private placement agencies and the ways to 
regulate/control their illegitimate activities, the Committee 
hope that the said Committee will also consider the issue of 
publication/ broadcast of fraudulent advertisements and 
recommend action on such publishers and broadcasters also. 
The Committee also desire that  matters regarding a Central 
Enforcement Machinery and a comprehensive law for regulating 
these agencies should also be considered by the Tripartite 
Committee. 
 
(Recommendation at Para No.4.11) 
 
14. The Committee while observing that on the one hand, there is 
higher unemployment amongst the educated and on the other, 
employers are complaining of lack of skilled manpower. The 
Committee were of the view that most of the employment 
opportunities will occur in the unorganized sector and a strategy for 
training the unorganized sector would need to be worked out. The 
Committee felt that an extensive survey on the employment 
opportunities, the skills required, present status, training needs, 
etc. of the unorg anized sector be made and on the basis of the 
findings, courses and training centres be opened otherwise merely 
providing training under the MES programme, which is meant for 
skill upgradation of workers, will not serve the purpose of catering 
the training needs of the ever-growing informal sector.  
 
15. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment stated as follows: 
A. "Steps taken for improvement 
The Apex Committee decided to relax the criteria of registrat ion of 
VTP for Company/Organisation/firms/ in respect of number of 
 

15 
 
employees and having trained the specified number of persons. 
Revised eligibility guidelines for selection of VTP are as under:- 
1. Vocational Training Providers (VTPs) should be registered 
based on infrastructure available. Size of the training batches 
will also be decided on the availability of training 
infrastructure. The committee also decided that the pre - 
inspection must take place quickly to avoid delays on account 
of delays in inspection. 
2. In respect to addition of new sectors/modules by VTPs, the 
Committee decided that, VTP Evaluation Committee (VEC) 
recommendation is mandatory for inclusion of new sector. 
3. Accreditation by Quality Council of India (QCI) within 6 
months and get ISO 17024 certification within a year is made 
mandatory for Assessing Bodies. 
4. The batch size for training and assessment has been restricted 
to 20 for manufacturing sector and 30 for agriculture, allied 
and service sectors was agreed. But, if some VTPs want to 
have larger batches they may apply to competent authority 
with full justification. The request to be decided after 
inspection to ensure availability of necessary training 
infrastructure. 
5. No assessing body should be permitted to do assessment in a 
State/UT, if d oes not have its office/infrastructure available 
within the State/UT.  
6. The Committee decided that all Testing Centres (TCs) declared 
by ABs prior to assessment should be inspected by a 
committee comprising of representative of RDAT, State 
Director and Indu stry expert. It is also decided to involve the 
industry associations and trade unions to help in inspection 
and providing feedback. 
7. The Committee decided that training should be conducted only 
after skill gap assessment is carried out by State/UT 

16 
 
Directorates to ensure placement. The State Govt. should 
prepare annual training programme for the next financial year 
and submit to DGET by 31 st January based on which 
resources will be released to State/UT Government. 
8. The Committee decided that franchises of the VTPs, ABs, or 
testing centres should not be permitted at all. 
Apart from improving SDI, a decision has also been taken to set up 
1500 new ITIs in PPP in unservised blocks of the country and 5000 
Skill Development Centers in order to cover youth from rural areas 
to get skills and meet the requirement of unorganised sector. 
Subsequently, the number of SDCs will be increased to 50,000 to 
cover the whole country. 
B. Monitoring and Evaluation 
 Apex Committee at national level and State Committees at 
State level advi se and guide the project implementation.  The 
Apex Committee is chaired by the Secretary( Labour & 
Employment), Govt. of India and State Committees will be 
chaired by concerned Secretary/Principal Secretary to the 
State Government.  These Committees have r epresentatives of 
major stakeholders.  
 Each State Government/UT administration has set up SDI 
Cell. States/UTs have declared one Govt. ITI as nodal ITI in 
each district, which coordinates with VTPs and provide 
support to the assessing bodies in its region. 
 VTP would assist trainees in getting employment and track the 
trainees till they get gainfully employed. 
 Post-training evaluation of 1% trainees certified would be done 
every year. 
 In respect of mid -term evaluation, Expression of Interest from 
Consultancy agencies has been obtained and after making 
official selection of agency the same will be carried out. 

17 
 
 Web based software would be used for implementation and 
monitoring of the scheme.  It will also act as on -line 
employment exchange providing job opportu nity to the 
candidates." 
 
16.  The Committee note that steps are being taken for the 
improvement, monitoring and evaluation of VTPs and revised 
guidelines have been issued for selection of VTPs. The 
Committee are of the view that a detailed analysis of manpower 
requirement in terms of numbers, skills and competitiveness in 
the next decade in both organized and unorganized sectors is 
essential for these institutes to succeed. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that a 
comprehensive study of the employment opportunities, the 
skills required, present status, training may be undertaken and 
on the basis of the findings, courses modified and training 
centres opened. 
 
 (Recommendation at Para No.4.13) 
 
17. The Committee found the State -wise position of vacancies of 
principals/ instructional staff in the ITIs grim and recommended 
that immediate steps be taken to fill -up the vacancies preferably by 
the end of the year 2011. 
 
18. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment stated as follows: 
During Mid -term Review of VTIP in April -June 2011, it was 
observed that there was improvement in filling up of vacant 
instructors’ positions. The  States have appointed contract faculty 
till regular appointments are made. To have quality instructors and 

18 
 
for their retention, many States have raised salary of contract 
instructors. Filling up of vacant instructor positions is a continuous 
process. Howe ver, in 2010 -2011, the percentage instructor in 
position has improved and some states such as Maharashtra, 
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh etc. have around 90% instructor 
position filled. However for States like Bihar, West Bengal, 
Jharkhand, J&K etc, where i nstructor vacancy is high, follow -up 
action will be taken to expedite filling up of posts. 
19. The Committee are happy to note that 90% of instructor 
positions have been filled in states like Maharashtra, Madhya 
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh etc. The Committee fee l that immediate 
action should be taken in the States where instructor vacancy 
position is still not encouraging. The Committee desire that 
emphasis should be given to recruit regular staff. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the success achieved in 
filling up the vacancies.   
(Recommendation at Para No.4.16) 
 
20. While observing that the Central Training Institutes are 
making payment of TA/DA to the sponsored instructor trainees as 
per their entitlement Certified by their respective State 
Governments, the Committee recommended that uniform rate of 
TA/DA be paid to all the instructor trainees so as to avoid any 
dissatisfaction and frustration in the minds of those trainees who 
get lesser TA/DA.  The Committee desired that Integrated Finance 
Division of the Ministry should again take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Finance to reconsider their earlier decision. 
 
21. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment stated as follows: 
TA/DA is paid according to  entitlement of State Governments. 
However according to  recommendation of Standing Committee,  the 
proposal for uniform rate of TA/DA be paid to all the instructor 

19 
 
trainees to avoid any dissatisfaction and frustration in the minds of 
those trainees who get less TA/DA will  again  be taken up with the 
IFD and Ministry of Finance. 
 
22. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of 
the proposal submitted to the Ministry of Finance and the 
decision taken by the them in the matter. 
 
(Recommendation at Para No.4.20) 
 
23. The Committee observed that besides upgradation  of the 
existing ITIs, new ITIs/ITCs may also be opened in remote areas of 
the Country with more emphasis on courses catering to local needs. 
The Committee desired that needs of the market may also be 
considered while finalizing the courses to be taught in  ITIs /ITCs 
and in doing so Public Sector Undertakings may also be 
involved/consulted and that these courses may be 
reviewed/upgraded every two years. The Committee were also of the 
view that more autonomy should be given to ITIs in their day-to-day 
functioning and desired that the Union Government also need to 
advise the State Governments that they should instead take a more 
active role in disseminating relevant information, viz., type of 
training provided, fees, and particularly the dropout, course 
completion and placement rates of different training 
institutes/Centres. The Committee were of the view that financial 
incentives, based on the number of students completing course, the 
pass rate, the average number of years taken to complete the 
courses and the  placement rate, may be given to well -performing 
institutes to encourage them. 
 
24. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 

20 
 
" To set up ITIs and SDCs preferably in remote, hilly, difficult, 
backward, SC/ST dominated and border,  areas, Ministry of Labour 
& Employment has formulated/ formulating  the following 
schemes:- 
1. Kaushal Vikas Yojana (KVY) - To establish 1500 Industrial 
Training Institutes (ITIs) and 5000 Skill Development Centers 
(SDCs). This scheme is under formulation. 
 
2. Skill Development in 34 districts Affected by Left Wing 
Extremism – To establish 34 new ITIs and 68 SDCs in remote 
areas of 34 Left Wing Affected Districts. 
Under the scheme ‘Upgradation of 1396 Government ITIs through 
PPP’, the following actions are being taken to complete the 
upgradation process as scheduled: 
1. Monitoring through Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs) received 
from the ITIs. 
2. Conducting zonal/regional workshops with all stake holders to 
review the progress of implementation of the scheme.  
3. Organizing Capacity Building Training (CBT) for Principals and 
senior faculty members of  ITIs covered under the scheme. 
4. Convening of review meetings with the Pr incipal 
Secretaries/Secretaries of all States/UTs. 
5. State Government would be requested to devise innovative 
training scheme for quality training.  
6. Key performance indicators for all ITIs have been introduced 
and are monitored regularly. These are enrolment  rate, drop 
out rates, pass out rates etc. 
Any other follow up action as that would be suggested by the 
awaited mid-term evaluation study of the scheme." 

21 
 
 
25. The Committee note that though Government propose to 
set up 1500 ITIs, yet no steps are being tak en to give 
autonomy to the ITIs in their day -to-day functioning. The 
Committee agree with the National Knowledge Commission 
that ITIs need be given  more power to strengthen and adapt 
their training programmes to better meet local market needs. 
The Committee feel that by giving functional autonomy to the 
ITIs, the efficiency of these institutions would increase 
manifold. The Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that State Governments instead of controlling 
ITIs should only confine their role in d isseminating 
information about the ITIs viz., types of courses offered, fee 
structure, relaxation for certain categories, hostel facilities, 
placement rates, rating of various institutes etc. only. The 
Committee are of the view that incentives may also be given 
based on key performance indicators. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that financial incentives may be introduced 
for providing good quality education i.e. different levels of 
finance may be allocated to the institutes based on their 
performance. The Committee further reiterate that emphasis to 
courses catering to local needs may be given and local Public 
Sector Undertakings may invariably be involved/consulted 
while finalizing the courses to be taught in ITIs /ITCs. 
 
(Recommendation at Para No.4.21) 
 
26. The Committee felt that the DGE&T should come out with a 
status paper at the end of the year on the implementation of the 
schemes, projects and programmes  that required participation of 
State Governments and Private Entrepreneurs and the Status paper 
may include the details of the schemes, the targets, achievements, 
whether implemented effectively by the State Governments/Private 
entrepreneurs, grading of t heir participation interest.  The Status 
paper may also be laid in the Parliament. 

22 
 
 
27. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment stated as follows: 
"Updated brochures of all the schemes of DGE&T are being 
published at regular intervals. The information in these brochures 
include the details of the schemes, targets, achievements, status of 
implementation have been included in these brochures. This 
information is also included in Annual report of the Ministry  
published every year." 
 
 
28. The Committee note that the updated brochures of all the 
schemes of DGE&T are being published at regular intervals and 
the information in these brochures include the details of the 
schemes, targets, achievements and status of their 
implementation. The Committee had desired that a status 
paper may be brought out on annual basis indicating the 
schemes, projects, programmes of the DGE&T that required 
participation of State Governments and private entrepreneurs. 
The Committee reite rate their earlier recommendation that 
DGE&T should come out with a status paper on the 
achievement of targets regarding the schemes, projects and 
programmes requiring the participation of the state 
governments and private entrepreneurs annually pointing o ut 
the efforts made by /not made by the respective State 
Governments and private parties in achieving the targets fixed 
for the year and giving comparative grades to all the State 
Governments and private entrepreneurs involved in various 
schemes, projects and programmes of DGE&T on the basis of 
the interest shown/ efforts made by them in achieving the 
targets. The Committee further reiterate that such status paper 
may also be laid in the Parliament. 
 

23 
 
  

24 
 
CHAPETER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2 Para 4.2)  
The Committee note that out of 969 employment exchanges 
in the country, 467 have been computerized by the Government 
till date and the Government have also initiated a mega project, 
namely, Employment Exchange Mission Mode Project (EEMMP) 
involving crores of rupees under which all the employment 
exchanges of the country are to be interlinked. The Committee 
find that the Government have not evaluated the performance of 
the employment exchan ges which have been computerized. On 
the other hand, the Government propose to computerize all 
employment exchanges and inter link them too. How, without first 
having assessed the technical limitations of the employment 
exchanges so computerized, the Gover nment intend to inter -link 
them, is  beyond the comprehension of the Committee? The 
Committee recommend that the Government should also 
undertake a comprehensive review of the computerized 
employment exchanges . so as to detect the possible shortcomings 
and nitty-gritty in the system and rectify them at initial stages 
itself so that EEMMP does not face any technical glitches later 
on. 

25 
 
 
  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
On the recommendation of the Committee that Government 
should also undertake a comprehensive review of computerized 
employment exchanges,  it is informed that under EEMMP Project  
while preparing Detailed Project Report (DPR) “as is Study” was 
conducted by  the Consultant i.e. NISG, a not  for profit 
organization. The States covered under this study include Haryana, 
Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and Assam.  Thereafter “Bench 
marking Study” was also conducted in the States of Gujarat and 
Maharashtra. Besi des, a number of meetings were held with the 
representatives of States/UT Administrations, officers by the 
Ministry and NISG and Ernst & Young (E&Y) and hence action was 
taken to study the possible shortcomings and nitty -gritty in the 
system so that DGE&T may not face any technical glitches while 
implementing the project.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4 Para No. 4.4)  
 
The Committee note that the Vocational Guidance and 
Employment Counselling Programme is implemented through 969 
Employment Exchanges, 420 vocation al Guidance units at 
Employment Exchanges and  83 University  Employment Information 
and Guidance Bureaus all over the country to help the youths in 

26 
 
career counselling and vocational guidance. The Committee are 
surprised to note that there is no prescribed  qualifications for the 
recruitment of Career Counsellors. In Committee's view, a Career 
Counsellor is supposed to be an expert and should not only 
possess the specific qualification but also be well conversant with 
the educational patterns, local language , culture and societal 
values of the State in which he is posted. The Committee are of 
the firm view that in the absence of these essential pre requisites, a 
Career Counsellor would not be in a position to guide the 
candidates appropriately. The Committee,  therefore, recommend 
that the Government prescribe a set of appropriate qualifications 
for appointment as Career Counsellors. The Committee also 
recommend that the career literature should also be made 
available in vernacular languages.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation has been brought to the notice of State/UT 
Governments for taking necessary action in this regard (Annexure -
A). Career Literature is prepared in English as well as vernacular 
languages.  Regarding appropriate qualification for appointment  of 
Career Counsellors, Government will discuss with the State 
Governments and prescribe appropriate qualifications after doing 
due diligence. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5 Para No. 4.5)  
 
 The Committee find that the Ministry has not made any 
provision for payment of unemployment allowance to the persons 

27 
 
registered with Employment Exchanges. However, some States 
(Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Puducherry 
and Jammu & Kashmir) are paying unemploym ent allowance to 
the registered unemployed youth. Such incentives, though small, 
encourage unemployed youth to come forward and register 
themselves with the Employment Exchanges, which in turn, 
enables States to analyse the correct employment situation and  
find ways and means for providing employment to these youths. 
The unemployment allowance also helps the  youth to complete 
their education.  The Committee strongly feel that payment of 
unemployment allowance not only helps unemployed youth to 
sustain in d ire situations but also facilitates the Government in 
getting realistic data of unemployment situation in the country. 
Though the Union Government is not in favour of providing any 
unemployment allowance, the Committee, however, desire that it 
may, at leas t persuade the rest of the States to emulate the 
States giving unemployment allowance.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The desire of Standing Committee of paying unemployment 
allowances to the registered unemployed youth with employment 
exchanges has been communicated to all the States/UTs. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7 Para No. 4.7)  
The Committee observe that there is no provision for 
providing financial assistance to the persons interested in self -
employment at the level of DGE&T. The Committee note that 23 

28 
 
self-employment promotion cells have been set up to motivate, 
guide and assist the jobseekers in taking up self -employment. 
The Committee are of the view that when the job seekers are 
motivated to take up self -employment they may also be made 
aware of the benefits available under the Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes like Prime Minister Employment Generation 
Programme (PMEGP), Swarn Jayanti Grameen Swarozgar 
Yojana (SJGSY) and Swarn Jayanti Grameen Shahri Rozgar 
Yojana (SJSRY) which promise financial assistance s o that 
these job seekers can avail the financial benefit under these 
schemes. The Committee recommend that these self -
employment promotion cells be set up in every district where 
the job seekers can be given guidance regarding career 
opportunities and be informed about the financial assistance 
available under PMEGP, SJGSY and SJSRY schemes.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT  
 
 Recommendation has been brought in the notice of State/UT 
Governments for taking necessary action in this regard (Annexure -
A). 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8 Para No. 4.8) 
    The Committee note that a plethora of private placement 
agencies catering to the recruitment needs of the private 
employers including those providing domestic helps have 
mushroomed in the recent past. Some of these private 

29 
 
placemen t agencies mislead the unemployed youth, collect 
money from them and vanish into the air. The Committee 
strongly recommend that such unscrupulous agencies must 
be regulated and checked so that the unsuspecting 
unemployed youth are not fleeced. The Committe e also note 
that guidelines on regulation of private Placement agencies 
were issued to all the States/UTs by DGE&T on 30.10.2003 
and thereafter, it has been left to the respective State 
Government to frame regulation and/or guidelines for 
monitoring the wo rking of private placement agencies keeping 
in view the current scenario and their local needs. The 
Committee impress upon the  Government to review the 
regulations/guidelines issued for monitoring the working of 
the placement agencies by  the respective State Governments 
and also ensure their proper implementation so that the 
unwitting unemployed youth are not exploited.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT  
This is regarding private placement agencies functioning in 
various parts of the country.  The Commi ttee recommended that 
these agencies must be regulated and checked so that unsuspecting 
unemployed youth are not fleeced.  The Committee also 
recommended review of regulations/guidelines issued by the 
Government of India.  In this respect, it is informed t hat such 
issues are being debated at various levels with much severity.  
Taking note of deliberations,  a Tripartite Committee has been 
proposed  which will re-examine the whole  issue relating to private 

30 
 
placement agencies and  how  to regulate/control th eir illegitimate 
activities. 
Recommendation (Sl. No.9 Para No. 4.9)  
The Committee note that misleading jobs advertisements 
cause jobseekers a great deal of hardship and difficulty. Some 
spurious advertisements dressed up as job opportunities have 
cost job seekers dearly in the past. More so, such 
advertisements are day -to-day feature of many newspapers. 
The Committee also note that the issues relating to agencies 
that are sending people for employment outside the country 
are handled by Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs. The 
Secretary during evidence stated that he would call a meeting 
of the Ministries of Overseas Indian Affairs and Information & 
Broadcasting and see what system could be put in place to 
ensure that at least advertisements which go in the e lectronic 
media, in the All India Radio were screened before being 
published/released. The Committee are of the view that there 
is an urgent need for a Central Enforcement Machinery and 
also for formulation of a comprehensive law for regulating 
these agenc ies. Besides,  publishers and broadcasters of 
such advertisements may also be made accountable in case a 
fraudulent advertisement is published/broadcast by them. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the response of 
the Ministries of Overseas Indian Af fairs and Information & 
Broadcasting.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT  

31 
 
This is regarding private placement agencies functioning in 
various parts of the country.  The Committee recommended that 
these agencies must be regulated and checked so that unsuspecting 
unemployed youth are not fleeced.  The Committee also 
recommended review of regulations/guidelines issued by the 
Government of India.  In this respect, it is informed that such 
issues are being debated at various levels with much severity.  
Taking note of deliberati ons,  a Tripartite Committee has been 
proposed  which will re-examine the whole  issue relating to private 
placement agencies and  how  to regulate/control their illegitimate 
activities. 
Recommendation (Sl. No.10 Para No.4.10)  
 The Committee are  of the considered view that in the 
present scenario there is an urgent need for redrafting of the 
National Employment Policy so that the public and the job 
seekers could have fair knowledge or idea of the availability of 
jobs in the market. The representa tives of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment stated that they had formulated the 
National Employment Policy in consultation with all the 
concerned Ministries. The Committee were informed that the 
National Employment Policy was almost in the final stages of 
formulation. The Committee hope that the Ministry will come 
forward with a comprehensive National Employment Policy 
once the 12 th Plan is finalized.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 

32 
 
The National Employment Policy is under consideration of the 
Government and will be modified as soon as approved. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11Para 4.11)  
The Committee observe that as per reports, a large 
proportion of the educated unemployed are first time work -
seekers. It appears that the aspirations of the educated are 
not being met and there could be a number of reasons for 
this. On the one hand, there is higher unemployment 
amongst the educated and on the other, employers are 
complaining of lack of skilled manpower. The Committee note 
that unorganized sector constitutes a bout 94% of the 
workforce in the country. The Committee are of the view that 
most of the employment opportunities will occur in the 
unorganized sector and a strategy for training the 
unorganized sector would need to be worked out. The 
Committee feel that a n extensive survey on the employment 
opportunities, the skills required, present status, training 
needs, etc. of the unorganized sector be made and on the 
basis of the findings, courses and training centres be opened 
otherwise merely providing training und er the MES 
programme, which is meant for skill upgradation of workers, 
will not serve the purpose of catering the training needs of the 
ever -growing informal sector. The Committee, 
therefore,recommend that a comprehensive study of the 
unorganized sector an d its needs be made and evaluated first 
and thereafter,  steps taken to enhance their employable skills.  
 

33 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT  
C. Steps taken for improvement  
The Apex Committee decided to relax the criteria of registration of 
VTP for Company/Organisation/firms/  in respect of number of 
employees and having trained the specified number of persons. 
Revised eligibility guidelines for selection of VTP are enclosed at 
Annex I. 
1. Vocational Training Providers (VTPs) should be registered 
based on infrastructure available. Size of the training batches 
will also be decided on the availability of training infrastructure. 
The committee also decided that the pre- inspection must take 
place quickly to avoid delays on account of delays in inspection. 
2. In respect to ad dition of new sectors/modules by VTPs, the 
Committee decided that, VTP Evaluation Committee (VEC) 
recommendation is mandatory for inclusion of new sector. 
 
3. Accreditation by Quality Council of India (QCI) within 6 
months and get ISO 17024 certification w ithin a year is made 
mandatory for Assessing Bodies. 
 
 4. The batch size for training and assessment has been 
 restricted to 20 for manufacturing sector and 30 for 
agriculture,  allied and service sectors was agreed. But, if some 
VTPs want to  have larger batches they may apply to competent 
authority with  full justification. The request to be decided after 

34 
 
inspection to  ensure availability of necessary training 
infrastructure. 
  
 5. No assessing body should be permitted to do assessment 
in  a State/UT, if does not have its office/infrastructure available 
 within the State/UT.  
 
 6. The committee decided that all Testing Centres (TCs) 
 declared by ABs prior to assessment should be inspected by a 
 committee comprising of representative of RDAT, S tate 
Director  and Industry expert. It is also decided to involve the 
industry  associations and trade unions to help in inspection and 
providing  feedback. 
 
 7. The committee decided that training should be 
conducted  only after skill gap assessment is ca rried out by 
State/UT  Directorates to ensure placement. The State Govt. should 
prepare  annual training programme for the next financial year 
and  submit to DGET by 31 st January based on which resources 
will  be released to State/UT Government. 
 
 8. The committee decided that franchises of the VTPs, ABs, 
or  testing centres should not be permitted at all. 
 
  Apart from improving SDI, a decision has also been 
taken to set up 1500 new ITIs in PPP in unservised blocks of 
the country and 5000 Skill Development  Centers in order to 

35 
 
cover youth from rural areas to get Skills and meet the 
requirement of unorganised Sector. Subsequently, the number 
of SDCs will be increased to 50,000 to cover the whole country. 
 
 
D. Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
 Apex committee at national level and State Committees at 
State level advise and guide the project implementation.  The 
Apex Committee is chaired by the Secretary( Labour & 
Employment), Govt. of India and State Committees will be 
chaired by concerned Secret ary/Principal Secretary to the 
State Government.  These Committees have representatives of 
major stakeholders.  
 
 Each State Government/UT administration has set up SDI 
Cell. States/UTs have declared one Govt. ITI as nodal ITI in 
each district, which coordi nates with VTPs and provide 
support to the assessing bodies in its region. 
 
 VTP would assist trainees in getting employment and track the 
trainees till they get gainfully employed. 
 
 Post-training evaluation of 1% trainees certified would be done 
every year. 

36 
 
 In respect of mid -term evaluation, Expression of Interest from 
Consultancy agencies has been obtained and after making 
official selection of agency the same will be carried out. 
 
 Web based software would be used for implementation and 
monitoring of the scheme.  It will also act as on -line 
employment exchange providing job opportunity to the 
candidates. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12Para No.4.12)  
The Committee find that on comparing with other 
developed economies of the world, the skill base of the Indian 
economy is far below. As per the data released by NSSO for the 
year 2004 -05, only 2% aspirants in the age group of 15 -29 
years have undergone formal vocational training. Ab out 8% 
aspirants have had non -formal vocational training. Hence, it 
clearly shows that out of the workforce actually entering the 
world of work, major chunk is captured by higher proportion of 
un-trained youth. The  Committee are, therefore, of the view 
that it has become essential to enhance the infrastructure 
providing skill development trainings so that all those entrants  
acquire relevant skills beforehand.  
The Committee also are of the view that the training 
centres should be accessible to the would -be-workforce like 
STD Booths and Internet Cafes which are easily reachable for 

37 
 
delivering low -cost, high quality training to majority of the 
workers every year. The Committee feel that besides getting 
trained workforce, this initiative would generate more 
employment in these small businesses. The Committee also find 
the Australian Government have a well defined system for 
enhancing the employability through their 'Skills Vouchers 
Programme'. The Scheme offers the eligible aspirants apply for a 
voucher which he lps them cover the cost of specific types of 
training. There are two different vouchers on offer:  a Business 
Skills Voucher and a Work Skills Voucher. A prospective trainee 
has to find out if he or she fits the eligibility criteria for either a 
Business S kills Voucher or a Work Skills Voucher. To apply  for 
the applicable voucher, the person can search for an eligible 
course as well as for the training organizations approved to 
deliver it. The system is integrated through the internet for 
universal access a nd ease of operations. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that an effective system on the above lines  
should be developed so that the existing as well as prospective 
youth of the country  be trained before their actual entrance in 
the world of work.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
(i)  To enhance Skill Development infrastructure for providing 
necessary training, Ministry of Labour & Employment  has 
formulated/ formulating the following schemes:- 
 

38 
 
A.  Kaushal Vikas Yojana (KVY) - To establish 1500 Industrial 
Training Institutes (ITIs) and 5000 Skill Development Centres 
(SDCs). This scheme is under approval. 
 
B. Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure (ESDI) in North 
Eastern States & Sikkim – To upgrade 20 ITIs by introducing 03  
new trades in each ITI and supplementing deficient 
infrastructure in 28 ITIs by introducing new hostel, boundary 
wall and replacing / providing obsolete / deficient tools & 
equipment of existing trades. 
 
C. Skill Development in 34 districts Affected by Le ft Wing 
Extremism – To establish 34 new ITIs and 68 SDCs and to train a 
total of 5340 youth of Left Wing Affected Districts in various skill 
training programme. 
 
(ii)  All the above new training facilities are about to be created in 
far flung areas of the country.  One SDC will be established in a 
cluster of 10 -12 villages under the scheme KVY.  Thus, the 
schemes aim to create Skill Development facilities so that these 
easily accessible to would  be workforce as well as at the 
doorsteps of rural youth.  
 

39 
 
 Skill Voucher Programme is being implemented by State of 
Gujarat. This would be discussed  by working group on Skill 
Development for XII Five year Plan. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.13 Para No.4.13)  
The Committee note  that the State-wise position of vacancies 
of principals/instructional staff in the ITIs is grim. According 
to the Ministry the matter of vacant posts was discussed in 
Labour Minister's Conference and during review meetings of 
Vocational Training Improveme nt Project. State Governments have 
also been asked to fill up the vacant posts by appointing 
guest/contract faculty till these are filled with regular 
appointments. The Committee are surprised to note that a large 
number of vacancies still exist. The Commi ttee recommend that 
steps be taken to fill up these vacancies preferably by the end of 
the year 2011 and they be apprised about the progress achieved in 
this regard. 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 During Mid -term Review of VTIP in April -June 2011, it was 
observed that there was improvement in filling up of vacant 
instructors’ positions. The States have appointed contract faculty till 
regular appointments are made. To have quality instructors and for  
their retention, many States have raised salary of contract instructors. 
Filling up of vacant instructor positions is a continuous process. 

40 
 
However, in 2010 -2011, the percentage instructor in position has 
improved and some states such as Maharashtra, Madh ya Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh etc. have around 90% instructor position filled. However 
for States like Bihar, West Bengal, Jharkhand, J&K etc, where 
instructor vacancy is high, follow -up action will be taken to expedite 
filling up of posts. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.14 Para No. 4.14) 
 
The Committee are distressed to note that there is around 
30% dropout rate in the ITIs. The Ministry admitted that there was 
a certain percentage of students who could not pass and quit the 
courses. Though the Government has not formally evaluated the 
reasons for this dropout rate yet the reasons were stated to be the 
long duration of courses in Craftsman Training Scheme and 
Apprenticeship Training Scheme, poor social acceptability of the 
courses covered in skill training programme an d shortage of 
instructors. The Committee note that the Government has taken 
various steps such as introduction of modular and multiskilled 
courses in centre of Excellence Scheme introduction of short term 
programmes based on modular employable skills. They  are of the 
considered view that a lot still needs to be done in the form of 
proactive and preemptive action with a view to checking the drop 
out rate. The Government should also consider making stipends 
given to the trainees lucrative enough so that they are able to 
complete the course. The Government may also consider providing 
soft loans, through public sector banks to the poor and potential 

41 
 
trainees so as to enable them to not only pursue specialized 
courses but also complete them as well. The Committee also 
recommend that hostel facility be provided to the rural, tribal 
students studying in these institutions. Further, the DGE&T need 
to coordinate with the State Governments, Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs etc. to explore the possibility of providing funds f or 
construction of these hostels.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 The ITIs are under the administrative control of respective state 
government. NCVT has made provision for payment of minimum  
Rs. 100/-  as stipend to trainees, there is no cap on upper limit . 
State Governments can provide stipend  lucrative enough so that 
trainees are able to complete the course. 
 Under the scheme “Skill Development in 34 districts Affected by 
Left Wing Extremism” a total of 5340 youth of Left Wing Affected 
Districts are proposed to be  trained  in various skill training 
programmes with a stipend of   paid Rs. 3500/ - per 
trainee/month so that they are able to complete the courses. All 
the 34 ITIs proposed to be established under this scheme will be 
having hostel facility. Out of 34 ITIs, 21 ITIs will be established in 
SC & ST dominated (SC- 3 & ST-18) districts. 
 All the 1500 ITIs to be established under the scheme “Kaushal 
Vikas Yojana (KVY)” would be having hostel facilities.  
 To fulfill the requirement of hostel in the ITIs in hilly and difficult 
areas of North Eastern region mainly with tribal population, 28 

42 
 
hostels are proposed to be built in 28 existing ITIs under the 
scheme ”Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure in North 
Eastern States & Sikkim”. 
 Regarding providing soft loans, through public sector banks to 
the poor and potential trainees, it would be taken up with 
Ministry of Finance. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15 Para No. 4.15)  
The Committee observe  that refresher courses for trainers 
are not being held periodically in the absence of which they are 
unable to update themselves with advancements of changing 
technologies and availability of information. The Committee 
strongly recommend that refresher co urses for trainers should be 
held at regular intervals and highly specialized trainings, in public 
and private institutions and other educational institutions may 
also be organized for them. The Committee also desire that the 
Government consider giving incentives to these trainers for 
attending  and successfully completing the training programme. 
The Committee further impress upon the Government that while 
framing instructors Training Programme, industry should also be 
consulted so that their requirements c ould be addressed and the 
programmes suitably retailored.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
To update the knowledge and skills of trainers  with advancements of 
changing technologies and availability of information, following 
trainers training courses are being offered at institutes of DGE&T 

43 
 
 
(i) Refresher training is provided to update and upgrade the 
knowledge and skill of the instructors of ITIs, to keep them 
abreast of technological developments in Industry. Training is 
also being imparted in advanced modules of multi Skill courses 
to the instructors of ITIs upgraded as CoE. 
(ii) Training on Quality Management Tools has been also arranged 
at above institutes for instructors of ITIs, jointly with Quality 
Council of India w.e.f.November, 2009. 
(iii) To empowering the instructors with ICT skills, Microsoft’s 
project Shiksha was launched jointly with M/S Microsoft in 
January’2009 for training of instructors of ITIs/ITCs. Around 
6711 trainers of ITIs/ITCs have been trained across the 
country.  
(iv) To make training programme more flexible and adaptable to 
changing technology, modular pattern of craft Instructor 
training in place of conventional one year training has been 
introduced in CTI and ATIs with effect from session started 
from Aug 2009. 
(v) TA/DA to instructors participating in any of the above course is 
being paid by Central Government .   
(vi) All the training programms are designed by a trade expert 
committee which normally consists of 60% members from 
industry.  
 
 
 

44 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16 Para No. 4.16)  
 
 The Committee observe  that the Central Training 
Institutes are making payment of TA/DA to the sponsored 
instructor trainees as per their entitlement Certified by their 
respective State Governments. According to the Ministry, DGE&T 
had proposed payment of uniform DA to the spon sored instructor 
trainees from various States by the Central Training Institutes. 
The Integrated Finance Division of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment in consultation with the Ministry of Finance agreed 
for payment of TA/DA as per State Government norms.  The 
Committee strongly feel  that uniform rate of  TA/DA be paid to all 
the instructor trainees so as to avoid any dissatisfaction and 
frustration in the minds of those trainees who get less TA/DA. 
The Committee desire that Integrated Finance Division of the 
Ministry should again take up the matter with  the Ministry of 
Finance to reconsider their earlier decision by conveying the 
concern of the Committee in the matter. The Committee may be 
apprised of the final decisian in the matter. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
TA/DA is paid according to entitlement of State Governments. 
However according to  recommendation of Standing Committee,  the 
proposal for uniform rate of TA/DA be paid to all the instr uctor 
trainees to avoid any dissatisfaction and frustration in the minds of 

45 
 
those trainees who get less TA/DA will  again  be taken up the IFD 
and Ministry of Finance. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18 Para No.4.18) 
 The Committee find that State Governments are paying stipend 
to SC/ST students in lump -sum that too at the end of the academic 
year. The Committee are of the firm view that paying stipend in lump -
sum and at the end of academic year, defeats the very purpose of the 
stipend which is to assist the studen ts to meet their academic 
expenses. The Ministry has asked the State Governments to take 
remedial measures and pay stipend to the SC/ST students on monthly 
basis. The Committee would like to be informed  whether the State 
Governments have started paying st ipends to SC/ST students on 
monthly basis. The Committee desire that yearly report also be 
obtained from States in the matter.The names of States who have so 
far not started paying monthly stipend to SC &  ST students be given 
in the Annual Report of the Ministry. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 All State Governments/UT Administration have been requested 
to pay stipend  to SC/ST trainees on monthly basis .They  have also 
been requested to forward a report on this so that, the information 
could be incorporation in the Annual Report. 
 
 

46 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19 Para No. 4.19) 
 The Committee find that several reports of the DGE& T, some of 
them being annual publications pertaining to the year 2007 are being 
released now. According to the Ministry, the reason for the delay is the 
time involved in collection of data from other sources. Such a specious 
argument is not acceptable to t he Committee. The Committee believe 
that these publication contain data and figures for a particular year, 
which if not brought out in time, lose their relevance and become 
redundant. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should concentra te on the latest data and old reports 
now be compiled and brought out in one single consolidated edition to 
serve academic interest/future reference needs and made  available on  
the Ministry's website. 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 The publication “Trade Apprentic eship Training in India” as on 
31.12.2009 is under approval. So far as Bulletin on Job -opportunities 
in India” is concerned, the major portion of the report based on the 
Primary/Secondary data derived from various recruiting agencies viz.. 
UPSC, SSC, RRB, State Public Service Commissions and 
UGC/Universities etc. The delay is due to the time taken by these 
Agencies to furnish the data in time. Secondly , the data based on 
secondary sources of this report depends on the timely release of such 
data by these a gencies which is beyond  control of this Ministry. The 
annual publication is being released on timely basis now. However, 
The Annual Employment Review, 2010 has already approved and is 
under process for printing and the “Bulletin on job opportunities in 

47 
 
India 2009” is under finalization. This report would serve the 
academic interest/future reference needs as per the 
recommendation/observation of the Committee.  
  

48 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
REPLY. 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

49 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 Para 4.3)  
 The Committee outright  reject the reply of the Ministry that 
making it mandatory for graduates/professional degree 
holders/diploma holders, who wish to apply for jobs to register 
with Employment Exchanges, is likely to create lot of 
repercussions being against the spirit of Art icle 10 of ILO 
Convention 88, relating to employment service, which India has 
ratified.  The Committee are of the view that Article 10 should be 
seen in a positive light, i.e. that all interested parties should take 
all possible measures to encourage full use of employment service 
facilities and making registration mandatory would only help job 
seekers to make full use of employment service facilities. The 
Committee strongly feel that making registration compulsory will 
be beneficial for the job seekers as it would not only enable them 
to get the alerts about job opportunities once the Exchanges are 
computerized but also make them eligible for unemployment  
allowance in the States where it is paid. Not only this, mandatory 
registration  will also benefit Emp loyment Exchanges as their data 
about the unemployment situation in the country would be 
automatically updated and, in turn, boost the Government's 
Employment Market Information  (EMI) Programme. The 

50 
 
Committee, therefore, recommend that it should be made 
mandatory for graduates/degree holders/diploma 
holders/certificate holders to register themselves with their 
nearest Employment Exchanges, or alternatively possibility of on 
line registration may be explored wherein the students appearing 
in their final exa mination may be given an option by their 
respective educational institution to register themselves. The 
Government may also consider the option of opening service 
branches/centres of the Employment Exchanges in every district 
post office where the pass out s can register themselves easily. The 
Committee feel that Career Counsellors may also be available in 
these service branches.  The Committee also desire that job melas 
be organized at regular intervals and such melas  may also be 
organized for the  backwar d  classes exclusively. The Committee 
further desire that Members of Parliament of the region may also 
be informed of these job melas.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
The Committee recommended that registration should be 
made mandatory for graduates/degree -holders/diploma-
holders/certificate-holders to register themselves with their 
nearest employment exchanges or alternatively online registration 
wherein the students appearing in their final examination may be 
given an option by their respective educational institutio ns to 
register themselves.  The Government may also consider opening 
of service branches/centres of employment exchanges in every 
district Post Office.  Career Counsellors may also be made 
available in the service branches.  Rozgar Melas organized by the 

51 
 
employment exchanges, Member of Parliament of the region may 
also be informed about it.  In this connection, it is informed that 
these issues were debated in the 35 th meeting of the Working 
Group on National Employment Service in which representatives 
from the State Governments including Ministry of Labour & 
Employment participated and after discussing the various pros 
and cons, it was agreed that registration should not be made 
mandatory.  At present, the online registration is being done in 
some of the Sta tes and other States are also computerizing their 
employment exchanges. As soon as the  EEMMP Project is 
implemented,  all the employment exchanges in the country will 
be connected and all the employment related services will be 
available on just clicking a button service.  All the stakeholders 
i.e. Government, employers, employees, industry and youth will be 
benefitted.  As far as the registration of job -seekers at the time of 
appearing in final examination of degree/diploma/certificate is 
concerned, it is  not possible at this stage.  However, Government 
of Karnataka has initiated  a new model named as HRD Centres. 
Thes HRD Centres aim at reducing the mismatch between demand 
and supply of skilled manpower and providing  job -seeker friendly 
environment at th e employment exchanges. A presentation was 
made in the 37 th meeting of the Working Group on National 
Employment Service recently held in Lucknow during 23 rd – 24th 
June, 2011.  It was advised to emulate this model, if  other  State 
can replicate it with due concurrence of their respective 
Governments. The effort of the Government is to provide efficient 
online services to all Stakeholders so that they are attracted to the 

52 
 
Employment Exchanges. However mailing registration mand atory 
will be impossible to enforce.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20 Para No. 4.20)  
The Committee note that the DGE&T is in the process of 
upgradation of 1396 Government ITIs, some through domestic 
funding, others through World Bank assistance and remaining 
through Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. The Committee 
expect that all the ITIs will be upgraded as per the schedule 
worked out. Besides upgradation of the existing ITIs, the 
Committee impress upon the Government that new ITIs/ITCs may 
also be opened i n remote areas of the Country with more 
emphasis on courses catering to local needs. The Committee 
desire that needs of the market may also be considered while 
finalizing the courses to be taught in ITIs /ITCs and in doing so 
Public Sector Undertakings may also be involved/consulted. The 
Committee also desire that these courses may be 
reviewed/upgraded every two years.  
The Committee are also of the view that more autonomy 
should be given to ITIs in their day -to-day functioning. The 
Committee desire that the Union Government also need to advise 
the State Governments that they should instead take a more 
active role in disseminating relevant information, viz., type of 
training provided, fees, and particularly the dropout, course 
completion and placement rates of  different training 
institutes/Centres. The Committee feel that to reach maximum 

53 
 
number of aspirants All India Radio and Vernacular press may be 
used to publicize various training programmes.  
The Committee also find that no attention is paid to 
using finan cing as an innovative means to encourage quality 
training. The same levels of finance are allocated to poorly 
performing institutions with high dropout rates vis-a-vis those 
that maintain a high quality of teaching and performance. The 
Committee are of the  view that incentives, based on the number  
of students completing course, the pass rate, the average number 
of years  taken to  complete the courses a n d  the placement rate, 
may be given to well-performing institutes to encourage them.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT  
To set up ITIs and SDCs preferably in remote, hilly, difficult, 
backward, SC/ST dominated and border,  areas, Ministry of Labour 
& Employment has formulated/ formulating  the following 
schemes:- 
 
1. Kaushal Vikas Yojana (KVY) - To establish 1500 Industrial 
Training Institutes (ITIs) and 5000 Skill Development Centers 
(SDCs). This scheme is under formulation. 
 
2. Skill Development in 34 districts Affected by Left Wing 
Extremism – To establish 34 new ITIs and 68 SDCs in remote 
areas of 34 Left Wing Affected Districts. 
 
 

54 
 
Under the scheme ‘Upgradation of 1396 Government ITIs through 
PPP’, the following actions are being taken to complete the 
upgradation process as scheduled: 
 
1. Monitoring through Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs) 
received from the ITIs. 
2. Conducting zonal/regional workshops with all stake holders to 
review the progress of implementation of the scheme.  
3. Organizing Capacity Building Training (CBT) for Principals and 
senior faculty members of  ITIs covered under the scheme. 
4. Convening of review meetings with t he Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries of all States/UTs. 
5. State Government would be requested to devise innovative 
training scheme for quality training.  
6. Key performance indicators for all ITIs have been introduced 
and are monitored regularly. These are enro lment rate, drop 
out rates, pass out rates etc. 
Any other follow up action as that would be suggested by the awaited 
mid-term evaluation study of the scheme. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21 Para No.4.21)  
The Committee note that the Employment Exchanges and 
Industrial Training Institutes are under the administrative control 
of the State Governments but the development programmes at 
national level, particularly the areas concerning common policies, 
common standards and procedures, training and trade testing is 

55 
 
the responsibility of DGE&T. The Committee feel that the DGE&T 
should come out with a status paper at the end of the year on the 
implementation of the schemes, projects - and programmes that 
required participation of State Governments and Private 
Entrepreneurs. The Status paper may include the details of the 
schemes, the targets, achievements, whether implemented 
effectively by the State Governments/Private entrepreneurs, 
grading of their participation interest. The Status paper may also 
be laid in the Parliament. 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 Updated brochures of all the schemes of DGE&T are being 
published at regular intervals. The information in these brochures 
include the details of the schemes, targets, achievements, status of 
implementation have been included in t hese brochures. This 
information is also included in Annual report of the Ministry 
published every year. 
 
  

56 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN 
NATURE. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1 Para 4.1)  
 One of the functions of DGET is to carry out continuous 
programme of evaluation of policies, procedures and working 
practices of Employment Exchanges within States and to 
establish coordination and consultations with the Ministries 
whose activities affect the employment situation in the country. 
The Committee observe that the administration of Employment 
Exchanges was passed on to the State Governments w.e.f. 01 
April, 1969 thereby transferring its entire responsibility of 
running the Employment Exchanges t o the States resulting in 
their poor functioning. The Committee observe that the Union 
Government have not made any comprehensive study on the 
working of the Employment Exchanges, response of the 
employers, the number of persons, and the number of job 
seekers. The Committee were informed that the Government 
proposes to amend the Employment Exchanges (CNV) Act, 1959 
with a view to diversify the activities of the National Employment 
Service and to enhance the scope and by covering other 
activities/establishments which are not within the purview of 
the Act as of now. The Committee are not able to comprehend 

57 
 
that without making any survey/study, how the Government 
brought the draft EE(CNV) Amendment Bill, 2010. The 
Committee  take a serious note of the deteriora ting condition of 
the Employment Exchanges  in the  country  and  recommend  
that Union Government take proactive action to revamp the 
functioning of the Employment Exchanges and make them 
efficacious and useful. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
The Employment Exchang es (Compulsory notification of 
Vacancies) Act, 1959 was enacted in the year 1959 and came into 
effect from 1 st May, 1960. Like all other Labour Laws the 
enforcement of the provisions of the Act is vested with the State 
Governments and the Directors of Empl oyment are the designated 
officers for enforcement of the provisions of the Act in their 
respective states. Based on the practical difficulties faced by the 
States in enforcing the provisions of the Act a number of proposals 
have been discussed in the vari ous meetings of the working group 
on National employment service.  
 
Ministry of Labour & Employment taking serious note of 
deteriorating conditions of Employment Exchanges in the country 
have already taken up a Mission Mode Project (EEMMP) for 
upgradation a nd modernization of employment exchanges in the 
country.  The introduction of e -Governance  in employment 
exchanges is to help in providing speedy and easy access to 

58 
 
employment service related information to job -seekers and 
employers.  The project aims to progressively support all State 
Governments/Union Territory Administrations in the country to 
make effective use of IT in various activities of employment 
services and make it user friendly.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6 Para No.4.6)  
 
The Committee note that t he Government has not prepared 
any definite strategy to attract private employers to notify their 
vacancies in the Employment Exchanges once the National Portal 
is operational. In the present scenario, private  establishments are 
much more than the government establishments. In Committee's 
view, to make Employment Exchanges attractive to job seekers, it 
is necessary that private employers notify their vacancies in the 
Employment Exchanges. The Committee, therefo re, recommend 
that a comprehensive strategy to attract private employers should 
be formed which may include, private employers to advertise their 
vacancies on the portal, giving them access to the profile of the 
candidates across the country, allowing them  to screen, test and 
interview the candidates in the Employment Exchange campus, 
etc. 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
The Committee recommended a comprehensive strategy to 
attract private employers in terms of notification of vacancies,  
access to the profile of job -seekers, screening of tests and 
interviews in the employment exchanges’ campuses.  It is 
 

59 
 
informed that all kinds of such activities will be geared up after 
implementation of EEMMP as it would not only provide easy 
access to online registration but it will p rovide all kinds of 
employment related services to all the stakeholders with full 
transparency. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17 Para No. 4.17) 
 As per the Apprentices Act, 1961 it is obligatory on the part of 
the employer to engage apprentices as per statutory notice. The 
Committee's examination reveals that as on 30 th March, 2009, as 
against 96759 training seats allocated for graduate and technician 
apprentices, only 57,991 seats had been utilized. The position 
regarding trade apprentices is no better. As on 30 th June, 2009 as 
against 2,78,123 training seats available 1,95,703 apprentices were 
undergoing training. The reasons for seats remaining vacant are 
stated to be lengthy procedure for engagement of apprentices in public 
sector. The Committee also note that  the rate of stipend given to the 
apprentices is paltry considering the present cost of Inflation Index. 
The Committee recommend that wide publicity may be given to these 
vacancies and procedure for appointment of the apprentices be 
simplified and the Gove rnment may consider inviting applications 
from the  prospective Apprentices when they are in their last session 
of the theoretical course.  They also recommend that the rate of 
stipend be revised keeping in view the rising trend in Consumer Price 
Index. 
 
 

60 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
i) Instructions will be issued to the establishments through all 
the Regional Directorates of Apprentices Training and 
State/UT Governments to give wide publicity of engagement of 
apprenticeship seats in electronics & print media so that a ll 
the apprenticeship seats are filled. Establishments will also be 
instructed to put the vacancies position of Apprenticeship 
seats on their website.  Government is also designing web 
portal having all the details of establishments engaging 
apprentices an d candidates can apply to the establishments 
directly.  
 
ii) The rates of stipend of apprentices on the basis of Consumer 
Price Index are revised after every two years.  The last revision 
of the stipend was done in October 2011 for trade apprentices 
and in March 2011 for other categories of apprentices. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                   HEMANAND BISWAL 
 21st March,  2012                              CHAIRMAN, 
 1 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)   STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.  
  

61 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 24TH FEBRUARY, 2012  
 The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs in Committee Room 
`C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt the 
following draft action taken reports: 
  (i)  Action Taken by the Government o n the recommendations 
 contained in the 18 th Report of the Committee on the subject 
 'Directorate  General of  Employment & Training – A Review';  
 (ii)  Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
 contained in the 19 th Report of the Committee o n 'Demands for 
 Grants of the Ministry of Labour and Employment for the year 2011 -
 12'; 
 (iii)  Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
 contained in the 20th Report of the Committee on   'Demands for 
Grants of  the Ministry of  Textiles' for the year 2011-12'. 
 PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal  - Chairman 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
    2. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
    3. Shri Narahari Mahato 
    4. Shri Hari Manjhi 
    5. Shri P. Balram Naik 
    6. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
    7. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
    8. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
    9. Ms. J. Shantha 
 
 
 

62 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 10. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 11. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 12. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 13. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
 14. Shri Rajaram 
 15. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 
  
  SECRETARIAT 
          
 1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Under Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about the draft action taken reports to be considered and adopted by 
the Standing Committee on Labour. 
  
3. The Committee took up the draft Reports for consideration. The 
Committee  adopted the draft Reports without any modification.   
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the reports 
to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

63 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FIFTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) 
 
          Total
 Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations    21       
   
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
Paragraph Sl. Nos.4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9,     
4.10, 4.11, 4.12, 4.13, 4.14, 4.15, 4.16, 4.18 and 
4.19. 
 
 15      71.4% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's reply. 
 
Paragraph Sl. Nos. NIL 
 
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration. 
 
 Paragraph Sl. Nos. 4.3,4.20,4.21 
 
3       14.3% 
 
 
 
 
  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature. 
 
Paragraph Sl. Nos.4.1, 4.6, and 4.17. 
 
3        14.3% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                     ----------- 
            100% 
                           ------------ 