43 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the  Thirty-first Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on 
‘Absorption/regularization of temporary drivers of Allahabad 
Bank' ] 
 
FORTY- THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
February,  2014/Magha , 1935 (Saka) 
FORTY-THIRD REPORT 


2 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the  Thirty-first Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Absorption/regularization of temporary drivers of Al lahabad 
Bank' ] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2014 
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2014 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February,  2014/Magha , 1935 (Saka) 
  
CONTENTS 


3 
 
       
                   PAGE(s)  
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Thirty-First   
  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
   

4 
 
   
  
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2013-14) 
 SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN - CHAIRMAN 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Ashok Argal  
3.  Shri Ismail Hussain  
4.  Dr. Manda Jagannath  
5.  Dr. Virendra Kumar  
6.  Shri Nara Hari Mahato  
7.  Shri Hari Manjhi  
8.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel  
9.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy  
10.  Smt. J. Shantha  
11.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh [Lalan]  
12.  Shri Ratan Singh  
13.  Shri Dinu Solanki  
14.  Shri Makansingh Solanki  
15.  Shri K. Sugumar  
16.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai  
17.  Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware  
18.  Shri Om Prakash Yadav  
*19.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
20.  Vacant  
21.  Vacant  
             Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Smt. T. Ratna Bai  
23.  Shri D. Bandyopadhyay  
24.  Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot  
25.  Shri P. Kannan  
26.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan  
27.  Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati  
28.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
29.  Shri Rajaram  
30.  Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
31.  Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
*  No           * Nominated w.e.f 17th December, 2013 
 
 

5 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy - Director 
 3. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
   

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Forty-Third Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-
First Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Absorption/regularization of temporary drivers of 
Allahabad Bank'. 
 
2. The Thirty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 9 th August, 2012.  The Ministry of Finance 
furnished their replies indicating action taken o n the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 15th January, 2013.  
The Standing Committee on Labour at their sitting held on                    
22nd January, 2014 considered and adopted the draft report and 
authorized the Chairman to finalise the same a nd present it to the 
Parliament.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty -First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
4. For the facility of referen ce and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed 
in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                               DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
  February , 2014                                                        CHAIRMAN,  
    Magha ,1935 (Saka)                  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirty -First Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Absorption/regularization of temporary drivers of Allahabad 
Bank’. 
1.2 The Thirty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid on the 
Table in Rajya Sabha on 9 th August, 2012. It contained 08 recommendations/ 
observations. Replies of Government in respect of all the recommendations 
have been received and are categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government –  
Para Nos. Nos.28, 29 and 30 
 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)            
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Para Nos. 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27  
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature- 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
 
   
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect of 
recommendations contained in Chapter I may be furnished to them at the 
earliest and in any case not later than 3 months of the presentation of the 
Report.  They find that replies to some recommenda tions are incomplete.  
They also find that in most of the replies it has been stated that ‘ the 
personal drivers engaged by the Executives have no right to be 
regularized by the banks’ giving an impression that Government have not 
considered the recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee with 
due seriousness.  While disapproving the tone and tenor of the replies  of 
the Ministry, the Committee caution the Ministry to be extremely careful 
in future while furnishing replies vis -à-vis recommendations of  the 
Committee.   
 
A. Bringing of temporary drivers into regular employment 
 (Recommendation No.23) 
 
1.4 The Committee were of the considered view that if the Executives of the 
Bank avail facility of Bank owned vehicle and other concomitant benefits, then 
it was also incumbent upon the Bank to bring those chauffeurs in the regular 
employment of the bank. 

9 
 
1.5 In their action ta ken reply, the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Financial Services  stated that …  The personal drivers are engaged by the 
Executives of Banks in their individual capacity and are not associated with 
the Bank.  The Bank has not prescribed any eligibility criteria for engagement 
of such personal drivers.  The Bank is nowhere concerned with engagement of 
drivers by its Executives.  Hence, there is no scope of "contractual 
arrangement" with the personal drivers on the part of the Bank.    The drivers 
hired by the Executives of Bank have filed Writ Petitions, appeals and SLP 
regarding absorption/regularization in the Hon'ble Calcutta High 
Court/Supreme Court, which have been settled by the Court.  The personal 
drivers engaged by the Executives have no right to be regularized by the banks. 
 
1.6 The Committee’s recommendation was in the backdrop of the fact 
that these drivers were serving the Executives of the Bank  for more than 
15-25 years and thus performing all the duties of a regular driver, driving 
the Bank owned vehicles for which maintenance and other costs were also 
borne by the Bank. The reply of the Government instead of addressing the 
issues highlighted in the recommendation chose to ignore the same by 
stating that the " personal drivers engaged by the Executives have no 
right to be regularize d by the banks.”   The Committee , therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that if the Executives 
of the Bank avail facility of Bank owned vehicles, then the drivers too 
ought to be brought under regular employment of the Bank. 
B. Relaxation in conditions of Employment 
 (Recommendation No.24 & 26) 
 

10 
 
1.7 The Committee noted that the conciliation proceedings were conducted 
without the participation of affected Drivers' Association.  Resultantly, the main 
issue of age and educational qualification etc. were given consideration while 
overlooking more relevant aspects like drivi ng skills, dedication and long 
duration of service etc.  They found little justification to withhold their 
regularization for want of prescribed educational qualification when the 
Executives of the Bank found their services satisfactory for over such a lon g 
period of time.  Having due consideration to their age, long and unblemished 
service record and the fact that at such a ripe age they would have bleak 
prospects of getting alternative employment, the Committee recommend ed that 
the condition of educationa l qualification be relaxed in case of these drivers as 
a onetime measure and they may also be considered for regularization on 
humanitarian ground. 
1.8 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Financial Services stated that …it was provided in the Settlement that in case 
any candidate did not hold valid license for driving, he would obtain the same 
within six months.  Further, those personal drivers who have completed at 
least 5 years of continuous engagement as personal driver as on 31.03.2010, in 
terms of the approval of the Bank's Board, were considered for appointment. 
Allahabad Bank has reported that the candidates were required to fulfill the 
educational qualification as prescribed by the Bank for appointment in 
subordinate cadre that is Class VIII passed.  And out of the 6 applicants who 
were found ineligible, 1 applicant did not fulfill the requirement of minimum 5 
years of engagement as personal driver, 1 applicant did not submit requisite 
document in support of his educ ational qualification and 3 applicants did not 
fulfill the requirement of minimum educational qualification.   … Therefore, 
there is no scope to relax the criteria regarding educational qualification, as 
recommended by the Committee. 
 

11 
 
1.9 The Committee find that the replies to the above recommendations 
had not touched upon  the Committee’s recommendation for relaxation in 
age and educational qualification and not for relaxation in obtaining 
license and number of years of service.  The Committee were of the 
opinion that since these drivers were driving the vehicles all th ese years 
without any complaint and incessantly and were proficient in the driving 
skills, their case definitely should have been given humanitarian view as 
they were at the fag end of their s ervice life.    The Committee were also 
of the firm opinion that had they be en given a chance to be party to the 
conciliation proceedings , they would have debated upon the issue of 
educational qualification too.   The Committee find that there are only 3 
such drivers who d o not fulfill the requirement of minimum educational 
qualification.  They, therefore, desire that a review must be made to cover 
them also by granting suitable relaxation. 
C. Revision in cut-off-date 
 (Recommendation No.25) 
 
1.10 The Committee fel t that the cut -off-date should have been the year of 
settlement i.e. 31st March, 2011.  Had it been so, some more drivers could 
have been covered.  They, therefore, desire d that the cut -off-date be revised to 
meet the ends of justice. 
1.11 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Financial Services stated that … Allahabad Bank has reported that the cut -off-
date for completion of minimum five years of continuous engagement as 
personal driver was fixed as on 31st March, 2010 in terms of the decision 

12 
 
taken in the Board meeting held on 26.06.2010.  Since the MOS dated  
17.06.2011 has been arrived at as a one -time exercise in full and final 
settlement of the issue, the cut-off-date cannot be revised at this juncture.    As 
stated earlier, the personal drivers have been engaged by Executives of the 
Bank in their individua l capacity and in absence of any Employer -Employee 
relationship, these personal drivers engaged by the Executives have no right to 
be regularized by the Banks. 
 
1.12 Going through  the reply of the Government, the Committee find 
that the decision for regula rization of these drivers was taken in the ir 
Board meeting held on 26.06.2010; hence the cut -off date was fixed as 
31st March, 2010.  They also found that the industrial dispute was raised 
in June, 2011 and the Memorandum of Settlement was also signed on 
17th June, 2011 .  The Committee find  no reason for setting up a cut-off 
date dating back to the year 2010  when the Tripartite Settlement was 
signed on 17 th June, 2011.  In Committee’s view this is sheer denial of 
coverage to the other drivers who too would have been benefitted, had the 
date been fixed as 31st March, 2011.   It is felt that a goof up has 
happened with regard to fixing the cut off date as 31 st March, 2010.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire a 
review of the decision in this regard. 
 
D. Issuance of application forms 
 (Recommendation No.27) 

13 
 
 
1.13 The Committee had apprehensions that  due to some chance slip some 
drivers might have been denied a fair chance to apply for regularization.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend ed that all such temporary drivers, fulfilling 
the criteria, be issued application forms and considered for regularization. 
1.14 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Financial Services  stated that …  Allahabad Bank has reported that as the 
personal drivers were engaged by the Executives in their individual capacity, 
Bank is not required to maintain record of such engagement.  All eligible 
personal drivers whose applications in terms of the Settlement dated 
17.06.2011 were received by the Bank, were considered for appointment. As 
stated earlier, the personal drivers engaged by the Executives have no right to 
be regularized by the Bank as the personal drivers have been engaged by the 
Executives of the Bank in their individual capacity. 
 
1.15 The Committee earlier found the whole process of handing  over of 
the application forms to be faulty .  The Ministry has not at all addressed 
the above specific issue and chose to repeat their reply  stating that "As 
stated earlier, the personal drivers engaged by the Executives have no 
right to be regularized by the Bank as the personal drivers have been 
engaged by the Executives of the Bank in their individual capacity."   The 
Committee find little justification in handing over the application forms 
to the prospective drivers through the Executives.  The Committee  feel 
that when a decision was taken by the Bank to regularize the temporary 
drivers, the Bank should have dealt directly with the drivers by giving 
them application forms in person .  The Committee , therefore, reiterate 

14 
 
their earlier recommendation and desire t hat all such temporary drivers, 
fulfilling the criteria, be issued application forms and considered for 
regularization. 
 
E. Framing of uniform policy 
 (Recommendation No.30) 
 
1.16 The Committee desired that necessary instructions be issued by the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services, to all the Nationalized 
Banks for framing a uniform policy and transparent guidelines for recruitment 
of regular drivers in the Banks and also for regularization of drivers engaged 
continuously for five years and above. 
1.17  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Financial Services stated that …The matter relating to absorption of personnel 
drivers in banks was examined in detailed and it was observed that these 
drivers are engaged by the Executives of the banks and they are paid by the 
Executives out of the allowances being granted to them by the banks.  There is, 
therefore, no relationship between the perso nal drivers engaged by the 
Executives and banks.  The question of absorption on regular establishments 
of the banks does not arise, as there is no employer -employee relationship 
between banks and the drivers engaged by the Executives.  This is also against  
the policy of public employment.  Any such recruitment in banks can only be 
made through the regular recruitment channels which also provide for 
reservations to the reserved categories.  It is for the Banks to have their own 
recruitment policies for the re cruitment in driver cadres with the approval by 
the respective Board of Directors of the concerned banks with the broad frame 
work of Government guidelines.  Government had issued instructions in the 
matter and reiterated its stand from time to time.  Copies of instructions issued 

15 
 
vide letter No.9/5/92 - IR dated 23.06.1997 and 27.03.2006 and 
F.No.7/4/9/2012–IR dated 26.10.2012 are enclosed (Annexure – I, II and III). 
 
 
1.18 The Committee find that while providing managerial autonomy to 
the Public Sector Banks for framing their own HR policies and procedure 
for recruitment, the Ministry have issued instruction from time to time in 
this regard.  The Committee like to draw atten tion of the Ministry 
towards the fact that leading Nationalised Banks are engaging drivers to 
drive Bank owned vehicles with all the paraphernalia but denying all the 
rights and privileges to these drivers which are otherwise available to 
regular drivers.  To protect the interests of persons engaged as temporary 
drivers by these banks, t he Committee,  reiterate their recommendation 
and desire that  the Ministry should come forward and frame a uniform 
policy and transparent guidelines for recruitment of regular drivers. 
 
      
  

16 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No.28) 
 The Committee note that besides 121 drivers who had completed 5 years 
of regular service as on 31st March, 2010, there were 117 more drivers who 
had not completed 5 years of service as on 31st March, 2010.  The Committee 
are dismayed to note that though the Bank has the information regarding 
number of drivers attached with the Executives, it could not have the names of 
the drivers and the date of their engagement. They, therefore, desire that a 
detailed database of all the drivers engaged by the Executives of Allahabad 
Bank be maintained and also furnished to them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Allahabad Bank has reported that the personal drivers are engaged by 
the Executives.  The number of left over personal drivers was a tentative figure 
estimated on the basis of the number of Executives eligible for Bank’s car and 
the number of permanent drivers are available.  The Bank is not required to 
maintain record of such engagement. 
 As the personal drivers have been engaged by the Executives of the Bank 
in their individual capacity, the question of maintaining database of such 
personal drivers does not arise. 
(Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services  
O.M.F.No.7/4/9/2012-IR dated 15.01.2013) 
 
(Recommendation No.29) 
 The Committee further find that the Allahabad Bank  have a policy of 
providing Bank owned vehicle to their Executives for which it bears the cost of 
petrol, maintenance and other attendant costs besides giving a fixed amount of 
Rs.6000/- to their Executive s for hiring drivers.  The Committee were also 
informed that the disbursement of this amount is available only to those 
Executives hiring the drivers and not for self driven vehicles.  The Committee 
are of the view that since driving is a perennial nature of job, they, recommend 
that henceforth, after absorption/ regularization of the present drivers who 
have completed 5 years of continuous service, a transparent policy may be 
framed for recruitment of regular drivers to avoid/prevent further 
dispute/litigation in the matter.  They desire to be apprised of the action taken 
in the matter.   

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Allahabad Bank has reported that the Bank owned vehicles are usually 
provided to the Executives in Scale V (Asstt. General Manager) and above.  
However, A.G.Ms. who are not availing Bank’s car, are eligible for payment of 
lump sum amount for vehicle usage, irrespective of whether they possess own 
vehicles or not.  The bank has also reported that the provision for recruitment 
of regular drivers is already available in the Bank’s Recruitment Policy. 
(Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services  
O.M.F.No.7/4/9/2012-IR dated 15.01.2013) 
(Recommendation No.30) 
 The Committee desired that necessary instructions be issued by the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services, to all the Nationalized 
Banks for framing a uniform policy and transparent guidelines for recruitment 
of regular drivers in the Banks and also for regularization of drivers engaged 
continuously for five years and above. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services  stated that 
…The matter relating to absorption of personnel drivers in banks was 
examined in detailed and it was observed that these drivers are engaged by the 
Executives of the banks and they are paid by the Executives out of the 
allowances being granted to them by the banks.  There is, therefore, no 
relationship between the personal drivers engaged by the Executives and 
banks.  The question of absorption on regular e stablishments of the banks 
does not arise, as there is no employer -employee relationship between banks 
and the drivers engaged by the Executives.  This is also against the policy of 
public employment.  Any such recruitment in banks can only be made through  
the regular recruitment channels which also provide for reservations to the 
reserved categories. It is for the Banks to have their own recruitment policies 
for the recruitment in driver cadres with the approval by the respective Board 
of Directors of the concerned banks with the broad frame work of Government 
guidelines. Government had issued instructions in the matter and reiterated its 
stand from time to time.  Copies of instructions issued vide letter No.9/5/92 - 
IR dated 23.06.1997 and 27.03.2006 and F. No.7/4/9/2012–IR dated 
26.10.2012 are enclosed (Annexure – I, II and III). 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 18 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
(Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services  
O.M.F.No.7/4/9/2012-IR dated 15.01.2013) 

18 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-   NIL   - 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No.23) 
 
 The Committee were of the considered view that if the Executives of the 
Bank avail facility of Bank owned vehicle and other concomitant benefits, the n 
it was also incumbent upon the Bank to bring those chauffeurs in the regular 
employment of the bank. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services  stated that … 
The personal drivers are engaged by the Executives of Banks in their individual 
capacity and are not associated with the Bank.  The Bank has not prescribed 
any eligibility criteria for engagement of such personal drivers.  The Bank is 
nowhere concerned with engagement of drivers by its Executives.  Hence, the re 
is no scope of "contractual arrangement" with the personal drivers on the part 
of the Bank.    The drivers hired by the Executives of Bank have filed Writ 
Petitions, appeals and SLP regarding absorption/regularization in the Hon'ble 
Calcutta High Court/S upreme Court, which have been settled by the Court.  
The personal drivers engaged by the Executives have no right to be regularized 
by the banks. 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 6 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
(Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services  
O.M.F.No.7/4/9/2012-IR dated 15.01.2013) 
 
(Recommendation No.24) 
 
 The Committee note that a dispute was raised before the Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central) by the All India Allahabad Bank Employees' 
Coordination Committee in June, 2011 against the management of Allahabad 
Bank in the matter of absorption of personal/tem porary drivers.  After the 
conciliation proceedings, a Memorandum of Settlement was signed between the 

20 
 
Management and the Coordination Committee on 17.06.2011. The Committee, 
however, note that the conciliation proceedings were conducted without the 
participation of affected Drivers' Association.  Resultantly, the main issue of 
age and educational qualification etc. were given consideration while 
overlooking more relevant aspects like driving skills, dedication and long 
duration of service etc.  The Committ ee, therefore, feel that in such cases a 
humanitarian view need to be taken and therefore, recommend that the 
Allahabad Bank review their decision and extend relaxation to those uncovered 
drivers under the present settlement. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services  stated that … 
As already stated, the Drivers' Association lost the protracted legal battle which 
they instituted against the Bank on the issue of absorption of the personal 
drivers in Bank's service.  Thereafter, the majority workmen union of the Bank 
regularly took up the matter and also raised an industrial Dispute before the 
Chief Labour Commissioner and after conciliation proceedings, a Settlement 
was signed on 17.06.2011.  It was provided in the Se ttlement that in case any 
candidate did not hold valid license for driving, he would obtain the same 
within six months.  Further, those personal drivers who have completed at 
least 5 years of continuous engagement as personal driver as on 31.03.2010, in 
terms of the approval of the Bank's Board, were considered for appointment.  
The Association of the Drivers engaged by the Executives in their individual 
capacity do not have any locus standi to participate in any discussion or 
settlement with the Bank.  As personal drivers engaged by the Executives in 
individual capacity have no right for regularization by Bank, there is no scope 
to review and extend any relaxation under the existing Settlement, as 
recommended by the Committee. 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 9 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
 
(Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services  
O.M.F.No.7/4/9/2012-IR dated 15.01.2013) 
 
 
(Recommendation No.25) 

21 
 
 
 The Committee find that the All India Allahabad Bank Employees' 
Coordination Committee raised an industrial dispute during June, 2011 with 
the CLC (C).  After conciliation proceedings, a Tripartite Settlement was signed 
amongst the Management of the Bank, All India Allahabad Bank Employees' 
Coordination Committee and the Dy. CLC(C) on 17th June, 2011.  However, 
the cut off date for completion of minimum five years of continuous 
engagement was set as 31st March, 2010.  The Committee feel that the cut -off-
date should have been the year of settlement i.e. 3 1st March, 2011.  Had it 
been so, some more drivers could have been covered.  They, therefore, desire 
that the cut-off-date be revised to meet the end of justice. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services stated th at … 
Allahabad Bank has reported that the cut -off-date for completion of minimum 
five years of continuous engagement as personal driver was fixed as on 31st 
March, 2010 in terms of the decision taken in the Board meeting held on 
26.06.2010.  Since the MOS dated 17.06.2011 has been arrived at as a one -
time exercise in full and final settlement of the issue, the cut-off-date cannot be 
revised at this juncture.    As stated earlier, the personal drivers have been 
engaged by Executives of the Bank in their indi vidual capacity and in absence 
of any Employer-Employee relationship, these personal drivers engaged by the 
Executives have no right to be regularized by the Banks. 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 12 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
(Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services  
O.M.F.No.7/4/9/2012-IR dated 15.01.2013) 
 
(Recommendation No.26) 
 
 The Committee are, however, happy to note that pursuant to their 
examination, the Allahabad Bank have re gularized 115 out of 121 temporary 
drivers who had applied for regularization after fulfilling the eligibility criteria 
with effect from 01.09.2011. The Committee find that the remaining drivers, 
were reportedly ineligible for want of requisite educational  qualification. The 
Committee find little justification to withhold their regularization for want of 
prescribed educational qualification when the Executives of the Bank found 

22 
 
their services satisfactory for over such a long period of time.  Having due 
consideration to their age, long and unblemished service record and the fact 
that at such a ripe age they would have bleak prospects of getting alternative 
employment, the Committee recommend that the condition of educational 
qualification be relaxed in case of these drivers as a onetime measure and they 
may also be considered for regularization on humanitarian ground. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Allahabad Bank has reported that the candidates were required to fulfill 
the educational qualification as prescribed  by the Bank for appointment in 
subordinate cadre that is Class VIII passed.  And out of the 6 applicants who 
were found ineligible, 1 applicant did not fulfill the requirement of minimum 5 
years of engagement as personal driver, 1 applicant did not submit  requisite 
document in support of his educational qualification and 3 applicants did not 
fulfill the requirement of minimum educational qualification.   As stated earlier, 
the personal drivers engaged by the Executives of the Bank in their personal 
capacity have no right for their regularization/appointment in the Bank.  
Therefore, there is no scope to relax the criteria regarding educational 
qualification, as recommended by the Committee. 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No.1. 9 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
(Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services  
O.M.F.No.7/4/9/2012-IR dated 15.01.2013) 
(Recommendation No.27) 
 The Committee find that the application forms were handed over to the 
prospective drivers through the Executives with whom they were attached.  
Such a mechanism does not inspire confidence and the Committee apprehend 
due to some chance slip some drivers might have been denied a fair chance to 
apply for regularisation.  The Committee, therefore,  recommend that all such 
temporary drivers, fulfilling the criteria, be issued application forms and 
considered for regularization. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services stated that …  
Allahabad Bank has reported that as the personal drivers were engaged by the 
Executives in their individual capacity, Bank is not required to maintain record 
of such engagement.  All eligible personal drivers whose applications in terms 

23 
 
of the Settlement dated 17.06.2011 were received by the Bank, were considered 
for appointment. As stated earlier, the personal drivers engaged by the 
Executives have no right to be regularized by the Bank as the personal drivers 
have been engaged by the Executives of the Bank in their individual capacity. 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 15 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
(Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services  
O.M.F.No.7/4/9/2012-IR dated 15.01.2013) 
 
 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;               DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
       January, 2014                                        CHAIRMAN,                 
 Agrahayana ,1935 (Saka)   STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

25 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 22nd January, 2014 from 1100 hrs. to 
1340 hrs. in Committee Room `E’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
   Shri Dara Singh Chauhan - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri Ismail Hussain 
3.      Dr. Manda Jagannath 
4.      Shri Hari Manjhi 
5.      Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
6.      Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
7.    Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
   Rajya Sabha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
8. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
9. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
10. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
11. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
12. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
13. Shri Rajaram 
14. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 

26 
 
  
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri A.K Singh   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
2.   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and 
apprised them about the  (i) Memorandum No. 5 on Action Taken by 
the Government on the 31 st Report of the Committee on 
‘Absorption/regularization of temporary Drivers of Allahabad Bank ’ 
and Draft Action Taken Report thereon; (ii) Memorandum No. 6 on 
the stand taken by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial 
Services for not sending any officer during the study visit o f the 
Standing Committee on Labour to Surat, Mumbai and Kolkata from 
19-23 October, 2013.   
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report 
without any modification. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the 
report to both Houses of Parliament. 
5.  XX    XX    XX 
6.  XX    XX    XX 
7.  XX    XX    XX 
8.  XX    XX    XX  
9.  XX    XX    XX 
 

27 
 
10.  XX    XX   XX 
11.  XX    XX   XX 
12.   XX    XX   XX 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XX  Matter do not pertain to this report. 
 

28 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY -FIRST 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FIFTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations      08   
II. Recommendations/Observations which have  03      37.5%   
 been accepted by Government 
 
 (Rec. Para. Nos.28, 29 and 30  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the   NIL   NIL  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s reply  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  05  62.5% 
 which replies of Government have not been 
 accepted by the Committee  
       
 (Rec.  Para. Nos.23, 24, 25, 26  and 27) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which NIL  NIL 
 final replies of Government are of interim in  nature 
  
       
                                          
         ----------------- 
           100%  
                                    ------------------ 
 