  
38 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2012-13) 
 (FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
 
'WELFARE OF SMALL WEAVERS IN MAU AND ADJOINING 
AREAS-A CASE STUDY’. 
 
         THIRTY- EIGHTH  REPORT 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
           August, 2013/Shravana, 1935 (Saka) 
  
 
 
       


2 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH   REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2012-13) 
 
(FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
'WELFARE OF SMALL WEAVERS IN MAU AND ADJOINING 
AREAS-A CASE STUDY’. 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 13th August, 2013  
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13th August, 2013 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
           August, 2013/Shravana, 1935 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 


3 
 
                      CONTENTS 
PAGE (S) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii)  
    
INTRODUCTION         (v)   
 
      REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I         INTRODUCTORY 
 
CHAPTER-II         RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS       
  
  
ANNEXURE 
 (i) Annexure-I - Minutes of the sittings of the Standing Committee on 
Labour held on  03.05.2013 and 29.05.2013.

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2012-13) 
 SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN - CHAIRMAN 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ismail Hussain 
*3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
5. Shri Nara Hari Mahato 
6. Shri Hari Manjhi 
7. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
8. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
9. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
10. Shri Dinubhai Boghabhai Solanki 
11. Shri Makhan Singh Solanki 
12. Shri K. Sugumar 
13. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
**14. Shri Ashok Argal 
 ***15. Smt. J. Shantha 
  ****16. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
 ****17. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
****18. Shri Ratan Singh 
****19. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
  MEMBERS 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
24. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
25. Shri P. Kannan 
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
27. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
28. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
29. Shri Rajaram 
30. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
31. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*    Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his  nomination to     
      Standing Committee on Commerce w.e.f. 13th December, 2012. 
       **    Nominated w.e.f. 9th January, 2013. 
      ***   Nominated w.e.f. 19th March, 2013. 
    ****    Nominated w.e.f. 1st May, 2013.  

5 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy - Director 
 3. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour (2012 -
13) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the report 
on their behalf, do present this Thirty -Eighth Report on ‘Welfare of 
Small Weavers in Mau and Adjoining Areas-A Case Study’. 
2. The Committee while taking note of the pitiable working 
conditions of the small weavers of Mau and adjoining area and 
finding non-implementation of any social security schemes for these 
poor weavers, undertook a study visit to Mau in January, 2013, to 
get first hand information of the plight of these workers. The 
Committee, thereafter, selected the subject for detailed 
examination. 
3.  The representatives of the Ministry of Textiles also tendered 
evidence on 3.5.2013. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
representatives of Ministry of textiles for placing before them their 
views and also for providing detailed written notes and information 
solicited by them on the subject. 
5.  The Committee consid ered and adopted the draft Report at 
their sitting held on 29.5.2013. 
6.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/ 
Recommendations have been printed in bold type in the body of the 
Report. 
 
 New Delhi;                      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
  August, 2013                                                                CHAIRMAN,  
 Shravana, 1935 (Saka)             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 

7 
 
  REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
Introductory 
 
 The Indian textile industry is extremely varied, with the hand-
spun and handwoven sector at one end and the capital intensive, 
sophisticated mill sector at the other and of the spectrum. The 
decentralized powerlooms/ hosiery and knitting sector forms the 
largest section of the Textiles sector. The textile sector is the second 
largest provider of employment after agriculture. 
 
2. The handloom sector provides employment to 43 lakh 
weavers/ workers and around 57 lakh weavers/ workers are 
estimated to be employed in decentralized Powerloom sector. Most 
of these weaver s/ workers are based in rural areas and follow 
traditional practices.  
 
FACTS 
3. The attention of the Standing Committee on labour was drawn 
towards the pitiable conditions of the small weavers of Mau and 

8 
 
adjoining areas. The Committee was very concerned w ith the 
pathetic working conditions of small weavers, lack of infrastructure, 
their exploitation at the hands of contractors, outdated looms and 
absence of any social security schemes particularly for the 
powerloom weavers. 
 
4. To ascertain the factual position, the Committee visited Mau in 
January, 2013 to interact with weavers/ workers of the area and 
found that: 
 
1. The weavers are living in small one room houses which also 
doubles up as their work place with the loom installed in that 
very room. 
2. The women of the family work throughout the night in extreme 
conditions to make yarn ready for weaving. 
3. The weavers are exploited by the contractors who finance their 
looms and then pay them meager rates for their products. 
4. The poor powerloom weavers are not able to sell their products 
in the open market. 

9 
 
5. The weavers are not aware of any scheme floated by the 
Government. 
6. The looms installed at ITI, Mau for giving training to the 
students are outdated. 
7. The looms installed in the area are of 0.5 to 1 horse power 
which has been done only to reduce manual effort. 
8. There is no effort from the Government to guide them with 
designing and quality to produce marketable products. 
9. The reach of TUFS has been negligible. 
  
5. During the evidence held on 3.5.2013, the Secretary info rmed 
the Committee: 
 "…Three major initiatives have already been taken by the 
 Ministry for upliftment and welfare of the powerloom sector on 
 the recommendations of this hon. Committee.  The first is the 
 initiation of the powerloom survey; the second is the 
 introduction of the health insurance scheme for powerloom 
 workers; and the third is the scheme for in situ upgradation of 
 powerlooms.  We are also happy to inform you that the 
 relaxation in norms of the RRR package and the extension of 
 the cut-off date is also under consideration. The EFC note is at 
 the final stage…" 
 
6. Further, the Secretary stated: 

10 
 
 "…The peculiarity of Mau is that it is neither fully handloom 
 nor  fully powerloom. So, we have been, on the advice of the 
 Committee, first tryin g to propose change in the definition of 
 handloom so that these products could also be covered. We 
 did  make a draft regulation. The Advisory Committee 
 recommended it.  However, before we could take it through the 
 entire process, which involves an amen dment, which as you 
 know is a long process, there has been a strong objection to 
 changing the definition the way we had proposed it. So, we 
 convened another meeting of the Advisory Committee on 12 th 
 April and all these State Governments were of the vie w that 
 the amendment as drafted would have an adverse effect on the 
 handloom sector because it would be difficult to differentiate 
 between the handloom and the powerloom.  So, while we are 
 concerned and want to come up with schemes for the small 
 powerloom weavers within the entire powerloom sector which 
 is very wide – there are big units and there are small units – 
 but we would like to define that category of small powerloom 
 weavers and think of what extra benefits could be given to 
 handloom weavers other than the benefits which are already 
 available for all powerloom weavers. We have  constituted a 
 Sub-Committee and it will very quickly give its  report after 
 visiting some of the States. The ToR of the Sub -
 Committee is to study different types of looms being operated 
 by handloom weavers and handloom clusters across the 
 country; to study the extent of modernisation and 
 mechanisation being carried out in different parts of the 
 country; the scope for further improvement and upgradation of 
 looms to reduce drudgery without compromising with the 
 quality of handloom fabric and possibly to replicate those 
 interventions in other handloom clusters and pockets; to 
 examine the feasibility of mechanising any two out of the three 
 basic motions, that i s shedding, picking and beating ; to 
 reduce the drudgery and enhance productivity without losing 
 the artistic creativity of weavers; to examine the possibility of 
 categorising small powerloom units and weavers into a 
 separate group so as to extend cert ain benefits on the lines of 
 handloom weavers; to examine and analyse the present 
 definition of handloom in view of changing scenario of textile 

11 
 
 sector; to assess the impact of proposed change in the 
 definition of ‘handloom’ on handloom sector and weav ers; and 
 to suggest changes, if required, in the present definition of 
 ‘handloom’ with the objective of improving the living conditions 
 of handloom weavers..."  
 
7. When asked about the details of Handloom and Powerloom 
weavers in the Mau and adjoining area, the Ministry provided the 
following information:  
Name of 
District 
Handloom Weavers Powerloom workers 
(As per 2 nd  
census 
1995-96) 
( As per 3rd   
census 
2009-10) 
(As per 
census 
1995-96)  
Azamgarh 53139 40346 2219 
Power loom 
survey 2011 -
12  is going 
on 
Gazipur 17560 357 2131 
Mau 10169 3723 47804 
Balia 2859   - 61 
Total 83727 44426 52215 
 
8. As regards details of the female weavers involved in handloom 
and powerloom industry, following information was provided:  

12 
 
Name of 
District 
No. of female weavers  involved in 
handloom s 
(as per 3rd  census 2009-10) 
No. of female workers  
involved in powerloom 
industry (as per census 
1995-96) 
Azamgarh 4841 244 
Gazipur 39 213 
Mau 372 6214 
Balia -  
Total 5552 6671 
   
 
9. On being asked about the number of looms the following 
details were given:  
Name of District 
No. of power 
looms 
No. of 
handlooms 
Azamgarh 
Power loom 
Survey 2011-
12 is going on 
18421 
Gazipur 153 
Mau 1800 
Balia  
Total 20374 
 

13 
 
10. When asked further about the status of handlooms in the 
area, the Ministry in their reply stated that: 
"Large numbers of handlooms in this area are traditional and 
 require up -gradation; however no detailed/household survey 
 has been done in these four districts.   A part of the 
 developmental activities, various technological interventions 
 have been implemented in different handloom pockets of the 
 country." 
 
11. On being asked about the size of Powerloom Units in the area, 
the Ministry replied: 
 "The details of size of powerloom units are not available at 
 present.  However, the average size of the Powerloom unit in 
 the  area are 2 -4 looms.  At present the work of All India 
 Powerloom Survey is going on and it is expected to be 
 completed by June 2013." 
 
12. Further, the Ministry stated that the details of number of 
Powerlooms in the area that are obsolete and require upgradation is 
not available.  However in Mau an d surrounding area, most of the 
powerlooms are shuttle plain looms which are 10 to 30 years old. 
 
13. When asked about the performance of Weavers Service Centre 
in the area, the Ministry replied as follows:  

14 
 
 "Mau and adjoining area falls under the jurisdiction of 
 Weavers  Service Centre (WSC),   Varanasi and all the 
 technical/design  support is provided by WSC, Varanasi to 
 the weavers of Mau  and adjoining area.    
 
  920 handloom weavers of Mau and adjoini ng area have 
 been provided training by WSC, Varanasi during last three 
 years. 
  3 design exhibitions cum dyeing workshops have been 
 organized by the WSC, Varanasi in the Mau and adjoining 
 area." 
 
14. As regards the efforts made by National Centre for T extile 
Design (NCTD), the reply of the Ministry was: 
  
 "Activities of National Centre for Textile Design  (NCTD) are 
 carried out through WSCs. NCTD provides design support to 
 handloom weavers online and more than 1300 traditional and 
 contemporary design s with technical details are available on 
 the website, which can be downloaded free of cost by any 
 weaver including weavers of Mau and adjoining area." 
 
15. During evidence, a representative of the Ministry further 
stated that facility of designer is being provided at the cluster level, 
as in Mubarakpur cluster. 
  

15 
 
16. When asked about the coverage of Handloom Weavers 
Comprehensive Welfare Scheme, the Ministry gave the following 
information: 
 
 "Details about the number of weavers covered under the 
 Health  Insurance Scheme of Handloom Weavers 
 Comprehensive  Welfare Scheme are given as under:   
 
District (2010-11) (2011-12) 
Mau 951 345 
Gazipur 0 01 
Balia 0 0 
Azamgarh 10484 3623 
             " 
17. On being asked about the efforts made for spreading 
awareness about various schemes, the Ministry in their written 
reply stated as under: 
 "Awareness camps are organized for publicizing the scheme 
 which is being implemented by the Office of the Development 
 Commissioner for Handlooms. Simultaneously, advertisements 
 are also published in regional languages in the leading 
 newspapers for the benefit of handloom weavers.  
  

16 
 
  In respect of Powerloom sector schemes, 
 seminar/workshop with Powerloom associations, Powerloom 
 organizations and stakeholders are co nducted by Powerloom 
 Service Centre regularly for creating awareness about the 
 schemes among the powerloom weavers.  The advertisements 
 and publicity of the Government schemes, Programmes, 
 Training Programmes etc. are given in local newspapers.  The 
 Weavers/workers are also directly contacted to advise them to 
 upgrade the skills & avail the benefits of the schemes etc.  
 Further all the schemes and programmes are kept in website 
 of the Office of the Textile Commissioner as well as Ministry of 
 Textiles. 
   
 Schemes of Office of DC(Handicrafts) are publicized 
through website, distribution of brochures, catalogue etc. 
through Marketing & Service Extension Centres and also  by 
organizing  events, like seminar, workshops etc." 
 
18.  As regards coverage of  the Group Insurance Scheme for 
Powerloom workers, the reply of the Ministry is as follows: 
 Number of workers of the area covered under the Group 
 Insurance Scheme for powerloom workers: 
 
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 Total 
1295 1049 1016 1008 1152 5520 
 
19. Further the Ministry stated that the workers/ weavers covered 
under the scheme who fulfill the eligibility criteria under the Group 
Insurance Scheme become eligible for scholarship for their children. 

17 
 
During the above period,  scholarship has not been given as no 
eligible application was received. 
 
20. The Ministry gave following figures in respect of exposure 
visits of powerloom weavers in that area during 2007-08 to 2011-12 
are as under: 
 
All India  Uttar Pradesh  
(including Mau 
area) 
Mau area in 
U.P. 
3009 563 120 
 
 
 
21. Following figures in respect of Training Programmes organized 
for powerloom workers/ weavers of the area were provided: 
 
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
83 148 120 25 30 
 

18 
 
22. The number of Exhibition / Buyer Seller Meet / Road Show 
organized during 2007 -08 to 2011 -12 in U.P.  nearby city of the 
area are as under: 
No. of Exhibition / Buyer Seller Meet / Road 
Show 
Total Uttar Pradesh 
59 6 
 
Entrepreneurs of Mau have also participated in the events held at 
Meerut & Kanpur. 
 
23. When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to help the 
weavers who are not able to sell their products, the Ministry stated: 
 "The Regional office of the Textile Commissioner, Powerloom 
 Service Centre of the office of the Textile Commissioner and 
 Powerloom Development & Export Promotion Council 
 (PDEXCIL) organize buyer seller meets wherein weavers are 
 participating to sell / market the powerloom products directly 
 to the  customer by e liminating the middlemen. The 
 advertisements of the government schemes, Programmes, 
 Training Programmes etc. are released in local newspapers. 
 The seminar/workshops are conducted for creating awareness 
 about government schemes/programmes. The weavers a re 

19 
 
 directly contacted & advised to upgrade the skills, avail the 
 benefits of the schemes etc." 
 
24. On being asked about the efforts made by the Ministry to help 
poor Powerloom owners who are too small to take benefit under 
other ambitious schemes of the  Ministry to upgrade their outdated 
powerlooms, the Ministry replied: 
 
 "Scheme for In -situ upgradation of plain powerloom is under 
 consideration at Ministry of Textiles for 12th plan period. 
 Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) provides 
 subsidy for upgrading the technology in textile units including 
 powerloom units. Automatic/ shuttleless powerloom are 
 covered under TUFS. The TUFS has been announced to have 
 been extended for 12th plan period." 
 
25. When asked whether any scheme for financing the looms been 
floated by the Ministry to help poor weavers so that they can buy 
their own looms, the Ministry replied as follows: 
 
 "Under the Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme, 
 Government of India is providing financial assistance to 
 handloom weavers for purchase of new looms and accessories.  
  Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme implemented by 
 the Ministry of Textiles provides subsidy on investment in 
 machinery for powerloom units for modernization / 
 upgradation of the technology. In the 12 th Five Year Plan 
 under TUFS, an increased focus shall be given to the 

20 
 
 Powerloom Sector as per Budget Announcements of Hon’ble 
 Finance Minister 2013 -14.  Increased subsidies have been 
 proposed for the Powerloom Sector."  
 
26. As regards the steps taken by the Ministry to save the weavers 
from the exploitation by contractors/ middlemen, the Ministry 
stated: 
 "Government of India through Marketing and Export 
 Promotion  Scheme provides financial assistance to the 
 State  Governments and other eligible handloom agencies 
 for  organizing domestic as well as international marketing 
 events  for marketing of the handloom products directly to 
 the general  public/buyers/consumers, thereby reduces 
 the dependence of  weavers on middlemen /master -weavers. 
 The marketing  incentive component has not been 
 discontinued rather it is  being modified to ensure that 
 benefit is passed on to handloom weavers. The 10% price 
 subsidy on hank yarn and subsidized credit has been 
 introduced with the objective to help weavers and p rimary 
 societies to compete with powerloom and mill sector. 
  The Regional office of the Textile Commissioner/ 
 Powerloom Service Centre / Powerloom Development Export 
 Promotion Council (PDEXCIL) organize buyer seller meets 
 wherein weavers are participa ting to sell / market the 
 powerloom products by eliminating the middlemen. The 
 advertisement/ publicity of the government schemes / 
 Programmes/ Training Programmes are given in local 
 newspapers, seminar/workshops are conducted for creating 
 awareness about government schemes/programmes, weavers/ 
 workers are directly contacted to advise them to upgrade the 
 skills/ avail the benefits of the schemes etc so that they can be 
 saved from exploitation by contractors/ middlemen." 
 

21 
 
27. When asked whether the M inistry has ever thought of any 
scheme for providing loan to the weavers from financial institutions 
at subsidized rates for buying homes as they live in miserable 
conditions, the Ministry replied: 
 "With an objective to provide subsidized/cheaper working 
 capital to handloom weavers, a new component of institutional 
 credit for handloom weavers under Integrated Handlooms 
 Development Scheme has been approved by the Government 
 in December, 2011 wherein margin money assistance @ 
 Rs.4200/- per weaver, 3% in terest subvention for 3 years and 
 credit guarantee through Credit guarantee Trust for Micro and 
 Small Enterprises is provided for 3 years.  The objective of this 
 scheme is to provide subsidized working capital to handloom 
 weavers for weaving related ac tivities.  The construction of 
 house is not covered under the scheme.  There is no 
 scheme/proposal with Ministry of Textiles for providing loan to 
 the powerloom weavers from financial institutions at 
 subsidized rates for buying homes." 
 
 
28. The Secret ary, during evidence stated that a provision for 
Group WorkSheds is being considered in the proposed Integrated 
Powerloom Development Scheme which has been circulated for 
consideration by EFC. 
 
      
  

22 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
29. The Committee observe that the last Powerloom survey 
was conducted in 1995 -96 and therefore the Ministry are not 
able to provide the figures relating to the number of 
powerlooms, powerloom weavers/workers and status of 
powerlooms and size of powerloom unit s in Azamgarh, 
Ghazipur, Mau and Balia. The Committee fail to understand the 
basis on which the Ministry are making budgetary allocations 
for the powerloom weavers/workers in absence of any up -to-
date information about actual number of beneficiaries etc.  The 
Committee feel that without having the latest data in respect 
of targeted population, neither the welfare schemes can be 
implemented successfully, nor the budgetary allocations 
justified. The Committee desire that to gauge the real situation 
prevailing on the ground, the regional offices of Textile 
Commissioner should conduct detailed periodical surveys for 
collecting information relating to number of powerloom 
weavers; size, condition and capacity of powerlooms and 

23 
 
powerloom units; average earnings of the powerloom weavers 
and ancillary workers; availability of raw material and 
infrastructural facilities; peculiar problems of the area; and the 
number of weavers migrating to other professions etc. The 
Committee desire that that the ongoing All India Powe rloom 
Survey should strive to address the concerns raised by the 
Committee and once that survey is completed, the identified 
weavers could be issued I -cards so that the schemes meant for 
them could be implemented and monitored in a better way. The 
Committee desire that the decision to continue the office of 
Textile Commissioner at Kanpur may be expedited which the 
Committee also recommended in their 36th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Textiles so 
that benefits of various schemes t o the poor weavers of that 
area could be ensured without further delay.  
30. The Committee are also of the view that the Powerloom 
Service Centre in Mau has not been able to contribute anything 
substantial towards improvement of the working conditions of 
Powerloom Weavers of the area. The Committee desire that the 

24 
 
officers deputed in Powerloom Service Cente, Mau should visit 
the area periodically to have first hand knowledge of the 
problems being faced by these weavers and also disseminate 
the information about the various schemes of the Ministry and 
the training programmes being conducted by the Powerloom 
Service Centre to the weavers personally. 
 
31. The Committee observe that there is a sharp decline in 
the number of handloom weavers in Azamgarh, Ghazipur, Mau 
and Balia in last two decades which indicates the failure of the 
schemes of the Ministry to sustain handlooms in these areas. 
The Committee are  shocked to note that in Balia, Uttar 
Pradesh not even a single handloom weaver exists as per the 
latest handloom census. The Committee note that Ministry 
have not conducted any detailed /household survey in the area 
and has no information about the status  of handlooms in the 
area. The Committee are of the firm view that the Ministry 
should take extra interest in these areas where the skill is 
dying and desire that a comprehensive survey of the area may 

25 
 
be conducted and reasons for dwindling number of handl oom 
weavers be ascertained and area specific solutions be applied 
instead of a general approach as is being done by the Ministry 
at present. 
 
32. The Committee note that only 920 handloom weavers of 
Azamgarh, Ghazipur, Mau and Balia have been trained by 
Weavers’ Service Centre, Varanasi and only 3 workshops have 
been organized in the last three years . The Committee feel 
that given the plight of weavers in the area this is far too less 
an effort to make any impact. The Committee are of the 
opinion that exte nsion centre of Weaver Service Centre, 
Varanasi, may be opened in Mau so as to cater to the needs of 
the weavers in the area. The Committee also desire that 
separate training programmes may be organized by the 
extension centre for women weavers/ workers an d allied 
workers.  
 

26 
 
33. The Committee further note that most of the powerlooms 
in the area are shuttle plain looms which are 10 to 30 years old 
and, at present, Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme is the 
only scheme available for upgradation of these looms.  The 
Committee also observe that in respect of restructured TUFS, 
there were only 5 cases out of a total 3741 approved cases 
where investment was less than 5 lakhs. The Committee, 
therefore, are of the firm opinion that small weavers have not 
been able to get any benefit under TUFS.  The Committee 
desire that an alternative scheme for upgradation of looms in 
the area may be chalked out and a part of the  TUFS allocation 
be kept exclusively for the benefit of the weavers of the areas 
where poorest of poor we avers reside and annual targets may 
also be fixed therefor.  
 
34. The Committee, during their study visit to ITI, Mau, found 
that the looms installed for training purposes were very old and 
traditional. The Committee feel that the looms installed at the 
ITI and other centres in the area need to upgraded at the 

27 
 
earliest. The Committee are of the opinion that the courses in 
trades relating to textile industry being offered in ITI, Mau 
need to be strengthened in order to make them market 
oriented. The Ministry of Textiles besides offering such courses 
themselves in the area under the ‘Skill Development Initiative’ 
may also take up the matter with the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and the State Government to improve the courses 
and facilities in ITI, Mau. 
 
35. The Committee observe that the National Centre for 
Textile Design provides design support to handloom weavers 
online and contemporary designs and technical details are 
available on their website. The Committee feel that giving on -
line information to poor weavers who are not even sure of their 
daily earnings and hardly have any access to 
computers/internet, does not serve their purpose and is of no 
use for them. The Committee also note from the reply of the 
Ministry that designers are appointed at cluster  level. The 
Committee are of the view that designer should also be 

28 
 
available at the Weaver Service Centre and Powerloom Service 
Centre who must visit households in the vicinity periodically 
to help the weavers produce marketable products.  Further, the 
offices of DC (Handlooms) and Textile Commissioner should 
take steps to groom talented designers amongst the weaver 
community by giving them requisite training and exposure and 
thus work towards making the clusters self sufficient. 
 
36. The Committee perused the low coverage of the insurance 
schemes of the Ministry viz. health insurance scheme for 
handloom weavers and Group Insurance Schemes for 
Powerloom workers. The Committee were surprised to note 
that not a single eligible application was received for 
scholarship which is a part of the Group Insurance Scheme for 
the workers. Further, on the training segment, only 406 
powerloom weavers have been trained in last 5 years. The 
Committee would like to point out that implementation of 
schemes in respect of powerl oom weavers has been pathetic 
and attribute this to absence of concerted efforts at field level 

29 
 
coupled with lack of awareness amongst the beneficiaries for 
whom the schemes are meant. The Committee view such lack 
of awareness about the schemes as the majo r reason for low 
coverage. The Committee desire that Ministry gear up their 
efforts to spread awareness about the schemes. The Committee 
may also be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 Further, the Committee are of the view that whenever the 
Ministry launches any welfare scheme, an orientation session 
for Members of Parliament, Members of Legislative Assemblies  
and other elected representatives be invariably organized by 
the Ministry through its regional offices as they are the public 
representatives and can better publicize the welfare schemes to 
the grass-root level of workers. The Committee also desire that 
brochures, preferably in local languages in respect of the 
schemes, be made available at the local post offices, gram 
panchayats and schools. 
 
 

30 
 
37. The Committee during their visit to Mau in January, 2013 
found that the female family members of the weavers work 
whole night in extreme conditions to make yarn ready for 
weaving.  The Committee were moved to see the pathetic living 
conditions of t hose female members.  During the evidence the 
Committee were informed that the Ministry are proposing to 
provide worksheds to the weavers. The Committee are of the 
opinion that these common worksheds will not make much of a 
difference in ameliorating the p light of the female family 
members of weavers who have to ultimately work in their 
homes. They, therefore, desire the Ministry to take steps for 
betterment of their working conditions alternately by 
introducing a housing scheme for these poor weavers. 
 
38. The Committee during their visit also saw that the poor 
weavers are exploited by the contractors who finance the looms 
and then pay meagre rates for the products. The Committee 
desire that a scheme for financing the looms for these weavers 

31 
 
be considered by the Ministry so that these weavers don’t have 
to depend on and get exploited by the contractors.   
 
 The Committee are of the view that the Ministry should 
help these poor weavers in sustaining their livelihoods and 
saving them from the exploitation at t he hands of contractors 
by fixing minimum price for each product on the lines of the 
MSP as is fixed for other commodities. The Committee further 
feel that if the weavers do not find buyers at these prices, the 
Ministry may in close coordination with State  Governments 
arrange buyers for these products amongst the government 
departments/government aided/funded organizations and PSUs 
to help the weavers sell their products.  
 
39. The Committee further desire that the office of the Textile 
Commissioner having the jurisdiction over the area should be 
pro-active in its approach and train the weavers in latest 

32 
 
trends, help the weavers in procuring orders from the buyers 
and in producing the required quality and quantity. 
The Committee are also of the opinion that a marketing 
complex may be set up at Mau to help the weavers to buy, sell 
and market their products at competitive prices without any 
involvement of middlemen. 
 
40. The Committee also observe that small powerloom 
weavers are marginalized in absence of social security schemes. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation 
made in their 36th Report on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of 
the Ministry of textiles, that the amendment in the definition 
of `Handlooms' may be made at the earliest and in  suc h a way 
that these small powerloom weavers also get the benefits of the 
schemes meant for handloom weavers. 
 
 

33 
 
41. The Committee also reiterate the recommendation made 
in their 36 th Report on Demands for Grants (2013 -2014) of the 
Ministry of Textiles, that instead of implementing separate 
schemes for health insurance, the Ministry should endeavour 
to operate one umbrella scheme for all the weavers/ workers in 
the textile industry and the Ministry need to take up the issue 
of extension of RSBY with Ministry o f Labour and Employment 
earnestly for all the weavers/ workers of the industry and not 
for the handloom weavers alone.  
 New Delhi;                      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
29 May, 2013                                                                CHAIRMAN,  
8 Jyaishtha, 1935 (Saka)          STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
  

Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 3 rd May, 2013 from 0930 hrs. to 1050 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
  PRESENT 
  Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.     Dr. Virendra Kumar 
3.     Shri Narahari Mahato 
4.     Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
5.     Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
6.     Shri Ashok Argal 
7.     Dr. Manda Jagannath 
8.     Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
  RAJYA SABHA  
9.     Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
10. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot  
SECRETARIAT 
        1. Shri A.K Singh    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy   - Director 
3. Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
3.  Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2.  XX    XX    XX  
3.  XX    XX    XX 
4.  XX    XX    XX 
5.  XX    XX    XX 
__________________________________________________________________ 
 
 XX  Do not pertain to this report. 

35 
 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
Sl.No Name Designation 
1. Ms. Zohra Chatterji Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Agnihotri AS & FA 
3. Shri V. Srinivas Joint Secretary 
4. Smt. Sunaina Tomar Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Balvender Kumar DC (Handlooms) 
6. Shri S.S. Gupta DC (Handicrafts) 
7. Shri A.B. Joshi Textile Commissioner 
 
6. The Committee then invited the representatives of the Ministry 
of Textiles and after welcoming them the Chairman invited their 
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 (1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker. 
7. The Members, thereafter, raised the following points for 
clarifications from the representatives of the Ministry of Textiles:- 
(i) change of definition of Handloom 
 (ii) need for awareness  
 (iii) issuance of identity cards 
 (iv)  coverage of weavers in RSBY 
 (v) provision of housing facilities  
 (vi)  identification survey of weavers 

36 
 
 (vii) weavers service centre 
        (viii) benefits of TUFS in Mau and adjoining areas 
 (ix) upgradation of looms 
  (x) status of NTC mill at Mau 
 (xi) availability of design for the weavers 
8. The Chairman, thereafter, direct ed the Secretary to send 
written replies to the unanswered queries of the Members within 
three days. 
9. The Chairman thanked the Secretary and other officials for 
giving valuable information to the Committee on various subjects. 
 
(A copy of the verbatim proceeding of the sitting was kept for record.) 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
  

37 
 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 29th May, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1720   
hrs. in Committee Room `E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
   MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ismail Hussain 
3. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4. Shri Narahari Mahato 
5. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
6. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
7. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
8. Shri K. Sugumar 
9. Shri Ashok Argal 
10. Smt. J. Shantha 
11. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
13. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
15. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
16. Shri Rajaram 
 17. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 18. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
 
 
 

38 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the draft report on 'Welfare of Small Weavers 
in Mau and adjoining areas - a Case Study’ for consideration and 
adoption by the Standing Committee on Labour. 
  
3. The Committee took up the draft Report for consideration and 
adopted the draft Report without any modifications.   
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the 
report to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
5.  XX    XX    XX 
 
6.  XX    XX    XX 
 
7.  XX    XX    XX 
 
8.  XX    XX    XX 
 
9.  XX    XX    XX 
 
 

39 
 
10.  XX    XX    XX 
11.  XX    XX    XX 
 
12.  XX    XX    XX 
 
13.  XX    XX    XX 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX    Do not pertain to this report. 
 
 
 
             
        
  
 
 