39 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-Sixth  Report of 
the Standing Committee on Labour on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Textiles for the year 2013-14] 
 
THIRTY- NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
December,  2013/Agrahayana,  1935 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
  
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-Sixth  Report of 
the Standing Committee on Labour on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Textiles for the year 2013-14] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12th December, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha  on  12th December, 2013 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December,  2013/Agrahayana , 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                   PAGE(s)  
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Sixth   
  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
  

4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2013-14) 
 SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN - CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Ashok Argal  
3.  Shri Ismail Hussain  
4.  Dr. Manda Jagannath  
5.  Dr. Virendra Kumar  
6.  Shri Nara Hari Mahato  
7.  Shri Hari Manjhi  
8.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel  
9.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy  
10.  Smt. J. Shantha  
11.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh [Lalan]  
12.  Shri Ratan Singh  
13.  Shri Dinu Solanki  
14.  Shri Makansingh Solanki  
15.  Shri K. Sugumar  
16.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai  
17.  Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware  
18.  Shri Om Prakash Yadav  
19.  Vacant  
20.  Vacant  
21.  Vacant  
              
             Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Smt. T. Ratna Bai  
23.  Shri D. Bandyopadhyay  
24.  Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot  
25.  Shri P. Kannan  
26.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan  
27.  Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati  
28.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
29.  Shri Rajaram  
30.  Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
31.  Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh  
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
                     SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy - Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Thirty -Ninth Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty -
Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Textiles for the 
year 2013-14. 
 
2. The Thirty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 29 th April, 2013.  The Ministry of Textiles 
furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 22nd July, 2013.  The 
Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Labour at their sitting held on 07th October, 2013.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty -Sixth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
4. For the facility of r eference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed 
in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
3rd December, 2013                                                       CHAIRMAN,  
12 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)    STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirty -Sixth Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Textiles for the year 
2013-14. 
 
1.2 The Thirty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid on the 
Table in Rajya Sabha on 29 th April, 2013. It contained 11 recommendations/ 
observations. Replies of Governmen t in respect of all the recommendations 
have been received and are categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government –  
Para Nos. 4.1, 4.2, 4.4, 4.5,4.7 and 4.8 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
4.3, 4.6, 4.9, 4.10  and 4.11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature -   
-NIL- 
 
  

8 
 
 
A. Access to institutional credit to weavers through Post Offices 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.3) 
 
1.3 The Committee noted that general apathy of the banks in implementing 
Institutional credit component of Integrated Handloom Development Scheme 
had resulted in low issuance of the weavers credit cards. The Committee, 
therefore, observed that since banks are already over burdened with the 
responsibility of implementing many of the schemes of the Government of 
India, the Ministry should devise ways to reach out to the beneficiaries. The 
Committee were of the view that where banking services are not available , the 
scheme cou ld be operated through local post -offices which are more wide -
spread. The Committee also desired that steps be taken for betterment of the 
poorest of poor weavers who were suffering at the hands of local money 
lenders.  
 
1.4 In their action taken reply, th e Ministry of Textiles stated that …  as 
regards implementing the “Institutional Credit through post offices, NABARD, 
the implementing agency has informed that post offices are not covered under 
the supervisory role of the Reserve Bank of India.  Hence, it may not be feasible 
to carryout activities like loan appraisal, documentation etc., aspects related to 
credit dispensation, nor the norms related to provisioning and NPA are 

9 
 
applicable to post offices. Further, at present Department of Post, Government 
of India is not implementing any loan scheme through post offices. 
 
1.5 The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that  though 
certain steps have been initiated by them under IEC activities to increase 
awareness, to help beneficiaries in registration and to boost coverage of 
the scheme, they, however, find that their observation regarding need for 
measures to help poor weavers who have taken loans from the local 
money lenders have not been re sponded to by the Ministry. The 
Committee, therefore, reitera te their recommendation and desire that 
such weavers may be identified and financial assistance may be 
considered for their betterment. The Committee also note that the reply 
of the Ministry that it is not feasible to carry out the credit component of 
the scheme through Post Offices without due diligence i.e. without 
getting the matter examined in consultation with the Department of 
Posts, Ministry of Finance, RBI etc. but merely on the premise that Post 
Offices are not covered under RBI’s supervisory oblig ations shows the 
casual approach of the Ministry in dealing with their important 
recommendations. The Committee , therefore,  desire that th eir 
proposal/recommendation be taken up with the Department of Post , 
Reserve Bank of India and Ministry of Finance etc. for their views . The 
Committee may be apprised of th e response  so received  and the action 
taken in this regard. 

10 
 
B. Definition of `Handlooms’ 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.4) 
1.6 The Committee observed that a proposed modification in the definition of 
handlooms had lingered for a long time. The Committee were of the firm view 
that the modification in definition may be expedited to enable handloom 
weavers to modernize without any adverse effects on the benefits received by 
them. They were also hugely concerned about the pathetic conditions of small 
powerloom weavers who are too small to sustain on their own in a vast 
decentralized powerloom sector. The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry 
to take steps to include these small powerloom weavers/ wo rkers (to be 
identified on the basis of number of looms and electricity load) under the 
schemes meant for handloom weavers so that they also get similar benefits. 
1.7 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Textiles stated that …  the 
Advisory Committe e on Handloom Reservation Act, 1985, under the   
chairpersonship of the then Secretary (Textiles), with the objective to reduce 
the drudgery of handloom weavers discussed the definition of handloom and 
recommended modifications in the definition of handloo m in the meeting of the 
Committee on 10 th December, 2012 … However, the issue of amendment of 
definition was subsequently opposed by many handloom experts and civil 
society members in the National Consultation on Handloom Sector held on 1 st 
March, 2013...In view of the above, the Advisory Committee in its meeting held 

11 
 
on 12.4.2013, has constituted Sub -Committee to study the various aspects in 
details.  The terms of reference (ToR) of the sub-committee are as under: 
(i) To study different types of looms being ope rated by handloom 
weavers in handloom clusters across the country. 
(ii) To study the extent of modernization being carried out in different 
parts of the country, scope for further improvement/upgradation of 
looms to reduce drudgery without compromising with the quality of 
handloom fabric and possibility to replace those interventions in 
other handloom clusters/pockets. 
(iii) To examine the feasibility of mechanizing any 2 out of three basic 
motions i.e. shedding, picking and beating to reduce drudgery and 
enhance prod uctivity without losing the artistic creativity of 
weavers. 
(iv) To examine and analyse the present definition of ‘handloom’ in 
view of changing scenario of textile sector, to assess the impact of 
proposed change in the definition of ‘handloom’ with the objecti ve 
of improving living conditions of handloom weavers. 
(v) To examine the possibility of categorizing small powerloom 
units/weavers into separate group so as to extend certain benefits 
on the lines of handloom weavers. 

12 
 
The Ministry while sharing the concerns  of the Committee  about 
the problems being faced by the small powerloom weavers, constituted a 
sub-committee of the Advisory Committee  mandated to examine the 
possibility of categorizing small powerloom units/weavers into a separate 
group so as to extend certain benefits on the lines of handloom weavers. 
 
1.8 The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the issue of 
amendment of definition was opposed by many handloom experts and 
civil society members  since it was felt that this change in definition of 
handloom would gradually eliminate the difference between handloom and 
powerloom resulting in the loss of uniqueness of the handloom ultimately. 
The Committee also note  that a sub-Committee of the Advisor y 
Committee has been constituted to study the various aspects in detail 
which include d examination of the possibility of  categorizing small 
powerloom units/weavers into separate group so as to extend certain 
benefits on the lines of handloom weavers. The Committee, however, note 
that no time frame has been fixed for this sub -Committee to complete 
their deliberations and the reply also does not indicate the composition 
thereof.  They, therefore, desire that the sub -Committee be requested to 
expedite its deliberations and give report at the earliest. They may also be 
apprised of the findings/ recommendations of the sub - Committee as and 

13 
 
when received along with the action taken/proposed to be taken to 
implement the recommendations. 
C. Periodic revision/fixation of Minimum Wages 
(Recommendation at Para No.4.6) 
1.9 The Committee were disappointed to note the Ministry’s lack of concern 
for the job workers and the hired Powerloom workers.  The Committee desired 
that the Ministry of Textiles should also take up with  the State Governments 
the issue of periodic revision/fixation of the minimum wages paid to these 
weavers in tandem with Ministry of Labour and Employment regarding effective 
implementation of labour laws for the welfare of these weavers/workers. 
1.10 The Ministry in their action taken reply stated that i n respect of the 
recommendation of the Standing Committee on Labour to take up the issue of 
periodic revision/ fixation of Minimum wages paid to these workers, the 
Ministry may take up the issue suitably wi th State Government(s) in tandem 
with Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
1.11 The Committee note that Ministry have enumerated their present 
and proposed schemes for the powerloom workers in their reply.  The 
Committee further note the Ministry’s lackadaisical attitude in regard to 
the recommendation of the Committee to take up the issue of minimum 
wages with the concerned agencies, wherein they have merely stated that 
they `may’ take up the issue of revision of minimum wages with the 

14 
 
Ministry of Labour and Employment and State Governments and have not 
indicated any concrete steps th at have been taken to address the 
problems of wage revision in respect of these job workers or the hired 
powerloom workers.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the issue of periodic revision/fixation of the 
minimum wages paid to these weavers should be taken up in right earnest 
with the State Governments and Ministry of Labour and Employment in a 
time bound manner. 
 
D. Marketing of Powerloom products 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.7) 
 
1.12 The Committee observed that the Mi nistry ha ve no definite strategy to 
help poor powerloom weavers who are not able to sell their products and the 
efforts of the Ministry are limited to organizing a few Buyer -Seller Meets in a 
year. The Committee were of the strong view that a multi -pronged strategy is 
needed which may include finding dedicated buyers for these weavers and 
following it up with improved infrastructure, modernization, training and 
market/ demand driven production. 
1.13 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 
 

15 
 
 “The Buyer - Seller Meets (BSM) for marketing the powerloom products 
are organized at regional and cluster level across the country in which 
powerloom units/weavers are participating to market their product 
directly, eliminating the mi ddlemen. The BSM provides a platform to 
Powerloom units to directly interact with the buyers (New & Existing) to 
demonstrate their products and offer their best deal. In turn the BSM 
helps to build a relation with buyers for long term business. Further, it  
has been brought to the notice of the Ministry of Textiles by some 
Powerloom Associations that the Defen ce Ministry has changed their 
uniform cloth etc. procurement policy favouring purchases only from 
composite mills depriving a big institutional marketi ng opportunity 
earlier available to the powerloom sector. Ministry of Textiles shall now 
liaise with Ministry of Defense to try restoration. 
  For improving the infrastructure, Group Workshed Scheme has 
been implemented to provide improved working conditio n in terms of 
more space, work environment to enhance the work efficiency and to 
facilitate the establishments for modern looms to provide required scale 
of economy for business operations. Under TUFS, 20% Margin Money 
subsidy on investment in modern power loom and other weaving 
preparatory   machines is provided for upgradation of technology in turn 
for improvement of the Powerloom fabrics. The Scheme for In -situ 
Upgradation of the Plain Powerloom is also under consideration for 12th 
plan Period for upgradi ng the plain powerloom so that defect free fabrics 
can be produced on plain powerloom. Integrated Skill Development 
Scheme (ISDS) has been implemented by the Ministry across the country 
through various organizations/ institutions to provide training for up -
gradation of skills to Textile workers including powerloom weavers/ 
workers." 
 

16 
 
1.14 The Committee observe that the Ministry have referred to the Group 
Workshed Scheme in its reply which has been discontinued from the 
current year according to the Back gro und note on schemes submitted by 
the Ministry during examination of Demands for Grants. The Committee 
ought to know the reasons for different versions and reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the Ministry should , in addition to its on-going 
efforts, take steps to find dedicated buyers for the poor powerloom 
workers and follow it up with improved infrastructure, modernization, 
training to make these weavers self sufficient besides responding  to the 
market forces.  They further desire that bulk purchas ers of powerloom 
products such as the Defence Ministry be requested to reconsider their 
decision with regard to purchase of powerloom products so as to enable 
them to avail of institutional marketing opportunity for overall 
betterment of the powerloom sect or.  They would like to be apprised of 
the steps taken and positive outcome thereof. 
E. Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.9) 
 
1.15. The Committee noted that the coverage of the TUFS has been skewed  as 
the already industrialized S tates garnered major portion of the subsidy 
sanctioned under the scheme. The Committee desired that the disadvantaged 
areas and sectors be identified on the lines of priority sector lending of the 

17 
 
banks and 40/50% of the tot al allocation be kept for this sector. The 
Committee also desired that ways to reach out to the priority sector may be 
devised and they be encouraged to upgrade/ invest in the latest technology 
with the help of elected representatives of the area, if necessary.  
 
1.16 The Ministry of Textiles in their action taken reply stated as follows: 
 
“TUFS is not a region specific scheme.   The Scheme is entirely demand 
driven.  The design of the scheme is non-discriminatory and all inclusive.  
The scheme in spite of being investor friendly has not been able to attract 
investment uniformly across the country as in some of the  states raw 
material are not easily available, uninterrupted supply of power is not  
provided, allied support services are not available and more over markets 
do  not exist for sale of production. 
In order to reach out to the priority sectors,  Ministry of Textiles is 
instructing office of Textile Commissioner to involve local MPs and MLA 
to hold awareness campaign, road shows, seminars, workshop to  
promote TUFS in remote/industrially backward areas." 
 
1.17  The Committee are disappointed to note the lack of will at the 
Ministry’s end to make the scheme beneficial for all strata of the society. 
It would not be out of place to mention here that t he lo an assistance 
given by the banks is also demand driven and not region specific, still, 
public sector banks have priority sector  lending demarcated. The 
Committee feel that a scheme which is meant for technology upgradation 

18 
 
should target/reach the regions a nd sectors where technology used is 
obsolete and needs urgent upgradation. The Committee are of the firm 
view that although the Ministry has instructed the Textile Commissioner 
to hold awareness campaigns in remote/ industrially backward areas, yet, 
setting specific targets would be more fruitful. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that  the disadvantaged areas and 
sectors be identified on the lines of `priority sector lending’ of the banks 
and 40/50% of the total allocation be kept for this sector.  They desire to 
be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
F. Implementation of R&D Schemes 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.10) 
 
1.18  The Committee were perturbed to find that the non -plan 
expenditure of the Ministry over the years  on the eight TRAs is more than the 
Plan expenditure on R&D. The Committee were of the view that the 
innovations/ achievements of these TRAs, which were formed in 1960s was 
lackluster and, therefore, the industry should fund the TRAs to improve their 
performance and the Ministry should invest in research projects undertaken by 
institutions/ individuals across the spectrum.  The Committee desire that the 
immediate focus of the R&D efforts of the Ministry should be to provide easy 

19 
 
upgradation/ modernization so lutions which are region -specific, non-polluting 
technology and latest designs and designing techniques for the poor weavers. 
 
 1.19 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 
“During the 12 th Five Year Plan special focus would be on ‘green’ R&D 
initiative which would support inter -alia research innovation, 
benchmarking studies, dissemination, compliance with identified best 
practices and other related activities to encourage the adoption of gr een 
initiatives.  The thrust would be on ensuring contract research, 
dissemination and commercialization of the R&D projects which are 
taken up.  There is also special focus on jute and efforts would also help 
in decreasing the reliance on sacking and prom oting the innovation in 
Jute Diversified Products to boost their exports which have huge markets 
worldwide.  The efforts would also help in further development of the 
machineries in Jute sector to increase the overall efficiency, productivity, 
environmental/health compliance." 
 
1.20  The Committee find that the Ministry ha ve not replied to the 
recommendation of the Committee regarding funding of TRAs  by the 
industry.  They also take strong exception to the evasive and incomplete 
replies furnished to them . T he Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation that the Ministry should, instead of funding these TRAs 
invest in research projects undertaken by institutions/ individuals across 
the spectrum . To increase the efficiency and output of the TRAs, the 
industry should fund them instead.  The Committee also desire that the 

20 
 
Ministry should focus on providing easy upgradation/ modernization 
solutions which are region -specific, having latest designs and designing 
techniques to the poor weavers. 
 
G. Health Insurance Schemes 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.11) 
 
1.21  The Committee were of the view that instead of implementing 
separate health insurance schemes, the Ministry should endeavour to operate 
one umbrella scheme for all the weavers/ workers in the industry. The 
Committee desired that the Ministry of Textiles ta ke up the issue of 
implementing the RSBY with Ministry of Labour and Employment for all the 
weavers/workers of the textile industry and not for handloom workers only.  
 
1.22 The Ministry of Textiles in their action taken reply stated as follows: 
 
“…DC Hand looms office is implementing separate Health Insurance 
Scheme of handloom workers.  From 2013 -14 onwards the scheme is 
proposed to be run on RSBY pattern of Ministry of Labour& Employment 
with additional component of outpatient treatment which is not a par t of 
RSBY as on date." 

21 
 
 
1.23  The Committee find that instead of replying to the 
recommendation of the Committee for implementing an umbrella scheme, 
the Ministry ha ve only  given its present status. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that one umbrella 
scheme for all the weavers/ workers in the industry may be operated 
instead of separate ones for each category of weavers.  They desire to be 
apprised of the action taken to implement their above recommendation at 
an early date. 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.1) 
The Committee observes that the Ministry could not utilize their 
budgetary allocation of Rs 7000 crores for Plan expenditure during the year 
which stood revised to Rs 4500 crores. According to the Ministry, the two 
schemes pertaining to Handloom sector namely „Revival, Reform and 
Restructuring Package for Handloom secto r‟ and Mill Gate Price Scheme did 
not take off as expected, resulting in shortfall in the expenditure. The 
budgetary estimates of Rs 2900 crores under the head „Revival, Reform and 
Restructuring Package for Handloom sector ‟ were reduced to Rs 600 crores at  
the revised estimates stage, however, the Ministry could spend Rs 291 crores 
only during the year since a total of 23 Apex, 3750 Primary Weavers 
Cooperative societies (PWCs) and 52000 individual weavers could be covered 
under the norms of the package as a gainst targeted 45 Apex, 16000 PWCs and 
about 6 lakh commercial weavers exclusively. The Ministry has informed that 
definite requirements of the funds could only be determined after carrying out 
statutory audit of the functional cooperatives upto 2009 -10 followed by special 
audit by NABARD. The Committee recall that the package was announced amid 
much fanfare by the Finance Minister in his budget proposals for the year 
2011-12 and now they find to their utter dismay that Ministry are not able to 
find beneficiaries for loan waiver and debt restructuring. The Committee note 
that though a revised package is under finalization, it is beyond their 
comprehension as to why, in the first instance, a populist package was 
announced without doing any ground work. The Committee are of the view that 
the Ministry routinely formulate schemes/ programmes without even 
estimating the numbers of targeted beneficiaries thereof. The Committee had 
also observed in their Twenty-Ninth Report on Demands for Grants for 2012-13 
that “formulation of schemes, without a fair assessment of the target group and 
the dimensions of the problems afflicting them, is a shot in the dark” which 
has been proven “to the hilt ‟ in the instant case too. The Committee, while 
reiterating their earlier reco mmendation, expect the Ministry to be extra 
cautious in the future and take steps to complete all the pending surveys in 
time and initiate new surveys wherever considered necessary before new 
schemes are proposed to the Planning Commission for approvals etc.  
 
The Committee note that the Ministry have been provided Rs.175 crores 
for the Revival, Reforms and Restructuring Package in the current year.  
 
 

23 
 
The Committee find from the reply of the Ministry that they have 
proposed relaxation in eligibility norms and extension of cut -off eligibility date 
and, therefore, additional funds would be required under the scheme. The 
Committee strongly desires that the Ministry of Textiles approach the Ministry 
of Finance for enhanced allocation so that maximum weavers get  the benefit of 
the loan waiver scheme. 
 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
 It is re-iterated that Revival, Reform and Restructuring (RRR) Package for 
Handloom Sector was formulated based on the audited reports received from 
14 State Governments to the extent of overdue loans on primary weaver’s 
cooperative societies (PWCs), apex societies and the requirement of funds for 
waiving of loans and recapitalization of handloom cooperatives.  Subsequently, 
States were consulted many times before finalization of the RRR pa ckage.  
Later on, when statutory audit was conducted by States in respect of 
functional handloom cooperatives up to 2009 -10 and special audit was 
conducted by NABARD, only then definite requirement of funds was known.  
 
 Further, the States had assessed po sition on the basis of available audit 
reports as on 31.3.2007 but the package has been implemented with a cut -off 
date of 31.3.2010.  During this period many societies which were eligible in 
2006-07 became non-viable and thus un-eligible mainly due to stringent norms 
of viability / potential viability under the RRR package.  This is the one of the 
main reasons due to which initial projections made in the package did not 
correspond with the actual outcome.  However, this does not undermine the 
importance or necessity of the scheme. 
 
Now based on audited data and feedback received from States and 
NABARD, MoT is moving CCEA note for seeking further modification in the 
guidelines of RRR Package so that viable and potentially viable handloom 
cooperative societies, which were left out, could be covered under the revised 
package which is proposed to be on realistic estimates. The EFC has 
recommended the proposal in its meeting held on 9.5.13.  The Ministry,  
however, noted the suggestion of the Standing Committee t hat the Ministry to 
be  extra cautious in the future and take steps to complete all the pending  

24 
 
surveys in time and initiate new surveys wherever considered necessary before 
new schemes are proposed to the Planning Commission for approvals etc.  
 
 The Ministry is thankful for the concern expressed by the Committee and 
its support for enhanced  budgetary allocation for handloom sector. The 
Ministry  has approached to Finance Ministry & Planning Commission for 
additional allocation under RRR package vide D.O. letters dated 14 th February, 
2013  from Minister of Commerce, Industry & Textiles addressed to Finance 
Minister and Dy. Chairman, Planning Commission. Once the CCEA approves 
the modifications in the RRR package, the Ministry of Textiles will again 
approach to Ministry of Finance for additional allocation in the supplementary 
Demands for Grants.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/12/2013-Parl. dated 22.07.2013) 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.2) 
 
 
The scrutiny of Demands for Grants reveals that the Minis try have not 
been able to utilize allocation in respect of Mill Gate Price Scheme due to the 
lack of demand under the newly introduced 10% hank yarn subsidy scheme. 
The Committee note that the Ministry were able to cover only 30% of the looms 
for issuing y arn passbooks which are needed to avail the benefits of the 10% 
hank yarn subsidy by individual weavers. The Committee strongly feel that 
adequate publicity to the hank yarn subsidy and local yarn depots schemes 
should be given and registration camps be or ganized with the help of district 
administration and Gram Panchayats to cover maximum number of weavers . 
The Committee observes from various reports that the smallest of weavers are 
not able to even purchase the minimum selling quantity and are, therefore,  
dependant on master weavers for supply of yarn who exploit them. They, 
therefore, desire that more and more yarn depots/ banks may be opened 
across the handloom dominated areas in all States to ensure that the small 
weavers are able to purchase smaller qu antities. They also desire that 
feasibility of making yarn available on credit may also be explored. They desire 
to be apprised of the action taken in the matter at an early date.  
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
 
The Ministry is thankful for the concern shown by the Standing 
Committee and has taken note of the observation regarding inadequate 
publicity of hank yarn supply scheme. On this issue, National Handloom 
Development Corporation Ltd.(NHDC)  has been instruct ed to organize 
awareness camps with the help of state handloom directorates and district 
administration.  The state governments have also been requested to make 
available the services of state handloom corporations to operate the yarn 
depots where NHDC doe s not have reach so that more and more number of 
weavers can be supplied the yarn.  NHDC alsoproposes to open yarn retail 
stores so that weavers can buy yarn across the counter.  As regards making 
the yarn available on credit the GOI is already making avai lable the subsidized 
credit to the weavers under which 3% interest subvention and Rs. 4,200/ - 
margin money is provided.   The same has been proposed to be increased to Rs. 
10,000/- and interest on credit to be limited to only 6% under the RRR 
package.  
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/12/2013-Parl. dated 22.07.2013) 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.4) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry have prepared a proposal to modify 
the definition of “handloom ‟ to reduce the drudgery of handloom weavers. As 
per proposed definition of handloom,  “handloom” means any loom, other than 
powerloom, and includes any hybrid loom on which at least one process for 
weaving requires manual intervention or human energy for production. The 
Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that in the ensuing Advisory 
Committee meeting, various issues involved in the proposed amendment in 
definition of  “handloom” and in particular how norms and mechanisms should 
be evolved so that power looms could be differentiated from handlooms would 
be discussed. The Committee are of the firm view that the proposal has 
lingered on for a while now and that the modification in definition may be 
expedited to enable handloom weavers to modernize without any adverse 
effects on the benefits received b y them. The Committee also feel that after 
changing the definition a complete overhaul/review of the schemes meant for 
handloom sector may also be done to give handlooms a big boost. They also 
note that though some of the handloom schemes have been merged,  still a lot 

26 
 
more needs to be done particularly for the ancillary workers, women weavers/ 
workers and weavers/workers belonging to the disadvantaged sections of the 
society. They are also hugely concerned about the pathetic conditions of small 
powerloom we avers who are too small to sustain on their own in a vast 
decentralized powerloom sector. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry 
to take steps to include these small powerloom weavers/ workers (to be 
identified on the basis of number of looms and el ectricity load) under the 
schemes meant for handloom weavers so that they also get similar benefits. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
 
Due to sharp decline in number of handlooms and handloom weavers in 
last one decade and non adoption of hand weaving especially by younger 
generation owing to low generation of income and hard labour required to 
operate looms,  the Advisory Committee on Han dloom Reservation Act, 1985, 
under the   chairpersonship of then Secretary (Textiles), with the objective to 
reduce the drudgery of handloom weavers discussed the definition of handloom 
and recommended modifications in the definition of handloom in the meeting of 
the Committee on 10th December, 2012. 
 
However, the issue of amendment of definition was subsequently 
opposed by many handloom experts and civil society members in the National 
Consultation on Handloom Sector held on 1st March, 2013.  
It was observed that this change in definition of handloom would 
gradually eliminate the difference between handloom and powerloom, and 
uniqueness of handloom would therefore, be ultimately lost. This would also 
lower the quality of many handloom products which are so unique and special 
when made on handlooms. Besides, a representation has also been received 
opposing the proposal to modify the definition.  
 
In view of the above, the Advisory Committee in its meeting held on 
12.4.2013, has constituted Sub -Committee to study the various aspects in 
details.  The terms of reference (ToR) of the sub-committee are as under: 
 
(v) To study different types of looms being operated by handloom 
weavers in handloom clusters across the country. 
(vi) To study the extent of modernization being carried out in different 
parts of the country, scope for further improvement/upgradation 

27 
 
of looms to reduce drudgery without compromising with the 
quality of handloom fabric and possibility to replace those 
interventions in other handloom clusters/pockets. 
(vii) To examine the feasibility of mechanizing any 2 out of three basic 
motions i.e. shedding, picking and beating to reduce drudgery 
and enhance productivity without losing the artistic creativity of 
weavers. 
(viii) To examine and analyse the present def inition of ‘handloom’ in 
view of changing scenario of textile sector, to assess the impact of 
proposed change in the definition of ‘handloom’ with the objective 
of improving living conditions of handloom weavers. 
(ix) To examine the possibility of categorizing small powerloom 
units/weavers into separate group so as to extend certain 
benefits on the lines of handloom weavers. 
 
The Ministry  share the concerns  of the committee  about the problems 
being faced by the small powerloom weavers, who have serious diffic ulty to 
sustain on their own in a vast decentralized powerloom sector. To address 
their problems, the sub -committee has been mandated to examine the 
possibility of categorizing small powerloom units/weavers into a separate 
group so as to extend certain benefits on the lines of handloom weavers 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/12/2013-Parl. dated 22.07.2013) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.8 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.5) 
 
The Committee note that Indian Institutes of Handloom Technology 
(IIHT) have been set -up to provide qualified and trained manpower to the 
handloom sector and to undertake experimental and research programmes on 
all aspects of the handloom industry. They fu rther note that the criteria for 
opening an IIHT in any area is concentration of weavers and production of 
handloom in that particular area/ State. The Committee desire that these 

28 
 
IIHTs should invariably involve themselves in “extension programmes” 
wherein these institutes should help in spreading awareness of the various 
schemes of the Ministry, equipping the weavers with the modern technology, 
identify the strengths of the local weavers and helping them in marketing 
their products. They further are of the  view that exuberance of the youngsters 
studying in the institutes be harnessed fully by involving them in 
developmental efforts of the Government can go a long way in improving the 
livelihood of the poor local population. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
 Indian Institutes of Handloom Technology (IIHTs) are academic 
institutions providing qualified manpower to handloom sector through diploma 
and post diploma courses in handloom technology and also undertake research 
& development programmes for the handloom  industry.  In view of limited 
manpower and inadequate infrastructure facilities, it’s currently difficult for the 
IIHTs to immediately start  extensionprogrammes  for the  Ministry.  However, 
Weavers Service Centres (WSCs), which are 25 in numbers and loc ated across 
the country are responsible for spreading awareness of govt’sprogrammes and 
schemes among weavers. The Ministry supports the valuable view expressed by 
the Standing committee about harnessing to the youngsters studying in IIHTs 
to the fullest by involving them in developmental efforts of the government.The 
IIHTs have been advised to engage their students in cluster development 
programmes especially technology upgradation and also to revise their course 
curriculum to suit the emerging requirement s of handloom sector especially at 
clusters level.  
Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/12/2013-Parl. dated 22.07.2013) 
 
 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.7) 
 
 
The Committee observe that the Ministry have no definite strategy to help 
poor Powerloom weavers who a re not able to sell their products and the efforts 
of the Ministry are limited to organizing a few Buyer -Seller Meets in a year.  
The Committee further note that the Ministry have explained the marketing 
assistance given to the handloom weavers which affir ms that nothing concrete 

29 
 
is being done to help Powerloom weavers. The Committee are of the strong view 
that a multi -pronged strategy is the need of the hour to help these weavers.  
The Ministry should, in the first instance, make efforts to find dedicated buyers 
for these weavers and follow it up with improved infrastructure, modernization, 
training and market/demand driven production. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Buyer - Seller Meets (BSM) for marketing the powerloom products 
are organized at regional and cluster level across the country in which 
powerloom units/weavers are participating to market their product directly, 
eliminating the middlemen. The BSM provides a platform to Powerloom units to 
directly interact with the buyers (New & Existing) to dem onstrate their 
products and offer their best deal. In turn the BSM helps to build a relation 
with buyers for long term business. Further, it has been brought to the notice 
of the Ministry of Textiles by some Powerloom Associations that the Defense 
Ministry has changed their uniform cloth etc. procurement policy favouring 
purchases only from composite mills depriving a big institutional marketing 
opportunity earlier available to the powerloom sector. Ministry of Textiles shall 
now liaise with Ministry of Defense to try restoration. 
 
 For improving the infrastructure, Group Workshed Scheme has been 
implemented to provide improved working condition in terms of more space, 
work environment to enhance the work efficiency and to facilitate the 
establishments for m odern looms to provide required scale of economy for 
business operations. Under TUFS, 20% Margin Money subsidy on investment 
in modern powerloom and other weaving preparatory   machines is provided for 
upgradation of technology in turn  for  improvement  o f  the  Powerloom  
fabrics. The Scheme for In -situ Upgradation of the Plain Powerloom is also 
under consideration for 12th plan Period for upgrading the plain powerloom so 
that defect free fabrics can be produced on plain powerloom. Integrated Skill 
Development Scheme (ISDS) has been implemented by the Ministry across the 
country through various organizations/ institutions to provide training for up -
gradation of skills to Textile workers including powerloom weavers/ workers. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/12/2013-Parl. dated 22.07.2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 

30 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.14 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.8) 
 
 The documents furnished to the Committee reveal that the regional o ffice 
of Textile Commissioner in Kanpur has been shifted to Noida and a new 
regional office has been opened in Indore.  On further scrutiny, they found that 
the Annual Report of the Ministry still states that there are eight regional 
offices of the Textile  Commissioner in India, one of which is in Kanpur.  
According to the Ministry, the decision to shift the office from Kanpur was 
taken on the basis of the report of IIM Bangalore on redefining the role of the 
office of Textile Commissioner.  To their utter dismay, they find that IIM 
Bangalore did not conduct any survey of textile industry or powerlooms in 
Uttar Pradesh before making such a recommendation.  Recommendation of IIM 
Bangalore was based only on the discussion with the office of Textile 
Commissioner and NITRA primarily an industry body which participated in the 
workshops conducted by IIM Bangalore.  Further, it has been stated in the 
reply that since textile industry is declining in Uttar Pradesh, the office may be 
shifted to Indore which has a flou rishing textile industry.  The Committee are 
of the view that the office of textile Commissioner is all the more required in a 
State where the industry is dying to take care of the poor weavers who are 
suffering and migrating to other occupations.  The pos ition, however, is 
contradicted by the Ministry themselves through the information supplied by 
them under RTI Act 2005 which shows that number of powerlooms and other 
textile units and machinery in Uttar Pradesh outnumber the machines and 
production in Mad hya Pradesh.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry to review its decision to shift the office from Kanpur in light of the 
latest data and situation prevalent in textile industry in Uttar Pradesh. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A review be made of the Textile activity in the State of Uttar Pradesh 
(especially in Kanpur) and adequacy of policy/service support requirement 
from Ministry of Textiles, Govt. of India through the Institution of the Textiles 
Commissioner there, in the pr esent scenario.  The Textile Commissioner has, 
therefore, constituted an Internal Committee 04.04.2013 comprising of 3 

31 
 
officers in the Office of the Textile Commissioner to examine and work on the 
job.  The terms of Reference for the study have been commun icated to the 
Committee on 26.4.2013.  The Internal Committee has submitted its report on 
05.06.2013 which is under consideration.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/12/2013-Parl. dated 22.07.2013) 
 
 In continuation of this Ministry’ s O.M of even no. date d 22.7.2013,  
undersigned is directed to say that in compliance of the observation of 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Labour in Para No.4.8 of Thirty -Sixth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants regarding 
shifting/closure of R egional Office of Textiles Commissioner from Kanpur to 
Indore, it has now been decided with the approval of the Hon’ble Minister of 
Textiles `to continue a sub -office of RO, NOIDA, at Kanpur for the 12 th Plan 
Period’. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/12/2013-Parl. dated 27.08.2013) 
 
 
 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.3)     
The Committee observe that the Ministry are dependant on banks for 
implementation of some of their schemes like Revival, Reforms and 
Restructuring Package for the Handloom Sector and Institutional Credit 
component of the Integrated Handloom Development Scheme among others. 
According to the procedure, either the weaver has to approach the banks with 
a request on plain paper for waiving the l oan or the banks have to suo -moto 
examine their records and find out loans taken by weavers and submit the 
claims to NABARD for loan waiver and the ultimate responsibility of 
implementing the scheme successfully lies with the lending institutions. 
Further, the Ministry have stated that general apathy of the banks in 
implementing Institutional credit component of IHDS has resulted in low 
issuance of weavers credit cards. The Committee are of the view that banks 
mostly in the public sector are already over bu rdened with the responsibility of 
implementing many of the schemes of the Government of India across various 
Ministries. It, therefore, becomes imperative that instead of depending on 
banks, the Ministry need to evolve other methods to implement their sche mes 
successfully. The Ministry should devise innovative ways to reach out to the 
beneficiaries by organizing camps in collaboration with banks and State 
Governments not only in clusters but also in the rural and far -flung areas. 
Further, where banking serv ices are not available, the institutional credit 
component of the IHDS could also be implemented through post -offices which 
are more wide spread. The Ministry should also take steps for the betterment of 
the poorest of poor weavers who are suffering under the burden of loans taken 
from the local money lenders and the debts of master weavers and consider 
involving local school teachers in identifying the weavers who have overdue 
loans by interacting with both banks and weavers.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The Ministry is aware that there has been reluctance on the part of 
public sector banks/financial institutions in extending credit support to 
handloom sector and handloom weavers due to past history of poor repayment 
and being overburdened with the responsi bility of implementing many other 
schemes of Government of India. Keeping this in mind, the Ministry has taken 
following steps under IEC activities:  
 

34 
 
(a) To organize awareness cum registration camps across the country by 
associating all the local stakeholders such as banks, State 
government officials, NABARD, NHDC etc to make the beneficiaries 
aware of the scheme, fill up the applications for issuance of WCC and 
sanction of loans etc. The Government of India is providing financial 
assistance of Rs. 40,000/ - per camp to organize such camps.  So far 
769 Weavers’ Credit Card (WCC) Camps have been organized across 
the country. 
 
 
 
 
(b) Banks have been authorized to engage Bunkar Facilitator (BF)  for 
collection and preliminary processing of loan application for 
completeness in all respects, submission of application to the correct 
bank branch and post-sanction monitoring till disbursement of loan. 
 
(c) Government of India will pay an incentive of 0.5% of loan amount 
disbursed subject  to minimum of Rs 200 and maximum of Rs. 
2000 per WCC to the bank, for onward  payment to the Bunkar 
Facilitator. 
 
 Further, Bank -wise intensive monitoring h as been initiated in 
consultation with Department of Financial Services and State Governments to 
improve the issuance of weavers’ credit card and sanction and disbursement of 
loan to handloom weavers. A meeting with CMDs/CEOs of nationalized banks 
under Ch airmanship of Ministry of Commerce & Textiles was held on 
12.2.2013.  Prior to the meeting, only 18,600 WCCs were issued.  Since then 
35028 WCCs have been issued till 31 st March, 2013.  D.O. letters have been 
issued to CMDs of banks & a monitoring proforma  has been prescribed to 
monitor the progress of issuance of WCC.   As on 30.06.2013, 70,404 Weavers 
Credit Cards have been issued.  Further review meeting with CMDs of national 
banks has been eld on 11/7/2013 under the Chairmanship of Minister of 
Textiles. 
 
 Before CITM meeting i.e. 12.02.2013 18,600 Weavers Credit Card 
have been issued. 
 After CITM meeting held during March, 2013, 53,628 Weavers 
Credit Card have been issued. 
 

35 
 
Regarding implementing the “Institutional Credit through post offices, 
NABARD, the implementing agency has informed that post offices are not 
covered under the supervisory role of the Reserve Bank of India.  Hence, it may 
not be feasible to carryout activities like loan appraised, documentation etc., 
aspects related to credit dispensatio n, nor the norms related to provisioning 
and NPA are applicable to post offices. Further, at present Department of Post, 
Government of India is not implementing any loan scheme through post offices. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/12/2013-Parl. dated 22.07.2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.5 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.6) 
 
The Committee are disappointed to note the Ministry’s lack of concern for 
the job workers and the hired Powerloom workers.  The fact that Ministry have 
not thought of any welfare measures for such category of workers shows the 
apathetic approach of the Ministry towards this very poor class of weavers. The 
Committee are of the view that the Ministry  ought to take steps for the 
betterment of weavers who are working on powerlooms owned by others so that 
they are not exploited by the affluent weavers.  The Ministry of Textiles should 
also take up with the State Governments the issue of periodic revision /fixation 
of the minimum wages paid to these weavers in tandem with Ministry of 
Labour and Employment regarding effective implementation of labour laws for 
the welfare of these weavers/workers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In this regard, it is informed that  aiming at the welfare of powerloom workers 
the Group Insurance Scheme has been implemented by the Ministry of Textiles 
in association with LIC from 1 st July 2003. The Scheme is implemented for 

36 
 
welfare of Powerloom workers/ weavers irrespective of any cate gory of 
weavers/workers of Powerloom sector including job workers or hired workers. 
Group Insurance Scheme provides benefits of Rs. 60,000/ - on natural death, 
Rs. 1,50,000/ - on accidental death, Rs. 75,000/ - on partial permanent 
disability and Rs. 1,50,000 /- on total permanent disability for which the 
premium payable by the worker is only Rs. 80/ - Per annum. This scheme has 
been continued in the 12th plan on increasing premium contribution from 
Government from Rs. 150/ - to Rs. 290/ - per worker keeping worke rs' 
contribution to premium unchanged at Rs. 80/ - per year. Health insurance, so 
far not available to powerloom sector workers, is also proposed to be 
introduced for 12 th plan period for powerloom workers. In respect of the 
recommendation of the Standing C ommittee on Labour to take up the issue of 
periodic revision/ fixation of Minimum wages paid to these workers, the 
Ministry may take up the issue suitably with State Government(s) in tandem 
with Ministry of Labour& Employment. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/12/2013-Parl. dated 22.07.2013) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.11 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.9) 
 
 
 The Committee NOTE THAT THE Ministry have spent Rs. 16399 crores 
under the Technology Upgradation Fund Schemes (TUFS) since its inception.  
The Committee, however, are shocked to note that Ministry do not maintain 
any data regarding the location, category or class of the beneficiaries.  
Furthermore, in respect of  Restructured TUFS, there were only 5 cases out of 
total 3741 approved cases where investment was less than  Rs. 5 lakhs.  On 
perusal of the data regarding State-wise subsidy sanctioned under restructured 
TUFS, it is clear that already industrialized state s like Gujrat and Maharashtra 
top the chart while poor States like Bihar, Assam, Uttar Prad esh etc. lag far 
behind.  This speaks volumes about the reach of the flagship Scheme of the 
Ministry.  The Committee is of the view that it is high time that the TUF S be 

37 
 
given a focused approach since there has been a skewed technology 
upgradation so far.  The Committee desire that the Ministry identify the 
disadvantaged areas and sectors on the lines of ‘priority sector lending’ of the 
banks and 40 -50 % of the total allocation should be kept for this sector.  The 
Committee find that the Ministry do not have any specific plan for spreading 
awareness about the scheme to the remote/industrially backward areas.  They 
desire that the Ministry devise other ways to reach out  to the priority sectors 
and encourage them to upgrade/invest in the latest technology for which the 
involvement of local MPs and MLAs may also be considered, if necessary. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 TUFS is not a region specific scheme.   The Scheme is entirely demand 
driven.  The design of the scheme is non -discriminatory and all inclusive.  The 
scheme in spite of being investor friendly has not been able to attract 
investment uniformly across the country as in some of the  states raw material 
are not e asily available, uninterrupted supply of power is not  provided, allied 
support services are not available and moreover markets do  not exist for sale 
of production. 
 
 In order to reach out to the priority sectors,  Ministry of Textiles is 
instructing office of Textile Commissioner to involve local MPs and MLA to hold 
awareness campaign, road shows, seminars, workshop to promote TUFS in 
remote/industrially backward areas. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/12/2013-Parl. dated 22.07.2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.17 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.10) 

38 
 
 
 The Committee observe that Research & Development Scheme of the 
Ministry of Textiles is implemented mainly through the eight Textile Research 
Association.  They are perturbed to find that the non -plan expenditure of the 
Ministry over the years on these eight TRAs is moe then the Plan expenditure 
on R&D.  They further find that these TRAs are industry bodies which have 
been partially funded by different Ministries over the years latest being Ministry 
of Textiles.  The Committee are of the view that the innovations/ achievements 
of these TRAs, which were formed in 1960s are lackluster and, therefore, the 
Ministry should, inst ead of funding these TRAs invest in research projects 
undertaken by institutions/ individuals across the spectrum.  The Committee 
strongly feel that to increase the efficiency and output of the TRAs, the industry 
should fund them instead.  The Committee de sire that the immediate focus of 
the R&D efforts of the Ministry should be to provide easy upgradation / 
modernization solutions which are region -specific, non -polluting technology 
and latest designs and designing techniques for the poor weavers while 
simultaneously striving to conserve/preserve the art of the master weavers. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Comments:  During the 12 th Five Year Plan special focus would be on ‘green’ 
R&D initiative which would support inter -alia research innovation, 
benchmarking studies, dissemination, compliance with identified best practices 
and other related activities to encourage the adoption of green initiatives.  The 
thrust would be on ensuring contract research, dissemination and 
commercialization of the R&D projects which ar e taken up.  There is also 
special focus on jute and efforts would also help in decreasing the reliance on 
sacking and promoting the innovation in Jute Diversified Products to boost 
their exports which have huge markets worldwide.  The efforts would also h elp 
in further development of the machineries in Jute sector to increase the overall 
efficiency, productivity, environmental/health compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/12/2013-Parl. dated 22.07.2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 

39 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.20 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4.11) 
 
The Committee observe that the Ministry of textiles are implementing separate 
health insurance scheme for workers of each sector namely Rajiv Gandhi  Swasthya 
Bima Yojana, Health Insurance Scheme for Handloom Workers and Newly introduced 
health insurance scheme for powerloom weavers. Similarly, separate life insurance 
schemes for weavers/ workers under various sectors are also being implemented. The 
Committee are of the view that instead of implementing separate schemes, the Ministry 
should endeavour to operate one umbrella scheme for all the weavers/ workers in the 
industry. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Textiles take up the issue of 
implementing the RSBY with Ministry of Labour and Employment for all the 
weavers/workers of the textile industry and not for handloom workers only. 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Yes, DC Handlooms office is implementing separate Health Insurance Scheme 
of handloom  workers.  From 2013 -14 onwards the scheme is proposed to be run on 
RSBY pattern of Ministry of Labour& Employment with additional component of 
outpatient treatment which is not a part of RSBY as on date. 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles’ O.M. No.2/12/2013-Parl. dated 22.07.2013) 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.23 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
  
  

40 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
 7th October, 2013                                                       CHAIRMAN,  
15 Asvina, 1935 (Saka)             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

41 
 
Annexure 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 7 October, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 
hrs. in Room No.53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri Ashok Argal 
3.      Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4.      Shri Narahari Mahato 
5.      Shri Hari Manjhi 
6.      Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
7.      Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
8.      Smt. J. Shantha 
9.      Shri Ratan Singh 
10. Shri K. Sugumar 
11. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
12. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
13. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
   Rajya Sabha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
14. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
15. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
17. Shri P. Kannan 
18. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
19. Shri Rajaram 
20. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 

42 
 
 
           SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri A.K Singh   - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri. P.V.L.N Murthy  - Director 
 3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
2.   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and 
apprised th em abut the draft Action Taken Report on the 
recommendations/ observations contained in the Thirty Sixth 
Report on Demands for Grants for the Ministry of Textiles (2013-14) 
and Memorandum No.2 for consideration and adoption. 
3. The Committee considered Memorandum No.2 and after some 
discussion adopted the draft Action Taken Report without any 
modification. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the 
report to both Houses of Parliament after factual verification from 
the Ministry concerned. 
5. xx     xx      xx.  
6. xx     xx      xx. 
7. xx     xx      xx. 

43 
 
8. xx     xx      xx. 
9. xx     xx      xx. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 _____________________________________________________________ 
XX       Matters do not pertain to this report.  
  

44 
 
 
  APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations       11   
II. Recommendations/Observations which have  06       54.55%   
 been accepted by Government 
 
 (Rec. Para. Nos.4.1, 4.2, 4.4,4.5, 4.7 and 4.8  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s reply  
         NIL    NIL  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
 which replies of Government have not been 
 accepted by the Committee        05   45.45 % 
  
 (Rec.  Para. Nos. 4.3,4.6,4.9,4.10 and 4.11) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which     
 final replies of Government are of interim in  nature       
         NIL   NIL 
                                    ----------- 
            100%  
                                                ------------ 
  