34 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-Ninth  Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Textiles for the year 2012-13] 
 
THIRTY- FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 August,  2012/Bhadrapada,  1934 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
  
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-Ninth  Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Textiles for the year 2012-13] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.8.2012     
Laid in Rajya Sabha  on  30.8.2012 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August,  2012/Bhadrapada,  1934 (Saka) 
 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                   PAGE(s)  
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth   
  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
  

4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
 
2. Shri Raj Babbar 
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
        **5. Shri Pakauri Lal 
6. Shri Narahari Mahato 
         7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Smt. Mausam Noor 
10. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
14. Ms. J. Shantha 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
*16. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
   ****17. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
     21. Vacant 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
25. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
***26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        28. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
        29. Shri Rajaram 
     ***30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri G. N. Ratanpuri 
   ***** 32.    Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
 
 

5 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
*   Nominated w.e.f 25th November, 2011. 
**  Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon 
his nomination to Standing Committee on Coal & Steel 
w.e.f. 3rd January, 2012. 
***   Retired w.e.f. 02.04.2012 and 03.04.2012 respectively. 
****  Nominated w.e.f. 12th April, 2012. 
*****Nominated w.e.f. 4th May, 2012. 
  
 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director  
 4.    Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
 
  

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having 
been authorised  by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Thirty -Fourth Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty -
Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Dema nds for Grants of the Ministry of Textiles for the 
year 2012-13. 
 
2. The Twenty -Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and 
also laid in Rajya Sabha  on 3.5.2012.  The Ministry of Textiles 
furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 1.8.2012.  The 
Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Labour at their sitting held on 23.8.2012.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -Ninth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed 
in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                  (HEMANAND BISWAL) 
23 August,  2012                                       CHAIRMAN, 
1 Bhadrapada , 1934 (Saka)        STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
     
  

7 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty -Ninth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Textiles for the year 2012-13. 
 
2. The Twenty -Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and 
also laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.05.2012. It contained 18 
recommendations/ observations. Replies of Government in respect 
of all the recommendations have been received and categorized as 
under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government –  
Para Nos. 3.7, 3.8, 3.20, 3.21, 3.23, 3.24, 
3.35, 3.38, 3.48.1, 3.48.2, 3.49, 3.53, 
3.54, 3.55 
  
 
 
 
Total - 14 
Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply – 
-NIL- 
 
 
Total -0 
Chapter-III 
 

8 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration – NIL 
 
 
 
 
Total-0 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim 
in nature -  Para No. 3.22,3.36,3.37,3.39 
 
 
Total-4 
Chapter-V 
 
    
3. The Committee desire that action taken replies in respect 
of recommendations/observations contained in Chapter I and 
final action taken replies in respect of the recommendation 
contained in Chapter V for which interim reply has been given 
by the Government may be furnished to them at the earliest.   
 
 
 
 
 
Powerlooms 

9 
 
 (Recommendation para No. 3.38) 
 
4. The Committee found that 44 service centers far from 
adequate for the powerloom  industry in which the weavers are 
largely untrained. The Committee were of the considered view that 
the Government consider opening new institutes for providing 
training to the powerloom weavers/workers in all aspects relating to 
powerloom sector and that  the existing Powerloom Service Centres 
besides providing training may also educate the weavers and 
entrepreneurs about the various schemes of the Government meant 
for the powerloom sector.  
 
5. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 
 
 "There was provision in Integrated Scheme for Powerloom 
 Sector Development (ISPSD) to provide financial assistance 
 upto Rs.100.00 lakh for purchasing the machines  and  
 equipments  for opening  the  new  Powerloo m  Service  
 Centres  on public and private partnership basis.  However, 
 proposals  from State Governments or  other eligible  agencies  
 are not  forthcoming. Moreover, funds allocated for 

10 
 
 powerloom sector  schemes were/are not adequate to open 
 and run new  Powerloom Service Centres entirely by the 
 Central  Government.  
 
  The Powerloom Service Centres are also imparting 
 training to powerloom workers based on the industry 
 requirement in the cluster, besides providing technical 
 services like testing of samples, design development, trouble -
 shooting etc. Training in managerial course can also be 
 imparted by Powerloom Service Centres subject to the industry 
 demand. Some Powerloom Service Centres like PSC at Erode, 
 Sommanur, Komarapallayam etc have co nducted 
 Entrepreneurs Development Programme on Textiles (EDP). 
 Such need based training programme will continue in 12 th 
 Plan also. Also,  in addition to Powerloom Service Centres,  
 other agencies   are also providing training under Integrated 
 Skill Development Scheme (ISDS) to meet the requirement of 
 skilled workers in textile industry including powerloom sector. 
 Powerloom Service Centres  conduct periodic Seminar / 
 Workshop and organize exhibitions to create awareness about 
 the various schemes of the Government for the powerloom 
 sector". 
 

11 
 
6. The Committee note from the reply of the  
Ministry that although there is a provision in the 
Integrated Scheme for Powerloom Sector 
Development(ISPSD) to provide financial assistance for 
purchasing machines an d equipments for opening new 
Powerloom Service Centres, the State Governments or 
other eligible agencies are not forthcoming and the 
funds allocated are not adequate to open and run these 
centres entirely by the Central Government. The 
Committee desire tha t the State Governments may be 
persuaded again to open Powerloom Service Centres 
especially in the States with such potential. The 
Committee recommend that if State Governments are 
still reluctant, the corporates may be got involved in 
the opening and runn ing of these centres under 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). 
 

12 
 
Integrated Skill Development Scheme 
 (Recommendation para No. 3.48.1) 
 
7. The Committee noted that a proposal for ‘Training of Trainers’ 
has been approved under the component I of the Integrated Skill 
Development Scheme. The Committee were of the view that the 
trainers should be informed about other schemes of the Ministry 
which might benefit the trainees, trainers should also be given 
training for imparting soft skills, it should be made compulsory for 
implementing agencies to recruit trainers who are well conversant 
in local language, the material for courses should be in verna cular 
languages, the courses offered be more oriented towards imparting 
practical knowledge and the refresher programmes for updating the 
knowledge of trainers should be conducted regularly and TA/DA 
paid to the trainers for attending such programmes. 
 
8. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 
 
 "In cases where the other schemes of the Ministry may be 
 beneficial to trainees, the details of the schemes are explained 

13 
 
 to trainees particularly in unorganized sector of Handicrafts.  
 The trainers are being given the soft skills training also in 
 their Training of Trainers Programme.  The trainers are being 
 recruited by the Implementing Agency and as and where the 
 trainees understand the local language only, the trainers 
 recruited are well conversant in local language. The course 
 materials developed by various implementing agencies are 
 being converted into vernacular language where the material is 
 in English language only. The courses offered are more 
 towards the practical training with the ratio of 70:30 for 
 practical and theory. The refresher programme for skill 
 upgradation is also one of the objectives of the scheme and 
 being given regularly.  In case, where the  trainers being 
 recruited, the salary is being to the trainers and in case of 
 guest lectures, honorarium is being given to trainers." 
 
9. The Committee are happy to note that the trainers 
are being prepared well for imparting skills to the 
trainees under  the Integrated Skill Development 
Scheme. The Committee, however, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation that refresher programmes 
should be held at regular intervals and that TA/DA 

14 
 
should be paid to the trainers who attend such 
programmes conducted by the Ministry as is being done 
by Central Training Institutes under the DGE&T for 
their sponsored instructor trainees.. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.48.2) 
 
10. The Committee noted that the Ministry have  not employed 
dedicated personnel for motivating people to take up the courses 
offered under the Scheme. The Committee were of the considered 
view that dedicated mobilisers would help the other personnel 
involved with the implementation of the scheme in concentrating on 
other areas and that these mobilisers can also track the trainees in 
case there is an increase in drop -out rates in any area, liaison with 
NGOs/industry and with their help the remotest of areas can also 
be accessed. 
 
11. In their action tak en reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 

15 
 
 "For motivating people to take up the course, the dedicated 
 mobiliser has been employed by the implementing agency as 
 per the felt need." 
 
12. The Committee note from the r eply of the 
Government that the dedicated mobilisers are being 
appointed wherever considered necessary by the 
implementing agencies. The Committee are of the 
considered view that it should be made mandatory for 
the implementing agencies to employ dedicated  
mobilisers, preferably locals since these mobilisers can 
persuade the large untrained population to enroll for 
training and hone their raw skills.  As regards, the 
number of mobilisers to be employed it may be left to 
the discretion of the implementing ag encies as these 
may vary according to the area and the estimated 
target population.  
 

16 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.54) 
 
13. The Committee noted that no subsidy is given under TUFS for 
ventures in investment in new designing techniques and were of the 
view th at any initiative for new techniques should be encouraged 
and subsidy given to such ventures. The Committee also 
recommended that since subsidy is no longer being given for the 
setting up of common effluent treatment plants under the 
restructured TUFS, the  Ministry might think of giving other 
incentives to the entrepreneurs who set up the effluent treatment 
plants voluntarily. The Committee felt that since the cost of 
borrowing capital has increased, TUFS has become prohibitive 
specially for the small inves tors and, therefore, recommended that 
the Ministry come out with some innovative scheme to maintain the 
tempo of the process of modernization of Indian textile industry. 
 
14. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 
 "Under Restructured TUFS (RTUFS), selected 
 machines/equipment’s and software  are eligible for 

17 
 
Textile Design Studio.   RTUFS also provides Interest 
 Reimbursement (IR) plus Capital Subsidy for Technical Textile 
Segment which  is an  emerging sector involving new 
techniques.    The Working  Group on 12 th Five Year Plan 
 recommended a scheme for  Common Effluent Treatment 
Plants with Marine Outfall  (CETPMO) for the existing textile 
processing cluster on the basis of an SPV where the  Central 
Government contributes 25%, State Governments bear 25% of the 
 expenditure  and remaining 50% by the Industry.   In order 
to subsidizes the cost of borrowing, RTUFS  provides 15% 
Margin Money Subsidy (MMS) (20% in case of powerloom sector) in 
lieu  of  IR.  In addition, small sectors also avail subsidy facilities 
of the State  Governments." 
 
15.  The Committee note that selected machinery/ 
equipments for Textile Design Studio are eligible under 
Restructured Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (RTUFS). 
The Committee, however, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that since Indian textiles lack on innovative 
front, subsidy should be given to the small entrepreneurs who 

18 
 
set up ventures in new designing techniques. The Committee 
may be apprised of the steps  taken by the Ministry to 
implement the recommendation of the Working Group on 12th 
Plan regarding setting up of Common Effluent Treatment 
Plants on the basis of SPV. 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.7)      
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry could utilize  Rs. 4260 
crore only out of the BE of  Rs.5000 crore which was revised to Rs 
5503 crore  at RE stage.  As regards the compliance with the 
governmental instructions that the pace of expenditure must be 
even throughout  the year so far as possible, the Ministry had 
assured the Committee that they  would ensure even  pace of  
expenditure in futu re.  The Committee are dismayed to note that 
the expenditure during 2011 -12 uptil the last quarter till 
22.3.2012,  was Rs 407 crore but it increased to Rs 1363 crore by 
31.3.2012 in a span of just one week.  Further, on perusal of the 
figures of last 5 years, the Committee find that the BE for the last 5 
years was Rs 18968 crore, the RE 21143 crore and the actual 
expenditure  was Rs 18271 crore. Apparently, the claim of Ministry 
about their financial performance does not stand to scrutiny in view 
of their inability to achieve the desired targets.  The idling of funds 
to the tune of Rs 2200 crore till the last week of the financial year is 
yet another matter of serious concern which needs to be addressed 
by the Ministry, Worse, rushing expenditure at the end  of the 
financial year besides violation of governmental instructions, may 
dilute scrutiny and monitoring leading to wasteful expenditure.   
Since budgeting involves fixation of priorities, foresight and 
forecasting based on sound analysis of past trends a nd the 
monitoring capabilities of the Department, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry evolve sound budgeting principles  
and monitoring mechanism so that their resources are optimally 
allocated,  there is no idling of funds and there is no rush of 
expenditure at the fag end of the financial year. 
 

20 
 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 The actual total plan expenditure as on 31.3.2012 is 
Rs.4321.97 crore i.e. 86.44% of BE and 81.50% of RE. The overall 
shortfall in expenditure as compared to BE is Rs. 678 crore. Of this, 
the North East Region for which an amount of Rs. 500 crore had 
been earmarked accounted for a shortfall of  Rs. 252.62 crore. The 
details of the quarter wise expenditure during 2011 – 12 are given 
below. 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
 
Item BE RE Expenditure 
during the 
quarter 
Cumulative 
Expenditure 
Allocation 
for TUFS 
(BE) 
Expenditure 
under TUFS 
2011 - 12  
 
5000.00 
 
 
5303.30 
   
 
3100.00 
(62%) 
 
1st quarter 1514.80 1514.80 1343.62 
2nd quarter 286.75 1801.55 8.79 
3rd quarter 1062.35 2863.90 943.54 
4th quarter 1458.07 4321.97 639.14 
           
 
 
Out of the total allotment of Rs.5000 crore, the Technology 
Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) has the largest allocation of 
Rs.3100 crore (62% of BE).  
           
 With 62% of BE of the Ministry allocated to TUFS, even 
utilization of Plan allocation for the Ministry is to a large extent 
dependent on the utilization under TUFS. Out of the BE of Rs.3100 
crore for TUFS, the quarterwise expenditure is Rs.1343.62 crore fo r 
Q1, Rs. 8.79 crore for Q2, Rs. 943.45 crore for Q3 and Rs. 639.45 
crore for Q4. 
          During Q2 funds release could not take palace because of 
non-submission of requisite certificates by the nodal 
banks/agencies. 
          

21 
 
 
  As against total allocat ion of Rs. 3100.00 crore under TUFS 
Rs. 2935.09 crore has been spent and the shortfall is only Rs. 
164.09 crore, mostly due to earmarking under NER i.e. Rs. 120 
crore 
 
Scheme-wise reasons for uneven pace of expenditure are as under:  
 
         The Ministry has reviewed in detail the reasons for shortfall 
crowding of expenditure.  The results of the  review are summarised 
below:- 
Wool: 
 (i)     Most of the schemes under wool are implemented over two -
three years through various state govts . After sanctioning of 
projects, further grants are released based on the performance of 
previous released grants and submission of UCs. Moreover slow 
performance by the Implementing Agencies also affects release of 
grants and lead to uneven expenditure.                     
(ii)    Woollen Expos are held during winter seasons (Nov. to Feb.) 
and claims of implementing Agencies are settled after the event in 
February-March leading to release of most of the funds in last 
quarter of financial year.  
(iii)    Un der Quality Processing of Wool Scheme, the Central Wool 
Development Board provides financial assistance of Rs.50.00 lakh 
for establishing Common Facility Centres and releases grants in 
three installments according to procurement of machineries 
through open  tendering process. As tendering, its finalization & 
manufacturing of machines takes its own time, even if a project is 
sanctioned in 1st Quarter, 2nd & 3rd Installment are released in 
last quarter leading to uneven expenditure. 
HANDLOOMS 
(i)         Under  Diversified Handloom Development Scheme, amount 
could not be utilized because the non -approval of construction 

22 
 
proposal of IIHT, Varanasi due to change of design and no further 
requirement received from the IIHT, Bargah. 
 (ii)       Under Handloom Weavers  Comprehensive Welfare Scheme 
the funds are released Policy Year-wise and subject to completion of 
enrolments (80% of which are renewal) which become due in 
(January-March) Quarter and submission of UCs by the service 
provider i.e. the funds are released o n the basis of completion of 
enrolment alone and Policy year is not co -terminus with Financial 
year which starts in December, therefore main expenditure is 
possible only in December - March. 
 
 
HANDICRAFTS  
          Under Handicrafts Sector, the shortfall is due to non -receipt 
of viable proposals especially from NER, non -receipt of fresh 
proposals under infrastructure component and non -completion of 
old projects. Besides these reasons, during the year 2011 - 12 the 
expenditure of March 2012 was restricted t o 15% of budget 
allocation though the bills were submitted for payment more than 
the 15%. This also led to shortfall 
POWERLOOM  
(i)         Under Group Workshed Scheme the bill of Rs.5,43,887 /- 
could not be passed for payment due to technical problem. Further 
the PDEXCIL could not submit the bills within financial year 2011 -
12 for Buyer-seller Meets and Exposure visits.  
        The allocation for ISPSDS under SCSP was done for the first 
time. As the scheme is meant for all, utilization specific to SCSP 
fund could not be made in absence of modalities.  
(ii)      Under Integrated Powerloom Cluster Development out of the 
balance of Rs.60.91 lakh, approval for bills for Rs.50.10 lakh could 
not be received from CPSMS Project Cell, Dept. of Expenditure, O/o 
Controller General of Accounts due to some technical problems.  
 
 

23 
 
NIFT 
(i)         For the BE -2011-12, an outlay of 128.00 Cr. was made, 
which included 20 Cr. for NER,   98 Cr. for Plan (for Raeba reli & 
OBC Quota) and 10 Cr. for SC/SP.   
(ii)     The major amount under plan allocation could not be utilised 
mainly due to delay in construction projects out of OBC funds and 
non-utilization of NER earmarking.  
(iii)     Cabinet, in its decision dated 2 4.11.2011, approved 
construction of NIFT Raebareli Centre by ITI Ltd. For the year 2011-
12, an amount of Rs. 2.00 crore has been released by MoT to 
Raebareli centre for rentals and academic infrastructure. Rs.1.00 
crore was earmarked for ITI for constructi on of permanent centre. 
The agreement between NIFT and construction agency has been 
signed on 23.9.2011. Rs.10.00 crores have been released to MGCC 
(construction agency) in March 2012. 
 
R&D including TRAs 
 
          Out of the BE of Rs.9.00 crore for R&D i ncluding TRAs, Rs. 
7.41 crores has been spent under different schemes. The quarter 
wise expenditure is Rs.1.50 crore in Q1, Rs.1.46 crore in Q2, 
Rs.1.20 in Q3  and Rs.3.25 crores in Q4. The expenditure in the 
last quarter was higher due to the completion o f R&D Projects and 
approval of new projects in this quarter. 
Jute Technology Mission 
          Fund of Rs. 54.00 crore could not be released during 2011 - 
12 due to non approval of extension of period for implementation of 
the scheme. 
Sardar Patel Institute of Textile Management Coimbatore (SVPITM) 
          Approval of detailed Project Report (DPR) of the Institute for 
its upgradation activities  got delayed. Therefore, Rs.2.75 crore from 
RE 2011-12 of the scheme has been surrendered. 
 
 

24 
 
Market Development & Product Diversification Scheme 
          Under Knitwear Technology Mission(KTM), a PPP mode 
project government has given an adhoc grant of Rs. 5.00 crore in 
October 2010, which was appropriated from the RE allocations of 
2010-11 for the Plan Scheme ‘Mark et Development & Product 
Diversification’ Scheme.   
          During FY 2011 -12, the Scheme was recast to bring down 
the costs and for greater share of cost to be borne by the Industry. 
The procurement action commenced in February 2012 after 
approvals by t he Expenditure Approval Committee.  An amount of 
Rs.50 crore (Rs.15 crore for revenue expenditure and Rs.30 crore 
capital expenditure) is being projected for 12th Five Year Plan in 
order to cater for plan KTM project at Ludhiana and Kolkata.   
Common Compliance Code 
          An allocation of Rs.7 crore was made for 2011 -12, for the 
Scheme of which an amount of Rs.3.50 crore was sanctioned. The 
project was delayed due to two issues concerning DISHA project viz. 
(i) extension of timelines by nine months for utilisation of funds 
from 31st March, 2012 to 31st December, 2012 owing to delay in 
project formulation, mobilization of subscribing units and 
consequential delay in mobilizing resources for the project and (ii) 
project was allowed to be implemented direct ly by outsourcing 
experts of programme management, marketing and promotion and 
other elements of DISHA.  Additional allocation of Rs.10 crore is 
being projected for the 12th Plan period for comprehensive coverage 
of the industry. 
Technical Textiles 
 (i)  Since the delegation powers for operating budget head for 
Technical Textiles were provided in  October 2011, no funds could 
be utilized in  the first two quarters.  
 (ii) For many instruments, the COEs were receiving single tenders 
and they have to go for retendering which is a time consuming 
process.   
 

25 
 
Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks (SITP) 
 Out of Rs 347 crore of Plan allocation under SITP only Rs. 
77.43 crore has been spent. This shortfall is due to the fact that 
while the allocations at BE and RE under SITP represented the 
project committed liability of the Ministry, the actual expenditure 
could take place only when claims were raised by individual SPVs. 
Despite monitoring both at Ministry and PMC levels, not all SPVs 
that were expected to prefer claims could do so, due to a variety of 
causes. The recent recession in the textile industry and delays in 
obtaining statutory clearances such as environmental clearan ce 
were some of the reasons for default by SPVs on submitting claims. 
Integrated Skill Development Scheme (ISDS) 
          Launched in mid of July, 2010, ISDS  was in the pilot phase 
of two years during the XI Plan. The process for selection of 
Implementing Agencies for the Scheme was a time censuring  
process which continued even in the financial year 2012 -13. 
Moreover, there were certain teething problems at the initial stage 
for putting in place the requisite infrastructure, man -power, 
developing curricu lum etc. and also certain procedural 
requirements which had to be fulfilled for releasing funds to 
implementing agencies. 
 
Mega Cluster 
Uniform progress on release of funds under Mega Cluster in each 
quarter is always not possible to maintain because of no n – 
fulfillment of various conditions prescribed in the guidelines by 
implementing agencies. 
Plan budget of the Ministry for the North East region. 
          The total expenditure for NER during 2011 -12 was 
Rs.247.38 crore as on 31.3.2012 which is 49.48% of the total 
allocated amount for NER i.e. Rs.500.00 crore.  
         

26 
 
  The shortfall in expenditure under the NER budget is Rs. 
252.62 crore. This was mainly due to lack of expenditure under the 
major schemes of the Ministry such as TUFS, SITP and other 
industry sector shemes.     
          With a view to enhancing plan expenditure in the North East, 
the Ministry proposes to follow a project approach in the  12th Plan, 
allowing maximum flexibility in the design and implementation of 
such projects. 
 
Conclusion:  
          Thus, due to  various reasons as explained above, there was 
an overall short fall of 15% in Plan expenditure with respect to BE. 
The expenditure could not be spread evenly across the four 
quarters mainly because of short fall in the second quarter due to 
lack of expenditure under TUFS.  The Ministry will  strive to 
increase over all plan expenditure in  future by closely monitoring 
the pace of expenditure and also by enhancing plan expenditure in 
the North East by formulating special schemes  / projects 
specifically for the North East. Concerted efforts will also be made 
to ensure even spread of expenditure through out the Financial 
Year.   
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.8)      
 
 The Committee note that an amount of Rs 54 crore  was 
allocated for 2011 -12 under the Jute Technology Mission (JTM) 
scheme but no expenditure could be incurred since the target 
period for completion of JTM expired on March 31, 2011.  The 
Committee are dismayed to note that the scheme expired on March 
31, 2011 and till March 31, 2012, the Ministry could not get 
extension of the scheme. The Committee while deploring such 
apathetic attitude of the Government, desire that the Ministry 
should initiate action on such matters well in advance so that 

27 
 
implementation of any scheme does not suffer due to procedural 
delays. 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 Jute Technology Mission:-   The budget allocation of Plan fund 
under Jute Technology Mission was Rs. 54 crore . Funds could not 
be released during 2011 -12 due to non -approval of extension of 
period for implementation of the scheme. Every effort was made to 
obtain the approval, but as not all comments received on the 
proposal in the precess of consultation were, po ssitive, the process 
took about 3 months longer than usual and, approval was 
forthcoming only at the end of the financial year 2011 -12.   Hence, 
Rs. 54 crore has been surrendered. Chronological details of action 
taken are given below:- 
 
 
S. 
No 
                                    Subject Date 
1. Request received from NJB for release of Plan 
fund under JTM for the year 2011-12. 
09.08.2011 
2. Proposal was submitted to the IFW for release 
of Plan fund under JTM for the year 2011-12 
10.08.2011 
3. Queries raised by IFW on the issue of release of 
Plan fund under JTM for the year 2011-12 
17.8.2011 
4. Submission of draft CCEA Note for approval of 
HMOT 
18.8.2011 
5. Approval of HMOTon draft CCEA Note 24.8.2011 
6. Circulation of draft CCEA Note amongst all 
concerned Ministries/Departments 
25.8.2011 
7. Query received from Planning Commission on 
the draft CCEA Note 
8.9.2011 

28 
 
8. Reply sent to Planning Commission 13.9.2011 
9. Reminder issued to the concerned Ministries 
for their comments on draft CCEA Note 
16.9.2011 
10. Comments received from Ministry of 
Agriculture 
16.9.2011 
11. Comments received from ICAR 23.9.2011 
12. Comments received from Planning Commission 11.10.2011 
13. Comments received from Department of 
Expenditure 
31.10.2011 
14. Obtained approval of HMOT on final note for 
CCEA after incorporating comments received 
from concerned Ministris/Deptt.  
18.11.2011 
15. Circulation of final note to PMO/Cabinet 
Secretariat for comments 
26.12.2011 
16. Comments received from PMO askinf to s eek 
the concurrence of COS 
10.01.2012 
17. As per directions of PMO, submission of COS 
note   for meeting 
24.1.2012 
18. Draft Note for COS was approved by Secretary 22.2.2012 
 
19. As per directions of PMO, submission of COS 
note for meeting 
23.2.2012 
20. Meeting of COS was held 2.3.2012 
21. Minutes of the meeting   of COS received 15.3.2012 
22. Approval of MOT on final Cabinet Note after 
incorporation of COS decision 
27.3.2012 
23. Circulation of final note to PMO/Cabinet 
Secretariat for  comments  
30.3.2012 

29 
 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.20)      
 
 The Committee note with concern that no authentic figures are 
available regarding the number of artisans employed in the 
handicrafts sector. As per the census conducted in 1995 -96, 47.61 
lakhs artisans were employed in handicrafts sector.  The Ministry 
have stated that based on the coverage of the districts undertaken 
and other parameters, the number of artisans employed in the 
handicrafts sector is estimated to be 68.86 lakhs.  A report of the  
United Nations, however, has revealed that over the past 30 years, 
the number of artisans in India has actually declined by 30% as 
many of these artisans have joined the rank of casual labourers and 
the informal economy. The Committee note that although c ensus of 
artisans is in progress but it took the Ministry 17 years to 
undertake the process. It is inexplicable how the Ministry are 
introducing schemes, fixing targets and reviewing them without 
ascertaining the actual number of artisans. The Committee ar e of 
the firm view that the Ministry undertake census of the artisans 
every 10 years as this would help them formulating, implementing 
and reviewing the schemes meant for the sector more effectively.  
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 The census of handicrafts artisans was approved during the XI 
plan period.  Initially it was decided to complete the census  within 
a five year period covering 20%  of the districts every year starting 
from 2007-08.  However on the recommendations of Parliamentary 
Standing committe e which had recommended completion of 
handicrafts artisans census in one go, the census work was 
expedited for 100% coverage of districts. The census work in some  
states is still in progress and final figures shall be known once the 
census is completed. 
 Based on the results, made available related to different 
parameters pertaining to the handicrafts sector as per the estimates 

30 
 
made on enumeration undertaken till now, the number of 
handicrafts  artisans is estimated to be 68.86 lakhs.  This office  
has 6 regional offices and keeps getting updates from the regions & 
new  enrolments of artisans  are done  on a regular basis on the 
basis of which the schemes are being implemented. 
 However the committee’s view that the Ministry undertake 
census of artisans  e very 10 Years  for effective implementation of 
schemes has been noted for future compliance.    
 
 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.21)      
 
 The Committee note that 1393 clusters have been sanctioned 
under the Baba Saheb Hastshilp Vikas Yojana till March, 2012 .  
Out of 68.86 lakhs artisans in the country only a few are clustered 
artisans with the result a preponderant majority are deprived of the 
benefits which accrue to clustered artisans. These artisans cannot 
get the benefits under the scheme, which makes th em dependent 
on middlemen who exploit them.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government come out with a comprehensive 
scheme to provide quality raw material, training, marketing 
platform and credit facilities to the artisans who are not part o f any 
cluster or are living in remote areas.  The Committee also feel that 
more and more visits by the officials of DC(Handicrafts) may be 
made to the remotest of areas where  handicraft artisans reside to 
make them aware of the benefits of clusterisation etc. besides 
making publicity of various schemes and by involving  local 
governments in a big way.  
 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
  1396 clusters have been sanctioned under the Baba Saheb 
Hastshilp Vikas Yojana till March, since inception  against 1393 as 
reported by the Committee.   Further, the recommendations of the 

31 
 
Committee have been noted and shall be included in the 12th Plan 
period. 
 
   
(Recommendation para No. 3.23)      
 
 Under the Guru Shishya Parampara component of the HRD 
scheme, the Committee f ind that training is provided only to the 
artisans from nearby clusters where the Master trainer resides. The 
Committee are, however, of the consdiered view that the training 
under the scheme should not be limited to those living in nearby 
clusters but als o extended to those living in remote areas whose 
skills need to be honed or upgraded.   Considering their financial 
distress, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should also 
give suitable TA/DA to these trainees by way of incentive.    
 The Committee also note that the timings of the courses are 
generally from 10am to 5pm and sometimes, it changes as per the 
climatic conditions of that area or at the convenience of the Master 
Trainer. The Committee feel that the concept of flexible timing may 
be introduced for the courses taking into account the fact that the 
trainees may include women who have to take care of their homes 
and children and artisans who would like to get training after their 
working hours.  
 Further, the Committee find that funds have be en released for 
setting of 3 labs under the Research and Development Scheme and 
the Government do not review the performance of these labs as they 
have no labs of their own. The Committee find it strange that 
Ministry are giving funds to labs without havin g any check on their 
performance and efficiency. The Committee recommend that 
Government ought to monitor the performance of the labs being 
funded by them to ensure that public funds are utilized properly 
and effectively.  
 
 
(Reply of the Government) 

32 
 
 
 
 As per the norms  of “ Guru Shishya Parampara”  component 
of the HRD scheme the coverage areas of the scheme is not limited 
to nearby clusters where the Master Trainer  reside.  Therefore, 
artisans living in remote areas can also take benefit of the scheme .  
As submitted earlier that the Master Trainer who are conducting 
training under this component, are spread across the country and 
most of them reside in small towns, villages and remote areas.  
Thus, all the artisans of these areas are  taking benefit of  the 
scheme.  However, department will consider the recommendation of 
the Committee to give suitable TA/DA to the artisans of remote 
areas while formulating the scheme for 12th Plan. 
 Further, as per the suggestions of the Committee, the timing  
of trainin g which is at present from 10 A.M. to 5.00 P.M.  in 
general.  However, there is no stipulation regarding the above 
timings and the convenience of artisans is accommodated.   The 
same will be reiterated through our field offices. 
 As regards to setting up o f labs under the R&D scheme, the 
recommendation is noted for future compliance.  
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.24)      
 The Committee note that the Government are implementing 
various schemes for the handicrafts sector but statedly,   in spite of 
their best efforts, only 71% of the total budgetary allocation could 
be spent.  In order to make the  schemes successful, the Committee 
recommend that more and more NGOs should be involved in the 
process of implementation and monitoring. Since, the handicrafts 
sector is largely unorganized, the Government need to take suitable 
action to upgrade the skills of the artisans, make available quality 
raw material on easy terms, provide credit facilities, provide market 
exposure to them and eliminate middlemen. The Committe e also 
recommend that in order to make handicrafts commercially viable, 
different Ministries should work in tandem to give momentum to 

33 
 
the exports of Indian handicrafts. Handicraft mark on the lines of 
handloom mark may also be introduced at the earliest s o that 
genuine Indian craft can be differentiated from the counterfeits.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures initiated 
in this behalf in due course. 
 
 (Reply of the Government) 
 
 As per the Committee’s recommendations, Office of the 
Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) has over the years tried to 
involve  more NGOs and adopted following steps for better 
implementation and monitoring of the schemes. 
• Proposals under different schemes are invited through 
advertisements. 
• For better co ntrol over performance of the schemes, 
inspection reports from field  officers, (on each activity 
implemented in their respective jurisdiction) have been 
 made mandatory. 
• For timely sanction  and release of funds.  It has been 
decided  that the process  of inviting applications  will be 
started  four months in advance so that all  sanctions are 
issued in time. 
                  
 The Office of the Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) has 
been implementing  schemes  like  Human Resource Development 
Scheme to upgrade the skills of the artisans, providing  Raw 
Material Banks for   making Raw material  available,  coordinating 
with banks to provide credit facilities to the artisans.  This office 
has also been implementi ng schemes for Marketing Support which 
provides direct marketing facilities to the artisans.  
 
 Urban Haats are being developed in various states to provide 
marketing plateforms  to artisans.  The various  schemes 
implemented by this office are all for the benefits of the artisans. 
  
 In this regard, the observation of the Committee has been 
noted for compliance and                                                                          
action will be initiated accordingly. 
(Recommendation para No. 3.35)      

34 
 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that no survey to have 
authentic field level data on powerlooms has been conducted so far. 
The Committee also note that now an agency has been engaged to 
conduct the powerloom survey and the survey report i s reportedly 
to be completed within next 9 months and in their considered view 
formulation of schemes, without a  fair assessment of the target 
group and the dimensions of the problems afflicting them, is a shot 
in the dark. The Committee, therefore, hardl y need to stress that 
the Ministry first undertake a comprehensive survey of the 
powerloom sector and then formulate the scheme(s).   
  
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 
 The Ministry has taken steps to undertake a comprehensive 
survey of the powerloom sector to  have all related data/information 
pertaining to powerloom weavers/industry. For this  purpose,  
service of  ACNielsen ORG -MARG Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, a reputed 
professional agency engaged in various important surveys,  has 
been requisitioned. The agency has already commenced field survey 
in U.P. & Haryana and survey in Punjab, M.P., Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, Tamilnadu & Karnataka will commence shortly.  The 
whole survey is expected to be completed by December, 2012.   
 
 Keeping in view the instructio ns/guidelines issued by the 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance on 12 th Five Year 
Plan, steps have been taken to continue with the existing schemes 
in its existing form (as approved under XIth Plan) only  in the 
financial year 2012 -13 (i.e. first y ear of 12 th Plan).  As per 
instructions of Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance, third 
party evaluation of all existing schemes is also being initiated  to re-
draft the guidelines of existing schemes, if necessary.  As far as new 
schemes proposed fo r 12 th Plan is concerned, the detailed  
guidelines will be framed only after formal approval for those 
schemes under 12 th Five Year Plan is received from Planning 
Commission. Also while framing the new detailed guidelines of 
existing/new schemes, due consi deration will be given to the 

35 
 
information/data to be available through the Baseline Survey on 
Powerloom presently being conducted on priority basis. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.38)      
 
 The Committee note that during last five years one Powerloom  
Service Centre has been approved at Imphal. The Committee also 
note that the role of Powerloom Service Centres include imparting 
practical training and skill to powerloom weavers in various 
aspects. The Committee find 44 service centers  far from adequate  
for the powerloom industry in which the weavers are largely 
untrained. The Committee are of the considered view that the 
Government consider opening new institutes for providing training 
to the powerloom weavers/workers in all aspects relating to 
powerloom sector. The Powerloom Service Centres should also 
impart training in managerial courses for existing entrepreneurs as 
well as for new entrants. The Powerloom Service Centres besides 
providing training may also educate the weavers and  entrepreneurs 
about the various schemes of the Government meant for the 
powerloom sector.  
 (Reply of the Government) 
 
 
 There was provision in Integrated Scheme for Powerloom 
Sector Development (ISPSD) to provide financial assistance upto 
Rs.100.00 lakh for purchasing the m achines  and  equipments  for 
opening  the  new  Powerloom  Service  Centre on public and private 
partnership basis.  However, proposals from State Governments or  
other eligible  agencies  are not forthcoming. Moreover, funds 
allocated for powerloom secto r schemes were/are not adequate to 
open and run new Powerloom Service Centres entirely by the 
Central Government.  
 
The Powerloom Service Centres are also imparting training to 
powerloom workers based on the industry requirement in the 
cluster, besides providing technical services like testing of samples, 

36 
 
design development, trouble -shooting etc. Training in managerial 
course can also be imparted by Powerloom Service Centres subject 
to the industry demand. Some Powerloom Service Centres like PSC 
at Erode, S ommanur, Komarapallayam etc have conducted 
Entrepreneurs Development Programme on Textiles (EDP). Such 
need based training programme will continue in 12 th Plan also. 
Also,  in addition to Powerloom Service Centres,  other agencies   
are also providing trai ning under Integrated Skill Development 
Scheme (ISDS) to meet the requirement of skilled workers in textile 
industry including powerloom sector. Powerloom Service Centres  
conduct periodic Seminar / Workshop and organize exhibitions to 
create awareness about the various schemes of the Government for 
the powerloom sector. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.48.1)      
 
 The Committee note that 18 proposals have been approved 
covering all facets of skill development including ‘Training of 
Trainers’ under the component I of the Integrated Skill Development 
Scheme and the orientation of trainers. The Committee are of the 
view that the trainers should be informed about other schemes of 
the Ministry which might benefit the trainees.  The Committee also 
recommend that besides imparting the computer skills, trainers 
should also be given training for imparting soft skills. The 
Committee  recommend that it should be made compulsory for 
implementing agencies to recruit trainers who are well conversant 
in local language.  Besides, the material for courses should also be 
in vernacular languages.  The courses offered be more oriented 
towards imparting practical knowledge and the refresher 
programmes for updating the knowledge of trainers should be 
conducted regularly and TA/DA paid to the trainers for attending 
such programmes.  
  
(Reply of the Government) 
 

37 
 
 In cases where the other sche mes of the Ministry may be 
beneficial to trainees, the details of the schemes are explained to 
trainees particularly in unorganized sector of Handicrafts.  The 
trainers are being given the soft skills training also in their Training 
of Trainers Programme.  The trainers are being recruited by the 
Implementing Agency and as and where the trainees understand 
the local language only, the trainers recruited are well conversant in 
local language. The course materials developed by various 
implementing agencies are  being converted into vernacular 
language where the material is in English language only. The 
courses offered are more towards the practical training with the 
ratio of 70:30 for practical and theory. The refresher programme for 
skill upgradation is also on e of the objectives of the scheme and 
being given regularly.  In case, where the trainers being recruited, 
the salary is being to the trainers and in case of guest lectures, 
honorarium is being given to trainers 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.48.2)      
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry have not employed 
dedicated personnel for motivating people to take up the courses 
offered under the Scheme. The Committee endorse the view of the 
Project Management Consultant that dedicated mobilisers be 
engaged by all t he implementing agencies for effective mobilization 
and to explore various other options for mobilization of the 
candidates.  The Committee are of the considered view that 
dedicated mobilisers would, help the other personnel involved with 
the implementation of the scheme in concentrating on other areas. 
These mobilisers can also track the trainees in case there is an 
increase in drop-out  rates in any area, liaison with NGOs/industry 
and with their help the remotest of areas can also be accessed. 
  
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 

38 
 
  For motivating people to take up the course, the dedicated 
mobiliser has been employed by the implementing agency as per the 
felt need. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.49)      
 
 The Committee find  that the Ministry have not carried out any 
impact study of the courses being offered under the scheme. The 
Committee also note that as of February 2012 out of 28664 
candidates, 6096 have been placed in industry and 5378 have 
opted for self employment.  The Com mittee are of the view that 
impact study needs to be carried out to gauge the effectiveness of 
the courses being offered as these are at the nascent stage and 
hence can be altered easily. The Committee feel that industry must 
be encouraged for recruiting t he pass -outs on the campuses of 
these institutes. The Ministry can also coordinate with the industry 
to give hands-on training to these candidates and share the stipend 
to be paid to the trainees till the confidence of industry is built. 
Further, the indus try may also be encouraged to sponsor 
candidates for these courses.   
 
 (Reply of the Government) 
 
 The impact study of the courses being offered is not yet done 
by the Ministry. However, Implementing Agencies will be advised to 
carry out the impact study. 
 
 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.53)      

39 
 
 
  The Committee is concerned to note that the cotton yarn 
production decreased by 19% during November 2011 and by 13% 
during April to November 2011. The Committee is of the view that 
improving cotton acreage and pro ductivity is the key for improving 
the competitiveness of Indian textiles. The Committee note that 
though Cotton Technology Mission has been set up for the purpose 
but still a lot needs to be done. Similarly, more R&D needs to be 
undertaken in the field in cluding sufficient investment in research 
programmes related to the betterment of cottonseeds and improving 
their productivity. Further, the Committee find that Indian weavers 
are still working on obsolete looms and a weaver who is preoccupied 
with the volatility in cotton yarn prices cannot think of modernizing 
his looms. The Committee, therefore, recommend that urgent steps 
be taken to maintain a balance between the interests of both the 
weavers and the industry by at least providing raw material to small 
weavers at reasonable prices in volatile situations. 
 
 (Reply of the Government) 
 
 
 The Government has taken the following steps in order to 
maintain a balance between the interests of both the weavers and 
the industry by providing raw material to small w eavers at 
reasonable prices in volatile situation: 
(i)   Government has constituted a Cotton Yarn Advisory Board 
(CYAB). CYAB is   to advise the Government on matters 
pertaining to production, consumption and availability of 
different types of cotton yarn and also provide a forum for liaison 
between all the stakeholders i.e. spinners, weavers, TRA’s, 
Government and to prepare a Cotton Yarn Balance Sheet etc. 
(ii)   A proposal to provide interest free Corpus Fund of Rs.100 lakh 
for setting up of Yarn Bank fo r each powerloom cluster for 
making availability of yarn to the weavers at reasonable rate has 
been proposed.  Under the said scheme, Textile Associations / 
SPV / Consortium will be eligible to operate the Yarn Bank. The 
eligible Agency will collect orders from the small weavers and 

40 
 
purchase yarn in bulk to avail of the quantity – discount and 
supply to weavers at reasonable price. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.54)      
 
 The Committee note that no subsidy is given under TUFS for 
ventures in investment in new designing techniques. The 
Committee are of the considered view that the Indian textile 
industry lacks on the innovation front and, therefore, any initiative 
for new techniques should be encouraged and subsidy given to 
such ventures. The Committee also note  that subsidy is no longer 
being given for the setting up of common effluent treatment plants 
under the restructured TUFS.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that, if not under TUFS, the Ministry might think of 
giving other incentives to the entrepreneur s who set up the effluent 
treatment plants voluntarily.  The Committee also notes that the 
revised TUFS Scheme has not been received well by the Industry.  
The Committee feel that since the cost of borrowing capital has 
increased, the scheme has become pro hibitive specially for the 
small investors. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should come out with some innovative scheme to maintain 
the tempo of the process of modernization of Indian textile industry.  
 
 (Reply of the Government) 
 
 Under Restructured TUFS (RTUFS), selected 
machines/equipment’s and software are eligible for Textile Design 
Studio.  RTUFS also provides Interest Reimbursement (IR) plus 
Capital Subsidy for Technical Textile Segment which is an emerging 
sector involving new techniques.    The Working Group on 12 th Five 
Year Plan recommended a scheme for Common Effluent Treatment 
Plants with Marine Outfall (CETPMO) for the existing textile 
processing cluster on the basis of an SPV where the Central 
Government contributes 25%, State Governments bear 25% of the 
expenditure and remaining 50% by the Industry.   In order to 

41 
 
subsidizes the cost of borrowing, RTUFS provides 15% Margin 
Money Subsidy (MMS) (20% in case of powerloom sector) in lieu of 
IR.  In addition, small sectors also avail subsidy facilities of the 
State Governments. 
(Recommendation para No. 3.55)      
 
 The Committee are constrained to point out a general want of 
due diligence in many wings/offices of the Ministry given their 
persistent failure to stick to the given time lines while responding to 
parliamentary matters.  In their considered view delay in submitting 
the information sought is indicative of poor control and command 
system and a cavalier attitude which must be corrected.  The 
Committee would like to be  apprised of the corrective measures 
taken in this regard to ensure that assurance given to Parliament is 
fulfilled within the stipulated time. 
  
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 The Ministry is a first point of contact between the parliament 
and other stake holders at the field/grass root level. While dealing 
with various parliamentary matters, the Ministry has to coordinate 
among all these stakeholders to get the desired informat ion 
collected and compiled before transmitting to the Parliament. 
Despite consistent effort, sometimes minor delay has been noticed 
due to the situation beyond control. However, the Ministry has 
taken effective steps to ensure transmitting responses on the  
parliamentary matters on time by well equipping its parliamentary 
division in so far as manpower and infrastructure are concerned. 
The Ministry is also using the telecommunications/online system 
for getting inputs from various stakeholders before transmit ting 
compiled information in a parliamentary matters and assures that 
the delay wherever noticed by the committee in the past will be 
curbed while dealing with matter received in future.   
 

42 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

43 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NIL 
  

44 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.22)      
 
  The Committee note that under the Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi 
Swasthya Bima Yojana  only 3 members of a family of artisans are 
covered.  The Committee feel that the dependents in an average 
family of artisan include his spouse, two children and dependant 
parents which makes it 5 people.  In such a situation, it is very 
difficult for a po or artisan to bear the medical expenses of other 
family members who are dependant on him. The Committee, thus, 
find the cover given to 3 members of an artisan’s family inadequate. 
The Committee, therefore,  recommend that the number of family 
members should be increased to at least .  
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 In the Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana 
implemented by the O/o DC(Handicrafts) the existing provision is 
for 1+3.  However the suggestions of the committee are under 
consideration for the 12th Plan. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.36)      
 
 The Committee note that the powerloom weavers covered 
under Janashree Bima Yojana  are entitled to an educational grant 
of Rs 600 per child/ per half year for two children studying in IX to 
XII standard for a maximum period of 4 years under the Shiksha 
Sahayog Yojana (SSY).  The Committee feel that such grants should 

45 
 
also be extended to  those weavers whose children are meritorious 
and wish to take up professional courses as such grants are 
incentives to those parents who want their wards to study.   
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 
  The Scheme in its existing form is being continued for the 
current financial year 2012 -13 subject to finalization of 12 th Plan.  
The recommendations of the Standing Committee have been noted.  
The  recommendations will be given due consideration while 
finalizing the Scheme for 12 th Plan in consultation with all 
stakeholders including Insurance Agencies as per the prescribed 
procedure.  
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.37)      
 
 The Committee note that there is no Health Insurance Scheme 
available for the powerloom  weavers.  However, a Health Insurance 
Scheme on the lines of RSBY is proposed to be implemented in 
areas where the RSBY does not cover the powerloom sector during 
12th Plan, subject to approval by the Planning Commission. The 
Committee are unable to under stand the rationale behind such a 
delay in introducing a Health Insurance Scheme for powerloom 
weavers when there is already a similar scheme in operation for  
handloom weavers and handicrafts artisans.  The Committee feel 
that instead of introducing a new  scheme, the Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi 
Swasthya Bima Yojana or the Health Insurance Scheme for 
handloom weavers be extended to the powerloom weavers also.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 
 
 Health Insurance under Rashtriay Swasthya Bima Yojana 
(RSBY) is exclusively meant for workers in BPL category. The Health 
Insurance Scheme for handloom weavers already in force is meant 
for coverage of eligible handloom weavers and their family members 
as per the criteria prescribed under the said scheme.  Since the 
status and conditions of powerloom weavers/workers are not 
exactly identical to those of handloom weavers,   eligibility 
conditions and benefits for powerloom weavers may vary with 
reference to eligibility condition and benefits under Health 
Insurance scheme ava ilable for Handloom weavers.  In order to 
cover all the powerloom weavers including those not falling under 
BPL category under Health Insurance Scheme, it is necessary to 
formulate a new policy i.e. Health Insurance Scheme for the 
powerloom weavers and the ir family members.  There is no Health 
Insurance Scheme for powerloom workers/weavers in operation 
during 11th Plan.  A new  Scheme  which  has been proposed  in the 
12th Plan period (even extension of  Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya 
Bima Yojana or Health Insurance Scheme for Handloom weavers to 
Powerloom weavers/workers) can be possible only after approval of 
Planning Commission.  
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.39)      
 The Committee observe that there are no permanent places for 
the weavers to se ll their products and this is one of the major 
problems for small time powerloom weavers due to which  they are 
exploited by unscrupulous middle -men and agents. The Committee 
recommend that special marketing areas/places be set up where 
these weavers can g o and sell their products without depending on 
the middlemen and agents.  Taking note that the Government give 
20% margin money subsidy under TUFS on investment on modern 
technology of machines in powerloom units, the Committee are of 
the considered view that the Government should also come out with 

47 
 
another scheme specially for small powerloom owners who are 
working on obsolete looms and cannot take benefits of the 
ambitious schemes of the Ministry but need smaller sums for 
upgrading of their looms.  The Co mmittee, therefore, recommend 
that the Government undertake a separate study  on the needs of 
small powerloom owners and come out with a proposal/scheme for 
their development.   
 The Committee further find that there is no scheme to provide 
credit faciliti es or raw material to powerloom weavers.  The 
Committee find it a step motherly treatment towards the powerloom 
weavers and urge the Government to look into the problems of this 
sector and come out with a comprehensive scheme for their benefit 
at the earliest.  
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 
 The Government has provided interest reimbursement or 
capital subsidy on the term loan availed by units for purchasing / 
installing the machines as per the guidelines of Technology 
Upgradation Fund Scheme. The proposal for providing financial 
assistance to set up Common  Facilities  Centre (including 
marketing facilities) in  powerloom clusters  and  for upgrading the 
plain powerlooms to semi -automatic looms for the benefit of small 
powerloom w eavers is also being explored under new schemes 
proposed for 12 th Five Year Plan.  The proposal for creating Yarn 
Bank  to enable the powerloom weavers  to get regular and direct 
supply of yarn in powerloom clusters with financial assistance 
provided by th e Government in the form of Interest free Corpus 
Fund is also under consideration in the 12th Plan.   
 
 
New Delhi;                  (HEMANAND BISWAL) 
23  August,  2012                                       CHAIRMAN, 
1  Bhadrapada , 1934 (Saka)       STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
     
  

48 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
 
The Committee sat on 23 August, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in the  Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   2. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
   3. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
   4. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
   5. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure   
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
   6.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
   7.  Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
   8.  Dr. E.M.Sudarsana Natchiappan 
   9.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
   10.Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
   
 
 
 
 

49 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. XX     XX    XX 
3. XX     XX    XX 
4. XX     XX    XX  
5. XX     XX    XX 
6. XX     XX    XX 
 
7. Thereafter, the Hon'ble Chairman apprised the Members about 
the following  draft Reports to be considered for adoption:   
 (i) XX    XX    XX 
    (ii)    XX    XX    XX 
     (iii)  Action taken by the Government on the     
  recommendations/observations contained in the 29th  
  Report of the Committee on 'Demands for Grants' of the  
  Ministry of Textiles for the year 2012-13 
 
8. The Committee took up the draft Reports one by one for 
consideration. After some discussions, the Committee  adopte d all 
draft Reports without any modification.   

50 
 
 
 
9. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
above draft reports in the light of factual verification from the 
concerned Ministry and present the Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament. 
      
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 XX Do not pertain to this report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

51 
 
  APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-NINTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations       18   
II. Recommendations/Observations which have  14       77.7%   
 been accepted by Government 
 
 (Rec. Para. Nos.3.7,3.8,3.20,3.21,3.23,3.24,  
 3.35,3.38,3.48.1,3.48.2,3.49,3.53,3.54 and 3.55  
  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s replies-  
         NIL    0  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
 which Government’s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration –           NIL    % 
  
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which     
 final replies of Government are of interim in  nature       
         04   22.22% 
 (Rec. Para No. 3.22,3.36,3.37 and 3.39)  
                                    ----------- 
            100%  
                                                ------------ 
  