26 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twentieth  Report of 
the Standing Committee on Labour on the `Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Textiles for the year 2011-12] 
 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 March,  2012/Chaitra,  1934 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twentieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour on the `Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Textiles for the year 2011-12] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.03.2012  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.03.2012 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
 March,  2012/Chaitra,  1934 (Saka) 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
       
       
         PAGE(s)   
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report  
  (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
  

4 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
2. Shri Raj Babbar 
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
4. Dr Virendra Kumar 
        **5. Shri Pakauri Lal 
6. Shri Narahari Mahato 
         7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Ms. Mausam Noor 
10. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
14. Ms. J. Shantha 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
*16. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
     21. Vacant 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
25. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        28. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
        29. Shri Rajaram 
        30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri G. N. Ratanpuri 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*      Nominated w.e.f 25th November, 2011. 
**  Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his 
nomination to Standing Committee on Coal & Steel w.e.f. 3 rd  
January, 2012. 
 

5 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director  
 3.    Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Under Secretary 
 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having 
been authorised  by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Twenty -Sixth Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on the `Dem ands for Grants of the Ministry of Textiles 
for the year 2011-12’. 
 
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.08.2011.  The Ministry of Textiles 
furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 30th November, 
2011.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Labour at their sitting held on 24.2.2012.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Tw entieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed 
in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                      HEMANAND BISWAL 
21st   March ,  2012                               CHAIRMAN, 
1 Chaitra , 1934 (Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.  
    
  
 

7 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants 
for the year 2011-12 of the Ministry of Textiles'. 
 
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha an d also 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.08.2011.  It contained 18  
recommendations.  Replies of Government in respect of all the 
recommendations have been received and have been categorized 
as under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations whic h 
have been accepted by the Government. 
 
Paragraph Sl. Nos.  3.13, 3.18, 3.25, 
3.29, 3.31, 3.32, 3.34, 3.37, 3.49, 3.50, 
3.52, 3.56, 3.60 and 3.63. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total-14 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government's reply. 
 
Paragraph Sl. Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
Total-NIL 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
 Paragraph Sl. Nos. NIL Total-NIL 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature. 
 
Paragraph Sl. Nos. 3.26, 3.27, 3.33, and 
3.42. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total-04 
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes in 
respect of recommendations contained in Chapter I and final 
action taken notes in respect of recommendations contained 
in Chapter-V for which only interim replies have been given 
by the Government may be furnished to them at the earliest 
and in any case  not later than 3 months of the presentation 
of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken replies of 
the Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
A.   North Eastern Region 
 
(Recommendation at Para No.3.25) 
 
5. The Committee while observing that the Ministry failed to 
promote their flagship schemes in the North -Eastern Region 
recommended the Government to constitute an expert group to 
advise them for popularization of TUFS and SITP in North Eastern 
Region.  The C ommittee urged the Government to set up their own 

9 
 
textile centres in the North Eastern region, train unemployed people 
and educate them about the benefits of TUFS or alternatively 
cooperatives be convinced/motivated to set up modernized textile 
units in the North Eastern Region. 
 
6. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 
"Government in consultation with State Government will 
constitute an Expert Group for popularization of TUFs and 
SITP in the North East region. 
Government of India will seek to further strengthen the 
Guwahati Powerloom Service Centre under the Integrated Skill 
development Scheme to develop a skilled workforce in the 
North Eastern region for textile Sector. 
During the current year, the following initiatives were taken in 
respect of TUFS and SITP: 
 A workshop was held in Shillong under the aegis of 
DC(Handicrafts) on promotion of Textiles Industry in North 
East for promotion of TUFS and Skill Development initiatives 
in July 2011. 
 An Inte grated Textiles park has been sanctioned in Tripura 
(Agartala) under the SITP scheme in August 2011. 
 

10 
 
The Government accepts all the recommendations of the 
Committee under Para 3.25. The details on the constitution of 
the expert group for popularization of  TUFs & SITP in the 
North East region will be submitted by January, 2012 
following inter Ministerial consultation." 
7. The Committee note that the Government is strengthening 
Guwahati Powerloom  Service Centre to develop a skilled 
workforce in the North Eastern region for textile sector. The 
Committee, however, feel that strengthening one centre alone 
would not serve the purpose of widening the skill base. The 
Committee are of the considered view  that textile centres need 
to be opened through out the North Eastern region preferably in 
rural areas where most of the weavers are concentrated. These 
textile centres should strive to train both young and 
unemployed youth on the powerlooms/handlooms and educate 
the whole community about the benefits of TUFS and other 
schemes. The Committee further reiterate that the 
cooperatives/ self help groups be convinced about the benefits 
of the TUFS scheme and motivated to set up modernized textile 
units in the Region and avail the benefits of the TUF scheme.  As 
regards an Expert Group to be constituted by the Government 
for popularization of TUFS and SITP in the North Eastern 
Region, the Committee would like to be apprised of the details 
of the Expert Group and su ggestions made for popularization of 
TUFS and SITP by it. 

11 
 
(Recommendation at Para No.3.26) 
 
8. Observing lack of infrastructure in the North Eastern region 
including obsolete technology, weak skill base, absence of product 
diversification & market developm ent and poor institutional frame -
work, the Committee had desired formation of self help groups in 
North Eastern Region to help weavers to come together and derive 
benefits from various Centrally Sponsored Schemes so that the 
manpower in handloom and handic rafts sub -sectors be 
strengthened at the earliest to make the schemes successful in 
North Eastern Region. Taking note of the fact that only 594, 185 
and 164 weavers got training in three Weavers Service Centre at 
Guwahati, Agartala and Imphal during the la st five years, the 
Committee felt that small training centers in rural/remote areas be 
set up in Private Public Partnership mode for unemployed villagers 
who hesitated to move to the cities to provide the prospects of 
training and employment in their villages only. The Committee were 
of the view that proper training be imparted to women members of 
the weavers' family for upgrading their skills in preparatory 
processes.   
9. In the action taken reply, furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 
"As per the latest Census (2009 -10) in North East, 90% of the 
handloom worker households are weaver households.  In 
contrast to the national trend, the North Eastern States 

12 
 
recorded an increase in the number of weavers’ households 
from 14.6 lakh weavers’ households (in 1995) to 15.1 lakh 
weavers’ households (Census 2009 -10).  A large majority of 
looms in the North Eastern States are engaged in domestic 
production (62%) and a relatively less proportion is into mixed 
production (34%).  This is primarily because handloom 
weaving is part of the culture across all social groups but rural 
households have a good part of domestic fabric requirements 
produced within the house.  However, 52% households 
produce less than one meter of fabric per weaver pe r day.  As 
far as Handloom Sector is concerned, the n umber of Clusters 
& Group Approach Projects sanctioned and funds released 
under IHDS in North Eastern Region are given next: 
 
 (Rs.in lakh) 
 Period (2007-08 to 2010-11) Period (2008-09 to 2010-11) 
 No. of 
Clusters 
sanction
ed 
Amount  
Released 
Total 
Beneficiaries 
Covered  
No. of 
Groups 
Sanction
ed 
Amount  
Released 
Total 
Beneficiaries 
Covered  
 Total: 144 3854.73 67934 293 2275.05 10565 
 
Emphasis is given on formation of Self Help Groups under the 
Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme. Programmes/ 
Schemes for 12 th Five Year Plan are also being formulated 
keeping in view of the special emphasis  to form  Self Help 
Groups (SHGs).  The Stat e Governments have been addressed 

13 
 
at various platforms that more and more SHG’s of weavers be 
formed to enable them to avail the benefits of various schemes 
of both the State and Centre Governments.  
 
The Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme being 
implemented during the XI Plan has a Skill Development 
component, under which the weavers are being provided 
training in weaving, design development and 
dyeing/managerial skill.  The training in these areas not only 
improves quality of the handloom products but  also enhances 
the earnings of weavers.     For the 12 th Plan period, it has 
been recommended that the domestic handloom should be 
encouraged to convert to commercial weaving as envisaged 
under the proposed Minimum Economic Size (MES) Scheme.  
For this, th e necessary modification of looms and accessories 
like dobby and jacquard will be provided. However, suitable 
financial assistance is available not only under the existing 
IHDS Scheme but also as proposed under the new MES 
Scheme for all types of loom acce ssories. These Schemes also 
provide for financial assistance for skill upgradation of 
weavers in weaving, dyeing and managerial aspects.  The 
benefits of IHDS Scheme are on a cost -sharing basis of 90:10 
ratio i.e. (GOI share: Beneficiary) for NER weavers. 
 
Promotion of weaving and imparting training to weavers is 
done through Weavers Service Centers (WSC) and 5 Indian 

14 
 
Institute of Handloom Technology (IIHT) which are functioning 
in different parts of the country. In addition, WSCs are also 
conducting design  cum dyeing workshop to disseminate the 
technological development in the field of weaving, designing, 
dying etc. and to make aware the weavers about the handloom 
schemes.   
 
To provide Marketing support to handloom weavers and their 
agencies, Government is implementing Marketing & Export 
Promotion Scheme, which provides marketing opportunities 
and infrastructure support through design development, and 
marketing linkages to ass ist sale of the Handloom products 
both in domestic and international market.  To assist 
Apex/Primary handloom cooperative societies & Corporations 
in developing the export -worthy products, financial assistance 
is provided for engaging professionally qualif ied designers for 
design development, engaging professional   marketing 
Consultant etc. Publicity and brand development through 
Handloom Mark and other measures are also being 
undertaken regularly.  Marketing Incentive @ 10% of the 
average sales turnover o f the last three years is also provided 
to offset the cost of handloom products and compete in the 
domestic and international market.    
 
Skill up gradation and training is provided under Integrated 
Handlooms Development Scheme which provides need based 

15 
 
inputs to develop “Clusters” of 300-500 Handloom or “Groups” 
of 10 -100 weavers for making them self -sustainable. This is 
done  by providing them financial assistance for margin 
money, working capital, new looms and accessories, skill-
upgradation training in weaving, dyeing and processing, 
designing, marketing opportunities and for providing 
assistance for construction of work shed, common facility 
centers etc.  
 
As regards the Committee’s recommendation that the 
manpower in handloom and handicrafts sub -sectors be 
strengthened at the earliest, it is stated that under the 
Integrated Handloom Development Scheme, assistance is 
provided for restructuring/strengthening of handloom 
organization in the form of seed money." 
 
10. The Committee observe  that as per the latest Census 
2009-10- 'a large majority of looms in the North -Eastern States 
are engaged in domestic production and most of them are in 
rural areas. The Committee are of the view that training to 
weavers not only improves the quality of t heir products but 
also increases their earning opportunities. The Committee are 
of the view that  a handful of weavers service centres in big 
cities and one institute of Handloom Technology in Guwahati 
with few seats reserved for the people for North Easte rn Region 
will not help skill development of weavers of the entire region 

16 
 
adequately. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that small training centres in rural/ remote 
areas be set up in Public Private Partnership mode for the 
weavers who are either producing only domestically or are not 
keen to go to big cities to get training. The Committee further 
reiterate that women weavers should also be trained, 
preferably, in preparatory processes. The Committee may also 
be apprised of the details of the proposed MES scheme. 
  B.   Handlooms 
 
(Recommendation at Para No.3.33) 
 
11. The Committee while observing that lack of vigorous 
marketing has led to the downfall of handloom products 
recommended that market orientation must be developed and quick 
response to the changing requirements of the market be made and 
that a handloom research centre be set up at the national level to 
undertake research in demand patterns, professional designs, 
weaving technology, raw materials, product diversificat ion and 
training facilities for implementing new technologies etc.. The 
Committee urged the Government to play a pivotal role in reviving 
and sustaining handlooms by subsidizing handloom products as 
genuine handloom products are highly priced and only have a niche 
market. The Committee strongly felt that Panchayati Raj 
Institutions can play an active and fruitful role in reviving and 

17 
 
sustaining handloom units by educating and guiding the 
entrepreneurs and weavers in their area about the facilities 
provided by the Government to run their units. The Committee 
further felt that these Panchayati Raj Institutions can help in 
cluster development in rural areas by conceptualizing viable 
projects using local resources of raw materials and skills and could 
stand surety to the clusters for obtaining finances. The Committee 
also recommended that suitable incentives be given to the weavers 
to produce popular handloom products in large quantities and a 
handloom brand may be evolved  to target the middle class and  
wider p ublicity be given to such products/brand as part of 
marketing strategy.   The Committee further desired that reviving 
old and extinct designs with professional help may be undertaken 
under Integrated Handloom Development Scheme and a National 
Museum of cos tumes, old and modern of different regions of the 
country be set up.   
12. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 
"The Government of India had introduced Integrated 
Handlooms Development Scheme (IH DS) in the year 2007 -08 
for implementation in the XI Plan period.   The scheme aims to 
focus on formation of weavers group as a visible entity, 
develop the Handlooms Weavers Groups to become self -
sustainable, inclusive approach to cover weavers both within 
and outside the Cooperative fold, skill up -gradation of 

18 
 
handlooms weavers/workers to produce diversified products 
with improved quality to meet the market requirements, 
provide suitable workplace to weavers to enable them to 
produce quality products with i mproved productivity etc.  The 
Cluster Development projects are under implementation and 
their success can be seen on completion of the projects.  
Skill up-gradation is one of the components of IHDS to equip 
the weavers with the latest technique of weaving  and create 
awareness on the knowhow of designing and dyeing.  
        Under the component of Design development and product 
diversification of IHDS, professional qualified Designers from 
NIFT/NID or any other Institute of repute have been engaged 
in the clusters for product development/diversification with 
design inp uts, training of local designers, documentation of 
designs/products and also for market linkages.  
The  National Handicrafts and Handlooms Museum (NHHM) 
popularly known as Crafts Museum is located at Pragati 
Maidan, New Delhi, under the administrative cont rol of 
Development Commissioner for Handlooms, Ministry of 
Textiles, plays a vital role in Collection, conservation and 
preservation of crafts specimen, revival, reproduction and 
development of Art and Craft.  
In order to provide a marketing  platform for  the 
weavers/handloom  organizations, the  Government of India  

19 
 
provide  grants in aid to the State Governments/ State 
Handloom Organisations to  organise marketing events at 
various levels,  i.e. District Level Events, Special Handloom 
Expos, National Han dloom Expos( all India level), Craft melas 
etc.  The weavers from all States of the country are given 
opportunity to participate and sell their products in Dilli Haat 
and various craft melas.   The number of marketing events 
have been increased every year to provide more opportunities 
to handloom weavers and their cooperative societies to sell 
their products directly to the consumers.  These events also 
provide the opportunity to understand weaver, the market 
demand in terms of designs, color trends etc.  
 
The number of marketing events organised during the last four 
years and sales is tabulated below: 
 
Year No. of marketing 
events organized 
Sales 
generated 
(Rs. In crore) 
2007-08 313 Rs.146 crore 
2008-09 399 Rs.220 crore 
2009-10 561 Rs.340 crore 
2010-11 680 Rs.410 crore 
 
During the current year 2011 -12, 665 marketing events have 
been approved till 14th October, 2011. 

20 
 
In order to popularize and establish handloom products as a 
brand, the Handloom Mark Scheme was launched by                    
Dr. Manmohan  Singh Hon'ble Prime Minister of India on 
28.06.2006.  The Handloom Mark Scheme provides a collective 
identity to the Handloom Products and is used not only for 
popularizing the hand woven products but also serve as a 
guarantee for the buyer that the produ ct being purchased is 
genuinely hand woven.   
The Scheme is operational throughout the country. Individual 
weavers, Weavers Co -operative societies, Master weavers, 
Retailers,  Exporters, Self Help Groups, Joint Liability Groups, 
Consortiums,  Handloom Weavers Groups, Producer 
Companies identified under Integrated Handloom Development 
Scheme. etc., are entitled to participate in the scheme.   As on 
August 2011, 8338 stakeholders have been registered under 
the scheme and 203.68 lakh handloom marks labels have 
been sold (cumulative) and 804 retail outlets  are selling 
handloom mark labelled goods. " 
  
13. The Committee find that the local panchayats have not 
been involved in Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme 
(IHDS) for Handloom Weaver Groups. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation th at Panchayati Raj 
Institutions should be invariably involved to play an active and 
fruitful role in reviving and sustaining handloom units. The 
Committee are of the considered view that panchayats must be 

21 
 
involved in cluster development and educating the w eavers 
regarding Government sponsored schemes and facilities 
provided to them. While observing that marketing platform to 
the weavers is being provided by organizing District level 
events, Special Handloom expos, National Handloom Expos, 
Craft melas etc. for artisans/ weavers, the Committee find that 
no efforts are being made to develop market orientation for 
production. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that handloom 
research centre with branches all over India may be opened to 
study market trends and ad vise the weavers to modify their 
production vis-à-vis change in demands of handloom products 
in domestic and international market.  The Committee 
recommend that a handloom brand targeting middle, lower 
middle class may be evolved and subsidized handloom products 
may be sold under that brand to tap the huge market potential 
in the said segment. 
  C.  Wool and Woollens 
 
(Recommendation at Para No.3.49) 
 
14. The Committee while observing the under achievement of 
physical targets of various developmental schemes in woollen sector 
during 2010 -11 recommended that sheep breeders be covered 
under the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) and that serious 
illnesses which require specialized treatment may be covered under 

22 
 
the Sheep Breeders Insurance Scheme, which at present only 
covers death and total and partial disability and desired that the 
Panchayats be involved in full measure in implementation of these 
social security schemes to make the scheme popular and 
maximizing its reach to the people.   
15. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 
"The Central Wool Development Board (CWDB) achieved 
Physical targets  under Integrated Wool Improvement and 
Development Programme (IWIDP) as fixed under its scheme. 
The CWDB was to cover total 26 lakh sheep under Sheep & 
Wool Improvement Scheme (SWIS) during 11 th plan as per 
approved EFC note and against this target, the Bo ard covered 
32 lakh sheep as tabulated under:   
SN Year Target to benefit 
sheep as set in 
EFC Note 
Sheep benefited during 
11th Plan 
(Achievements) 
1 2007-08 4.5 lakh sheep 6.75 lakh sheep 
2 2008-09 13.5 lakh sheep 9.25 lakh sheep 
3 2009-10 8 lakh sheep 10.5  lakh sheep 
4 2010-11  5.5 lakh sheep 
5 2011-12  - 
 Total 26 lakh sheep 32 lakh sheep 

23 
 
 Scheme-wise Physical targets achieved during the 11 th Five 
Year Plan (upto Sept.,2011) against the targets set in 
EFC/SFC Note of Board’s schemes are as under:  
SN. Name of 
scheme 
Total targets 
as per  
EFC/SFC for 
11th Plan 
Actual 
achievement 
upto Sept.,2011 
Shortfall if 
any 
1 Sheep & 
Wool 
Improveme
nt Scheme  
(SWIS) 
26 lakh sheep 32 lakh sheep -- 
2 Angora 
Wool 
Developmen
t Scheme 
400 families 400 families -- 
3 Pashmina 
Wool 
Developmen
t Scheme 
2400 families 2400 families 
 
-- 
4 Human 
Resource 
Developmen
t & 
Promotional 
Activities 
1000 trainees 1013 trainees -- 
5 Quality 
Processing 
of Wool 
scheme ( 
Common 
Facility 
centre for 
Pre-loom 
14 CFC under 
Pre-loom & 1  
under  Post-
loom 
processing 
facilities. 
Established 14 
CFCs under Pre-
loom processing. 
1 CFC 
under post 
loom 
scheme 
could not 
be 
establishe

24 
 
and Post-
loom 
processing 
facilities) 
d. 
6 Sheep 
Breeders 
Insurance 
under 
Social 
Security 
Scheme 
1,35,000 
shepherds 
88,094 
shepherds 
 
Targets 
could not 
be 
achieved 
fully. 
7 Sheep 
Insurance 
Scheme  
under 
Social 
Security 
Scheme 
14.55 lakh 
sheep 
4,85,808* sheep 
*After decentralization of Sheep Insurance Scheme in Oct. 2009,  
actual region wise figures have not been provided by OIC. 
 
From above, it is clear that except under Insurance Schemes, 
the Board achieved almost all the targets. Under the scheme of 
Quality Processing of Wool Scheme, the Board established all 
14 Common Facility  Centres under Pre -loom processing 
activity but could not establish one Finishing Centre under 
post-loom processing facility as no suitable and viable project 
proposal was received even after repeated advertisements in 
newspapers.  

25 
 
Sheep Breeders Insurance  Scheme  &  Sheep Insurance 
Scheme were  new schemes and were launched  first time 
during 11th five year plan and require  very active participation 
from mostly  poor and illiterate sheep breeders who is on 
migration most of the time along with their sheep  flock. The 
Sheep Breeder Insurance Scheme is being implemented by Life 
Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) and Sheep Insurance 
Scheme by Oriental Insurance Corporation of India (OIC) and 
both these Schemes were to be implemented in all wool 
producing sta tes in India i.e. J&K, HP, Uttarakhand, 
Rajasthan, Haryana, Gujarat, Maharashtra. A.P.  &  
Karnataka etc. 
During the financial year 2008 -09, the No. of Sheep Breeder 
Insurance and Sheep Insurance Scheme got some momentum 
as large number of SWIS projects we re sanctioned to different 
NGOs / Implementing Agencies and as these NGOs were 
working at the field level with sheep breeders for 
implementation of health care, breed improvement and other 
components of the SWIS,  are  at the same time also helping 
them in  filling the insurance form, collecting these forms and 
submitting the same to Insurance Agencies.   
But it was found at implementation stage that whole process 
of insurance including settling claim from  Insurance Agencies 
was a cumbersome and difficult  process  to be fulfilled by 

26 
 
illiterate or semi literate sheep breeders. Some of these 
difficulties faced by sheep breeder are as under. 
a) Immediate intimation of death of the insured sheep by the 
sheep Breeder/Nodal Agency and within 24 hours to 
insurance company. 
b) Ear Tag applied to the animals should be surrendered or 
otherwise claim will be rejected. 
c) In cases where tags are lost and intimation has already been 
given to the insurance company but the re -tagging has not 
been carried out, the claim will be con sidered by Insurance 
agency on merits. 
d) Submission of Panchnama/ FIR/ Postmortem Report, in case 
of Accidents. 
e) When the claim per instance exceeds five animals, Photograph 
of carcasses with ear tag intact along with the beneficiary shall 
be submitted. 
 
Sheep Insurance was a new activity to OIC, Jodhpur and it 
was not fully equipped to take up this scheme at national level 
due to sshortage of man power.   
  Initially the Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. (OIC) implemented the 
scheme all over India from Jodhpur regional office only. All 
papers related to Insurance and for death claim were reaching 
OIC Jodhpur office which was very small office with very 
limited staff and lead to abnormal delay in Claim settlement. It 

27 
 
was also very difficult for NGO/ Implementing Agencies from 
far-flung area of the country to come to OIC Jodhpur office 
and settle the issue and when this difficulty was pointed out 
by CWDB to OIC, after much persuasion the scheme was 
decentralized by OIC in October 2009.  After decentralization, 
Regional offices of OIC (in different states) took their own time 
in understanding the scheme and processing the death claims. 
It took also some time in transferring all the records related to 
claim from Jodhpur office to different Regional offices and 
initially there was total confusion whether a claim will be 
settled by Jodhpur office or Regional office of the state 
concerned.  But till then lot of time was already passed and 
many sheep Breeders already discontinued the insurance due 
to abnormal delay in processing of death claim by OIC.  
Physical targets and achievements during 11 th Plan of the 
Central Wool Development Board under different schemes are 
given below:  
1 
Name of 
scheme 
Unit 11th 
Plan 
targets 
2007-
08 
(Achi
evem
ent) 
2008-
09 
(Achi
evem
ent) 
2009-
10 
(Achie
vemen
t 
2010-
11 
(Achi
evem
ent 
2011-
12 
(Achiev
ement 
upto 
Sept.,2
011) 
Total 
(Achieve
ments- 
upto 
Sept.,20
11) 
1 Angora Wool 
Development 
Scheme 
No. of  
families 
400 40 140 20 120 80 400 
2 Human 
Resource 
Development 
& 
Promotional 
No. of 
trainees 
1000 206 295 197 225 90 
 
1013 

28 
 
Activities 
3 Quality 
Processing of 
Wool scheme 
No. of  
CFC 
14 
(Pre-
loom) 
& 1 
(Post 
loom) 
6 2 Nil 4 2 14 (Pre-
loom 
facility) 
 
From above table it is clear that during 2009 -10, progress was 
rather slow under Angora Wool Development Scheme and 
Quality Processing of Wool scheme as in spite of repeated 
advertisements Board could not get viable and suitable project 
proposal under CFC and Angora Wool Development Scheme 
but these shortfalls have been made up in next FY and in all 
the three  components, targets as set for 11 th Plan were 
achieved fully. 
Just after launching the schemes of 11th Plan and after getting 
response from stake holders, it was found that it will be very 
difficult to achieve targets fully under (i) Quality Processing of  
Wool Scheme and (ii) Social security Scheme because there 
was poor response to both these scheme even after repeated 
advertisement in news papers.  
The Board made several marketing efforts for setting up CFC 
under Post loom activity of Quality Processing of Wool scheme. 
Scheme was advertised repeatedly in national newspapers. 
CWDB also held meeting with wool Industrialist in potential 
wool industry area like Bikaner, Bhadohi, Panipat, Amritsar , 
Ludhiana etc. but  very few suitable and viable  projects 
proposals were received by CWDB . 
Similarly in the case of Social Security Scheme, it was found 
at implementation stage that settling claim from Insurance 
agencies is a cumbersome process and very difficult to be 
complied by illiterate or semi literate sheep breeders who is on 

29 
 
the migration most of the time along with his sheep flock and 
lost interest in the scheme when claim were not settled by 
Insurance agencies timely and discontinued the insurance. 
  From the project proposals received from different State 
Governments it was found that there are large number of 
project proposals under Integrated Wool Improvement and 
Development Programme ( IWIDP) as these scheme were 
benefitting Sheep Breeders directly  but all these  proposals 
could not be sanctioned within the allocated outlay for IWIDP. 
On the other side there were savings under Quality Processing 
of Wool Scheme and  Social security Scheme because there 
were very few suitable and viable project propos als. So after 
looking into demands of different state Government agencies, 
advantages of the schemes to sheep breeders and to avoid over 
all saving in fund allocated  to CWDB, it was decided to utilize 
the savings of  Quality Processing of Wool Scheme and  Social 
security Scheme under IWIDP after approval of Ministry of 
Textiles. 
  Thus the un -utilized savings of schemes where there was no 
viable and suitable project proposal, were utilized under 
components/ scheme where there was demands from State 
Governments. 
Out of total budget allocation of Rs. 67.16 Crore for the 11 th 
Five Year Plan, the Board has already utilized Rs. 58.24 Crore 
and expected to utilize remaining grant during current 
financial year 2011-12, as under :  
SN Annual 
Plan  
11th Plan 
allocation  
Fund 
Utilization  
1 2007-08  Rs. 13.35 
Crore 

30 
 
2 2008-09 Rs. 67.16 Crore  Rs. 14.80 
Crore 
3 2009-10 Rs. 10.94 
Crore 
4 2010-11 Rs. 15.03 
Crore 
5 2011-12  
(Proposed)  
Rs.4.12 
Crores (till 
Sept. 2011)  
 Total  Rs. 67.16 Crore Rs. 58.24 
Crore (till 
Sept. 2011) 
 
  Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) is being implemented 
by Ministry of Labour and Employment. The CWDB is 
examining the implementation of the scheme to cover sheep 
breeders." 
 
16. The Committee find that the targets under (i ) Quality 
Processing of Wool Scheme and (ii) Social security Scheme were 
not achieved.  The Committee desire that the Government take 
urgent steps to provide insurance cover to poor sheep breeders 
and their flock. The Committee are of the view that the cri tical 
illnesses must be covered under the new scheme and claims 
settled in time. The Committee also reiterate that the local 
panchayats be involved in full measure for implementation of 
these social security schemes, viz. providing group insurance 

31 
 
to the s heep breeders, verifying the identity of sheep 
breeders/no. of sheep and for expediting settlement of claims. 
The Committee also expect that the government would 
reconsider/revise the conditions for setting up of Finishing 
centre under post loom processing  facility and invite fresh 
proposals thereafter. 
 
  D.   Research & Development 
 
(Recommendation at Para No.3.60) 
 
17. The Committee observed that in the absence of advanced 
technology and R&D, domestic textile industry faces tough 
competition from the competitive countries and  desired that the 
Government should come out with an R&D policy for the entire 
textile sector to counter the challenges posed by technological 
developments in competing countries and recommend that 
adequate financial assistance be  provided to the research 
bodies/Associations undertaking research in textile sector and also 
to monitor the expenditure and progress of work of R&D 
institutions. 
18. In the action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated as follows: 
"Research & Development (R&D) R&D ac tivities which, inter 
alia,  cover studies, need based survey, taking into account 

32 
 
the strength and weakness of the Handloom Sector and take 
steps to ensure that the Sector benefits from the more open 
trading. During the 12 th Plan, Rs.7.00 crore (@ 1.40 crore per 
year for 5 years) has been proposed for Research and 
Development. 
 The Ministry of Textiles has a comprehensive R&D Scheme for 
the entire Textile Sector. The scheme provides for support to 
the Textile Re search Associations (TRAs) and textiles related 
R&D Projects taken up by Govt. Approved Research Centres 
such IITs/Govt. Aided Institutions/Recognised Engineering 
colleges / Institutions approved by DST / DSIR etc.  Apart 
from this Comprehensive Scheme, in centives are available for 
R&D in Technical Textiles under the TMTT (Technology 
Mission on Technical Textiles).   
There are 8 Textile Research Association catering to various 
needs of the textile industry viz south India Textile Research 
Association (SITRA ), Bombay Textile Research Association 
(BTRA), Northern India Textile Research Association (NITRA), 
Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research Association (SASMIRA), 
Manmade Textile Research Association (MANTRA), Indian Jute 
Industries Research Association (IJI RA), Ahmedabad Textiles 
Industries Research Association (ATIRA) and Wool Research 
Textile industries (WRA).  In the 11 th Five Year Plan, Rs. 34 
crores was available under the R&D efforts in the sector 
during the 12th Five year Plan." 

33 
 
19. The Committee note that during the 12 th plan, Rs 7 crore 
(i.e.@Rs 1.40 crore p.a.) has been proposed for Research and 
Development. The Committee find that against a total 
budgetary allocations of Rs. 5000 crore of Ministry of Textile 
for the year 2011-12, only Rs 1.40 crore, which is not even one 
percent, has been allocated for R&D and is far from 
satisfactory. Keeping in view the fact that India lags far behind 
other leading textile exporting countries as far as innovative 
and technology intensive products are concerned.  W hile 
reiterating their earlier recommendation that the Government 
should come out with a comprehensive R&D policy, the 
Committee also recommend that a policy be framed for 
increasing the country's share of advanced technology -based 
products and high value -added items in global market and to 
provide a special focus on eco -friendly textiles that would help 
in reducing carbon footprint. The Committee further desire the 
Government to ensure monitoring of the expenditure incurred 
annually and progress made by th e TRAs and other R&D 
projects & Research centres receiving grants from the 
Government. 
 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.13)     
 The Committee note that against the budget allocation of Rs.4725 crore 
(Rs.1215 crore for VSE section and Rs.3510 crore for I&M), an amount of 
Rs.976.17 crore was  utilized for various schemes under VSE Section, and 
Rs.3265.55 core for I&M sector.  Althoug h, the Government have taken steps for 
even spread of expenditure over the four quarters of the financial year, the 
Committee are unhappy to note that despite weekly reviews, Rs.483.28 crore 
remained unspent for various schemes and a major portion of the u nutilized 
amount of Rs.310.18 crore i.e. 65.6 per cent of the budget outlays earmarked for 
the North Eastern States could not be utilized during the year 2010 -11.  The 
reasons forwarded by the Ministry such as non -receipt of viable proposals from 
North Eas tern States under handlooms and jute, non -finalization of insurance 
agency, delayed receipt of bills, no demand under TUFS, delay in acquisition of 
land and obtaining statutory clearances, etc are not acceptable to the Committee.  
They are interested in fr uctification of schemes and programmes and in tangible 
results.  The Committee deplore that the Ministry has failed to achieve the desired 
targets and utilization of funds during the last 4 years of the 11 th plan period.  The 
Committee feel that as 10% of the total allocation of funds to the Ministry is to be 
expended on development activities in North Eastern States, the onus to create and 
make available the infrastructure to set up and develop supporting infrastructure of 
all their schemes/projects lies w ith them.  The Committee find that there is lack of 
awareness regarding the TUFS and SITP Schemes in North Easter Region and 

35 
 
therefore, recommend that more vigorous efforts be made to make the people of 
North East aware of the benefits of the Schemes.  The  Committee also recommend 
the Government to take all and appropriate measures, regardless of the 
impediments, to give an impetus to the development of Textile Sector in the North 
Eastern region and ensure that the budgetary allocations for the year 2011 -12 are 
fully utilized.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan of the 
Government in this regard. 
                  Reply of the Government   
A. Initiatives taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry of Textiles for creating  
 Awareness about TUFS, SITP and other Schemes in the North East. 
 
 The Ministry of Textiles, through the office of the Textile Commissioner in 
association with PSC (IJIRA), Guwahati and concerned State Govt. authorities in 
NE State has been making vigorous efforts to p opularize the different schemes 
under TUFS and other schemes like MGWS & SITP by organizing Seminar/ 
Workshop/ Awareness -cum-Facilitation Campaign/ Buyer -Seller Meet/ ECC 
meeting in different places in the North Eastern Region since long period. The 
efforts made in this regard during the last 5 years is summarized in the following 
table: 
  
 
Details of Seminars/Workshops conducted in the North East for creating 
awareness about various textile sector schemes. 
 

36 
 
 
Besides the above, PSC (IJIRA), Guwahati  conducted 8 Seminar / Workshop during the F.Y.2010 -
11 
 
Year No. of 
Seminars/W
orkshops 
Venue Date No. of 
participants 
2006-07 2 Guwahati (Assam) 
Dimapur (Nagaland) 
18.12.2006 
12.02.2007 
80 
170 
2007-08 2 Agartala (Tripura) 
Imphal (Manipur) 
20.04.2007 
07.01.2008 
55 
60 
2008-09 1 Aizwal (Mizoram) 29.05.2008 94 
2009-10 1 Guwahati (Assam) 12.06.2009 160 
2010-11 6 Guwahati (Assam) 
 
Guwahati (Assam) 
Imphal (Manipur) 
Shillong (Meghalaya) 
Aizwal (Mizoram) 
Guwahati ( Assam) 
 
 
13.05.2010 
& 14.05.2010 
23.06.2010 
21.07.2010 
18.11.2010 
 
28.01.2011 
25.02.2011 
to 27.02.2011 
 
29 
 
63 
250 
160 
 
180 
 
50 
2011-12 4 Imphal, Manipur 
Shiloong 
(Meghalaya) 
Guwahati (Assam) 
Imphal (Manipur) 
26.04.2011 
25.05.2011 
&26.05.2011 
29.06.2011 
20.07.2011 
25 
160 
 
30 
60 
 
     
In addition, PSC (IJIRA), Guwahati conducted two Export Consultancy Committee (ECC) meetings 
during the Financial Year 2011-2011 on 25.04.11 and 20.09.11 at Imphal (Manipur) and Shillong 
(Meghalaya) respectively. 
     

37 
 
B. Initiatives under Handlooms 
The North Eastern Region is predominantly a handloom sector since ancient 
times. As far as Handloom sector  is concerned, during the year 2010 -11 an 
amount of Rs.382.05 crore was allocated in RE in respect of General States, out of 
which, expenditure of Rs.378.19 crore was incurred i.e. 98.99%.  An amount of 
Rs.106.00 crore was also allocated under RE in respect of North Eastern States, out 
of which, expenditure of only Rs.47.32 crore could be  incurred i.e. 44.64% of the 
total allocation because viable proposals were not received from the North Eastern 
States. 
In order to extend the benefits available in the various handloom schemes and 
to encourage handlooms in the Nort h Eastern States, the Government of India has 
already made special provision in the handloom schemes, which not only provide 
better basic input support, infrastructural support but also Marketing support for 
the products of North Eastern States. The major steps taken/proposed to be taken 
by the Government for the development of handloom sector in the North East are 
the following: 
i. Establishment of a Mega Handloom Cluster  at Sivasagar in Assam State 
under Public Private Partnership mode with a project outlay of Rs.70.00 
crore for the overall development of the adopted cluster to cover about 
25000 looms over a period of 5 years based on the diagnostic study by the 
cluster Management Technical Agency under the Comprehensive 
Handloom Cluster Development Schemes. 
 
ii. Establishment of 2 Handloom Clusters  with coverage of about 5000 
looms at Bijoynagar in Assam and Imphal in Manipur with a project outlay 
of Rs.2.00 crore each for the overall development of the adopted cluster 

38 
 
over a period of 4 years based on the diagno stic study by the Clusters 
Implementing Agency. 
iii. Under the Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme, the Government 
of India has sanctioned 144 handlooms cluster in the North Eastern region 
covering 67394 beneficiaries and an amount of Rs.3854.73 lakh has be en 
released since 2007 -08 till 2010 -11.Also, special dispensation has been 
given under the Basic Input component in the ratio of 90% by GOI, 5% by 
State Government and 5% by the Beneficiary agency as against the ratio of 
70% by GOI 20% by State and 10% by the beneficiary/agency. 
iv. Similarly, 293 Group approach projects  have been sanctioned covering 
10565 beneficiaries over a period of 2008 -09 till 2010 -11 and amount of 
Rs.2275.00 lakh has been released. 
v. Under the Marketing and Export Promotion Scheme , every e ffort is 
being made to popularize the handloom products from North Eastern 
region. 2 Urban Haats (i) Imphal in Manipur and (ii) Agartala in Tripura 
have been sanctioned, which will provide exclusive platform for the 
products of North Eastern region. 
vi. Under the Mill Gate Price Scheme actual reimbursement of the freight for 
transportation of yarn from the factory to the destined place in North 
Eastern region is being made by the National Handloom Development 
Corporation. The freight prescribed for reimbursemen t to N.E State is as 
under: 
 
Area For other 
than Silk & 
Jute Yarn 
Silk 
Yarn 
Jute Yarn Depot 
operating 
charge 
Service 
Charge to 
NHDC 

39 
 
For 
NER 
3.0% 1.5% 8.5% 2.5% 0.75% 
 
vii. The Government of India under the Handloom Weavers Comprehensive 
Welfare Scheme  has been providing Health Insurance coverage through 
ICICI Lombard and Life Insurance cover through Life Insurance 
Corporation of India. During the Policy year 2010 -11 (i.e. December, 2010 
to November, 2011) in case of Health Insurance Schemes (HIS) and f or 
2011-12 (i.e. April, 2011 to March, 2012) in case of Mahatama Gandhi 
Bunkar Bima Yojana  (MGBBY), it is expected to enroll 7.23 lakh 
weavers in NER (including renewal) under Handloom Weavers 
Comprehensive Welfare Scheme (HWCWS) (both under HIS & MGBBY). 
Upto September, 2011, Rs.13.19 crore has been released for enrollment in 
NER under HWCWS. It is expected that Rs.33.21 crore will be released by 
November, 2011 to enroll the targeted  number of weavers in North 
Eastern Region (NER).The implementing Agencie s i.e. ICICI in case of 
HIS and LIC in case of MGBBY have been directed to make efforts to 
organize awareness camps and generate adequate publicity in the NER 
Region to achieve the physical target of enrolments.  
viii. Weavers’ Service Centre: Three Weavers' Service Centres are functioning 
in the North -East Region, one each at Guwahati, Agartala and Imphal.  
These centers have been providing technical support services to the 
handloom weavers for product development, quality upgradation, 
increasing productivity, r evival of languishing crafts through training 
programmes, exhibitions, workshops and specific Research & Development 
projects.  The Weavers' Service Centre at Guwahati has been upgraded as 

40 
 
Regional Design Centre for the entire North -Eastern region to impro ve the 
competitive needs of handloom products. 
ix. Indian Institute of Handloom Technology:  With a view to meeting long -
felt need of providing the necessary technical personnel for the development 
of the handloom industry, the Government of India started an Indian 
Institute of Handloom Technology at Guwahati in the year 1982.  The main 
objectives of the Institute is to provide technically qualified human resource, 
undertake experimental and research programmes in all aspects of the 
handloom industry, to lay down the highest possible technical standard of 
training programmes for technical personnel  to be employed in the 
handloom and powerloom sectors, to devise channels of service in order to 
build up the closest possible liaison between the Institute and handloom 
production units. 
x. National Handloom Development Corporation: The Corporation has been 
operating three offices in NE States at Guwahati, Imphal and Agartala.  The 
Corporation has given the following facilities to buyer handloom agencies of 
North Eastern States:- 
(a) Full reimbursement of the freight under Mill Gate Price Scheme. 
(b) The depots for s upply of yarn, recommended by the State 
Directorate of Handloom & Textiles of concerned States have been 
approved. 
(c) 34 spot dyers training programme has been organized in the last 
three years, Corporation also organizes Appropriate Technology 
Exhibitions to  disseminate the latest technology to the handloom 
weavers for their benefit. 
(d) North Eastern Handloom and Handicraft Development 
Corporation: NEHHDC is a national level organization which 

41 
 
takes care of the marketing needs of the handloom sector in North -
Eastern Region.  
 
C. Initiatives under Handicrafts  
 In so far as the handicrafts sector in NE is concerned the reasons for low 
utilization of funds are as under : 
 The developmental schemes of the handicrafts sector are grant -in-aid 
schemes, which are impleme nted through NGOs, Cooperatives, etc. 
Majority of Implementing Agencies are local NGOs with inadequate 
capacity and no exposure. Further, it being a highly decentralized sector, the 
NGOs often find it difficult to assess the ground level. 
 Problems of the a rtisans to come up with good, comprehensive and viable 
proposals. 
 Delay in settlement of accounts of earlier grants (Pendency of Utilization 
Certificate), etc. 
 
The steps taken for improvement in the implementation of schemes, include 
the following: 
 Inviting proposals through News Paper advertisement ensuring transparency, 
& greater awareness about the schemes. 
 A fortnightly review on implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthay 
Bima Yojana introduced at field, Regional Office and Headquarter levels. 
 Effective implementation will be ensured by undertaking periodic reviews. 
 The existing monitoring and review system will be strengthened. 
 Periodicity of monitoring and review be increased in a need based manner 
etc. 

42 
 
 For effective implementation of schemes, proposals for the ensuing financial 
year are being sought in time bound manner for scrutiny and consideration. 
 Workshops are being organized at Regional Level, alongwith field offices & 
NGOs, to create greater awareness. 
 All these measures will not only lead to the development of textiles sector in 
the North Eastern region but it is also expected that the budgetary allocations for 
the year 2011-12 may be fully utilized.   
 
 The Committee note that the Government had introduced TUFS with a view 
to modernize the textile industry.  The Government have also given special subsidy 
for new Hi-tech machinery developed indigenously.  The Committee also note that 
second hand machinery fulfilling certain specifications can, however, be imported 
under TUFS.  In view  of the fact that textile industry has always preferred used 
vintage machinery from other countries and also new cheap machines, the 
Committee feel that no subsidy be given to import of second hand machinery of 
the technological specifications similar to the one being manufactured in India and 
the duty concession be restricted only to domestic manufacturers competing with 
the country(ies) producing cheap and often sub -standard machines.  The 
Committee also desire the Government to ensure standard bench mark  regarding 
quality and standard of the new/vintage machines imported.  
(Reply of the Government) 
  Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) was launched in April 1999 
to facilitate technology upgradation of the textile industry to meet the challenges of 
the quota free globalised trade.  The scheme aims to provide access to timely and 
adequate capital at internationally comparable rates of interest to enable textile 
industry to upgrade its technology level.  The scheme has facilitated installation of 

43 
 
state of the art machinery by the textile industry.  It would not be wrong to say that 
TUFS has transformed ‘sunset industry’ into a ‘sunrise industry’.  The scheme was 
continued in modified form w.e.f. 01.04.2007 to 28.06.2010. The scheme has again 
been launched in restructured form for the period 28.04.2011 to 31.03.2012. 
As per Para 3.2 of the Government Resolution no. 6/5/2011 – TUFS dt. 
28.4.2011 on  restructured TUFS, generally only new machinery will be permitted, 
however, the following imported second han d machinery are also eligible under 
Restructured TUFS: 
Air jet, Projectile, Rapier and Waterjet shuttleless looms fitted with or without 
electronic jacquard / electronic dobby and with or without high speed direct beam 
warper with creel and/or sectional warping machine with auto stop and tension 
control of upto 10 years’ vintage and with a residual life of minimum 10 years and 
with the value cap of Rs. 8.00 lakh. 
 The technology of the machines under the Scheme are benchmarked .  The 
list of machines alongwith their specifications are covered in Annexes A to N of 
the GR stated above. Specifications for the new brand new shuttleless looms have 
been given in Circular No. 2 (2011 -2012 Series) dt. 29.7.2011 issued under the 
Scheme, which is reproduced below: 
Specifications for brand new Rapier Loom, Projectile Loom, Airjet looms and 
Waterjet Looms 
S. 
No 
Type of 
loom 
Specifications 
1. Rapier 
Loom 
Weft insertion rate not less than 650 mtrs . per minute with or 
without electronic dobby / electronic jacquard  

44 
 
2 Projectile 
Loom 
Weft insertion rate not less than 750 mtrs. per minute with or 
without electronic dobby / electronic jacquard  
3 Airjet 
Loom 
(i) Weft insertion rate not less than 1200 mtrs. per minute 
without electronic dobby / electronic jacquard 
(ii) Weft insertion rate not less than 900 mtrs. per minute with 
electronic dobby / electronic jacquard 
4 Waterjet 
loom 
(i) Weft insertion rate not less than 1000 mtrs. per minute 
without electronic dobby / electronic jacquard 
(ii) Weft insertion rate not less than 800 mtrs. per minute with 
electronic dobby / electronic jacquard 
 
 Imported second hand machinery stated in Para 3.2 of the GR stated above 
are eligible only upto  a specified value caps. The value caps are specified in 
Circular No. 1 (2011-2012 Series) dt. 1.6.2011 issued under the Scheme, which are 
reproduced below: 
 
 
S. No 
Description of 
the second hand 
imported 
machinery 
Specifications/ 
Model 
Upper ceiling on Benchmarked price  
for subsidy purposes Rs. Lakh 
EU 
Countries 
Non EU Countries 
1. Projectile looms 
irrespective of 
shedding 
P-7100, P-7150 
P-7200, P-7250 
8.00 _ 

45 
 
mechanism  
2. Airjet looms 
irrespective of 
shedding 
mechanism  
Irrespective of 
speed/width 
8.00 5.50 
3. Waterjet loom 
irrespective of 
shedding 
mechanism  
Width 190 cm. 
And above 
4.00 2.50 
Width less than 
190 cm. 
3.00 1.50 
4. Rapier loom Width 190 cm. 
and WIR more 
than 750 mpm 
8.00 4.50 
 
Width 190 cm 
and WIR more 
than 450 mpm 
but less than 750 
mpm 
6.00 3.50 
 
Width more than 
190 cm. 
8.00 4.50 
 Hence, only new machinery with benchmarked  technology are eligible 
under TUFS except those specified above with the specified technology and 
prescribed value cap. 

46 
 
Second hand machines were earlier allowed for the spinning sector also.  
Now under the Restructured TUFS the scheme has been rationalized and only 
specified second hand machines with value caps in weaving sector is eligible for 
benefits under TUFS.   Accor dingly as per Para 3.2 of the Government Resolution 
No. 6/5/2011 -TUFS dated 28.4.2011 on Restructured TUFS, generally only new 
machinery will be permitted, however the following imported second hand 
machinery are also eligible:  
Air jet, Projectile, Rapier  and Waterjet shuttleless looms fitted with or 
without electronic jacquard / electronic dobby and with or without high speed 
direct beam warper with creel and/or sectional warping machine with auto stop and 
tension control of upto 10 years’ vintage and wit h a residual life of minimum 10 
years and with the value cap of Rs. 8.00 lakh 
(Recommendation para No. 3.18)     
 
 The Committee observe that budgetary allocations of Rs.883.08 crore were 
made to Ministry of Textiles towards non -plan expenditure during 201 0-11.  This 
was enhanced to Rs.2043.85 crore at RE stage to meet the pending liabilities on 
increase in Minimum Support Price – cotton allocation and increase in 10% 
handloom rebate scheme besides the increase in loans to BIC and NJMC and 
payment of salary/wages.  The Committee are concerned to note that although they 
had in their 11 th report on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) of  Ministry of Textiles 
(15th Lok Sabha)  recommended that, in view of the need for sustainable growth of 
textile industry, funds shou ld not be released at the fag end of the year, yet, the 
balance amount of non -plan funds as revised during 2010 -11 was released only in 
March, 2011.  The Committee are dismayed to note the huge increase in allocation 

47 
 
of funds at the RE stage that too for c learing the statutory dues and payment of 
salary/wages.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that prudent measures be 
taken by the Government for realistic planning and timely release and utilization of 
funds.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the delay, if any, in 
payment of salary/wages to the employees of BIC due to delayed release of funds.  
(Reply of the Government) 
 The Salaries of the employees are sought through the RE -BE estimates well 
in time and released as soon as budgetary grants are received. Presently, salaries 
upto the month of September, 2011 have been paid.  Further, funds have been 
sought for payment of s alary for the next 6 months through the Second 
Supplementary in the Demands for Grants. 
 Whenever the market price of kapas falls below / touches the Minimum 
support Price (MSP), cotton Corporation of  India Ltd. (CCI) is mandated to 
undertake support pric e operation and purchases kapas rates were under pressure 
and ruled at MSP level.  Hence the Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) agency 
identified by the Government of  India had to undertake MSP operations to meet 
losses suffered on account of procurement o f kapas from the farmers during the 
2010-11. 
 Initially only an amount of Rs. 244 crores was budgeted during 2010 -11 
which was later on enhanced to Rs. 1217 crores at the R.E. stage to enable the CCI 
to meet losses suffered on the procurement of kapas from the farmers. 
(Recommendation para No. 3.25)     
 The Committee are surprised to note that not a single demand for TUFS has 
been received in North Eastern Region as of now and the Government have 

48 
 
abdicated their responsibility by merely stating that North Eastern region is not a 
textile activity region in- spite of the fact that about 21.75 lakh people are engaged 
in handloom sector as per Handloom census, 2009 -10.  The reply of the 
Government that there is no scope for incurring any expenditure under TUFS and 
SITP in the North Eastern Region is not acceptable as by Government's own 
admission about 21.75 lakhs people are engaged in the handloom sector.  In their 
considered view, the Committee feel that the Ministry has failed to promote their 
flagship scheme s in the North -Eastern Region.  While recommending that the 
Government constitute an expert group to advise them for popularization of TUFS 
and SITP in North Eastern Region,  the Committee also urge the Government to set 
up their own textile centres in the  North Eastern region, train unemployed people 
and educate them about the benefits of TUFS or alternatively cooperatives may be 
convinced/motivated to set up modernized textile units in the North Eastern 
Region.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Government in this regard. 
(Reply of the Government) 
 Government in consultation with State Government will constitute an Expert 
Group for popularization of TUFs and SITP in the North East region. 
Government of India will seek to further strengthen the Guwahati 
Powerloom Service Centre under the Integrated Skill development Scheme to 
develop a skilled workforce in the North Eastern region for textile Sector. 
During the current year, the following initiatives were taken in respect of TUFS 
and SITP: 
 A workshop was held in Shillong under the aegis of DC(Handicrafts) on 
promotion of Textiles Industry in North East for promotion of TUFS and 
Skill Development initiatives in July 2011. 

49 
 
 An Integrated Textiles park has been sanctioned in Tripura (Agartala) under 
the SITP scheme in August 2011. 
 
The Government accepts all the recommendations of the committee under Para 
3.25. The details on the constitution of the expert group for popularization of TUFs 
& SITP i n the North East region will be submitted by January, 2012 following 
inter Ministerial consultation. 
(Recommendation para No. 3.29)     
 The Committee note that the Government had introduced TUFS with a view 
to modernize the textile industry.  The Government have also given special subsidy 
for new Hi-tech machinery developed indigenously.  The Committee also note that 
second hand machinery fulfilling certain specifications can, however, be imported 
under TUFS.  In view of the fact that textile industry has always preferred used 
vintage machinery from other countries and also new cheap machines, the 
Committee feel that no subsidy be given to import of second hand machinery of 
the technological specifications similar to the one being manufactured in India and 
the duty concession be restricted only to domestic manufacturers competing with 
the country(ies) producing cheap and often sub -standard machines.  The 
Committee also desire the Government to ensure standard bench mark regarding 
quality and standard of the new/vintage machines imported.  
(Reply of the Government) 
   Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) was launched in April 
1999 to facilitate technology upgradation of the textile industry to meet the 
challenges of the quota free globalised trade.  The s cheme aims to provide access 
to timely and adequate capital at internationally comparable rates of interest to 
enable textile industry to upgrade its technology level.  The scheme has facilitated 
installation of state of the art machinery by the textile in dustry.  It would not be 

50 
 
wrong to say that TUFS has transformed ‘sunset industry’ into a ‘sunrise industry’.  
The scheme was continued in modified form w.e.f. 01.04.2007 to 28.06.2010. The 
scheme has again been launched in restructured form for the period 28.04.2011 to 
31.03.2012. 
As per Para 3.2 of the Government Resolution no. 6/5/2011 – TUFS dt. 
28.4.2011 on  restructured TUFS, generally only new machinery will be permitted, 
however, the following imported second hand machinery are also eligible under 
Restructured TUFS: 
Air jet, Projectile, Rapier and Waterjet shuttleless looms fitted with or without 
electronic jacquard / electronic dobby and with or without high speed direct beam 
warper with creel and/or sectional warping machine with auto stop and tension 
control of upto 10 years’ vintage and with a residual life of minimum 10 years and 
with the value cap of Rs. 8.00 lakh. 
 The technology of the machines under the Scheme are benchmarked.  The 
list of machines alongwith their specifications are covered in Annexes A to N of 
the GR stated above. Specifications for the new brand new shuttleless looms have 
been given in Circula r No. 2 (2011 -2012 Series) dt. 29.7.2011 issued under the 
Scheme, which is reproduced below: 
Specifications for brand new Rapier Loom, Projectile Loom, Airjet looms and 
Waterjet Looms 
S. 
No 
Type of 
loom Specifications 
1. Rapier 
Loom 
Weft insertion rate not less than 650 mtrs. per minute with or 
without electronic dobby / electronic jacquard  
2 Projectile Weft insertion rate not less than 750 mtrs. per minute with or 

51 
 
Loom without electronic dobby / electronic jacquard  
3 Airjet 
Loom 
(iii) Weft insertion rate not less than 1200 mtrs. per minute 
without electronic dobby / electronic jacquard 
(iv) Weft insertion rate not less than 900 mtrs. per minute with 
electronic dobby / electronic jacquard 
4 Waterjet 
loom 
(iii) Weft insertion rate not less than 1000 mtrs. per minute 
without electronic dobby / electronic jacquard 
(iv) Weft insertion rate not less than 800 mtrs. per minute with 
electronic dobby / electronic jacquard 
 
 Imported second hand machinery stated in Para 3.2 o f the GR stated above 
are eligible only upto a specified value caps. The value caps are specified in 
Circular No. 1 (2011-2012 Series) dt. 1.6.2011 issued under the Scheme, which are 
reproduced below: 
 
 
S. No 
Description of 
the second hand 
imported 
machinery 
Specifications/ 
Model 
Upper ceiling on Benchmarked price  
for subsidy purposes Rs. Lakh 
EU 
Countries Non EU Countries 
1. Projectile looms 
irrespective of 
shedding 
mechanism  
P-7100, P-7150 
P-7200, P-7250 
8.00 _ 
2. Airjet looms 
irrespective of 
shedding 
mechanism  
Irrespective of 
speed/width 
8.00 5.50 
3. Waterjet loom 
irrespective of 
Width 190 cm. 
And above 
4.00 2.50 

52 
 
shedding 
mechanism  
Width less than 
190 cm. 
3.00 1.50 
4. Rapier loom Width 190 cm. 
and WIR more 
than 750 mpm 
8.00 4.50 
 
Width 190 cm 
and WIR more 
than 450 mpm 
but less than 750 
mpm 
6.00 3.50 
 
Width more than 
190 cm. 
8.00 4.50 
 Hence, only new machinery with benchmarked  technology  are eligible 
under TUFS except those specified above with the specified technology and 
prescribed value cap. 
Second hand machines were earlier allowed for the spinning sector also.  
Now under the Restructured TUFS the scheme has been rationalized and only  
specified second hand machines with value caps in weaving sector is eligible for 
benefits under TUFS.   Accordingly as per Para 3.2 of the Government Resolution 
No. 6/5/2011 -TUFS dated 28.4.2011 on Restructured TUFS, generally only new 
machinery will be p ermitted, however the following imported second hand 
machinery are also eligible:  
Air jet, Projectile, Rapier and Waterjet shuttleless looms fitted with or 
without electronic jacquard / electronic dobby and with or without high speed 
direct beam warper with creel and/or sectional warping machine with auto stop and 
tension control of upto 10 years’ vintage and with a residual life of minimum 10 
years and with the value cap of Rs. 8.00 lakh 

53 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.31)     
 The Committee observe that plan outlays for Handloom Sector during the 
first four years of 11th plan were not fully utilized and as against approved outlays 
of Rs.315 crore, Rs.340 crore, Rs.340 crore and Rs.488.05 crore during 2007 -08, 
2008-09, 2009 -10, 2 010-11, the actuals were Rs.292.58 crore, Rs.324.44 crore, 
Rs.329.29 crore and Rs.425.51 crore respectively.  The Plan Outlays for all the 
Handloom schemes viz., Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme, Marketing 
& Export Promotion Scheme, Handloom Weavers  Comprehensive  Welfare 
Schemes and Diversified Handloom Development Scheme except  the Mill Gate 
Price Scheme fell short of the targets.  The Committee are dismayed to note that 
against a total provision of Rs.106 crore for Handloom Sector to be spent in North 
Eastern Region, the actual funds released were only Rs.47.32 crore, till 31st 
March, 2011.  While observing that shortfall is mainly reported in case of North 
Eastern Region particularly  in Handloom Weavers Comprehensive Welfare 
Scheme, as the polic y period is  not co -terminus with the financial year and will 
continue until 30th November, 2011,  the Committee are concerned to note that 
only Rs.13.19 crore were released under the scheme during 2010 -11 out of a total 
plan outlay of Rs.66 crore.  The Co mmittee, therefore, strongly urge the 
Government to ensure that the funds allocated for this welfare scheme are fully 
utilized by 30th November, 2011 and the physical targets set are fully achieved.  
(Reply of the Government) 
 Year-wise funds allocated and expenditure incurred are given as under in 
respect of North Eastern States:  
 
 

54 
 
Year BE Expenditure %w.r.t (BE) 
2007-08 63.00 62.11 98.58 
2008-09 85.00 69.79 82.11 
2009-10 85.00 77.00 90.58 
2010-11 106.00 47.32 44.64 
2011-12 
(as on 30th 
Sept.) 
80.00 18.52 23.15 
 
 
 During the Policy year 2010-11 (i.e. December, 2010 to November, 2011) in 
case of Health Insurance Scheme (HIS) and for 2011-12 (i.e. April, 2011 to March, 
2012) in case of Mahatama Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana (MGBBY), it is expected 
to enroll 7.23 lakh weavers in NER (including renewal) under Handloom Weavers 
Comprehensive Welfare Scheme (HWCWS) .  Uptill September, 2011, Rs.13.19 
crore has been released for enrollment in NER under HWCWS.  It is expected that 
Rs.33.21 crore will be released by November, 2011 to enroll the targeted number 
of weavers in North Eastern Region (NER).    
 
 The implementing Agencies i.e. ICICI in case of HIS and LIC in case of 
MGBBY have been directed to make efforts to organize aware ness camps and 
generate adequate publicity in the NER Region to achieve the physical target of 
enrolments.  
 
 
 

55 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.32)     
 
 The Committee note that though the total number of handloom weavers in 
the country is 43 lakhs , the Government have announced a package of Rs.3000 
crore for 15000 weavers societies having more than 3 lakhs weavers in phases.  
The package includes waiver of overdue interest and overdue loans of Societies,  
recapitalization of the balance sheet of Primary Weavers Cooperative Societies and 
State level Apex Societies with adequate fund support from Governments  and 
financing the credit needs of handloom weavers/ Societies at lower rate of interest 
with interest subvention etc. The Committee would like t he details of the 
implementation plan of the package by the Government and the plan of the 
Government to give financial support to those handloom weavers who are outside 
cooperative fold as a large number of handloom weavers are dependant on private 
money lending. 
(Reply of the Government) 
 In the Budget Speech of 2011 -12 Hon’ble Finance Minister has announced 
the Financial Package worth Rs. 3000 crore for waiver of loans and interest of 
handloom weavers of the country. 
 
 The package is for 15000 Viable & potentially viable Co-operative Societies 
and will benefit more than 03 lakh handloom weavers. 
 The financial package will open choked credit lines for the handloom 
weavers. 
 In pursuance to the Budget Speech (2011 -12), a package worth Rs.3970 
crore has bee n submitted to the Planning Commission on 13.6.2011, as per 

56 
 
following break -up.  In this package, the Government of India’s share is 
worked out to be Rs.3266 crore. 
 
Sl.No. Component Cost             
(Rs. crore) 
1. Recapitalization 
 (80:20 to be shared between GoI & State Govt.) 
2521.00   
 (approx.) 
2. Expected escalation on account of shift in cut off date from 31.03.2007 to 
31.03 2010(80:20 to be shared 
 between GoI & State Govt.) 
500.00 
3. Waiver of individual weaver loan in the Package (80 :20) 500.00 
4. Strengthening weaver cooperative societies 114.00 
5. Training for the functionaries 30.00 
6. Interest Subvention for fresh loans 240.00 
7. Credit Guarantee Mechanism 25.00 
8. Loss assessment exercise & Cost of Implementation 39.36 
  Total 3969.30 
say 3970 crore 
 
The salient features of the Financial Package are: 
 
i. Total cost for loan waiver and recapitalisation are estimated at Rs. 3021 
crore  (Rs. 2521+Rs. 500) for AWCS and PWCS.  A sum of Rs. 500 
crore is estimated for waiver of overdue loans as on 31 st March 2010 
extended by Banks to individual weavers . However, actual losses will be 
based on actual loss assessment exercise on the basis of agreed norms.  
ii. The Govt. Of India share in loan waiver and reca pitalisation would be 

57 
 
Rs.3266 crore ore( 80% of recapitalisation) and the State share would be 
Rs. 704.20 crore ( 20% of  recapitalisation) 
iii. The repayment from this package for loan waiver will be limited to 100% 
of overdue principal and only 25% of overdue  interest as on the date of 
loan becoming NPA.  The balance 75% of overdue interest and the entire 
penal interest, if any, will have to be written off by the bank as a pre -
condition.   
iv. Components 4 to 8 above  (Rs. 449.00 crore ) will be funded entirely by  
GoI. 
v. Receivables from Central and State Governments, including 
institutions/agencies under the control of the State Governments, which 
amount to approximately Rs. 300 crore will be paid outside the package, 
separately, as a pre-condition. 
vi. The release of recapitalisation assistance would be linked to commitment 
to carry out institutional & legal reforms by the State Governments.   
vii. On the lines of ADWDR Scheme of Govt.of India, wherein banks 
agreed to issue fresh loans, once the overdue agricultural loans we re 
written off, Recapitalisation of losses & repayment of outstanding loans 
to Banks under the package would be subject to commitment to give 
fresh loans. A format wherein banks agree to extend fresh loans in lieu of 
receipt of old outstanding weaver loans  would be an integral part of the 
loss assessment guidelines. 
viii. NABARD would be designated as the implementing agency for the 
scheme. However, for guiding and monitoring the implementation of the 
scheme at National, State and District levels, Implementing an d 
Monitoring Committees would be constituted. The scheme will be 
implemented once an MOU is signed by the major stake holders, viz, 

58 
 
Government of India, State Governments and NABARD. 
ix. The entire package assistance will be non -recurring in nature, except for  
the component on interest subvention.  
x. Regarding the coverage of individual weavers, it is clarified that the 
financial package will also cover individual weavers and once 
implemented, it would result in relief to more than 3 lakh individual 
weavers and 15000 cooperative societies, and they will be able to access 
institutional credit once again. 
(Recommendation para No. 3.34)     
 The Committee further note that lack of awareness of Government policies 
regarding handloom industry and clusterisation has als o contributed to the decline 
in the number of handloom weavers.  Limited availability of skilled workers and 
technicians have further aggravated the problem.  The Committee desire that 
information about facilities being made available by Government and fin ancial 
institutions may be disseminated to clusters through regular newsletters and 
through the mass media. The Committee are of the considered view that the 
procedures for sanction of loans should be simplified and liberalized, the loans 
should be given o n single window concept and in a time bound manner. The 
Committee feel that besides formation of clusters, the Government should also take 
necessary steps to ensure successful operation of handloom clusters already formed 
since success of existing clusters  will induce other individuals to come together as 
clusters and consolidate their gains.   
(Reply of the Government) 
 Under the Integrated Handloom Cluster Development Scheme (Phase-I), 400 
awareness camps were organized involving 29580 weaver from the clusters to 

59 
 
make weavers aware about the scheme and its benefits.  202 dyers workshops were 
organized with participation of 2952 dyers, leading to improvement in dyeing 
technology.  3312 new designs developed by professional designers in the cluster 
to provide marketable products.  69 managerial training programmes were 
organized for members of consortiums and local institut ions for strengthening the 
institution building apart from publicity through print media and other materials 
such as leaflets, banners are being used.  
        In addition to above, the Government of India is taking all possible steps to 
ensure successful implementation of handloom clusters already formed so that the 
success of existing clusters will induce other individuals to come together as 
clusters and consolidate their gains.  For example,  concept of formation of SHG’s 
in the scheme is not only to go in for business at once, but to encourage the 
weavers to understand the concept of collective work and its advantages.  
However, it takes time for these SHGs to understand the concept in its true spirit. 
Once the weavers realize that the SHGs can be conver ted as cohesive production 
and marketing units, they will take up these activities willingly and banks will also 
finance such groups unhesitatingly. Similarly, advantages of organizing/ 
participation in various exhibitions/expos/BSM boost the sales, settin g up of 
Common Facility Centre (CFC) and Dyes House can be used by the weavers on 
user charge basis to avail the facilities. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.37)     
 The Committee are perturbed to note that although projects worth Rs.288.24 
crore were sanction ed under Component -I of IHDS launched in 2010 -11 in the 
pilot mode for two years under the head Human Resource Development, only 

60 
 
Rs.41.72 crore were disbursed during 2010 -11 against the BE of Rs.131.49 crore 
and RE of Rs.92.31 crore to train 2 lakh weavers .  Further, a provision of Rs.110 
crore has been made for the scheme in the Annual Plan 2011 -12 of the Ministry.  
The Committee also observe that though the Government have initiated Integrated 
Skill Development Scheme in the year 2010 -11 for training the entrepreneurs, 
weavers, skilled and unskilled workers, the scheme has not made much headway 
yet.  The Committee, therefore, hardly need to emphasize that the Government take 
necessary steps in right earnest to ensure that the allocated funds are fully util ized 
for fruition of the objectives of the scheme.  The Committee also recommend that 
the courses to be offered must be based on the market and local requirements etc. 
and apart from the skill development initiatives, the  short term courses on 
handling of  machines, labour management,  market trends, pollution control, 
designs and quality control may also be organised in rural/remote areas and 
preferably in their local languages.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the project sanctioned under the p ilot scheme and the current status of their 
implementation. 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 The scheme IHDS as mentioned in the observation of the Committee may be 
read as Integrated Skill Development Scheme, (ISDS).   The ISDC scheme was 
launched in July 2010 in the pilot mode for the XI  Five year Plan. The scheme has 
two components.   
        A total project cost was approved at Rs. 229 crore   The budget estimate for 
2010-11 was Rs. 166.13 crores which was reduced to Rs. 92.31 crore  at RE stage, 
as the scheme was started in the mid of the year 2010.  As per the plan outlay of 
Ministry of Textiles, the provision for this purpose was Rs.131.49. 
 

61 
 
    The scheme in its nascent stage saw implementation of only component -I 
wherein proposal s from   agencies under this Ministry were taken up for 
consideration and despite lots of hurdles and initial hiccups only Rs. 41.72 crore 
were disbursed as initial instalments for projects in 2010-11. 
 
         18 projects have been sanctioned under Component- I, with a total cost of Rs. 
434 crores with the grant Component of Rs. 322 crores targeting 4.34 Lakhs 
trainees over a period of next 5 years.  So far approximately 140 centres have 
become operational across India enrolling 15000 candidates. Approxima tely 4500 
candidates have been successfully trained, out of which 45% trainees have been 
placed in the industry. 
 
During budget estimates for the year 2010 -11, the budget provision is  Rs. 110 
crores for Component- I &II of the scheme.  
         
     Under Component-II, dealing with projects in Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
mode, could not be operationalized in the 1 st year of the Pilot project.  In 
implementing of Component -II of the scheme, Request for proposals (RFPs) for 
selection of Lead Implementin g agencies (LIAs) were invited and in all 47 bids 
have been received, out of which 35 projects have been selected.  So far 12 LIA’s 
have been recommended by the  Project Appraisal and Monitoring Committee 
(PAMC) which will be placed before the Project Appraisal Committee (PAC)  for 
its approval.  
       

62 
 
 The  committees’ recommendations that the courses to be offered must be based 
on the market and local requirements etc.;  apart from the Skill Development 
initiatives  are noted. 
(Recommendation para No. 3.49)     
 The Committee are concerned to note that although the Wool Development 
Board has utilized Rs.15.03 crore against the available grant of Rs.15 crore for 
wool and woollen sectors during 2010 -11, the physical targets for different 
schemes are much below the targets fixed.  Against the targeted 9 lakh new sheep 
to be covered under Sheep and Wool Improvement Scheme, only 6 lakh sheep 
were covered during 2010-11.  Similarly, out of the targeted 93500 shepherds to be 
covered only 14358 have been covere d under `Sheep Breeders Insurance Scheme' 
and only 423953 sheep have been covered under Sheep Insurance Scheme' against 
the target of 9 lakh sheep. The Committee further note that the targets set for 
Angora wool Development, Promotional activities, CFC for  integrated wool 
processing could not be achieved during the year.  While observing the under 
achievement of physical targets of various developmental schemes in woollen 
sector during 2010 -11, the Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons as 
to how the funds allocated for the purpose are fully utilized without accomplishing 
the given targets.  The Committee view this as a poor reflection on budget 
estimation process and lack of unrealistic planning.  As the Government is unable 
in popularizing the social security scheme, the Committee recommend that sheep 
breeders also be covered under the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) and 
that serious illnesses which require specialized treatment may be covered under the 
Sheep Breeders Insurance Scheme, whi ch at present only covers death and total 
and partial disability.  To make the scheme popular and maximizing its reach to the 

63 
 
people, the  Committee desire that the Panchayats be involved in full measure in 
implementation of these social security schemes.   
(Reply of the Government) 
 The Central Wool Development Board (CWDB) achieved Physical targets 
under Integrated Wool Improvement and Development Programme (IWIDP) as 
fixed under its scheme. The CWDB was to cover total 26 lakh sheep under Sheep 
& Wool Improvement Sccheme (SWIS) during 11th plan as per approved EFC note 
and  against this target, the Board covered 32 lakh sheep as tabulated under :   
 
SN Year Target to benefit sheep as set in 
EFC Note 
Sheep benefited during 11th 
Plan (Achievements) 
1 2007-08 4.5 lakh sheep 6.75 lakh sheep 
2 2008-09 13.5 lakh sheep 9.25 lakh sheep 
3 2009-10 8 lakh sheep 10.5  lakh sheep 
4 2010-11  5.5 lakh sheep 
5 2011-12  - 
 Total 26 lakh sheep 32 lakh sheep 
Scheme-wise Physical targets achieved during the 11 th Five Year Plan (upto 
Sept.,2011) against the targets set in EFC/SFC Note of Board’s schemes are as 
under:  
SN. Name of scheme Total targets as 
per  EFC/SFC for 
11th Plan 
Actual achievement 
upto Sept.,2011 
Shortfall if any 
1 Sheep & Wool 26 lakh sheep 32 lakh sheep -- 

64 
 
Improvement 
Scheme  (SWIS) 
2 Angora Wool 
Development 
Scheme 
400 families 400 families -- 
3 Pashmina Wool 
Development 
Scheme 
2400 families 2400 families 
 
-- 
4 Human Resource 
Development & 
Promotional 
Activities 
1000 trainees 1013 trainees -- 
5 Quality 
Processing of 
Wool scheme ( 
Common Facility 
centre for Pre-
loom and Post-
loom processing 
facilities) 
14  CFC under 
Pre-loom & 1  
under  Post-loom 
processing 
facilities. 
Established 14 
CFCs under Pre-
loom processing. 
1 CFC under post 
loom scheme 
could not be 
established. 
6 Sheep Breeders 
Insurance under 
Social Security 
Scheme 
1,35,000 
shepherds 
88,094 shepherds 
 
Targets could 
not be achieved 
fully. 

65 
 
7 Sheep Insurance 
Scheme  under 
Social Security 
Scheme 
14.55 lakh sheep 4,85,808* sheep 
*After decentralization of Sheep Insurance Scheme in Oct. 2009,  actual region 
wise figures have not been provided by OIC. 
From above, it is clear that except under Insurance Schemes, the Board 
achieved almost all the targets .  Under the scheme of Quality Processing of Wool 
Scheme, the Board established all 14 Common Facility Centres under Pre -loom 
processing activity but could not establish one Finishing Centre under post -loom 
processing facility as no suitable and viable proje ct proposal was received even 
after repeated advertisements in newspapers.  
Sheep Breeders Insurance Scheme  &  Sheep Insurance Scheme were  new 
schemes and were launched  first time during 11 th five year plan and require  very 
active participation from mo stly  poor and illiterate sheep breeders who is on 
migration most of the time along with their sheep flock. The Sheep Breeder 
Insurance Scheme is being implemented by Life Insurance Corporation of India 
(LIC) and Sheep Insurance Scheme by Oriental Insuranc e Corporation of India 
(OIC) and both these Schemes were to be implemented in all wool producing states 
in India i.e. J&K, HP, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Haryana, Gujarat, Maharashtra. 
A.P.  &  Karnataka etc. 
During the financial year 2008 -09, the No. of Shee p Breeder Insurance and 
Sheep Insurance Scheme got some momentum as large number of SWIS projects 
were sanctioned to different NGOs / Implementing Agencies and as these NGOs 
were working at the field level with sheep breeders for implementation of health 

66 
 
care, breed improvement and other components of the SWIS,  are  at the same time 
also helping them in  filling the insurance form, collecting these forms and 
submitting the same to Insurance Agencies.   
But it was found at implementation stage that whole pr ocess of insurance 
including settling claim from  Insurance Agencies was a cumbersome and difficult  
process  to be fulfilled by illiterate or semi literate sheep breeders. Some of these 
difficulties faced by sheep breeder are as under. 
f) Immediate intimatio n of death of the insured sheep by the sheep 
Breeder/Nodal Agency and within 24 hours to insurance company. 
g) Ear Tag applied to the animals should be surrendered or otherwise claim will 
be rejected. 
h) In cases where tags are lost and intimation has already be en given to the 
insurance company but the re -tagging has not been carried out, the claim 
will be considered by Insurance agency on merits. 
i) Submission of Panchnama/ FIR/ Postmortem Report, in case of Accidents. 
j) When the claim per instance exceeds five animals, Photograph of carcasses 
with ear tag intact along with the beneficiary shall be submitted. 
 
Sheep Insurance was a new activity to OIC, Jodhpur  and it was not fully 
equipped to take up this scheme at national level due to shortage of man power.   
  Initially the Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. (OIC) implemented the scheme all 
over India from Jodhpur regional office only. All papers related to Insurance and 
for death claim were reaching OIC Jodhpur office which was very small office 
with very limited staff and lead to abnormal delay in Claim settlement. It was also 
very difficult for NGO/ Implementing Agencies from far -flung area of the country 

67 
 
to come to OIC Jodhpur office and settle the issue and when this difficulty was 
pointed out by CWDB to OIC, aft er much persuasion the scheme was 
decentralized by OIC in October 2009.  After decentralization, Regional offices of 
OIC ( in different states) took their own time in understanding the scheme and 
processing the death claims. It took also some time in trans ferring all the records 
related to claim from Jodhpur office to different Regional offices and initially there 
was total confusion whether a claim will be settled by Jodhpur office or Regional 
office of the state concerned.  But till then lot of time was already passed and many 
sheep Breeders already discontinued the insurance due to abnormal delay in 
processing of death claim by OIC.  
Physical targets and achievements during 11 th Plan of the Central Wool 
Development Board under different schemes are given below :  
 
1 
Name of 
scheme 
Unit 11th Plan 
targets 
2007-
08 
(Achi
evem
ent) 
2008-09 
(Achiev
ement) 
2009-
10 
(Achi
evem
ent 
2010-11 
(Achiev
ement 
2011-12 
(Achievement 
upto 
Sept.,2011) 
Total 
(Achievements- 
upto Sept.,2011) 
1 Angora 
Wool 
Developm
ent 
Scheme 
No. of  
families 
400 40 140 20 120 80 400 
2 Human 
Resource 
Developm
ent & 
Promotio
nal 
No. of 
trainees 
1000 206 295 197 225 90 
 
1013 

68 
 
Activities 
3 Quality 
Processin
g of Wool 
scheme 
No. of  
CFC 
14 (Pre-
loom) & 1 
(Post 
loom) 
6 2 Nil 4 2 14 (Pre-loom 
facility) 
 
From above table it is clear that during 2009 -10, progress was rather slow 
under Angora Wool Development  Scheme and Quality Processing of Wool 
scheme as in spite of repeated advertisements Board could not get viable and 
suitable  project proposal  under CFC and  Angora Wool Development Scheme but 
these shortfalls have been  made up in next FY and in all the three components, 
targets  as set for 11th Plan were achieved fully. 
 Just after launching the schemes of 11 th Plan and after getting response from 
stake holders, it was found that it will be very difficult to achieve  targets fully 
under (i) Quality Processing of Wool Scheme and (ii) Social security Scheme 
because there was poor response to both these scheme even after repeated 
advertisement in news papers.  
The Board  made several marketing efforts for setting up CFC under Post 
loom activity of Quality Processing of Wool scheme . Scheme was advertised 
repeatedly in national newspapers. CWDB also held meeting with wool 
Industrialist in potential wool ind ustry area like Bikaner, Bhadohi, Panipat, 
Amritsar , Ludhiana etc. but  very few suitable and viable  projects proposals were 
received by CWDB . 
Similarly in the case of Social Security Scheme, it was found at 
implementation stage that settling claim from  Insurance agencies is a cumbersome 

69 
 
process and very difficult to be complied by illiterate or semi literate sheep 
breeders who is on the migration most of the time along with his sheep flock and 
lost interest in the scheme when claim were not settled by I nsurance agencies 
timely and discontinued the insurance. 
  From the project proposals received from different State Governments it was 
found that there are large number of project proposals under Integrated Wool 
Improvement and Development Programme ( IWID P) as these scheme were 
benefitting Sheep Breeders directly but all these  proposals could not be sanctioned 
within the allocated outlay for IWIDP. On the other side there were savings under  
Quality Processing of Wool Scheme and  Social security Scheme be cause there 
were very few suitable and viable project proposals. So after looking into demands 
of different state Government agencies, advantages of the schemes to sheep 
breeders and to avoid over all saving in fund allocated  to CWDB, it was decided 
to utilize the savings of  Quality Processing of Wool Scheme and  Social security 
Scheme under IWIDP after approval of Ministry of Textiles. 
  Thus the un -utilized savings of schemes where there was no viable and 
suitable project proposal, were utilized under components/ scheme where there was 
demands from State Governments. 
Out of total budget allocation of Rs. 67.16 Crore for the 11 th Five Year Plan, 
the Board has already been utilized Rs. 58.24 Crore and expected to utilize 
remaining grant  during current financial year 2011-12, as under :  
SN Annual Plan  11th Plan allocation  Fund Utilization  
1 2007-08  Rs. 13.35 Crore 

70 
 
2 2008-09 Rs. 67.16 Crore  Rs. 14.80 Crore 
3 2009-10 Rs. 10.94 Crore 
4 2010-11 Rs. 15.03 Crore 
5 2011-12  
(Proposed)  
Rs.4.12 Crores ( 
ill Sept. 2011)  
 Total  Rs. 67.16 Crore Rs. 58.24 Crore 
(till Sept. 2011) 
 
  Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) is being implemented by Ministry 
of Labour and Employment. The CWDB is examining the implementation of the 
scheme to cover sheep breeders.    
(Recommendation para No. 3.50)     
 The Committee observe that Wool Industry is smaller in size in comparison 
to other textile industries in India and bulk of the wool produced in India is of low 
quality and therefore major raw wool requirement has to be imported.  Taking note 
of the low budgetary support of Rs.60 crore during the first four years of the 11th 
plan, the Committee recommend that urgent and dras tic measures be initiated by 
the Government for strengthening the wool sector including seeking  of 
cooperation from the leading countries in the woollen sector,   exchange of 
programmes, fairs etc. with the special focus on breed improvements, proper health 
care for sheep and technological advancements in sheep breeding.   
 

71 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 The Planning Commission, Govt. of India approved 11 th Plan allocation of 
Rs. 67.16 Crore  only to the Central Wool Development Board, out of total 
proposed budget estimation of Rs. 89.98 Crore. Out of Rs. 67.16 Crore, the Board 
has utilized Rs. 58.24 Crore upto Sept.,2011 and expected to utilize remaining 
grant during current financial year 2011-12.  
 Under report of Sub Group for Recommending measures for Development 
of Wool and Woollen Textiles during the 12 th Five year Plan, the Board had 
proposed  Rs. 200 Crore for implementation of different schemes for development 
of wool and woolen texti les with special focus on breed improvements, proper 
health care for sheep and technological advancements in sheep breeding.  
  The recommendation/observation of the Standing Committee are accepted 
and will be implemented/included in 12 th Five Year Plan pe riod for strengthening 
the wool sector including seeking of cooperation from the leading countries in the 
woollen sector, exchange of programmes, fairs etc. with the special focus on breed 
improvements, proper health care for sheep and technological advanc ements in 
sheep breeding. 
(Recommendation para No. 3.52)     
 The Committee note that under welfare and other schemes for artisans out of 
Rs.84.11 crore (BE) allocated during 2010 -11 only Rs.2 lakhs were spent as on 
14.02.2011.  Further, against the Revise d Estimates of Rs.67.11 crore, the actual 
utilization for the two welfare schemes for artisans was only Rs.26.19 crore.  
Moreover, out of the targeted 8,40,000 artisans to be covered under RGSSBY only 
1,36,000 were covered whereas under Bima Yojana for art isans against the set 
target of One lakh, only 89 thousand were covered during 2010 -11.   The 

72 
 
Committee find the strategy of the Ministry of Textiles to target cooperatives, 
clusters etc. quite inadequate to cover the entire handicraft sector which is high ly 
unorganized.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should 
review the performance of the schemes and shortcomings be analyzed, and a 
strategy to cover maximum artisans be formulated and popularized at the earliest 
so that maximum artis ans benefit from the scheme. Taking note of absence of any 
organized network for implementation of the welfare schemes, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should examine whether these social security 
schemes can be operated through local post-offices. 
(Reply of the Government) 
 As per the Committee’s recommendations, the performance of the Scheme 
has been reviewed with a view to analyse  the shortcomings and accordingly a 
strategy has already been evolved to cover the prescribed physical target and to 
utilize the allocated budget under the Scheme 
 
 Under the RGSSBY scheme, so far as the slow performance in the year 
2010-11 is concerned, i t is to inform the Committee that during the year 2010 -11, 
in the major part of the year, the process for selection of suitable Implementing 
Agency was on through the tendering process. The tendering process took more 
than the expected time because due to some unexpected reasons, the process had to 
be repeated leading to re -tendering. Consequently, the re -tendering process got 
completed only towards the end of 2010 -11 i.e. in February, 2011. The contract 
was signed with two Insurance Companies for implementation of RGSSBY, which 
left the department hardly over a month up to 31.03.2011 to achieve the prescribed 
target. This explains the low utilization of allocated budget and low physical 
coverage during the year 2010-11. 

73 
 
 However, as advised by the Committee , consequent upon review of 
implementation of the Scheme, necessary steps to meet the physical targets for the 
year 2011-12 have been put in place. These efforts shall be further supplemented 
through a sustained publicity campaign which will involve camp a pproach at the 
cluster level where, alongside spot enrollments, awareness will also be organized 
throughout the country at different locations. The requisite funds in this regard 
have already been placed with the field formations across the country. 
  
As regards Committee’s suggestion of utilizing the services of local Post Offices 
for implementation of RGSSBY, it is to inform that the artisans under the Scheme 
receive cashless health care facilities through the network hospitals of the two 
insurance compan ies. However, in case of payment of claims may be through 
Cheque, post offices can be utilized. 
 
 As regards Committee’s observations about low physical coverage under 
Janashree Bima Yojana (JBY) in the year 2010 -11, it is submitted that it appears 
that the physical target of 89,000 under JBY has been inadvertently presented in 
the report since this number relates to coverage under RGSSBY and not JBY. It is 
now placed on record that the actual coverage under JBY in the year 2010-11 was  
1, 37,765 artisans as against the target of 1.00 lakh. 
(Recommendation para No. 3.56)     
 The Committee note that continuous discharge of industrial wastes in rivers 
and lakes causes environmental hazard.  Further, it  endangers public health after 
being  channelized in crop s/agriculture through polluted rivers/water bodies.  The 
Committee note that the domestic textile industry consumes bulk of low cost 
dyestuffs at manageable cost for their end product.  The Committee also note that 

74 
 
Indian export consignments face restricti ons in international markets due to use of 
polluting dyes.  The Committee, therefore, recommend  the earnest efforts be made 
for pollution free manufacturing throughout the country in a stipulated time period.  
The Committee also recommend that suitable in centives be given to entrepreneurs 
for preferring the use of non-polluting dyes and for setting up of effluent treatment 
plants by these units  as also to check units producing poor quality dyestuff.    
   
(Reply of the Government) 
   The Government has allocated Rs 200 crore in the form of Additional Central 
Assistance (ACA) to the Govt. of Tamil Nadu for establishment of Zero Liquid 
Discharge System at Tirupur, Tamil Nadu for effluent treatment.  Rs. 100 crore has 
already been release d to the State Government of Tamil Nadu.  The balance amount 
could not be released as the State Govt. failed to utilise the amount already released. 
The Government has also constituted a technical committee to study the technological 
options proposed by Tamilnadu Water Investment Company to ensure a sustainable and 
viable technological option to treat effluent discharge of dyeing houses. 
So far as handicrafts products other than carpets are concerned, the products are 
mostly pollution free and no such industrial waste or discharge is used.  With regards to 
carpet Industry, it is to inform that the Carpet Industry has already started using 
vegetable dyes and high quality imported dyes for dying of yarn used for manufacturing 
of carpets as per the demand of th e buyers.  However, the 
recommendations/observations of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demand for 
Grants will be earnestly taken up. 
Handloom Sector is a highly decentralized and dispersed sector and majority of 
handloom weavers operate as household units.  Hence dyeing is done manually in small 
quantities which require basic equipments viz. utensils, installation of boring pump, 

75 
 
heating equipment.    However, emphasis has given on training to the weavers for use of 
natural dyes.  Further, it is to inf orm that where modern dyeing machines are required, 
installations of ETP has been preferred in Gadag Handloom Cluster in Karnataka, 
Samudragarh Dhatrigram (Burdwan) Handloom Cluster in West Bengal, Chirala 
Handloom Cluster in Andhra Pradesh under IHCDS and  Varanasi (U.P), Sivasagar 
(Assam), Virudhunagar(Tamil Nadu) and Murshidabad (West Bengal) Mega Handloom 
Clusters  under Comprehensive Handloom Cluster Development Scheme (CHCDS). 
 
 Manufacture of azo dyes stands banned in India and the domestic regulation  
is a part of national treatment.  Products are being accompanied by Azo -dyes 
certificate issued by a textile testing laboratory accredited by national 
Accreditation Agency of the country of origin.  Since manufacture of azo -dyes 
stands banned in India, product not accompanying with such a certificate is subject 
to be tested in India.  Common Effluent Treatment Plants are being set up in all the 
Textile Park under SITP Scheme. 
Planning Commission (Industry Division) vide Office Memorandum No. I & 
M – 3 (17)/2011 dt. 28 th April, 2011 has constituted a Working Group on Textiles 
and Jute Industry (excluding Handloom and Handicraft Segments) for formulation 
of the 12 th Five Year Plan (2012 -17). The Working Group has formed sub groups 
for formulation o f the report. One of the Sub Group formed vide Office 
Memorandum No. 13/6/2011 –TUFS dt. 28.4.2011 is Sub Group on Textiles and 
Apparel. The recommendations of the Sub Group given in its draft report are 
reproduced in Annex – I.  
 
 

76 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.60)     
 The Committee note that at present no separate budgetary allocation is made 
for research and development in Handloom sector.  The Committee observe that in 
the absence of advanced technology and R&D, domestic textile industry faces 
tough compet ition from the competitive countries.  The Committee, therefore,  
desire that the Government should come out with an R&D policy for the entire 
textile sector to counter the challenges posed by technological developments in 
competing countries and recommend that adequate financial assistance be provided 
to the research bodies/Associations undertaking research in textile sector and also 
to monitor the expenditure and progress of work of R&D institutions. 
(Reply of the Government) 
  Research & Development (R&D ) R&D ac tivities which, inter alia,  cover 
studies, need based survey, taking into account the strength and weakness of the 
Handloom Sector and take steps to ensure that the Sector benefits from the more 
open trading. During the 12 th Plan, Rs.7.00 crore (@  1.40 crore per year for 5 
years) has been proposed for Research and Development. 
 The Ministry of Textiles has a comprehensive R&D Scheme for the entire 
Textile Sector. The scheme provides for support to the Textile Research 
Associations (TRAs) and textil es related R&D Projects taken up by Govt. 
Approved Research Centres such IITs/Govt. Aided Institutions/Recognised 
Engineering colleges / Institutions approved by DST / DSIR etc.  Apart from this 
Comprehensive Scheme, incentives are available for R&D in Tec hnical Textiles 
under the TMTT (Technology Mission on Technical Textiles).   
There are 8 Textile Research Association catering to various needs of the 
textile industry viz south India Textile Research Association (SITRA), Bombay 

77 
 
Textile Research Associatio n (BTRA), Northern India Textile Research 
Association (NITRA), Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research Association 
(SASMIRA), Manmade Textile Research Association (MANTRA), Indian Jute 
Industries Research Association (IJIRA), Ahmedabad Textiles Industries Re search 
Association (ATIRA) and Wool Research Textile industries (WRA).  In the 11 th 
Five Year Plan, Rs. 34 crores was available under the R&D efforts in the sector 
during the 12th Five year Plan. 
(Recommendation para No. 3.63)     
 The Committee note that lack of proper infrastructure is one of the major 
problems of Indian Textile Industry particularly of the small units.  Lack of proper 
roads, transport network and the remote location of these units from the markets 
hinder the growth of such units.  Moreov er, high power tariffs are also a major 
deterrent.  The Committee recommend that Ministry of Textiles take up the issues 
of infrastructural facilities with the respective State Governments and convince 
them to provide continuous concessional power supply a nd economic transport to 
these units. 
(Reply of the Government) 
 The Ministry of Textiles has introduced several initiatives to incentivize 
development of infrastructure, particularly for small and medium units.  The 
Scheme for integrated Textiles parks (SITP) and the Mega Cluster Schemes in the 
Powerloom, Handloom and Handicraft Sectors have been designed to address 
infrastructure gaps by providing for common infrastructure including internal 
roads, CFCs (Common Facility Service Centres), dyeing houses, marketing 
support etc.  Various issues regarding statutory clearanc es for infrastructural 

78 
 
development related issues are taken up with the State Government from time to 
time on the request of the SPVs under the SITP Scheme. 
 The recommendations / observations contained in para -3.63 of the 20 th 
Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demand for Grants 2011 -12 have 
been communicated to all the respective State Govts., with a request to convince 
their Governments  for providing better roads and economic transportation to the 
beneficiaries, as well as to providing contin uous power supply for the 
infrastructures at subsidized rates, which have been created under the Centrally 
sponsored Catalytic Development Programme during the XI  Plan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

79 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT'S REPLY. 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

80 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

81 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN 
NATURE. 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.26)     
 The Committee are concerned to note that textiles sector in North Eastern 
Region has not been able to derive benefit of a ny of the development schemes of 
the Ministry of Textiles as it  is unorganized and dispersed.  The Committee find 
that there is lack of infrastructure in the region, obsolete technology, weak skill 
base, absence of product diversification & market develop ment and poor 
institutional frame -work.  The Committee further observe that out of 43 lakh 
handloom  weavers in the country about 21.75 lakh weavers i.e. about 50% are 
engaged in handloom sector in North Eastern Region as per Handloom Census 
2009-10. The C ommittee desire the Government to encourage formation of self 
help groups in North Eastern Region to help weavers to come together and derive 
benefits from various Centrally Sponsored Schemes. While observing that only 
594, 185 and 164 weavers got training  in three Weavers Service Centre at 
Guwahati, Agartala and Imphal during the last five years, the Committee feel that 
small training centers in rural/remote areas be set up in Private Public Partnership 
mode for unemployed villagers who are hesitant to mov e to the cities to provide 
the prospects of training and employment in their villages only.  Further, centres so 
set up should encourage weavers to convert weaving into commercial venture 
through robust marketing strategy and wider publicity.  Also, proper  training is 
also required for women members of the weavers' family for upgrading their skills 
in preparatory processes. These training institutes may provide training using well 

82 
 
developed looms, designs and dyeing procedures.  The Committee also 
recommend that the manpower in handloom and handicrafts sub -sectors be 
strengthened at the earliest to make the schemes successful in North Eastern 
Region. 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
  As per the latest Census (2009 -10) in North East, 90% of the handloom 
worker households are weaver households.  In contrast to the national trend, the 
North Eastern States recorded an increase in the number of weavers’ households 
from 14.6 lakh weavers’ ho useholds (in 1995) to 15.1 lakh weavers’ households 
(Census 2009 -10).  A large majority of looms in the North Eastern States are 
engaged in domestic production (62%) and a relatively less proportion is into 
mixed production (34%).  This is primarily becaus e handloom weaving is part of 
the culture across all social groups but rural households have a good part of 
domestic fabric requirements produced within the house.  However, 52% 
households produce less than one meter of fabric per weaver per day.  As far a s 
Handloom Sector is concerned, the n umber of Clusters & Group Approach 
Projects sanctioned and funds released under IHDS in North Eastern Region are 
given next: 
  
(Rs.in lakh) 
 Period (2007-08 to 2010-11) Period (2008-09 to 2010-11) 
 No. of 
Clusters 
sanctione
Amount  
Release
d 
Total 
Beneficiarie
s 
No. of 
Groups 
Sanctione
Amount  
Release
d 
Total 
Beneficiarie
s Covered  

83 
 
d Covered  d 
 Total
: 
144 3854.73 67934 293 2275.05 10565 
 
Emphasis is given on formation of Self Help Groups under the Integrated 
Handlooms Development Scheme. Programmes/ Schemes for 12 th Five Year Plan 
are also being formulated keeping in view of the special emphasis  to form  Self 
Help Groups (SHGs).  The Stat e Governments have been addressed at various 
platforms that more and more SHG’s of weavers be formed to enable them to avail 
the benefits of various schemes of both the State and Centre Governments.  
 
The Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme being imple mented during 
the XI Plan has a Skill Development component, under which the weavers are 
being provided training in weaving, design development and dyeing/managerial 
skill.  The training in these areas not only improves quality of the handloom 
products but also enhances the earnings of weavers.     For the 12 th Plan period, it 
has been recommended that the domestic handloom should be encouraged to 
convert to commercial weaving as envisaged under the proposed Minimum 
Economic Size (MES) Scheme.  For this, th e necessary modification of looms and 
accessories like dobby and jacquard will be provided. However, suitable financial 
assistance is available not only under the existing IHDS Scheme but also as 
proposed under the new MES Scheme for all types of loom acce ssories. These 
Schemes also provide for financial assistance for skill upgradation of weavers in 
weaving, dyeing and managerial aspects.  The benefits of IHDS Scheme are on a 
cost-sharing basis of 90:10 ratio i.e. (GOI share: Beneficiary) for NER weavers. 
 

84 
 
Promotion of weaving and imparting training to weavers is done through 
Weavers Service Centers (WSC) and 5 Indian Institute of Handloom Technology 
(IIHT) which are functioning in different parts of the country. In addition, WSCs 
are also conducting design  cum dyeing workshop to disseminate the technological  
development in the field of  weaving, designing, dying etc. and to make aware the 
weavers about the handloom schemes.   
 
To provide Marketing support to handloom weavers and their agencies,  
Government is implementing Marketing & Export Promotion Scheme, which 
provides marketing opportunities and infrastructure support through design 
development, and marketing linkages to assist sale of the Handloom products both 
in domestic and international market.  T o assist Apex/Primary handloom 
cooperative societies & Corporations in developing the export -worthy products, 
financial assistance is provided for  engaging  professionally qualified designers 
for design development, engaging professional   marketing Consu ltant etc. 
Publicity and brand development through Handloom Mark and other measures are 
also being undertaken regularly.  Marketing Incentive @ 10% of the average sales 
turnover of the last three years is also provided to offset the cost of handloom 
products and compete in the domestic and international market.    
 
Skill up gradation and training is provided under Integrated Handlooms 
Development Scheme which provides need based inputs to develop “Clusters” of 
300-500 Handloom or “Groups” of 10 -100 weavers for making them self -
sustainable. This is done  by providing them financial assistance for margin 
money, working capital, new looms and accessories, skill-upgradation training in 
weaving, dyeing and processing, designing,  marketing opportunities and for 
providing assistance for construction of work shed, common facility centers etc.  

85 
 
 
As regards the Committee’s recommendation that the manpower in 
handloom and handicrafts sub -sectors be strengthened at the earliest, it is stated 
that under the  Integrated Ha ndloom Development Scheme, assistance is provided 
for restructuring/strengthening of handloom organization in the form of seed 
money. 
(Recommendation para No. 3.27)     
 The Committee note that although about 21.75 lakh  people are engaged in 
handloom sector in North Eastern Region, only 88,125 handloom weavers are 
covered under one mega Handloom Cluster at Sivsagar, (Assam) and another 
78,499 have been benefited from 144 Handloom Clusters and 293 Group Approach 
Projects leaving behind a major chunk of weavers  in unorganized sector.  The 
Committee feel that till clusterisation picks up in North Eastern Region, individual 
weavers should not suffer and the credit facility be made available to individual 
weavers for the work ing capital required on easy terms.  Besides, the Ministry of 
Textiles should take up necessary steps to organize visits of the officers and 
experts at frequent intervals to the areas where these weavers/artisans work or 
reside and educate them about the b enefits of forming clusters/cooperatives/SHGs.  
These officers may also liaise with the local Panchayats to spread awareness about 
the schemes.  Benefits of other schemes hitherto meant for clusters may also be 
extended to these individual weavers. The Com mittee desire that required 
infrastructure be made available in each district where weavers/artisans can display 
and sell their products.  The officer posted in these outlets guide the individual 
weavers/artisans about the forthcoming exhibitions, seminars  and workshops so 
that they showcase their products and get to know about market trends, training 
facilities, etc.  The Committee also feel that since all the weavers/artisans are not 
educated, publicity may be given about all the schemes and facilities th rough the 

86 
 
print and electronic media.  Further, the Government should also ensure that 
Village Panchayats, Local Members of Parliament, Members of Legislative 
Assembly and Municipal bodies are involved in publicity campaigns which must 
be held in remote/rural areas in their local language.  
(Reply of the Government) 
 For provision of credit, the Finance Minister, in his budget speech, 2011 has 
announced Financial Package of Rs. 3000 crore for the Handloom sector which 
inter-alia, includes providing loans to  handloom sector at lower rate of interest, 
waiver of overdue interest and overdue loans of Weavers/Private Weavers 
Cooperative Societies/Apex Societies. This package will benefit 15,000 handloom 
weavers cooperative societies and 3 lakh handloom weavers, w ho had taken loan 
earlier but have not been able to repay the loan.  Implementation of this package is 
to begin in December this year. 
All the State Governments have formed State Level Project Committees 
consisting of representatives from the Apex/Primary/ Cooperative Societies, who 
are the ground level functionaries, for formulating the projects, keeping in view of 
the prime requirement  at grass root level of the weavers.  This Committee is 
responsible to identify weavers, cluster and formulate project/pro posal to the 
Central Government through their respective State Government to extend financial 
assistance in their favour.    
Regarding provision of infrastructure, Govt. of India provides financial 
assistance for setting up of permanent marketing infrastru cture ( Urban Haat) at 
prime locations in the country  to provide marketing outlets to the handloom 
weavers / craft persons on the pattern of Dilli Haat.  The participating weavers / 
artisans sell their products directly to the customers.  This provides   direct 

87 
 
marketing facilities to the weavers and eliminates middlemen/agencies. Further, 
the Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme provides need based inputs to 
develop “Clusters” of 300 -500 Handloom or “Groups” of 10 -100 weavers for 
making them self -sustainable by providing them financial assistance for margin 
money, working capital, new looms and accessories, skill-upgradation training in 
weaving, dyeing and processing, designing,  marketing opportunities and for 
providing assistance for construction of wo rk shed, common facility centers etc. .  
The weavers are sent to the other parts of the country for exposure visits also. 
Govt. of India also provides financial assistance towards infrastructure and 
publicity for organization of marketing events like Natio nal Handloom Expos, 
Special Handloom Expos, District Level Events, Craft Melas where the 
participating handloom organizations/ weavers sell their products directly to the 
customers.  
As far as publicity of the schemes is concerned, information regarding th e 
schemes being implemented by office of Development Commissioner 
(Handlooms) are available on the website www.handloms.nic.in  in various regional 
languages.  Workshops and Seminars are also conducted to create awa reness 
about schemes and programmes. 
The Government of India also provides financial assistance for organizing   
various marketing events in North Eastern region including Fashion shows   every 
year to popularize the handloom products to NER.    
Also, thre e handloom products of Manipur State have been provided 
financial assistance to register under the   Geographical Indication Act.   
  
  

88 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.33)     
 
 The  Committee note that as per the latest census 2009 -10, 43 lakh  
handloom weavers and allied workers employed in the sector have been identified 
against 65 lakh handloom weavers and allied workers as per 1995 -96 handloom 
census.  The Committee also observe that the market for quality handloom textiles 
and fine handloom  products which were woven earlier has also diminished as the 
consumers prefer the cheaper powerloom or mill textiles as they are easy to 
maintain.  The Committee feel that in the absence of desired support to sustain the 
handloom sector, the fine handloom textiles, that require a lot of skill to make, are 
becoming extinct.  The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Government to 
play a pivotal role in reviving and sustaining handlooms by subsidizing handloom 
products as genuine handloom products are high ly priced and only have a niche 
market. The Committee observe that lack of vigorous marketing has also led to the 
downfall of handloom products.  Since, it is not possible for the ordinary weavers 
to study the market trend and to make production befitting the shifting nature of 
the demand, the Committee recommend that a handloom research centre be set up 
at the national level to undertake research in demand patterns, professional designs, 
weaving technology, raw materials, product diversification and traini ng facilities 
for implementing new technologies  etc. The Committee strongly feel that 
Panchayati Raj Institutions can play an active and fruitful role in reviving and 
sustaining handloom units.  The Government may organize orientation 
programmes about the Schemes for handloom units for the Panchayats who may in 
turn educate and guide the entrepreneurs and weavers in their area about the 
facilities provided by the Government to run their units. The Committee further 
feel that these Panchayati Raj Institutio ns can help in cluster development in rural 

89 
 
areas by conceptualizing viable projects using local resources of raw materials and 
skills and could stand surety to the clusters for obtaining finances. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that market orientatio n must be developed and quick 
response to the changing requirements of the market be made.  The Committee 
also recommend that suitable incentives be given to the weavers to produce 
popular handloom products in large quantities.  A handloom brand may be evolved  
to target the middle class and  wider publicity be given to such products/brand as 
part of marketing strategy.   Further, the Committee also feel that reviving old and 
extinct designs with professional help may be undertaken under Integrated 
Handloom Development Scheme and a National Museum of Costumes, old and 
modern of different regions of the country be set up.   
(Reply of the Government) 
 The Government of India had introduced Integrated Handlooms 
Development Scheme (IHDS) in the year 2007 -08 for implementation in the XI 
Plan period.  The scheme aims to focus on formation of weavers group as a visible 
entity, develop the Handlooms Weavers Groups to become self -sustainable, 
inclusive approach to cover weavers both within and outside the Cooperative fold, 
skill up-gradation of handlooms weavers/workers to produce diversified products 
with improved quality to meet the market requirements, provide suitable workplace 
to weavers to enable them to produce quality products with improved productivity 
etc.  The Cluster Development projects are under implementation and their success 
can be seen on completion of the projects.  
Skill up-gradation is one of the components of IHDS to equip the weavers 
with the latest technique of weaving and create awareness on the  knowhow of 
designing and dyeing.  

90 
 
               Under the component of Design development and product diversification 
of IHDS, professional qualified Designers from NIFT/NID or any other Institute of 
repute have been engaged in the clusters for product d evelopment/diversification  
with design inputs, training of local designers, documentation of designs/products 
and also for market linkages.  
The  National Handicrafts and Handlooms Museum (NHHM) popularly 
known as Crafts Museum is located at Pragati Maida n, New Delhi, under the 
administrative control of Development Commissioner for Handlooms, Ministry of 
Textiles, plays a vital role in Collection, conservation and preservation of crafts 
specimen, revival, reproduction and development of Art and Craft.  
In order to provide a marketing  platform for  the weavers/handloom  
organizations, the  Government of India  provide  grants in aid to the State 
Governments/ State Handloom Organisations to  organise marketing events at 
various levels,  i.e. District Level E vents, Special Handloom Expos, National 
Handloom Expos( all India level), Craft melas etc.  The weavers from all States of 
the country are given opportunity to  participate and sell their products in Dilli  
Haat and various  craft melas.   The number of ma rketing events have been 
increased every year to provide more opportunities to handloom weavers and their 
cooperative societies to sell their products directly to the consumers.  These events 
also provide the opportunity to understand weaver, the market de mand in terms of 
designs, color trends etc.  
The number of marketing events organised during the last four years and 
sales is tabulated below: 
 
 

91 
 
Year No. of marketing events 
organized 
Sales 
generated 
(Rs. In crore) 
2007-08 313 Rs.146 crore 
2008-09 399 Rs.220 crore 
2009-10 561 Rs.340 crore 
2010-11 680 Rs.410 crore 
 
During the current year 2011 -12, 665 marketing events have been approved 
till 14th October, 2011. 
In order to popularize and establish handloom products as a brand,   the 
Handloom Mark Scheme was launched by Dr. Manmohan Singh Hon'ble Prime 
Minister of India on 28.06.2006.  The Handloom Mark Scheme provides a 
collective identity to the Handloom Product s and is used not only for popularizing 
the hand woven products but also serve as a guarantee for the buyer that the 
product being purchased is genuinely hand woven.   
The Scheme is operational throughout the country. Individual weavers, 
Weavers Co-operative societies, Master weavers, Retailers,  Exporters, Self Help 
Groups, Joint Liability Groups, Consortiums,  Handloom Weavers Groups, 
Producer Companies identified under Integrated Handloom Development Scheme. 
etc., ar e entitled to participate in the scheme.   As on August 2011,  8338 
stakeholders have been registered under the scheme and 203.68 lakh handloom 
marks labels have been sold( cumulative)  and 804 retail outlets are selling 
handloom mark labelled goods.  
  

92 
 
(Recommendation para No. 3.42)     
 The Committee note that Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration & 
Protection) Act, 1999 provides legal protection to goods and prevents unauthorized 
use thereof.  The Committee, however, feel that the Geographical Indications of 
Goods Act, 1999 cannot alone save the textile industry from flooding of market 
with fake imported products as the producers of genuine products are uneducated 
and belong to socially and economically deprived groups.  The Committee feel that 
besides the GI Certificate issued for various handloom items, necessary steps must 
be taken for brand building and suitable promotional schemes launched for their 
registered handloom products to ensure that products sustain in the market. 
Besides, vigorous awareness campaigns be launched to educate the people about 
the difference between the genuine and fake products.   The Committee also 
recommend that registration under GI Certificate be seen as a component of a full -
fledged strategy aimed at overall development of handloom  & handicrafts in India 
and more and more registration  certificates be issued to prevent unauthorized  use 
by others.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the legal action taken, 
if any, during the last five years by the Of fice of Development Commissioner 
Handloom against their  unauthorized use under the Act. 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 The Government of India provide grants to State Governments/State 
Handloom Organisations @ Rs.1.50 lakh per handloom product    to register under 
the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration & Protection) Act, 1999.  
Financial assistance to register 39 items under G.I. has been providc3ed so far in 
the 11th Plan.  The State Governments have been requ ested to organise awareness 
campaigns to educate the weavers about the Act.  For effective implementation/ 

93 
 
enforcement of G.I. registration, it has been proposed to provide financial 
assistance of Rs.5 lakh per product for post registration awareness progr amme, 
publicity & other related activities.  A corpus of Rs.5 crore is also proposed to be 
created for providing legal assistance for effective implementation and to present 
misuse of GI by others.   
 
 
New Delhi;                               HEMANAND BISWAL 
 21st March,  2011                                                     CHAIRMAN, 
  1 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)       STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.   
              

94 
 
 MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 24TH FEBRUARY, 2012  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs in Committee Room `C', 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt the following draft 
action taken reports: 
 
 (i)  Action Taken by the Government on the  recommendations   
  contained in the 18th Report of the  Committee on the subject  
  'Directorate General of  Employment & Training – A  Review';  
 
(ii)  Action Taken by the Government on the  recommendations   
  contained in the 19th Report of the  Committee on 'Demands for  
  Grants of the Ministry of  Labour and Employment for the year 2011- 
  12'; 
 
(iii)  Action Taken by the Government on the  recommendations   
  contained in the 20th Report of the Committee on  'Demands for   
  Grants of the Ministry of  Textiles' for the year 2011-12'. 
 
PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.     Dr. Virendra Kumar 
3.     Shri Narahari Mahato 
4.     Shri Hari Manjhi 
5.     Shr P. Balram Naik 
6.     Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
7.     Shri S. Pakkirappa 
8.     Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
9.     Ms. J. Shantha 
 
 
 

95 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
10. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
11. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
12. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
13. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
14. Shri Rajaram 
15. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 
  
  SECRETARIAT 
          
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Under Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them 
about the draft action taken reports to be considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Labour. 
  
3. The Committee took up the draft Re ports for consideration. The Committee  
adopted the draft Reports without any modification.   
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the reports to both 
the Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

96 
 
 APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations           18       
   
II.     Recommendations/Observations which have been           14            77% 
        accepted by the Government. 
 
        Paragraph Sl. Nos.  3.13, 3.18, 3.25, 3.29, 3.31,   
        3.32, 3.34, 3.37, 3.49, 3.50, 3.52, 3.56, 3.60  
        and 3.63. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
III.    Recommendations/Observations which the   
         Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the    
         Government's reply. 
 
         Paragraph Sl. Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
        replies of Government have not been accepted by    
        the Committee and which require reiteration. 
 
          Paragraph Sl. Nos. NIL 
  
 
V.     Recommendations/Observations in respect of which             
         replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
        Paragraph Sl. Nos. 3.26, 3.27, 3.33, and 3.42.                  
 
 4           23% 
                                            ----------- 
              100%  
                                                               ------------ 
  