30 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-12) 
 (FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
`Welfare of Beedi Workers'] 
 
         THIRTIETH  REPORT 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
           April, 2012/Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
  


2 
 
      
THIRTIETH  REPORT    
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 
(FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
`Welfare of Beedi Workers'] 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 3rd May, 2012    
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2012 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
                   April, 2012/Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 


3 
 
 CONTENTS 
PAGE (S) 
    
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (iii)  
    
INTRODUCTION         (v)   
 
 
Chapter-I  Report 
Chapter-II  Recommendations/Observations which  
   have been accepted by the Government 
 
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations which  
   the Committee do not desire to pursue in  
   view of the Government's reply 
 
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect 
   of which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration 
 
Chapter-V  Recommendations/Observations in respect 
   Of which replies of the Government are  
   Interim in nature 
   
   APPENDICES 
I. Minutes  of  the sittings  of   the  Standing  Committee  
on Labour held  on  30.4.2012    
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
  

4 
 
   COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
2. Shri Raj Babbar 
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
        **5. Shri Pakauri Lal 
6. Shri Narahari Mahato 
         7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Smt. Mausam Noor 
10. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
14. Ms. J. Shantha 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
*16. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
  ****17. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
     21. Vacant 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
25. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
***26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        28. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
        29. Shri Rajaram 
     ***30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri G. N. Ratanpuri 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*   Nominated w.e.f 25th November, 2011. 
**  Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his 
nomination to Standing Committee on Coal & Steel w.e.f. 3rd 
January, 2012. 

5 
 
***   Retired w.e.f. 02.04.2012 and 03.04.2012 respectively. 
****  Nominated w.e.f. 12th April, 2012. 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director  
 3.    Smt. Archana Srivastava - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
      
   
  
 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I,  the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour (2011 -
12) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report 
on their behalf, present this Thirtieth Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Welfare of Beedi Workers’. 
 
2.  The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.3.2012.  The Ministry of Labour and 
Employment furnished their re plies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 19.3.2012             
The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee 
on Labour at their sitting held on 30.4.2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Gove rnment on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
    
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee have been printed 
in bold type in the body of the Report.                
                  
   
 
New Delhi,                                   HEMANAND BISWAL,   
 30th April,  2012,                        CHAIRMAN,                                                  
10 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
       
 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations/observations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on `Welfare of Beedi Workers'. 
  
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 24 th March, 2011. It contained 18 
recommendations/ observations. Replies of Government in respect 
of all the recommendations have been received and categorized as 
under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government –  
Rec. Sl. Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 
11, 12, 13, 15, 17 - Para Nos. 1.18, 1.19, 
1.20, 1.21, 1.22, 1.23, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 
2.14, 2.15,  3.5, 3.6, 4.8 and 5.14 
  
 
 
 
Total - 15 
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply  
– NIL -    
 
 
 
 
Total - 0 
Chapter-III 
 

8 
 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not    
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration – 
 Rec.  Sl. No. 14 - Para No. 4.7 
 
 
Total -1 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim 
in nature -   
Rec. Sl.No. 16 and 18 - Para No. 5.13 and 
5.15 
 
 
Total-2 
Chapter-V 
 
    
3. The Committee desire that action taken replies in respect 
of recommendations/observations contained in Chapter I and 
final action taken replies in respect of the recommendations 
contained in Chapter V for which interim replies have been 
given by the Govern ment may be furnished to them at the 
earliest but in any case, not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report.   
 
  

9 
 
Amendment to the Beedi Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1976 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.18)      
 
4. The Committee had found  that the only source of finance of 
welfare schemes for beedi workers under BWWF  was the Cess 
collected on manufactured beedis . At Present, the cess is collected 
@ 0.5% per thousand beedis manufactured w.e.f. 01 April, 2006. 
The Committee had strongly fe lt that the Beedi Workers Cess Act, 
1976, which was last amended in 1998 need urgent amendment 
since the rate of cess cannot be increased beyond Rs.5/ - per 
thousand manufactured beedis. The Committee  had, therefore, 
recommended that a suitable proposal be mo oted to the Ministry of 
Finance de-novo, specifically expressing the serious concern of the 
Committee, for amending the Beedi Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1976 
to enhance the rate of cess with provision of periodic revision.  The 
Committee had also recommend ed that in the meantime, till the 
Cess Act is amended, additional budgetary support be obtained 
from the Ministry of Finance for funding the Beedi Workers Welfare 
Fund so that welfare activities of beedi workers are not impeded.  
5. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee , the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 
Ministry of Finance has been requested vide letter dated 
22.7.2011 to enhance the rate of cess. A D.O reminder was 
issued on 12.12.2011. Last reminder issued on 10.2.201 2. 
Proposal has also been sent to the Controller of Accounts, 

10 
 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for allocation of 
additional fund. 
 
6. The Committee note  that though the Ministry had 
pursued the matter with the Ministry of Finance but without 
any results.  Since lack of funds is badly affecting the welfare 
activities of beedi workers, the Committee reiterate that the 
matter may continue to be pursued with the Ministry of 
Finance till adequate budgetary support is extended for the 
welfare of beedi workers. 
 
Withdrawal of exemption to Beedi Manufacturers 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.19)      
 
7.  Keeping in view the exemption available under Section 3A 
of the B eedi Workers Cess Act, 1976, to the manufacturers of less 
than 20 lakh unbranded beedis in a year , a number of 
manufacturers were splitting their business into smaller units to 
enjoy the exemption limit and escape payment of cess.  While 
dismissing the argument of Ministry of Finance that the withdrawal 
of exemption should put a big administrative burden on the Central 

11 
 
Excise Department, the Committee  recommended that the Ministry 
might move a fresh proposal to the Ministry of Finance emphasizing 
the considered view of this Committee since all the welfare activities 
of the beedi workers are financed through the cess collection only.  
8. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committ ee, the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 
Ministry of Finance has been requested vide letter dated 
22.7.2011 for withdrawal of exemption given to beedi 
manufacturers. A D.O.  reminder was issued on 12.12.2011.  
Last reminder issued on 10.2.2012. 
 
9. The Committee are concerned about the plummeting 
corpus of B eedi Workers' Welfare Fund (BWWF) which  
incessantly is in deficit.  Since all the welfare activities for the 
beedi workers are dependant upon and are financed through 
BWWF, the Committee desire the Ministry to take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance with unflagging resolve till 
the exemption given to beedi manufacturers is withdrawn. 
 
Issuance of Identity Cards and Identification of Beedi Workers 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.21 & 1.22)      

12 
 
 
10.  The Committee had noted that there were number of 
players running illegal beedi companies through contractors and 
sub-contractors thereby showing lesser  employees in their records 
whereas a large number of people are actually working under them 
through their contractors and sub -contractors.  In the absence of  
direct link age with a particular employer tho se workers were 
deprived of all the benefits under the Beedi W orkers Welfare Fund.  
The Committee had, therefore, recommended that the Government 
should initiate immediate steps to bring awareness amongst the 
workers engaged in beedi rolling about their legitimate rights and 
all beedi workers  be issued Identity Card s irrespective of the fact 
whether they were registered with any contractor or sub-contractor.   
 
11.  The Committee had noted that as per the estimation of 
the Ministry, there were around 55 lakh workers all over the 
country engaged in beedi rolling by th e registered companies.  This 
figure might go beyond one crore if unregistered small companies 
too are taken into account.  The Committee  had, therefore, 
recommended that a proper mapping should be done for identifying 
the beedi workers engaged by th ose unregistered small companies 
and also under contractors and sub -contractors for issuance of 
Identity Cards so that they are able to avail the welfare schemes 
meant for them. 

13 
 
12. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee , the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 
Principal Secretaries  of the State Governments have been 
requested vide letter dated 21.6.2011 for necessary action.  All 
WCs have also been requested vide letter dated 21.6.2011 for 
necessary action. 
 
13. The Committee are o f the considered view that mere 
writing letters to State Governments will not achieve the 
desired result unless the matter is pursued vigorously.  Further 
the matter needs to be discussed at conference of State Labour 
Secretaries or Labour Ministers or at every such common for a 
so that Identity Cards are issued to all the beedi workers with a 
view to preventing their exploitation and to facilitate them to 
avail the benefits of welfare schemes meant for them. 
 
Evaluation studies of the schemes under BWWF 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.23)      
 

14 
 
14. The Committee had found that no evaluative study ha d been 
undertaken by the Ministry in the recent past to assess the 
performance of various schemes under BWWF  accept an evaluative 
study in respect of only two of the welfare schemes, viz., hospitals 
and housing.  The Committee had felt that all the schemes under 
BWWF were vital and need periodic evaluation so that not only their 
impact and the shortcomings be known but also th ose could be 
restructured suitably.  The Committee had, therefore, recommended 
that evaluation studies of all the schemes under BWWF be 
conducted within a definite timeline and their reports furnished to 
the Committee along with the action taken by the Government 
thereon.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
outcome of the evaluation study being conducted in respect of 
housing and hospitals for the beedi workers.   
 
15. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee , the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 
 
Evaluation studies have been conducted by the Ministry viz.  
(A) Survey for assessment of Identity Cards of Beedi Workers 
in Malda and Murshidabad  in West Bengal (B) Revised 
Integrated Housing Scheme (RIHS), 2007 for Beedi Workers in 
various states of India (C) Scheme of Financial Assistance for 
education under Beedi, Cine and Mine Workers Welfare Funds 

15 
 
– Impact evaluation and enhancement (D) Up gra dation of 
Beedi worker’s Hospitals.  All the above reports have been 
received. Welfare commissioners have been advised to take 
necessary actions on the suggestions/recommendations. 
 
16. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry have 
conducted evalu ative studies for housing, education and 
hospitals besides survey for assessment of Identity Cards in 
Malda and Murshidabad Distts of West Bengal.  The Committee 
desire that they may be furnished a copy each of the above 
reports alongwith the action taken or proposed to be taken by 
the Government.   The Committee also desire that the mapping 
of beedi workers for assessment of Identity Cards be finished 
without any further delay. 
 
Stipulation of depositing Rs.5000 by the beedi worker for grant 
of subsidy 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.7)      
 
17. The Committee  had found that to avail the subsidy of 
Rs.40,000/- under the Revised Integrated Housing Scheme (RIHS), 

16 
 
the worker ha d to deposit an amount of Rs.5,000/ - which was 
released to him alongwith the 2 nd instalment.  The Central Advisory 
Committee (CAC), in one of their recommendations, advocated the 
need to waive of the wor kers’ contribution of Rs.5000. The 
Committee had endorsed the recommendation of the CAC that 
necessary steps be taken to do away with this stipulation of 
depositing Rs.5000 by the beedi worker for grant of subsidy. 
 
18. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee , the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 
The issue was examined and it was felt that in order to induce 
ownership in the scheme some contribution would be required 
to be taken from the beneficiary. 
 
19. Considering the distressful financial conditions of the 
beedi workers and the recommendation of the Central Advisory 
Committee, t he Committee find the reply of the Ministry 
unacceptable.   The Committee feel that sense of ownership 
would arise once the beneficiary gets the subsidy to construct 
his own house.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the 
contribution of beedi workers be waived off.  

17 
 
 
Evaluation Study of Revised Integrated Housing Scheme 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.8)      
 
20. The Committee had noted that an evaluation study of the 
existing RIHS was conducted by an external agency.  The 
Committee had desired to know the status of the evaluation study 
time of submission of the and also the recommendations made by 
them. 
 
21. In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee , the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as follows: 
 
The society for Regional Research and Analysis, Gurgaon has 
submitted its report in November 2010. Welfare 
Commissioner’s have been advised to take the necessary 
action.  The recommendations/suggestions of the report are as 
under: 
(i)There should be regula r monitoring of the scheme to have 
periodical reviews in order to timely address the problems if 
any and to avoid long delays.  Effective monitoring is very 
important as there are very old pending cases (ii) 
Advertisements in  local newspapers and TV chann els should 
be placed for creating better awareness. Panchayats can also 

18 
 
be used to create awareness by sending leaflets related to the 
scheme to the panchayats with the request to put it on their 
notice board (iii) Houses constructed under the scheme should 
have some sign boards/some identification marks on the 
house of clear identification of the house from those 
constructed under other schemes and/or by using own money 
(iv) It is very difficult to get non -encumbrance certificate and 
the documents related to ownership of land.  Panchayat letter 
certifying the possession of the land by the beneficiaries 
should be considered for land ownership and that of Notary 
Public in place of non -encumbrance certificate.(v) Most beedi 
workers with a few exceptions have income below Rs. 6500 per 
month as required to be eligible for the scheme.  Therefore, the 
requirement of income certificate may be waived. (vi) 
Application for accessing RIHS 2007 requires the design/map 
of the proposed house.  In many places the photocopi es of 
predrawn maps are available and the beneficiaries buy and 
enclose these maps.  None of the beneficiary has used the 
design enclosed with application in building their house.  
These maps are available in a high cost of upto Rs. 100 in 
some places.  Th e Labour Commissioners may get a house 
design/map drawn keeping in mind the local house types in 
their respective areas and should  give a copy to the beedi 
workers who are selected to provide grant and should be asked 
to follow the design.(vii) It has bee n observed in most of the 
states that the period of 18 months for the completion of the 

19 
 
house is  not enough for various reasons.  Increasing the 
period from 18 to 24 months may be considered for individual 
houses and 30 months for Group Housing Schemes. ( viii) The 
subsidy amount is released in two installments.  After getting 
the administrative approval of the house, release of first 
installment and utilization certificate of the first installment, 
the approval of the second installment may be accorded by the 
Welfare Commissioner.  In case required, extension of first 6 
months may also be awarded by Welfare Commissioner.(ix) 
The decision as regards to the maximum amount of Rs. 1.0 
lakh to be spent on the construction was taken some years 
back.  The construc tion cost has increased over that period 
and the ceiling may be revised to Rs. 1.5 lakh because many 
beneficiaries have spent more than one lakh rupees. (x) Beedi 
workers should be encouraged to form cooperative societies 
and construct group houses wherever possible.  This is easy to 
monitor the progress and quality of construction of number of 
houses constructed at one place by one contractor than those  
constructed by the individually scattered at different places.  
(xI) The implementation of RIHS 2007 re quires lot of work and 
more staff than available in the states with the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment.  Active partnership of the states, 
which have staff in various administrative units, will help in 
efficient implementation of the scheme.  Such an ar rangement 
will need periodic monitoring by the Welfare Commissioners 

20 
 
and the officers of the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
based in Delhi as wall as in respective states/ regions. 
 
22. The Committee find that the study commissioned by the 
Government has made a number of valuable suggestions which 
if accepted, would lead to effective implementation of the 
scheme.  The Committee desire that the recommendations 
made by the Society for Regional Research and Analysis, 
Gurgaon be given serious consideration a nd the bottlenecks in 
the Scheme as pointed out by them be corrected without 
further delay.  
  

21 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.18)      
 The Committee note that the Beedi Workers Welfare Fund Act, 
(1976) (BWWF) is an important legislation enacted by Parliament for 
the benefit of beedi workers. The Beedi Workers Welfare Fund, set 
up under the said Act, is financed through a levy of cess by the way 
of excise duty on manufactured beedis. The Committee find that the 
cess so collected is the only source of finance of welfare schemes for 
beedi workers under BWWF. Till the year 2006 -07, the BWWF had 
surplus funds and from the year 2007 -08, the corpus of BWWF 
plummeted, went in def icit and continues to be in deficit. At 
Present, the cess is collected @ 0.5% per thousand beedis 
manufactured w.e.f. 01 April, 2006. The Committee note that the 
expenditure on the welfare schemes is increasing every year and 
due to paucity of funds, the M inistry is finding itself handcuffed to 
run smoothly even the ongoing schemes. The Committee further 
note that during 2009 -10, the Ministry of Finance allocated an 
additional sum of Rs. 40.05 crore as budgetary support to fund the 
backlog of scholarships given to the children of beedi workers under 
the Welfare Fund. The Committee strongly feel that there is an 
urgent need to amend the Beedi Workers Cess Act, 1976, which 

22 
 
was last amended in 1998 and under which the rate of cess cannot 
be increased beyond Rs. 5/- per thousand manufactured beedis. 
The Committee feel that since the cost of living has gone up 
considerably, the rate of cess too needs revision. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a suitable proposal be mooted to the 
Ministry of Finance de-novo, specifically expressing the serious 
concern of the Committee, for amending the Beedi Workers Welfare 
Cess Act, 1976 to enhance the rate of cess with provision of periodic 
revision.  The Committee also recommend that in the meantime, till 
the Cess Act is a mended, additional budgetary support be obtained 
from the Ministry of Finance for funding the Beedi Workers Welfare 
Fund so that welfare activities of beedi workers are not impeded.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Ministry of Finance has been requested vide lett er dated 
22.7.2011 to enhance the rate of cess. A D.O reminder was issued 
on 12.12.2011. Last reminder issued on 10.2.2012. Proposal has 
also been sent to the Controller of Accounts, Ministry of Labour and 
Employment for allocation of additional fund. 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.19)      
 The Committee note that under Section 3A of the Beedi 
Workers Cess Act, 1976, exemption in cess is granted to the 
manufacturers of less than 20 lakh unbranded beedis in a year.  
Taking advantage of this provision, a num ber of unscrupulous 
manufacturers are splitting their business into smaller units to 

23 
 
enjoy the exemption limit and escape payment of cess.  According to 
the Ministry, its proposal to the Ministry of Finance to withdraw the 
exemption was not agreed to on th e ground that withdrawal of 
exemption shall put a big administrative burden on the Central 
Excise Department to collect the cess from a large number of small 
manufacturers who would also be put to hardship.  Since all the 
welfare activities of the beedi workers are financed through the cess 
collection only, the Committee dismiss the argument of 
apprehended administrative burden of the Ministry of Finance being 
untenable as withdrawal of such an exemption will not only bring in 
funds to the depleted corpus of the BWWF but also tax the profits of 
those beedi manufacturers who are thriving at the cost of poor 
beedi labourers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry move a fresh proposal to the Ministry of Finance 
emphasizing the considered view o f this Committee so that the 
exemption given to beedi manufacturers of less than 20 lakh 
unbranded beedis in a year is done away with.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Ministry of Finance has been requested vide letter dated 
22.7.2011 for withdrawal of exemption given to beedi 
manufacturers. A D.O.reminder was issued on 12.12.2011.  Last 
reminder issued on 10.2.2012. 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.20)      

24 
 
 The Committee note that about 6 lakh beedi workers have not 
been issued identity cards till date which is depriving them to have 
access to the welfare fund and availing benefits under the schemes 
meant for them.   On the other hand, the Committee are perturbed 
to note that  about 24.8% identity cards were of questionable 
validity in Malda and Murshidabad districts of West Bengal as 
revealed by the sample survey conducted by Shri Ram Centre of 
Industrial Relations and Human Resources, New Delhi in the year 
2009.  In the view of the Committee, if this is the position of only 
two districts of one State, then the percentage of fake/duplicate 
identity cards might be, obviously, far more had the survey 
traversed other States too where beedi rolling is a profession.  The 
Committee a ttribute it to the fact that multiple agencies are 
involved in the issuance of identity cards.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the work of issuance of identity cards be 
allocated block / district wise to only one agency so as to avoid 
duplicity a nd stringent action be taken against the unauthorized 
agencies found issuing the fictitious identity cards. The Committee 
note that issuance of identity cards is an ongoing process but 
certainly it cannot remain infinitely so and vigorous efforts must be 
made to complete it within the year 2011 atleast to cover the 
identified beedi workers.  The Committee would like to be informed 
of the progress achieved in the matter before June, 2011.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

25 
 
 Matter is under consideration.  All Welfare Commissioners 
have been requested to take necessary action.  Till 31.07.2011, 
51.28 lakh beedi workers have been issued identity cards against 
49.82 lakh upto 31.12.2009.     
(Recommendation Para No. 1.21)      
 The Committee note that there are a number o f players 
running illegal beedi companies through contractors and sub -
contractors.  These employers show in their records a very small 
number of people working under them whereas a large number of 
people are actually working under them through their contra ctors 
and sub-contractors.  Resultantly, these workers are not registered 
in the main employers’ muster roll and are, therefore, not directly 
linked with a particular employer.  Eventually, in the absence of 
their registration with any employer these worke rs are deprived of 
all the benefits under the Beedi Workers Welfare Fund.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government initiate 
immediate steps to bring awareness amongst these workers 
engaged in beedi rolling about their legitimate rights and all beedi 
workers  be issued Identity Cards irrespective of the fact whether 
they are registered with any contractor or sub-contractor.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Pr. Secretary’s of the State Governments have been requested 
vide letter dated 21.6.2011 for necessary action.  All WCs have also 
been requested vide letter dated 21.6.2011 for necessary action. 

26 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.22)      
 The Committee further note that as per the estimation of the 
Ministry, there are around 55 lakh workers all over the country 
engaged in beedi rolling by the registered companies.  This figure 
might go beyond one crore if unregistered small companies too are 
taken into account.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a 
proper mapping should be done for identifying the b eedi workers 
engaged by these unregistered small companies and also under 
contractors and sub -contractors for issuance of Identity Cards so 
that they are able to avail the welfare schemes meant for them.   
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Pr. Secretary’s of the State Governments have been requested 
vide letter dated 21.6.2011 for necessary action.  All WCs have also 
been requested vide letter dated 21.6.2011 for necessary action. 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.23)      
 The Committee find that no evaluative study ha s been 
undertaken by the Ministry in the recent past to assess  the 
performance of various schemes under BWWF.  According to the 
Ministry, an evaluative study in respect of only two of the welfare 
schemes, viz., hospitals and housing was being conducted.  The 

27 
 
Committee feel that all the schemes under BWWF are vital and need 
periodic evaluation so that not only their impact and the 
shortcomings be known but  also these could be restructured 
suitably to ensure decent standard of life and enjoyment of leisure 
by the beedi workers and their families. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that evaluation studies of all the schemes under BWWF 
be conducted within a definite timeline and their reports furnished 
to the Committee along with the action taken by the Gover nment 
thereon.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
outcome of the evaluation study being conducted in respect of 
housing and hospitals for the beedi workers.   
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Evaluation studies have been conducted by the Ministry viz.(A) 
Survey for assessment of Identity Cards of Beedi Workers in Malda 
and Murshidabad in West Bengal (B) Revised Integrated Housing 
Scheme (RIHS), 2007 for Beedi Workers in various states of India 
(C) Scheme of Financial Assistance for educati on under Beedi, Cine 
and Mine Workers Welfare Funds – Impact evaluation and 
enhancement (D) Up gradation of Beedi worker’s Hospitals.  All the 
above reports have been received. Welfare commissioners have been 

28 
 
advised to take necessary actions on the 
suggestions/recommendations. 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.11)      
2.11  The Committee note that the medical facilities are being 
provided to 55 lakh identified beedi workers through 7 hospitals 
and 204 dispensaries all over the country.  The Ministry have  
admitted that these hospitals are inadequate to cater to the needs 
of the beedi workers.  Still worse, most of these hospitals are 
located at far off places and beyond the access of beedi workers due 
to which they are not in a position to avail the medica l facilities.  
The Committee find that common problems associated with beedi 
rolling are respiratory, asthma, body ache, headaches, eyestrain, 
tuberculosis and spondilitis.  These affect the beedi rollers and 
others involved in the manufacturing of beedis too.  The Committee, 
strongly feel that these workers need specialized, accessible, 
affordable and regular medicare.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
that some alternative arrangements be made urgently for extending 
specialized medical treatment to the be edi workers who suffer from 
these ailments.  Besides, arrangements also be made to ferry these 
workers to the hospitals as often they cannot afford to go to the 
hospitals for treatment for want of money. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 A decision has been taken t o cover beedi workers  under  
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojna which covers all pre -existing 

29 
 
diseases and Rs. 100 is given at the time of discharge of the patient 
for transport expenses.  
(Recommendation Para No. 2.12)      
 The Committee note that the accomm odation in all the seven 
hospitals, meant for beedi workers, is not commensurate with their 
population. Not only this, even these hospitals are also not well -
equipped to cater to the medical requirements of the beedi workers 
and there is an acute shortage of medical and para-medical staff in 
these hospitals.  A 30 bedded hospital at Bihar Sharif which was 
constructed long back but is still not operational for want of 
medical staff.  Such an apathy and indifference speaks volumes 
about the Ministry’s concern  for the health and well -being of beedi 
workers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that vacancies of 
medical and para -medical staff in all the hospitals be filled up by 
December, 2011 positively and the Committee apprised. 
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Ministry of Health, which is cadre controlling authority for 
medical officer, has provided medical staff for the hospitals but only 
few of these have joined.  Welfare Commissioners have also been 

30 
 
advised to fill-up post on contract basis and make arrangemen t for 
other staff. 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.13)      
 The Committee note that after the amendment in the 
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Bill, the ESI Corporation 
has agreed in principle to extend the medical benefits to the 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima  Yojna (RSBY) beneficiaries.  The spare 
capacity of ESIC hospitals is also being utilized for the  persons 
willing to avail such services on payment basis.  The Committee 
recommend that in view of the financial crunch in the BWWF, 
possibilities be explored  and negotiations made with the ESIC to 
utilize their extant healthcare infrastructure for beedi workers too 
rather than opening new hospitals for them in the areas covered by 
the ESIC.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ESIC has been approached to examine the feasi bility extending 
facility in ESIC hospitals to beedi workers. 4 new hospitals and 40 
dispensaries have also been approved in the country for Beedi 
Workers.. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.14)      

31 
 
 The Government is running flagship programmes like 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojna (RSBY) and Aam Admi Bima Yojna 
(AABY) in the health sector.  Beedi workers who are in the BPL 
category are eligible for coverage under the RSBY and the rural 
landless worker can get coverage under the Aam Admi Bima Yojna.  
The Committee are of the considered view that almost all the beedi 
workers can well be covered under either of these schemes.  Hence, 
the hospitals earmarked for the beneficiaries of these schemes can 
also be utilized for the medical needs of the beedi workers.  The 
Committee,  therefore, desire that beedi workers particularly those 
in rural areas be made aware of these facilities so that they need 
not necessarily depend only on those hospitals meant for them and 
which are far off/inaccessible. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 All Welfare Commissioners have been requested vide letter 
dated 21.6.2011. 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.15)      
 The Committee find that an amount of Rs.10,000/- for natural 
death and Rs.25,000/ - for accidental death is being paid to the 
heirs of the beedi  workers. The premium is paid from the Beedi 
workers Welfare Fund to the Life Insurance Corporation of India 
(LIC).  As the compensation is very low and keeping in view the 
limited funds, this amount cannot be enhanced as it would entail 
enhanced premium, the Committee are of the view that once the 

32 
 
arrangements are made with the ESIC and other hospitals for the 
beedi workers as suggested in para 2.14 above, the funds so saved 
can well be utilized to enhance the amount atleast to Rs.50.000/ - 
for natural death and Rs.1,00,000/- for accidental death.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 A proposal in this regard is under consideration of the 
Government. 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.5)      
 The Committee note that scholarships are given to the wards 
of beedi  workers studying in various classes starting from 1 st 
standard and also undergoing professional courses.  The 
scholarship per child per annum ranges from Rs.250 to Rs.8,000. 
The Ministry confessed that “ the amount of Rs.8,000/ - for 
professional degree cou rse is not justified.”  Accordingly to the 
Ministry, the flagship programme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) of 
the Central Government has become so popular that all schools 
running for the wards of beedi workers have been closed down due 
to this Sarva Shiks ha  Abhiyan and the funds are now being 
utilized for disbursement of scholarships.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry step up the amount of 
scholarships commensurately so that the wards of the beedi 
workers could pursue the professional degree courses. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

33 
 
 Proposal for enhancement of scholarship to the professional 
degree courses is under consideration of the Government.  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.6)      
 The Committee note that the entire family of a beedi  worker 
must work for the whole day to meet the target of rolling 1000 
beedis to secure full day wage.  In such a pernicious circumstance, 
children forego per force their education to supplement their family 
income. The Committee, therefore, desire that a suitable 
mechanism be evolved and awareness campaign launched so that 
the children of beedi workers could  get at least the elementary 
education under the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 All Welfare Commissioners have been requested  for n ecessary 
action.  
(Recommendation Para No. 4.8)      
 The Committee note that an evaluation study of the existing 
RIHS is being conducted by an external agency.  The agency was 
given a time frame of six months for submission of its report. The 
Committee de sire to know the current status of the evaluation 
study and likely time of submission of the report by the agency.  
The Committee also desire that they may also be apprised of the 
recommendations made by the agency. 

34 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The society for Regional Research and Analysis, Gurgaon has 
submitted its report in November 2010. Welfare Commissioner’s 
have been advised to take the necessary action.  The 
recommendations/suggestions of the report are as under: 
(i)There should be regula r monitoring of the scheme to have 
periodical reviews in order to timely address the problems if any 
and to avoid long delays.  Effective monitoring is very important as 
there are very old pending cases (ii) Advertisements in  local 
newspapers and TV chann els should be placed for creating better 
awareness. Panchayats can also be used to create awareness by 
sending leaflets related to the scheme to the panchayats with the 
request to put it on their notice board (iii) Houses constructed 
under the scheme shoul d have some sign boards/some 
identification marks on the house of clear identification of the 
house from those constructed under other schemes and/or by 
using own money (iv) It is very difficult to get non -encumbrance 
certificate and the documents related to ownership of land.  
Panchayat letter certifying the possession of the land by the 
beneficiaries should be considered for land ownership and that of 
Notary Public in place of non-encumbrance certificate.(v) Most beedi 
workers with a few exceptions have i ncome below Rs. 6500 per 
month as required to be eligible for the scheme.  Therefore, the 
requirement of income certificate may be waived. (vi) Application for 
accessing RIHS 2007 requires the design/map of the proposed 

35 
 
house.  In many places the photocopi es of predrawn maps are 
available and the beneficiaries buy and enclose these maps.  None 
of the beneficiary has used the design enclosed with application in 
building their house.  These maps are available in a high cost of 
upto Rs. 100 in some places.  The Labour Commissioners may get a 
house design/map drawn keeping in mind the local house types in 
their respective areas and should  give a copy to the beedi workers 
who are selected to provide grant and should be asked to follow the 
design.(vii) It has bee n observed in most of the states that the 
period of 18 months for the completion of the house is  not enough 
for various reasons.  Increasing the period from 18 to 24 months 
may be considered for individual houses and 30 months for Group 
Housing Schemes. ( viii) The subsidy amount is released in two 
installments.  After getting the administrative approval of the 
house, release of first installment and utilization certificate of the 
first installment, the approval of the second installment may be 
accorded by the Welfare Commissioner.  In case required, extension 
of first 6 months may also be awarded by Welfare Commissioner.(ix) 
The decision as regards to the maximum amount of Rs. 1.0 lakh to 
be spent on the construction was taken some years back.  The 
construction cost has increased over that period and the ceiling 
may be revised to Rs. 1.5 lakh because many beneficiaries have 
spent more than one lakh rupees. (x) Beedi workers should be 
encouraged to form cooperative societies and construct group 
houses wherever possible.  This is easy to monitor the progress and 
quality of construction of number of houses constructed at one 

36 
 
place by one contractor than those  constructed by the individually 
scattered at different places.  (xI) The implementation of RIHS 2007 
requires lot of work and more staff than available in the states with 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment.  Active partnership of the 
states, which have staff in various administrative units, will help in 
efficient implementation of the scheme.  Such an ar rangement will 
need periodic monitoring by the Welfare Commissioners and the 
officers of the Ministry of Labour and Employment based in Delhi as 
wall as in respective states/ regions. 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.14) 
 During their study visit to Kolkata, the y also came across 
glaring instance of the Minimum Wages Act.  The Committee are 
appalled to note that the workers are getting merely Rs.41/ - per 
thousand beedis rolled on the basis of bi -partite agreement reached 
in the year 2005 between the Employers’ As sociation and the 
Workers’ Union notwithstanding the fact that State Government of 
West Bengal has fixed Rs.113.97 (the minimum in the State of West 
Bengal) as minimum wages for per 1000 beedis rolled or Rs.113.02 
per day. The Committee are disconcerted to note that unscrupulous 
employers are exploiting the poor workers by making a mockery of 
the Minimum Wages Act.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
State Governments be vigorously persuaded to adopt atleast the 
Minimum Floor Level Wages besides fram ing stricter norms against 
the beedi manufacturers/contractors who indulge in such wanton 
malpractices. 

37 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 All State Governments have been requested   to adopt atleast 
the National  Floor Level Minimum  Wages. 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDTIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
  

38 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 (Recommendation Para No. 4.7)      
 The Committee find that under the Revised Integrated Housing 
Scheme (RIHS), a uniform subsidy of Rs. 40,000/ - is provided to 
the beedi workers who have atleast  completed one year of service 
and who have approx of 60 sq. yard of land.  In order to avail the 
subsidy, the worker has to deposit an amount of Rs.5,000/ - which 
is released to him alongwith the 2 nd instalment.  The Central 
Advisory Committee (CAC), in on e of their recommendations, 
advocated the need to waive of the workers’ contribution of 
Rs.5000.  The Committee find that often it is very difficult for a poor 
beedi worker to arrange even Rs.5000 and failing which he would 
be deprived of the subsidy of Rs .40,000 under the RIHS.  The 
Committee endorse the recommendation of the CAC that necessary 
steps be taken to do away with this stipulation of depositing 
Rs.5000 by the beedi worker for grant of subsidy. 
 
 
 

39 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The issue was examined and it was felt that in order to induce 
ownership in the scheme some contribution would be required to be 
taken from the beneficiary. 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 (Recommendation Para No. 5.13)      
 During their study visit to Kolkata in June, 2010, the 
Committee were anguished to find rampant exploitation of beedi 
workers on a multiple of scores like under payment of wages on per 
thousand beedis rolled by them, r ejection of beedis rolled on one 
pretext or the other, denial of social security benefits/schemes, 
avoidance of full payment and denial of other statutory 
amenities/facilities. The Committee deplore that the Ministry 
instead of finding a concrete way out t o ensure that the contractors 
do not debunk and mock at the statutory protections,  replied that 
the implementation of the Beedi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of 
Employment) Act, 1966 fell under the domain the State 
Governments. Such a specious argument is  not acceptable and the 
Union Government cannot be allowed to shirk their responsibility of 
upholding the laws of the republic intended to safeguard the vital 
interest and well being of poor beedi workers.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Governme nt undertake comprehensive 
review of all the labour laws in order that statutory protections to 
the poor workers including beedi workers do not remain pious 
platitudes but enforced substantially in accord with the legislative 
intent.   

41 
 
The Committee were a lso informed by the Ministry that ‘as per the 
decision of CAC, V. V. Giri National Labour Institute has been 
requested to undertake a study and suggest amendments to the 
Beedi and Cigar Workers Act, 1966’.  The Committee are of the view 
mere amendments to the Act will not yield the desired results as 
implementation/execution of the provisions of the Act would still 
rest with the State Governments. The Committee also find that 
Deputy Labour Commissioners and Regional Labour 
Commissioners merely act as concil iation machinery and have no 
prosecution powers at present due to which implementation of the 
Act becomes more or less ineffective. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly feel that the office of the Chief Labour Commissioner be 
given adequate statutory powers to ensure proper implementation 
of the labour laws through its enforcement machinery, i.e. the 
Deputy Labour Commissioners (C), Regional Labour Commissioners 
and Assistant Labour Commissioners positioned in different States.    
The Committee further recommend that it must be made mandatory 
for all RLCs and ALCs in the States to make regular field visits and 
conduct surprise checks every month to detect any violation of the 
labour laws by the beedi manufacturers and submit their  reports 
to the Chief Labour Commissioner for suitable action against the 
guilty manufacturers.  The Committee would also like that the 
Government place annually a review on the implementation of 
statutory protections given to the labour under each enactment.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

42 
 
 Letter sent to NLI to undertake a study and suggest 
amendments to the Beedi and Cigar Workers Act, 1966. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.15)      
 
 The Committee observe that an amount of Rs.5,000/ - each is 
granted to widow/widower of beedi worker for solemn izing the 
marriages of first two daughters.  The Committee find this amount 
rather too paltry to solemnize a marriage.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that this amount be enhanced atleast to 
Rs.25,000/-. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The matter will be pla ced before central advisory committee in 
the next meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;               HEMANAND BISWAL 
 April,  2012                                                CHAIRMAN  
Vaisakha , 1934 (Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR. 
  
  

43 
 
  

44 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 30TH APRIL, 2012.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs in Room 
No.116, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt 
the draft Reports on Demands for Grants for the yea r 2012-13 of 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment and Ministry of Textiles 
and Action Taken Report on the Seventeenth Report on `Welfare of 
Beedi Workers'.  
PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
3. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4. Shri Narahari Mahato 
5. Ms. Mausam Noor 
6. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
7.      Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 8. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
 9. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 10. Dr. E.M.Sudarsana Natchiappan 
 11. Shri Rajaram 
 12. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  
     
 
 

45 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the draft Reports on Demands for Grants for 
the year 2012 -13 of the Ministry of Labour and Employment and 
Ministry of Textiles and Action Taken Report on the Seventeenth 
Report on `Welfare of Beedi Workers'.  
  
3.  The Committee then took up the draft Reports one by one in 
the following order and after detailed deliberations, the Committee 
adopted the draft Reports without any modification: 
   
 (i) Draft Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
  Labour and Employment for the year 2012-13; 
 (ii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
  Textiles for the year 2012-13; and 
 (iii) Action taken by the Government on the     
  Recommendations/Observations contained in the   
  Seventeenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on `Welfare of  
  Beedi Workers' 
 
 
 

46 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
Reports and to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

47 
 
 APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations       18   
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government –  
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 
15, 17 - Para Nos. 1.18, 1.19, 1.20, 1.21, 1.22, 1.23, 
2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 2.15,  3.5, 3.6, 4.8 and 5.14 
 
  
 
 
15       83.4% 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply  
 
 
    NIL      0% 
 
  
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government  have not    been accepted by 
the Committee and which require reiteration – 
  
Rec.  Sl. No. 14 - Para No. 4.7 
 
      1         5.6% 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature -   
 
Rec. Sl.No. 16 and 18 - Para No. 5.13 and 5.15 
     2        11% 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  

48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 