1 
 
  
36 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2012-13) 
 (FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2013-14) 
  
         THIRTY- SIXTH  REPORT 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
           April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 


2 
 
      
THIRTY-SIXTH   REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2012-13) 
 
(FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2013-14) 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on  29th April, 2013    
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29th April, 2013 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
                   April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE (S) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE        
    
INTRODUCTION          
 
      REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I        IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMITTEE'S  
 RECOMMENDATIONS 
  
CHAPTER-II    INTRODUCTORY         
       
CHAPTER-III  REPORT – DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14)   
A. General Performance 
B.  Indian Institutes of Handloom Technology 
C. Plight of small powerloom weavers 
D. Office of the Textile Commissioner 
E. Research & Development 
F. Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 
G. Health Insurance Schemes 
CHAPTER-IV RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSRVATIONS 
 
ANNEXURES 
  (i) Annexure-I -Status of textile industry in Uttar Pradesh  as provided 
   by Ministry under RTI Act, 2005 
  (ii) Annexure-II -Significant achievements of TRA's in last five years 
  (iii) Annexure-III-State-wise R-TUFS subsidy sanctioned by MOT from  
   time to time  (Position as on 30.03.2013)    
    (iv) Annexure-I-Minutes  of  the sittings  of   the  Standing  Committee  on 
Labour held  on 4.4.2013 and 16.4.2013    
   
 
    

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2012-13) 
 SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN - CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ismail Hussain 
*3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
4. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
5. Shri Nara Hari Mahato 
6. Shri Hari Manjhi 
7. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
8. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
9. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
10. Shri Dinubhai Boghabhai Solanki 
11. Shri Makhan Singh Solanki 
12. Shri K. Sugumar 
13. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
**14. Shri Ashok Argal 
 ***15. Smt. J. Shantha 
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
  MEMBERS 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
24. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
25. Shri P. Kannan 
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
27. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
28. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
29. Shri Rajaram 
30. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
31. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*     Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his  nomination  
      to   Standing Committee on Commerce w.e.f. 13th December, 2012. 
**   Nominated w.e.f. 9th January, 2013. 
***  Nominated w.e.f. 19th March, 2013. 

5 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy - Director 
 3. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
          I,  the  Chairman, Standing Committee on Labour (2012 -13) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,  present this 36 th 
Report on Demands for Grants  for the year 2013-2014 of the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Committee considered the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Ministry 
of Textiles for the year 2013 -2014 which were laid on the Table of the House on 
18th March, 2013. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Textiles on 04th April, 2013.  
 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Textiles for appearing and furnishing the information as desired by them in 
connection with the examination of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry. 
 
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 16th 
April, 2013. 
 
5. For facility of reference, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.                   
    
 
 
 
 New Delhi;                      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
18  April, 2013                                                                CHAIRMAN,  
28  Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)        STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMITTEE‟S RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The Twenty-Ninth Report (15th Lok Sabha) of Committee on Labour 
on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Ministry of Textiles was 
presented to Parliament on 3 rd May, 2012.  The Report contained 18 
recommendations/observations. 
 
1.2 In compli ance of Direction 73 A of Directions by Speaker, the 
Minister of Textiles made a Statement in Lok Sabha on 28 th August, 
2012 giving the status of implementation of various recommendations 
made by the Committee in their Twenty -Ninth Report.  An analysis of 
the Minister‟s Statement showed that Government had accepted 14 out 
of 18 recommendations. The Ministry had implemented 2 
recommendation and 11 recommendations were under process. 5 
recommendations were still to be implemented.   
 
1.3 On the basis of the A ction Taken Notes received from the Ministry 
of Textiles of the above Report, the Committee presented their Thirty -
Fourth Action Taken Report (15 th Lok Sabha) to the Lok Sabha on 30 th 
August, 2012.   The Committee commented on the Action Taken Replies 
furnished by the Ministry in respect of Recommendations at Para No.  
3.38, 3.48.1, 3.48.2 and 3.54 contained in the Original Report. 
 

8 
 
1.4 The Committee expect the Government to take conclusive action in 
respect of these four recommendations and furnish further action taken 
notes at the earliest.  

9 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 The Indian Textiles Industry has an overwhelming presence in the 
economic life of the country. Apart from providing one of the basic 
necessities of life, the textiles industry also plays a  pivotal role through 
its contribution to industrial output, employment generation, and the 
export earnings of the country. Currently, it contributes about 14% to 
industrial production, 4% to the GDP, and 1 1% to the country‟s export 
earnings. It provides di rect employment to over 35 million people. The 
textiles sector is the second largest provider of employment after 
agriculture. The Indian textiles industry is extremely varied, with the 
hand-spun and handwoven sector at one end of the spectrum and the 
capital intensive, sophisticated mill sector at the other. The 
decentralized powerlooms / hosiery and knitting sector form s the 
largest section of the textiles sector. The close linkage of the Industry to 
agriculture and the ancient culture, and traditions of the country makes 
the Indian textiles sector unique in comparison with the textiles 
industry of other countries.  The major sub -sectors that comprise the 
textiles sector include the organized Cotton/Man -Made Fibre Textiles 

10 
 
Mill Industry, the Man -Made Fibre / Filament Yarn Industry, the Wool 
and Woollen Textiles Industry, the Sericulture and Silk Textiles 
Industry, Handlooms, Handicrafts, the Jute and Jute Textiles Industry, 
and Textiles Exports. 
 
2.2 The main functions and activities of the Ministry of Text iles are 
policy formulation and planning, development, export promotion and 
trade regulation of the textile sector.  The Ministry formulates policies 
regarding production, distribution (for domestic consumption and 
exports) and development of all textiles including cotton, woollen, jute, 
silk, synthetics, etc. produced on handlooms, powerlooms and in mills.  
The Ministry is also responsible for readymade garments, handicrafts 
and industries related to production of silk and cellulose fibres.    
 
2.3. The developmental activities of the Ministry are oriented towards 
making adequate quantities of raw material available to all sectors of 
textile Industry and augment the production of fibres at reasonable 
prices from the organized and de-centralised sectors of the industry.  To 
achieve this objective, the Ministry lays down guidelines for a planned 
and harmonious growth of various sectors of the industry. 

11 
 
 
2.4. The Ministry monitors the techno economic status of the industry 
and provide  the requisite policy framework for modernization and 
rehabilitation.  It also coordinates the activities of Textile Research 
Associations and lends financial support to them for undertaking 
research and development.  The Ministry exercises administrative 
control over various organizations and public sector undertakings under 
their charge. 
2.5. The principal functional areas of the Ministry cover the following:- 
 The Textiles Policy & Coordination. 
 The man-made Fibre/Filament Yarn Industry. 
 The Cotton Textiles Industry. 
 The Jute Industry. 
 The Sericulture and Silk Textiles Industry. 
 The Wool & Woollen Textiles Industry. 
 The Decentralised Powerlooms Sector. 
 The Exports Promotion  
 Handicrafts 
 Handlooms 
 The Planning & Economic Analysis. 

12 
 
 The Integrated Finance Matters. 
 The Information Technology 
           
2.6. The Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Textiles for the year 
2013-2014 are given under Demand No. 92.  The detailed Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry were laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on     
18.3.2013.   The following are the major heads under which the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry have been given:- 
3451  - Secretarial Economic Services 
        2552  -       North-Eastern Areas 
 2851  -       Village and Small Industries  
 2852  - Industries 
         3453   - Foreign Trade and Export Promotion 
 3601  - Grants-in-aid to State Governments 
         3602         -       Grants-in-aid to Union Territory Governments 
 4552  - Capital Outlay on North-Eastern Areas 
         4851        -       Capital outlay on Village and Small    
    Industries 
 4860  - Capital Outlay on Consumer Industries 
 6860  - Loans to Public Sector and other Undertakings  
 

13 
 
2.7. In order to efficiently carry out the task of implementing various 
schemes, the Ministry has the foll owing two attached offices, two 
subordinate offices, six advisory boards, three registered societies and 
six statutory bodies under it:- 
Attached offices:- 
 
(a) Office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms 
(b) Office of the Development Commissioner for Handicrafts 
Subordinate offices:- 
 
(a) Office of the Textiles Commissioner 
(b) Office of the Jute Commissioner 
 
Advisory Boards:- 
 
(a) All India Handicrafts Board 
(b) All India Powerlooms Board 
(c) All India Handloom Board 
(d) Cotton Advisory Board 
(e) Jute Advisory Board 
(f) Coordination Council of Textiles Research Associations 
(TRAs) 

14 
 
Registered Societies:- 
 
(a) Central Wool Development Board (CWDB) 
(b) National Centre for Jute Diversification (NCJD) 
(c ) Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Institute of Textiles Management 
(SVPITM) 
Statutory Bodies:- 
(a) Jute Manufactures Development Council (JMDC) 
(b) Central Silk Board (CSB) 
(c ) Textiles Committee 
(d) Commissioner of Payments 
(e) National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT) 
(f) National Jute Board 
2.8. The Committee scrutinized the Demands for Grants for the year 
2013-2014 of the Ministry which have been dealt in the succeeding 
Chapters. 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER-III 
REPORT 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
A.    General Performance 
 
3.1  As per the information furnished to the Committee, Rs.7000 
crore were earmarked for Plan expenditure during 2012 -13 which was 
reduced at the Revised Estimate stage to Rs.4500 crore.  The total 
utilization is Rs. 3644.73 crores i.e. only 52% of BE and 81% of RE. 
Similarly, Non -Plan expenditure was estimated at Rs 836.41 cror e 
which was revised to Rs. 810.55 crore and the actual expenditure was 
Rs 754.24 crore during the year which is 90%  of the BE.  
 
3.2  When asked about the reasons for significant reduction in the 
Plan expenditure at the revised estimates stage, the Minist ry replied  as 
under: 
   “…the two schemes pertaining to Handloom Sector namely 
  Revival, Reforms and Restructuring Package for Handloom 
  Sector and Mill Gate Price Scheme did not take off as  
  expected.  Revival, Reforms and Restructuring package was 
  formulated on the basis of figures received from various State 
  Governments about the extent of loan disbursed to   
  handlooms sector and the requirement of funds for waiving of 

16 
 
  loan overdue and recapitalization of Handlooms cooperatives. 
  Based on the above projections, reforms and restructuring 
  package for handlooms sector was approved in November 
  2011. When statutory audit was conducted by States in  
  respect of functional handloom cooperatives up to 2009 -10 
  and then special audit by NABARD, only then the definite 
  requirement of funds could be known. In retrospect, it may 
  be accepted that the loans overdue were much lesser than 
  envisaged. Consequently, the expenditure as a percentage of 
  the total estimation was low. 
 
Under Revival, Reform and Restructuring (RRR) Package 
for Handloom Sector: Against the RE of Rs.600 crore, only Rs. 
291 crore has been utilised.  The main reason for non -
utilisation of remaining funds is that as against 45 apex 
societies, nearly 16000 functional primary weavers 
cooperative societies (PWCs) and about 6 lakh of commercial 
weavers (exclusive), only 23 apex, 3750 PWCs societies and 
about 52000 individual handloom weavers could be covered 
under the norms of RRR package. To further expand the 
coverage t o remaining societies and individual weavers, a 
revised RRR package is under finalization.” 
 
3.3  DC(Handlooms) during the evidence held on 4.4.13 told the 
Committee that the estimation was based on the data received from the 
State Governments in 2006 -07 and accordingly Rs 3500 crore package 
was announced in the budget but when the scheme was being made 
operational, the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance 
imposed some harsh conditions for eligibility. He also told the 

17 
 
Committee that the revised  proposal has been sent to the Ministry of 
Finance and the approval is expected shortly. 
3.4  The Ministry have further stated in their written reply: 
 
 "The Revival, Reform and Restructuring (RRR) package under 
 existing norms is benefitting 24 apex, arou nd 4065 primary 
 weavers cooperative societies, 46911 individual weavers and 
 weavers of 6314 self-help groups (SHGs) as against envisaged 
 15000 cooperatives and 3 lakh individual handloom weavers 
 when proposal was formulated. Loan waiver and 
 recapitalization claims amounting to Rs 514.96 crore have 
 been approved by State Implementation Monitoring and 
 Review Committee (SIMRC) and now NABARD, the 
 implementing agency is in the process of settling these 
 approved claims under RRR package. NABARD had been  
 released Rs 200 crore in March,2012. Therefore, against the 
 RE of Rs.600 crore during 2012 -13, only Rs. 291 crore has 
 been utilized and remaining fund has been surrendered. 
  To further extend the coverage to more societies and 
 individual weavers, Ministry of Textiles for seeking the 
 approval of CCEA on a proposal, has circulated EFC memo 
 for inter -ministerial consultation. The proposal seeks 
 modifications in RRR package by way of relaxation of 
 eligibility norms of viability /potential viability of apex and 
 primary weavers‟ cooperative societies, besides extending the 
 cutoff date of eligibility as 31.03.12 and the scheme upto 
 31.12.2012. It is expected that by modification in the 
 eligibility norms of viable and potentially  viable societies and 
 other parameters, additional 4000 handloom cooperatives 
 (both apex and PWCs) and organizations including State 
 Handloom Corporations would be benefitted under RRR 
 package. Further, additional 50,000 handloom weavers are 
 also expe cted to be covered for loan waiver. For 
 implementation of the RRR package with revised guidelines, it 
 is estimated that additional Rs 400 to 500 crore would be 

18 
 
 needed against which Rs 175 crore has been provided during 
 2013-14. Moreover, the exact requ irement of funds would 
 depend upon the extent of relaxation of norms, proposed by 
 the Ministry for seeking Government‟s approval." 
 
3.5  The Minutes of the 5th  National Implementation Monitoring & 
Review Committee (NIMRC) reveal as follows:- 
Loan waiver in respect of individual weavers. 
“DC (HL) explained that loans taken by handloom weavers for 
weaving purposes are being waived off and 100% of principle 
and 25% of interests overdue as on 31.3.2010 is being borne by 
GOI. To avail benefit under the scheme , the weaver has to 
approach his bank with a request on plain paper for waiving the 
loan and the bank, in turn will submit the consolidated claims 
to NABARD in a prescribed proforma. The bank will also 
undertake to sanction fresh loan to the weaver. In add ition, the 
Banks have to suo -moto examine their records and find out 
loans taken by weavers for weaving purposes and submit the 
claims to NABARD for loan waiver, as per the Scheme. DC 
(Handlooms) expressed the concern that Banks are expected to 
come forward for availing benefits under Loan Waiver Scheme 
as it will liquidate their NPAs and clean their portfolio. Lending 
Institutions are required to undertake following measures: 
 Identify the borrowers/defaulters, display borrowers list;  
 contact individual we avers for availing benefits under the 
scheme;  
 obtain undertaking to carry out handloom activity in future;  
 Sanction fresh credit; 
 Bank Headquarters should issue clear guidelines for loan waiver 
to their branches.” 
 
 

19 
 
Instructions issued to banks on Individual Waiver Scheme 
 
“The ultimate responsibility of implementing the scheme 
successfully rests with the lending institutions.  
Lending Institutions are expected to assess the claims in their 
branches strictly in terms of the G overnment of India  Scheme. 
They are su ggested t o get the same audited by the branch 
auditors/ internal/ concurrent auditors before forwarding  to 
NABARD.  
Measures like identification of borrowers, display of borrowers list, 
obtaining undertaking to carry out handloom activity in future and 
avail fresh credit as per bank terms & conditions, publicity of the 
scheme perse etc as prescribed in the scheme may be adhered to.  
It will be obligatory for the bank to maintain borrower -wise detail 
records/ data against which the claims  are preferred. GoI./ 
NABARD has a right to conduct audit of the records, if required, in 
future.” 
 
3.6  Further the Minutes of the 7 th  National Implementation 
Monitoring & Review Committee (NIMRC) mention as follows:- 
“Chairperson/Secretary (Textiles) indicated that the GoI is 
not „very happy‟ with the outcome as the claims under the 
Package indicate that either the State Governments have 
overestimated the amount of debt or the entire Handloom 
Sector has moved away from formal lending in to informal 
lending though the master weavers. 
Under Mill Gate Price Scheme (MGPS), earlier the budget 
estimate (BE) was kept Rs. 385 crore for 2012 -13.  The main 
reason for substantial increase of BE to Rs. 385 crore 
compared to the expe nditure of Rs. 54.27 crore on MGPS in 
2011-12 was due to the introduction of additional component 

20 
 
of 10% subsidy on yarn in MGPS in January, 2012.   It was 
anticipated that owing to 10% subsidy on cotton and 
domestic silk, there would be substantial demand  for yarn 
supply under MGPS, estimated to be 2000 lakh kgs during 
the year 2012 -13. Out of this budget estimate of Rs.385 
crore, Rs.250 crore was anticipated to be spent against 10% 
subsidy component alone. 
The following are the two main reasons behind the shortfall 
in achieving the target:- 
(a)  At the time of issuance of guidelines of the scheme, a 
quantity restriction was considered desirable on supply of 
subsidized yarn - cotton & silk to avoid cornering of subsidy 
by lesser no. of weavers.  As per the exis ting guidelines, there 
is a restriction of supply of subsidized cotton @ 30 kg below 
40 counts, 10 kg for 40 counts and above, and 4 kg for silk 
per month per loom. However, this restriction proved to be a 
limiting factor in off- take under the scheme. 
(b) Restrictions on State-wise maximum numbers of looms to be 
eligible under the scheme. Out of 23.7 lakh looms, only 5.87 
lakh looms having market linkages were taken up. 
  
After reviewing the scheme , the restrictions as stated in 
para (b) have been removed. Further, from the year 2013 -14, 
apart from cotton and silk, wool and jute/coir are proposed to 
be added in this scheme. Also for cotton, quantity limit is being 
increased from 30 kg to 80 kg upto10 counts which are 
primarily used by the handloom sector. The budget was revised 
downward to Rs. 133 lakh keeping in view the anticipated sale 
of 1000 lakh kg of yarn to weavers by NHDC by end of March, 
2013.”   
 
3.7  As regards the shortfall in expenditure under the Integrated 
Handloom Development Scheme, the Ministry replied as under: 
“Against a BE of Rs.195.00 crore, expenditure of Rs.69.10 
crore was incurred upto January 2013.  The main reason for 
shortfall in expenditure com pared to the BE was general 

21 
 
apathy of the banks in implementing scheme of Institutional 
credit component of IHDS resulting in very low issuance  of 
weavers credit card. Despite regular review and follow up 
there was also a shortfall in receipt of adequate number of 
viable proposals from the State Governments/implementing 
agencies. Besides, Utilization Certificates (UCs) and physical 
& financial progress of the previous releases could not be 
received on time from the State Governments /implementing 
agencies. As a result, an amount of Rs.129 crores has been 
sanctioned till 25.03.2013.   
 
“Institutional Credit” was one of the components of the 
Integrated Handlooms Development Scheme (IHDS) in 
December 2011 with a provision of margin money; interest 
subvention a nd credit guarantee to ensure availability of 
concessional credit to the handloom sector.  Despite 
organizing 677 awareness camps in different parts of the 
country and then submitting after scrutiny,  around 3.23 
lakh applications received from weavers to various banks 
through respective lead banks, only 42638 weavers credit 
cards (WCCs) have been issued by the banks.” 
 
 
Definition of Handlooms 
 
3.8  On the issue of amending the definition of Handlooms, the 
Ministry stated: 
“Under the Handlooms (Reservation of Articles for Production) 
Act, 1985 handloom has been defined as “any loom other 
than powerloom”. Experience over the years has shown that 
the numbers of handlooms as well as handloom weavers are 
declining sharply and especially the younger generation is not 
willing to continue or enter into this profession owing to low 
generation of income and hard labour required to operate 
looms.  While the scenario in textile sector has changed the 

22 
 
world over including India, the handloom weavers are still 
engaged wi th hand operated looms doing tedious work to 
earn their wages and a substantial population of weavers is 
still living in poor conditions. 
 
In order to reduce the drudgery of handloom weavers, 
the Advisory Committee on Handloom Reservation Act, 1985, 
under the   chairpersonship of Secretary (Textiles), discussed 
the definition of handloom and recommended modifications 
in the definition of handloom. Based on the recommendations 
of Advisory Committee, the Ministry of Textiles has prepared 
a proposal to modify the definition of „handloom‟ to seek 
approval of the Government. As per proposed definition of 
handloom, „handloom means any loom, other than 
powerloom; and includes any hybrid loom on which at least 
one process for weaving requires manual intervention or 
human energy for production‟.  
 
The purpose of proposed change in definition of 
„handloom‟ was that handloom sector would get benefits of 
modernization by way of adopting mechanized operations on 
the looms, which in turn would enhance productivity and 
reduce drudgery as well as help low skilled weavers hitherto 
suffering from the disadvantages associated with traditional 
handlooms. The new definition of handloom would enable the 
existing handloom weavers to upgrade their looms without 
losing out on the bene fits available to handloom weavers 
under various Govt. Schemes.” 
 
3.9  When asked whether the Cabinet note has been put up in 
this regard, the Ministry replied: 
“The draft amendment in the definition of „handloom‟ is to be 
discussed in the Advisory Committee meeting which has been 
convened on 12 th April, 2013 to discuss various issues 
involved in the proposed amendment in definition of 
„handloom‟ and in particular how norms and mechanisms 

23 
 
should be evolved so that power looms could be differentiated 
from handlooms.” 
 
 
3.10  The Secretary during the evidence held on 4.4.2013 shared 
the concern of the Committee regarding the modification in the 
definition of handlooms for improving the conditions of the handloom 
weavers and the small powerloom weavers. The Secretary further stated 
that it will be examined how these small powerloom weavers can be 
provided benefits available to handloom weavers under various 
handloom schemes.  The Secretary also told the Committee that the 
Advisory Committee would  be meeting to discuss some special 
arrangement for small powerloom weavers. 
 
3.11  The Ministry have also furnished the following information: 
  "From the year 2013 -14, as against five different schemes of 
  Handloom sector, 3 schemes would be implemented  in 12th 
  Plan after merging the various components of 2 Centrally 
  Sponsored Schemes namely, Integrated Handloom   
  Development Scheme (IHDS), Marketing & Export Promotion 
  Scheme (MEPS) and 1 Central Sector Scheme namely,  
  Diversified Handloom Development Scheme (DHDS) as a new 
  Centrally Sponsored Scheme called Comprehensive   
  Handloom Development Scheme (CHDS) along with 2 Central 
  Sector Scheme namely Handloom Weavers' Comprehensive 
  Welfare Scheme (HWCWS) and Yarn Supply Scheme." 
 
 

24 
 
Indian Institutes of Handloom Technology 
 
3.12  When asked about the criteria for setting up Indian Institute 
of Handloom Technology in an area/ State, the Ministry replied as 
follows: 
“IIHTs provide qualified and trained manpower to the 
Handloom Sector and undert ake experimental and research 
programmes on all aspects of the handloom industry.  
Concentration of weavers and production of handloom in a 
particular area/State are the major criteria to decide the 
geographical location of an IIHT. There are five Central IIHTs 
located at Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh), Salem (Tamil Nadu), 
Jodhpur (Rajasthan), Guwahati (Assam) and Bargarh 
(Odisha). 
 
IIHTs can also be opened in the State sector on the 
specific request from the State Governments.  In such case, 
central assistance is limited to  one time grant of 40% of non-
recurring cost for that IIHT.  All other expenditure is borne by 
the State governments.  Currently  IIHT Champa  in 
Chhattisgarh ,  IIHT Venketagiri  in  AP , IIHT Gadag  in   
Karnataka and  IIHT Kannur  in  K erala are  the IIHTS under 
the State Sector.” 
 
3.13  On being asked whether any extension programmes have 
been taken up by these IIHTs the Ministry submitted: 
“Indian Institutes of Handloom Technology (IIHTs) are not 
directly involved in providing extension se rvices to the 
weavers. These Institutes are primarily responsible for 

25 
 
providing qualified and trained manpower to the handloom 
sector through their regular diploma courses and undertake 
experimental and research programmes on all aspects of the 
handloom re lated activities. Besides the regular courses 
offered in the Institutes, they also conduct short term in -
house training programmes for the weavers. Recently, under 
the Integrated Skill Development Scheme (ISDS) of the 
Ministry of Textiles, IIHTs have condu cted some field training 
programmes in   pre -weaving, weaving and post weaving 
related activities. In 15 training programs, IIHTs have covered 
approximately 300 weavers in all.  
Extension services to the weavers are being rendered by 
the Weavers Service Centres (WSCs) which involve transfer of 
design inputs, skill up-gradation in weaving related areas and 
dissemination of the technological interventions for reducing 
drudgery to the handloom weavers.”  
 
Plight of small powerloom weavers 
3.14  When the Ministry were confronted regarding the steps taken 
to increase the low wages being paid to the powerloom weavers and 
whether there i s any special scheme for workers who work on the  
powerlooms owned by the others , the Ministry in their written reply 
stated that as per the Labour laws, Industrial Workers including 
powerloom workers are required to be paid minimum wages. There is no 
scheme designed specifically for the workers  of powerlooms owned by 
others. 
 

26 
 
3.15  On being asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to help 
poor weavers who are not able to sell their products, the following 
written reply was furnished by the Ministry:- 
“Integrated Scheme for Powerloom Sector Development 
(ISPSD) has been implemented for Powerloom Sector. The  
Scheme  has   several   components including marketing 
development programme for powerloom sector. Under 
marketing development programme, infrastructural support 
is provided for marketing the powerloom products. The Buyer 
– Seller  Meets  (BSM)  for  marketing  the  pow erloom  
products  are  organized at regional and cluster level across 
the country in which powerloom units/weavers are 
participating to market their product directly, eliminating the 
middlemen.     During 2007 -08 to Sept.2012, total 60 BSMs 
have been condu cted and Govt. has released the fund of 
Rs.3.99 Crore.”  
 
3.16  When asked how fewer buyer seller meets are enough for 
poor weavers to sell their products, the Ministry replied: 
“Buyer Sellers meet provides an opportunity to handloom 
weavers and their orga nizations to establish marketing 
linkages. Besides organizing the Buyer Seller Meetings 
(BSMs) under marketing and export promotion scheme 
(MEPS) of DC Handlooms, exhibitions of various levels are 
organized to provide platform to handloom organizations and  
weavers for marketing of handloom products both in 
domestic and international markets. Weavers are also 
provided free of cost stalls in various craft melas like 
Surajkund, Taj  Mahotsav etc. for marketing their products 
directly to the consumers. Urban haa ts and handloom 
marketing complexes at different places in the country have 

27 
 
also been set up to market handloom products by handloom 
agencies and weavers. Professionally qualified designers have 
also been provided under clusters to diversify and develop 
contemporary products and to link with the market. During 
the 11 th Plan, 2753 domestic and international events were 
organized with an expenditure of Rs.230.20 crores.” 
 
Office of the Textile Commissioner 
3.17  According to the Annual Report of the Ministry (2012-13), the 
office of Textile Commissioner has 8 regional offices including a regional 
office at  Kanpur. The Committee received a representation from Uttar 
Pradesh Powerloom Federation stating that the Kanpur Office was being 
closed on the basis of the recommendation in the Report of IIM 
Bangalore.  It was representated  that the recommendation of IIM, 
Bangalore was not based on the proper analysis of the textile situation 
prevalent in Uttar Pradesh .  The representation was forwarded to the 
Ministry and the Ministry replied as follows:- 
“The s tatistics available show a decadal picture from 2001 -
2010(i.e. the period after the IIM Bangalore Report) the 
effective working spindles, rotors and looms have 
considerably declined in the State of UP in general and 
Kanpur in particular.  The number of workers employed in 
non-SSI mills (i.e. excluding the de -centralized powerloom 
and SSI sector) have also come down drastically so also the 
spun yarn production.  The number of powerlooms in de -
centralized sector is more or less static or even the number 

28 
 
could be less than stated.  Thus, the contention that the 
growth graph of expansion/development/Upgradation of 
textile industry has gone up substantially in UP is an 
exaggeration and is contrary to facts.  The other conten tion 
about growth of textile industry through response to several 
schemes of Ministry of Textiles (like TUFS, Group Workshed 
etc.) is rather misleading.” 
 
3.18  When asked whether any survey of Uttar Pradesh Powerloom 
Industry was conducted by IIM Bangalor e before recommending the 
relocation of the Kanpur office, the Ministry stated: 
“IIM Bangalore had conducted the study in the year 2000 in 
which 18 Industry Associations had participated. Northern 
India Textile Research Association, New Delhi (NITRA) which 
is running 4 Powerloom Service Centres in Uttar Pradesh for 
the development of powerloom industry and for the welfare of 
powerloom weavers  of UP is one of the Associations which 
participated in the study. The Powerloom Service Centers in 
UP run by NITRA are located at Meerut, Tanda, Gorakhpur 
and Kanpur which continue to serve and take care of the 
powerloom industry and the needs of powerloo m weavers in 
U.P., besides the Powerloom Service Centre run by Office of 
the Textile Commissioner located at Mau.”  
 
3.19  When asked to spell out the jurisdictional areas under  each 
of these offices , the criteria for op ening/closing a regional office, the  
functions of these offices and the weavers covered under them, the 
Ministry replied as follows: 

29 
 
“Textile Commissioner has eight (8) Regional Offices (ROs) as 
stated above which have been functioning for more than four 
decades on the basis of concentration  of textile industry at 
that time, no specific criteria were, therefore, prescribed for 
it. 
In view of the changing textile scenario, the Ministry of 
Textiles initiated an independent study through Indian 
Institute of Management (IIM), Bangalore. The IIM B angalore 
with a view to redefin ing the role of Office of the Textile 
Commissioner identified specific role for the O/o Textile 
Commissioner in consonance with the National Textile Policy 
2000 and on the basis of extensive consultation with various 
stake ho lders including industry associations, textile 
research associations and the Ministry of Textiles. 
With regards to adequacy of the field offices under the 
Textile Commissioner‟s office, the study report observed that 
the present 8 ROs would be quite adequa te except that there 
is a need to relocate two of the existing ROs at Kanpur and 
Chennai. The recommendations of the IIM was accepted by 
the Committee of Secretaries and adopted by the Ministry of 
Textiles. Accordingly, RO, Chennai was shifted to Bangalore  
in May 2007 and RO, Kanpur was partially shifted to Indore 
in the year August 2008, keeping a sub office of RO, Noida at 
Kanpur. 
The services rendered by the Regional offices include; 
Supporting, counselling and facilitating the 
decentralised textile sectors, such as powerlooms and small 
processors, for taking up TUF Scheme, quality upgradation, 
promoting exports, including  processing of applications and 
joint inspection of units in connection with release of 20% 
Margin Money Subsidy under TU FS for Powerloom Sector, 
15% Margin Money Subsidy under TUFS for SSI sector, 
Modified Group Workshed Scheme for Powerloom Sector, 
Group Insurance Scheme for Powerloom Weavers, Integrated 
Scheme for Powerloom Sector Development,  Other Integrated 
Industry Cluster Development Schemes.” 
 

30 
 
3.20  As regards the numbers of weavers/ workers covered, the 
Ministry stated that they had not been formally surveyed, the 
powerloom survey is, however, commissioned now and report will be 
available by June 2013.   
The number  of weavers assumed as per the available data on 
number of powerloom according to the Ministry is as below: 
SL 
No. 
Regional Office Number of 
Workers/Weavers 
1 Ahmedabad 8,10,865 
2 Amritsar 62,971 
3 Bangalore 3,18,270 
4 Coimbatore 10,20,788 
5 Indore 3,04,968 
6 Kolkata 37,871 
7 Navi Mumbai 29,92,025 
8 Noida 2,84,149 
Total: 58,31,907 

31 
 
  The information supplied by the Office of Textile 
Commissioner, Mumbai under RTI Act, 2005 is placed in Annexure-I 
3.21  The Secretary during the evidence held on 4.4.2013 stated 
that the decision to close the Kanpur regional office was taken long 
back and that she would be studying the issue in the light of the 
current requirements and submit a report to the Committee. 
Research & Development 
3.22  When asked the nu mber and details of 
associations/organizations/bodies/institutions/ individuals getting 
assistance under the head Research and Development, the Ministry 
replied: 
“There are eight Textiles Research Associations (TRAs) in the 
country i.e., Ahmadabad Textile Industry Research 
Association (ATIRA), Bombay Textile Research   Association 
(BTRA), South India Textile Research Association (SITRA) and 
Northern India Textile Research Association (NITRA) which 
carry out consultancy, testing, training and research and 
development in cotton and cotton/synthetic as well as 
cotton/natural fibre blends. Other fibre specific TRAs are 
Man-made Textile Research Association (MANTRA), Synthetic 
& Art Silk Mills Research Association (SASMIRA) who work 
predominantly in synthetics, W ool Research Association 
(WRA) and Indian Jute Industry‟s Research Association 
(IJIRA) carry out work in wool and jute, respectively.  
 

32 
 
Further there are two agricultural universities who have 
availed assistance, which are as under:-  
 
 (a)Tamil Nadu Agricultural University  
 (b) University of Agricultural Sciences, Dharwad 
 
However, the scheme is open to organizations in the 
Government, non -Government sectors and professional 
bodies working in areas related to development of 
technologies.  These organizations could be institutions 
registered under Societies Act/Companies Act; professional 
and industry associations; agricultural Universities/IITs etc.”   
 
 
3.23  As regards  their innovations/achievements during the  last 
five years, year-wise, the Ministry informed as follows: 
“During last five years in 11 th Five Year Plan total 101 
projects have been undertaken which includes inter -alia high 
end research projects in Technical Textiles including in the 
areas of Nano Technology, Plasma Technology, Biotechnology 
& Eco -friendly technologies etc.  Some projects are 
undergoing field/human trials, patents have been applied for 
in some cases.  
 
Significant achievements of projects in last five years is given 
in Annexure-II.” 
  
3.24  On being asked about the origin of TRAs, the Ministry stated 
that the Textiles Research Associations were formed as industry‟s 
bodies at different point of time and in 1961, six TRAs came under the 

33 
 
purview of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 
partial funding. In 1978, the responsibility of partial funding of these 
associations came under the purview of Ministry of Industry.  Further in 
1980, they were transferred to the Min istry of Commerce and Civil 
Supplies.  In 1986 -87, responsibility of the partial funding to these 
TRAs was shifted to the Ministry of Textiles, after creation of this new 
Ministry.  Ministry of Textiles continues to fund these associations for 
their R&D re lated projects and partial support through non plan grant 
for meeting their administrative expenses.  The TRAs submit their 
annual performance report and annual accounts to the Ministry of 
Textiles which are placed on the Table of both the houses of the 
Parliament every year. 
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 
3.25  The allocation and expenditure under TUFS . year wise since 
its inception, is as under:    
   (Rs. Crores) 
Financial 
Year 
Budget 
Provision (in 
crores) 
Total 
expenditure 

34 
 
1999-00 1.00 1.00 
2000-01 70.00 70.00 
2001-02 200.00 198.89 
2002-03 220.00 202.59 
2003-04 250.00 249.06 
2004-05 284.00 283.61 
2005-06 485.00 485.00 
2006-07 835.00 823.92 
2007-08 1143.37 1143.37 
2008-09 2632.00 2632.00 
2009-10 2890.00 2886.03 
2010-11 2786.68 2784.18 
2011-12 2980.00 2488.30 
2012-13 2323.03 2151.66 
Total 17100.08 16399.56     ” 

35 
 
The State-wise details for the expenditure on TUFS and the 
cases dealt by lending agencies/banks are not maintained by the 
Office of the Textile Commissioner.  Similarly, the Ministry stated 
that the details of SC/ST entrepreneur beneficiaries are not 
maintained and since TUFS is a back -ended interest 
reimbursement scheme the location -wise details of claims are not 
maintained. 
3.26  When asked about the number of claims made under TUFS 
for the investment s/expenditure of less than Rs. 5 lakhs, the Ministry 
in their written reply stated: 
“TUFS is essentially a bank -driven scheme and details in 
respect of Modified TUFS may have to be obtained from the 
Lending Agencies. In respect of Restructured TUFS scheme 
there are only 5 cases under Rs 5 lakh investment out of total 
3741 approved cases.  Regarding the cases of 20% 
CLCS/MMS- TUFS and 15% MMS - TUFS routed through 
Office of the Textile Commissioner, the following claims were 
made for investment/expenditure (subsidy) of less than Rs.5 
lakh :- 
Year No. of claims  
(20% CLCS/MMS) 
No. of claims  
(15% 
CLCS/MMS) 
2003-04 *(4) - 
2004-05 *(150) - 
2005-06 *(368) - 

36 
 
2006-07 362 (827) - 
2007-08 191 (570  ) Routed through 
O/o Tx.C. since 
November 2007. 
2008-09 146 (404  ) 271 (307) 
2009-10 126 (363  ) 534 (607) 
2010-11 66 (233  ) 427 (472) 
2011-12 128 (293  ) 500 (573) 
2012-13 151 (528  ) 454 (579) 
Total 1170 (3740)  2186 (2538) 
 
* Data not available. Figures in brackets indicate Total number of 
claims made. 
 
3.27  On being asked about the procedure for creating awareness 
amongst the beneficiaries about the benefits of the scheme in remote 
areas, the Ministry replied that awareness campaigns were launched for 
awareness of scheme in association with Lending agencies a nd various 
Industry Associations at All India and local levels. The scheme details 
are also available on the web -site of Office of Textile Commissioner for 
wider publicity. The seminar /workshop with Powerloom associations, 
Powerloom organizations and stakeholders are conducted by Powerloom 
Service Centres regularly for creating awareness about the schemes 
including TUFS among the powerloom weavers. The advertisements and 

37 
 
publicity of the Government schemes, Programmes, Training 
Programmes etc. are given in  local newspapers. The Weavers/ workers 
are also directly contacted to advise them to upgrade the skills & avail 
the benefits of the schemes etc. Exposure Visits of the weavers are also 
organised with special emphasis to create awareness about TUFS and 
technology of the machinery. Further all the schemes and programmes 
are kept in website of the Office of the Textile Commissioner as well as 
Ministry of Textiles.  The State -wise R -TUFS subsidy sanctioned by 
Ministry of Textiles is given in Annexure-III. 
Health Insurance Schemes 
3.28  On being asked as to why all the weavers/workers , in the 
purview of various schemes of the Ministry , are not covered under one 
single health insurance scheme , the Ministry stated that  pursuant to 
the budget announcement of 2005 -06 by the Finance Minister, the 
Health Insurance Scheme (HIS) for handloom weavers was introduced in 
2005-06 for coverage of 3.00 lakh handloom weavers.  Since the scheme 
proved to be very beneficial to the handloom weavers, the benefits of the 
scheme were extended to large no of handloom weavers. Since no such 
scheme was in operation to provide IPD as well as OPD to the handloom 
weavers and ancillary workers, the HIS for handloom weavers was 

38 
 
continued separately b y Office of the Development Commissioner for 
Handlooms. Now, as Ministry of Labor & Employment (MoLE) has 
agreed in principle to provide OPD facility additionally to the handloom 
weavers under the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY). It has now 
been prop osed to run HIS on the pattern of RSBY scheme for two 
years(2013-14 & 2014 -15) after which, the scheme is proposed to be 
merged with RSBY. 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.1  The Committee observe that the Ministry could not 
utilize their budge tary allocation of Rs 7000 crores for Plan 
expenditure during the year which stood revised to Rs 4500 crores. 
According to the Ministry, the two schemes pertaining to 
Handloom sector namely „Revival, Reform and Restructuring 
Package for Handloom sector‟ an d Mill Gate Price Scheme did not 
take off as expected, resulting in shortfall in the expenditure. The 
budgetary estimates of Rs 2900 crores under the head „Revival, 
Reform and Restructuring Package for Handloom sector‟ were 
reduced to Rs 600 crores at the revised estimates stage , however, 
the Ministry could spend Rs 291 crores only during the year since 
a total of  23 Apex, 3750 Primary Weavers Cooperative societies 
(PWCs) and 52000 individual weavers could be covered under the 
norms of the package as against targeted 45 Apex, 16000 PWCs and 
about 6 lakh commercial weavers  exclusively. The Ministry have 
informed that definite requirements of the funds could only be 

40 
 
determined after carrying out statutory audit of the functional 
cooperatives upto 2009 -10 follo wed by special audit by NABARD. 
The Committee recall that the package was announced amid much 
fanfare by the Finance Minister in his budget proposals for the year 
2011-12 and now the y find to their utter dismay that Ministry are 
not able to find beneficiar ies for loan waiver and debt 
restructuring. The Committee note that though a revised package 
is under finalization , it is beyond their comprehension as to why, 
in the first instance ,  a populist package was announced without 
doing any ground work. The Comm ittee are of the view that the 
Ministry routinely formulate schemes/ programmes without even 
estimating the number s of targeted beneficiaries thereof . The 
Committee had also observed in their Twenty-Ninth Report on 
Demands for Grants for 2012-13 that “form ulation of schemes, 
without a fair assessment of the target group and the dimensions of 
the problems afflicting them, is a shot in the dark” which has been 
proven „to the hilt‟ in the instant case too. The Committee, while 
reiterating their earlier recommendation, expect the Ministry to be 
extra cautious in the future and take steps to complete all the 
pending surveys in time and initiate new surveys wherever 

41 
 
considered necessary  before new schemes are proposed to the 
Planning Commission et al  for approvals etc. 
  The Committee note that the Ministry have been 
provided Rs.175 crores for the Revival, Reforms and Restructuring 
Package in the current year.  The Committee find from the reply of 
the Ministry that they have proposed relaxation in eligibility norms 
and extension of cut -off eligibility date and, therefore, additional 
funds would be required under the scheme.  The Committee 
strongly desire that the Ministry of Textiles approach the Ministry 
of Finance for enhanced allocation so that maximum weavers g et 
the benefit of the loan waiver scheme. 
 
4.2  The scrutiny of Demands for Grants reveals  that the 
Ministry have not been able to utilize allocation in respect of Mill 
Gate Price Scheme due to the lack of demand under the newly 
introduced 10% hank yarn su bsidy scheme. The Committee note 
that the Ministry were able to cover only 30% of the looms for 
issuing yarn passbooks which are needed to avail the benefits of 
the 10% hank yarn subsidy by individual weavers. The Committee 

42 
 
strongly feel that adequate publ icity to the hank yarn subsidy and 
local yarn depots schemes should be given and registration camps 
be organized with the help of district administration and gram 
panchayats to cover maximum number of weavers. The Committee 
observe from various reports tha t the smallest of weavers are not 
able to even purchase the minimum selling quantity and are, 
therefore, dependant on master weavers for supply of yarn who 
exploit them. The y, therefore, des ire that more and more yarn 
depots/ banks may be opened across the  handloom dominated 
areas in all States to ensure that the small weavers are able to 
purchase small er quantities. The y also desire that feasibility of 
making yarn available on credit may also be explored. They desire 
to be apprised of the action taken in the matter at an early date. 
 
4.3  The Committee observe that the Ministry are dependant 
on banks for implementation of some of their schemes like Revival, 
Reforms and Restructuring Package for the Handloom Sector and 
Institutional Credit component of the Integrated Handloom 
Development Scheme  among others . According to the procedure, 
either the weaver has to approach the banks with a request on 

43 
 
plain paper for waiving the loan or the banks have to suo -moto 
examine their records and find out loans taken by weavers and 
submit the claims to NABARD for loan waiver and the ultimate 
responsibility of implementing the scheme successfully lies with 
the lending institutions. Further, the Ministry have stated that 
general apathy of the banks in implementing Instituti onal credit 
component of IHDS has resulted in low issuance of weavers credit 
cards. The Committee are of the view that banks mostly in the 
public sector are already over burdened with the responsibility of 
implementing many of the schemes of the Government  of India  
across various Ministries.    It, therefore, becomes imperative that 
instead of depending on banks, the Ministry need to evolve other 
methods to implement their schemes successfully. The Ministry 
should devise innovative ways to reach out to the b eneficiaries by 
organizing camps in collaboration with banks and State 
Governments not only in clusters but also in the rural and far -flung 
areas.  Further, where banking services are not available, the 
institutional credit component of the IHDS c ould also  be 
implemented through post-offices which are more wide spread. The 
Ministry should also take steps for the betterment of the poorest of 

44 
 
poor weavers who are suffering under the burden of loans taken 
from the local money lenders and the debts of master we avers and 
consider involving local school teachers in identifying the weavers 
who have overdue loans by interacting with both banks and 
weavers. 
 
4.4  The Committee note that the Ministry have prepared a 
proposal to modify the definition of „handloom‟ to r educe the 
drudgery of handloom weavers. As per proposed definition of 
handloom, „handloom means any loom, other than powerloom, and 
includes any hybrid loom on which at least one process for weaving 
requires manual intervention or human energy for production‟. The 
Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that in the 
ensuing Advisory Committee meeting, various issues involved in 
the proposed amendment in definition of „handloom‟ and in 
particular how norms and mechanisms should be evolved so that 
power looms could be differentiated from handlooms would be 
discussed. The Committee are of the  firm view that the proposal 
has lingered on for a while now and that the modification in 
definition may be expedited to enable handloom weavers to 

45 
 
modernize without any adverse effects on the benefits received by 
them. The Committee also feel that after changing the definition a 
complete overhaul /review of the schemes meant for handloom 
sector may also be  done to give handlooms a big boost. They also 
note that though some of the handloom schemes have been merged 
still a lot more needs to be done particularly for the ancillary 
workers, women weavers/ workers and weavers/workers belonging 
to the disadvantaged sections of the society. The y are also hugely 
concerned ab out the pathetic conditions of small powerloom 
weavers who are too small to sustain on their own in a vast 
decentralized powerloom sector. The Committee , therefore, desire 
the Ministry to take steps to include these small powerloom 
weavers/ workers (to be identified on the basis of number of looms 
and  electricity load) under the schemes meant for handloom 
weavers so that they also get similar benefits. 
4.5  The Committee note that Indian Institutes of Handloom 
Technology (IIHT) have been set-up to provide qualified and trained 
manpower to the handloom sector and to undertake experimental 
and research programmes on all aspects of the handloom industry. 
They further note that the criteria for opening an IIHT in an y area 

46 
 
is concentration of weavers and product ion of handloom in that 
particular area/ State. The Committee desire that these IIHTs 
should invariably involve themselves in „extension programmes‟ 
wherein these institutes should help in spreading awareness of the 
various schemes of the Ministry,  equip ping the weavers with the 
modern technology, identify the strengths of the local weavers and 
helping them in marketing their products. The y further  are of the 
view that exuberance of the youngsters studying in the institutes 
be harnessed fully by  involving them in  developmental efforts of 
the Government can go a long way in improving the livelihood of 
the poor local population.  
4.6  The Committee are disappointed to note the Ministry‟s 
lack of concern for the job workers and the hired powerloom 
workers. T he fact that Ministry have not thought of any welfare 
measures for such category of workers shows the apathetic 
approach of the Ministry towards this very poor class of weavers. 
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry ought to take 
steps for the be tterment of weavers who are working on 
powerlooms owned by others so that they are not exploited by the 
affluent weavers. The Ministry of Textiles should also take up with 

47 
 
the State Governments the issue of periodic revision/fixation of 
the minimum wages paid to these weavers in tandem with Ministry 
of Labour and Employment regarding effective implementation of 
labour laws for the welfare of these weavers/workers. 
4.7  The Committee observe that the Ministry have no 
definite strategy to help poor powerloom weavers who are not able 
to sell their products and the efforts of the Ministry are limited to 
organizing a few Buyer -Seller Meets in a year. The Committee 
further note that the Ministry have explained the marketing 
assistance given to the handloom weavers  which affirms that 
nothing concrete is being done to help poor powerloom weavers.  
The Committee are of the strong view that a multi -pronged 
strategy is the need of the hour to help these weavers. The 
Ministry should, in the first instance, make efforts to  find 
dedicated buyers for these weavers and follow it up with improved 
infrastructure, modernization, training and market/ demand driven 
production. 
 

48 
 
4.8  The documents furnished to the Committee reveal that  
the regional office of Textile Commissioner in Kanpur has been 
shifted to Noida and a new regional office has been opened in 
Indore. On further scrutiny, they found that the Annual Report of 
the Ministry still states that there are eight regional offices of the 
Textile Commissioner in India, one of which is in Kanpur. 
According to the Ministry, the decision to shift the office from 
Kanpur was taken on the basis of the report of IIM Bangalore on 
redefining the role of the office of Textile Commissioner.  To their 
utter dismay, they  find that IIM Bangalore did not conduct any 
survey of textile industry or powerlooms in Uttar Pradesh before 
making such a recommendation.  Recommendation of IIM 
Bangalore was based only on the discussion with the office of 
Textile Commissioner and NITRA  primarily an industry body which 
participated in the workshops conducted by IIM Bangalore. 
Further, it has been stated in the reply that since textile industry 
is declining in Uttar Pradesh , the office may be shifted to Indore 
which has a flourishing textile industry. The Committee are of the 
view that the office of Textile Commissioner is all the more 
required in a State where the industry is d ying to take care of the 

49 
 
poor weavers who are suffering and migrating to other occupations. 
The position, however, is contradicted by the Ministry  themselves 
through the information supplied by them under RTI Act 2005 
which shows  that number of powerlooms and other textile units 
and machinery in Uttar Pradesh outnumber the machines and 
production in Madhya Pradesh. The Committee,  therefore, desire 
that the Ministry to review its decision to shift the office from 
Kanpur in light of the latest data and situation prevalent in textile 
industry in Uttar Pradesh. 
 
4.9  The Committee note that the Ministry have spent Rs 
16399 crores under the Technology Upgradation Fund 
Scheme(TUFS) since its inception. The Committee , however, are 
shocked to note that Ministry do not maintain any data regarding 
the location, category or c lass of the beneficiaries.  Furthermore, 
in respect of Restructured TUFS, there were only 5 cases out of 
total 3741 approved cases where investment was less than Rs 5 
lakhs. On perusal of the data regarding State -wise subsidy 
sanctioned under restructured TUFS, it is clear that already 
industrialized states like Gujarat and Maharashtra top the chart 

50 
 
while poor States like Bihar, Assam, Uttar Pradesh etc. lag far 
behind. This speaks volumes about the reach of the flagship 
Scheme of the Ministry. The Committe e are of the view that it is  
high time that the TUFS be given a focused approach since there 
has been a skewed technology upgradation so far. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry identify the disadvantaged areas and 
sectors on the lines of „priority sector lending‟ of the banks and 40-
50% of the total allocation should be kept for this sector. The 
Committee find that the Ministry do not have any specific plan for 
spreading awareness about the scheme to the remote /industrially 
backward areas. They desire that the Ministry devise other ways to 
reach out to the priority sector s and encourage them to upgrade/ 
invest in the latest technology for which the involvement of local 
MPs and MLAs may also be considered, if necessary. 
4.10  The Committee observe that R esearch & Development 
Scheme of the Ministry of Textiles is implemented ma inly through 
the eight Textile Research Associations. They are perturbed to find 
that the non -plan expenditure of the Ministry over the years on 
these eight TRAs is more than the Pla n expenditure on R&D. The y 
further find that these TRAs are industry bodies which have been 

51 
 
partially funded by different Ministries over the years latest being 
Ministry of Textiles. The Committee are of the view that the 
innovations/ achievements of these  TRAs, which were formed in 
1960s are lackluster and, therefore, the Ministry should, instead of 
funding these TRAs invest in research projects undertaken by 
institutions/ individuals across the spectrum. The Committee 
strongly feel that to increase the ef ficiency and output of the 
TRAs, the industry should fund them  instead. The Committee 
desire that the immediate focus of the R&D efforts of the Ministry 
should be to provide easy upgradation/ modernization solutions 
which are region -specific, non -polluting technology and latest 
designs and designing techniques for the poor weavers  while 
simultaneously striving to conserve/preserve the art of the master 
weavers. 
4.11  The Committee observe that the Ministry of textiles are 
implementing separate health insura nce scheme for workers of 
each sector namely Rajiv Gandhi Swasthya Bima Yojana, Health 
Insurance Scheme for Handloom Workers and Newly introduced 
health insurance scheme for powerloom weavers. Similarly, 
separate life insurance schemes for weavers/ workers under various 

52 
 
sectors are also being implemented. The Committee are of the view 
that instead of implementing separate schemes, the Ministry 
should endeavour to operate one umbrella scheme for all the 
weavers/ workers in the industry. The Committee desire that the  
Ministry of Textiles take up the issue of implementing the RSBY 
with Ministry of Labour and Employment for all the 
weavers/workers of the textile industry and not for handloom 
workers only.  
 
 
New Delhi;                           DARA SINGH CHAUHAN, 
18    April, 2013                                                            CHAIRMAN,  
28   Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)           STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 

53 
 
ANNEUXRE-I 
STATUS OF TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN MADHYA PRADESH AND UTTAR 
PRADESH (PARA NO.3.20 REFERS) 
It is also mentioned here that the statistical data in respect of status of 
Textile Industry in Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh were provided by 
the Office of Textile Commissioner, Mumbai under RTI Act, 2005 vide 
their letter No.20 (164)/2010/RTI/Legal/3 3 dated 17.08.2010.  The 
brief of status of textile industry in Uttar Pradesh is as under:- 
Type of Textiles Madhya Pradesh Uttar Pradesh 
Composite Mills 11 12 
Spinnings 43 53 
Weaving 8 20 
Processing 25 109 
Hosiery Knitting Nil 2673 
Hosiery Processing House Nil 39 
Brading Machines Nil 1000 
Technical Textile Units 55 243 
Embroidery 100 950 
Powerlooms 41706 211500 
Shuttless Powerlooms Nil 1346 
Zari Used Looms Nil 580 
Carpet Looms Nil 100000 
Needle Looms Nil 500 
Readymade Garment Units 2000 7200 
 Two textile units M/s Ginni Filaments Ltd., Mathura and M/s 
Shree Laxmi Cotsyn Ltd. Fatehpur are falling in Uttar Pradesh 
which comes under top 10 units of the country. 

54 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
(Para No.3.23 refers) 
Significant achievements of TRA's in last five years is as follows: 
 
TRA  Year Project Title 
ATIRA 2009-10 Development of nano fibre 
based textiles 
BTRA 2008-09 Plasma technology for textile 
processing 
BTRA 2009-10 Nano technological studies on 
development of high 
performance polyester and 
polypropylene fibres  
NITRA 2009-10 Development of NYCO fabrics 
for paramilitary and military 
combat uniforms 
SASMIRA 2009-10 Application of supercritical 
fluid for dyeing 
SITRA 2009-10 Development of speciality 3D 
compression bandage for lymph 
edema 
WRA 2009-10 Development of internet based 
color matching facility for small 
and medium dye houses in 
decentralized sector. 
 

55 
 
 
 
The Plan expenditure on Research and Development and 
Non-Plan expenditure on TRAs in last few years is as follows: 
Year B.E. R.E Expenditure 
(Rs in Crores) 
2003-04 2 2 2 
2004-05 2 2 2 
2005-06 2 2 2 
2006-07 2 2 2 
2007-08 2 2 2 
2008-09 2 2 2 
2009-10 10 10 10 
2010-11 10 9 9 
2011-12 9 9 7.5 
2012-13 7 7 5.96 
 
  

56 
 
Partial non-plan support is made available to the 8 TRAs for 
recurring and administrative expenses through a separate non -
plan grant in the budget. Non -plan grant given to TRAs in the last 
5 years is as under: 
Year Non Plan Grant  
(Rs. In lakhs) 
2008-09 859.60 
2009-10 765.30 
2010-11 1625.00 
2011-12 764.90 
2012-13 870.90 
 
The total Plan assistance released to all TRAs from 2003 -04 
to 2011 -12 stands at Rs.47 crores and the Non Plan Grant 
assistance to all TRAs stands at Rs.105.37 crores. 
  

57 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
(Para No.3.27 refers) 
State-wise R-TUFS subsidy sanctioned by MOT 
from time to time (Position as on 30.03.2013) 
SL. No. Name of the State 
Sanctioned 
subsidy 
Amount  (Rs.in 
Lakh) 
1 ANDHRA PRADESH  2066.83 
2 ASSAM  15.17 
3 BIHAR  8.81 
4 CHANDIGARH  182.00 
5 CHATTISGARH  2.07 
6 DADRA & NAGAR  2321.91 
7 DAMAN & DIU  359.90 
8 DELHI  1148.35 
9 GUJARAT  17970.10 
10 HARYANA  1475.03 
11 HIMACHAL PRADESH  280.27 
12 JAMMU & KASHMIR  22.10 
13 KARNATAKA  2219.13 
14 KERALA  52.59 
15 MADHYA PRADESH  2295.89 

58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
16 MAHARASHTRA  7409.58 
17 ORISSA  50.18 
18 PONDICHERY  28.66 
19 PUNJAB  8188.91 
20 RAJASTHAN  3541.58 
21 TAMIL NADU  3479.47 
22 UTTAR PRADESH  704.41 
23 UTTARANCHAL  40.91 
24 WEST BENGAL  1097.70 
  Total 54961.56 

59 
 
ANNEXURE-IV 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 4th April, 2013 from 1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs. 
and 1500 hrs. to 1740 hrs. in Committee Room `074', Ground Floor, 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.  
   PRESENT 
    Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
   MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
3. Shri Narahari Mahato 
4. Shri Hari Manjhi 
5. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
6. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
7. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
8. Shri K. Sugumar 
9. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
10. Shri Ashok Argal 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
12. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
13. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
15. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
16. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 17. Shri Rajaram 
 18. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 19. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 

60 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy   - Director 
3. Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
  
     REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES  
Sl.No. Name of the Officer 
Designation 
1. Ms. Zohra Chatterji Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Agnihotri AS & FA 
3. Shri V. Srinivas Joint Secretary  
4. Smt. Monika S. Garg Joint Secretary  
5. Shri Sujit Gulati Joint Secretary 
6. Smt. Sunaina Tomar Joint Secretary 
6. Shri N.D. George Economic Advisor 
7. Shri Subrata Gupta Jute Commissioner 
8. Shri Balvender Kumar DC (Handlooms) 
9. Shri S.S. Gupta DC ( Handicrafts) 
10. Smt. Ishita Roy Member, Secretary, CSB 
11. Shri A.B. Joshi Textile Commissioner 
12. Shri K.R. Pillai CMD, NTC 
13. Shri B.K. Mishra CMD, CCI 
14. Shri Nirmal Sinha CMD, HHEC 
15. Shri Arun Kumar Chakraborty CMD, JCI 

61 
 
16. Shri J.K. Baweja CMD, NHDC 
17. Shri Heerak Upadhaya CMD, BIC 
18. Shri Arjit Banerji Secretary, NJB 
19. Shri Prem Kumar Gera DG, NIFT 
20. Ms. Aarti Kanwar MD, BJEL 
21. Smt. Alka Arora MD, CCIC 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the 
Ministry of Textiles and invited their attention to the provisions 
contained in Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker.   
3. The Chairman, thereafter, asked the Secretary to brief the 
Committee regarding the Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry 
of Textiles. 
 
4. The Secretary briefed the Committee on the budgetary allocations, 
revised estimates and the actual expenditure for the last year vis-à-vis 
for the year 2013 -14 on various schemes/programmes undertaken by 
the Ministry through a power point presentation.  
 
5. The Members, thereafter, asked questions and sought specific 
clarifications from the representatives of the Ministry on the various 
Schemes of the Ministry among others on the following 
issues/Schemes:-    
(a) General Performance of the Ministry. 

62 
 
(b)  Reasons for significant reduction in Budgetary Estimates for 
Plan Expenditure. 
(c ) Shortfall in Expenditure under various Schemes. 
(d) R&D measures taken by Central Silk Board. 
(e) Problems of silk sector and Jute sector. 
(f) Basis of determination of Minimum Support Price of cotton 
and Jute. 
(g) Low pace of expenditure under TUFS during last year. 
(h) Terms of loan waiver. 
(i) Incorrect estimates of beneficiaries of loan waiver package. 
(j) Modification of definition of `handlooms'. 
(k) Reasons of closure of Regional Office of Textile Commissioner 
at Kanpur. 
(l) Welfare of powerloom workers. 
(m) Increase in allocation under R&D head. 
(n) Poor working conditions in textile mills. 
(o) Share of Indian textiles in global market. 
(p) Setting up of NIFT in J&K. 
6. The Chairman, thereafter, directed the Secretary to send written 
replies to the unanswered queries and the Supplementary List of Points 
to the Secretariat within three days. 

63 
 
7. The Chairman thanked the Secretary and other officials for giving 
valuable information to the Committee on various subjects. 
 
 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
 
The Committee again sat from 1500 hrs. to 1740 hrs.  
 
8.  XX    XX    XX   
9.  XX    XX    XX 
10.  XX    XX    XX 
11.  XX    XX    XX 
12.  XX    XX    XX 
13.   XX    XX    XX 
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
--------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  XX Do not pertain to this Report.  
 

64 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 16th April, 2013 from 1200 hrs. to 1 235 
hrs. in Room No.62, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
  PRESENT 
    Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
   MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
3. Shri Narahari Mahato 
4. Shri Hari Manjhi 
5. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
6. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
7. Shri K. Sugumar 
8. Shri Ashok Argal 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
10. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
11. Shri P. Kannan 
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
13. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 15. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy   - Director 
3. Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
  
 

65 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about the draft Reports on Demands for Grants for the year 2013-
14 of the Ministry of Labour and Employment and Ministry of Textiles  
respectively.  
 
3.    XX   XX    XX 
 
4. The Committee, then, took up the draft Report on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Textiles for consideration. The Committee,  
adopted the draft Report without any modification.   
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
Reports in view of the consequential changes arising out of factual 
verification and to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  XX Do not pertain to this Report.  
 
 