 
6  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Labour 
on the `Development Schemes for Handicrafts Sector’] 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2009/ Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
  


  
SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Labour 
on the `Development Schemes for Handicrafts Sector’] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2009 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2009 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
 
December, 2009/ Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 


   
CONTENTS 
        
     PAGE(S)  
         
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv)  
       
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..    
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
   replies of Government have not been accepted by  
   the Committee and which require reiteration………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature    …………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Third Report  
  (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2009-2010) 
 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL-CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
     2. Shri  M. Anandan  
     3. Shri  P. Balram (Mahabubabad)  
     4. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq    
     5. Shri  Sudarshan Bhagat  
     6. Shri  Hassan Khan  
     7. Shri  Kaushalendra Kumar  
     8. Shri P. Lingam  
     9. Shri  Hari Manjhi  
    10. Shri  P.R. Natarajan  
    11. Km. Mausam Noor  
    12. Shri  S. Pakkirappa  
    13. Shri  Ramkishun  
    14. Shri  Mahendra Kumar Roy  
    15. Shri  Chandu Lal Sahu  
    16. Shri  Murari Lal Singh  
***17. Shri Raj Babbar  
    18. Vacant     
    19. Vacant  
    20. Vacant  
    21. Vacant 
 
 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
    22. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy  
    23. Shri  Rudra Narayan Pany  
 **24. Shri  Pyarelal Khandelwal  
    25. Shri  Rajaram  
    26. Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
   27. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri  
  *28. Shri  Mohammad Adeeb  
   29. Vacant    
   30. Vacant   
   31. Vacant  
 

 
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*   Changed the nomination from Committee on Labour to   Committee on       
Commerce w.e.f. 17th September, 2009. 
           **  Expired on 6th October, 2009. 
                     ***  Nominated w.e.f. 3rd December, 2009. 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
                
1.    Shri Devender Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri B.S. Dahiya     - Director  
3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
4.    Shri Suresh Kumar   - Senior Executive Assistant 
     
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been 
authorised  by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Sixth Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty -Third Report of the Standing Committee on Labour 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on  the `Development Schemes for Handicrafts Sector’. 
 
2. The Thirty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 24.10.2008.  The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in that Repo rt on 24.2.2009.  The 
Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Labour at 
their sitting held on 11.11.2009. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty -Third Report of the Standing C ommittee on Labour 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed in thick type 
in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;               HEMANAND BISWAL 
11th Novemeber, 2009                                       CHAIRMAN, 
20 Kartika, 1931 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.    
  

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1. This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Thirty -Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on 
`Development Schemes for Handicrafts Sector’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Th irty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 24.10.2008.  It contained 12 recommendations.  Replies of Government in 
respect of all the recommendations have been received and have been categorized as 
under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10 and 12.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply  -  NIL 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in res pect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration--Paragraph Sl. No.  8. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 2, 6, 9 and 11.  
 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect of 
recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action taken notes in respect 
of recommendations contained in Chapter -V for which only interim replies have 
been given by the Governme nt may be furnished to them at the earliest and in 
any case not later than 3 months of the presentation of this Report.   
 
4.      The Committee will now deal with the action taken replies of the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
  

 
 
A. Census of artisans 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2  Para 13) 
5.  The Committee in their original Report observed that the existing process of 
conducting census for handicraft artisans by covering 20% districts every year, was 
cumbersome and skewed as it would no t bring out the exact figures of artisans in the 
country because by the time census of last phase took place, the figure in areas wherein the 
census was carried out in the first phase might have changed drastically.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommended t hat it would be in the fitness of things if a one time survey was 
carried out to cover the entire strength of artisans all over the country and the current 
process of covering 20% of the districts every year should be continued thereafter to keep the 
data updated.   
 
6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry stated that : 
`The recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee to have one 
time survey i.e. 100% census conducted, has been referred to the competent 
authority, for approval.  Since the me thodology of conducting 100% census is a 
shift from the existing policy of conducting census of 20% districts every year, 
the change in policy has to be decided by the competent authority and requires 
subsequent approvals including from the Planning Commis sion.  This process 
will take more time.  It has, therefore, been decided to carry on with the census 
on the basis of present policy covering further 20% districts in the country this 
year i.e. 2008 -09 and the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee to conduct 100% census, shall be implemented w.e.f. the next 
financial year i.e. 2009-10 after the acceptance and approvals of the competent 
authority as aforesaid.  A proposal in this regard has been submitted to the 
Internal Finance Wing and wil l be taken up thereafter with the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance etc.’ 
 
 
 
 

7. The Committee take note of the Ministry’s assurance that the census 
operations shall be undertaken throughout the country in the next financial year 
i.e. 2009-10, after the subsequent approvals of the Planning Commission and 
Ministry of Finance. The Committee desire that entire census needs to be 
conducted within the current financial year so that realistic targets could be 
fixed under various developmenta l and welfare schemes well before 
implementing them in the next financial year i.e. 2010-11. 
 
B. Low coverage under the schemes for Handicrafts Sector 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3  Para 18) 
 
 
8. The Committee in their Report, considering the very low coverage under the 
developmental and welfare schemes of handicrafts sector recommended that all out efforts 
should be made to cover the entire strength of artisans within the current Five Year Plan, 
particularly under the welfare schemes.  For the purpose, the targets under each of the 
schemes should be revised accordingly and if needed be, the Ministry of Finance and 
Planning Commission should be urged to enhance the budgetary allocations to meet the 
increased targets.  
 
9. In their action taken reply, the  Ministry stated that : 
`The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. It will be the sincere 
efforts of the Government to cover large number of handicraft artisans through 
the six plan schemes approved for the 11th Plan. The Committee’s 
recommendations with specific reference to coverage of larger number of 
artisans under the Welfare Scheme has also been noted.  In   first 2 years of the 
plan period, physical coverage under the welfare scheme s has been achieved 
more than what had been envisaged in the projections under the welfare scheme 
submitted for approval before the beginning of the 11th Plan.  The increased 
physical coverage had been due to the reason that the actual annual premium 

under the health scheme determined after a competitive bidding process at the 
beginning of the Plan period had come out to be significantly lower than what 
was assumed while making physical and financial projections under scheme 
submitted for approval at the beginning of 11th Plan.’ 
 
10. The Committee take note of the assurance given by the Ministry to cover 
large number of handicrafts artisans under the developmental and welfare 
schemes during the remaining period of 11 th Five Year Plan.  The Committee, 
while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry for achieving the physical targets 
more than the initial projections under Janashree Bima Yojana and Rajiv Gandhi 
Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana during the first two years of the plan period, urge 
them  to demonstrate s imilar performance under other developmental and 
welfare schemes also  so that  the needy artisans can also receive benefits of 
these schemes and sustain in the sector progressively.  
 
C. Travel assistance to artisans 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6  Para 39) 
 
11. The Committee in their Report further recommended that the limit of distance 
considered for providing travel assistance to the artisans who wished to take part in 
various handicraft exhibitions, should have been reduced from existing 500 kms. to at 
least 100 kms so that it did not prove an obstacle for the needy artisans to exhibit 
their skills. Similarly, some arrangements like plying special buses should have been  
arranged for the artisans residing/working within the radius of 100 kms. of the 
exhibition venue.  
 
 

 
12. In their action taken reply, the Ministry  stated that : 
`During the 11 th Five year Plan the facility of payment of TA/DA to artisans 
which earlier was paid to artisans from some identified and difficult localities 
has been extended to all the artisans who come to participate in a market 
related activity from a distance of and more than 500 kms. from and to their 
place of residences. The acceptance of the recommendation of the  Standing 
Committee on Labour to relax the rules for payment of TA/DA to artisans 
participating in Market related programmes of this office reducing the d istance 
from approved 500 Kms to 100 Kms. requires the approval of the competent 
authority. A proposal in this regard has been submitted to the Planning 
Commission.’ 
  
13. The Committee note that the Ministry have submitted the proposal to 
reduce the limit of distance from 500 kms. to 100 kms. for the purpose of paying 
TA/DA to artisans who participate in the marketing events relating to 
handicrafts, to the Planning Commission for  approval. The Committee are of the 
opinion that as it is a welfare measure, the Ministry should take up the matter 
with the Planning Commission with top priority and expeditious approval.  The 
Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that some 
local transport arrangements at the time of conducing marketing events should 
also be made for the artisans residing/working within the radius of 100 kms. of 
the exhibition venue as such  step will not only encourage the artisans to 
participate in these exhibitions but  will also help spread awareness of 
handicrafts products/Industry among the common masses.  

D. Training and financial assistance to artisans 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8  Para 55) 
14. The Committee in their Report, while noting the lower coverage of artisans under 
training programmes recommended that training of artisans was of utmost importance 
for their sustainable growth and to achieve this, though in a phased manner, a proper 
and well thought out strategy might be devised to continue it on a regular basis. The 
publicity of such programmes be adequately g iven amongst the artisans for achieving 
maximum coverage and to make them aware about the benefits of these trainings. The 
proposal for soft loan to artisans under Design and Technological Upgradation Scheme 
should have been also mooted with the provision of buy back arrangements of finished 
products against such loan.  
 
15. In their action taken reply, the Ministry   stated that:  
`This is already taken care of, under different components of the existing Human 
Resource Development Scheme implemented by this office.  The range of these 
trainings provided varies from skill development under the tutelage of Master 
craftperson and speci alized institutional trainings.  A wide publicity of all the 
schemes including that of the HRD Scheme is regularly ensured through press 
advertisement for creating awareness among the stake - holders.  As regards soft 
loan to artisans under Design & Technol ogy Upgradation Scheme, it is 
submitted that as of now there is no such enabling provision in the existing 
approved schemes of this office. However, under the Ambedkar Hastshilp Vikas 
Yojana there is a  component of Credit Guarantee Scheme through which the  
Government of India bears the cost of Guarantee Fee and Annual Service 
Charges, which is paid to Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for micro, medium and 
small enterprises for obtaining guarantee cover in respect of the credit 
sanctioned to the handicraft artisa ns by different Member Lending Institutes 
(MLIs) i.e. Banks. This arrangement is applicable in respect of credit sanctioned 
to both artisans and Self Help Groups (SHGs).’ 
 
 
 
 
 

 
16. The Committee notice that the Ministry/Office of Development 
Commissioner (Handicrafts) are providing training to artisans under different 
components of `Human Resource Development Scheme’ and  wide publicity of all 
the Schemes is regularly ensured through  press advertisement for creating 
awareness among the stakeholders.  However, reply of the Ministry is silent 
regarding fixing periodicity of various training programmes being organized by 
them.  Since the major population of artisans belongs to an unorgan ized sector 
and are working in individual capacity, they cannot afford to go for training 
unless they get time to plan for the same well in advance.  The Committee are of 
the firm opinion that the artisans can avail the benefits of training programmes 
in a better way and in larger number if they are aware of the schedule of such 
programmes in the very beginning of the year.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their  recommendation and urge upon the Ministry to prepare a definite 
schedule of training progra mmes to be organized under different schemes 
throughout the year.  The Committee  further desire that the credit guarantee 
scheme which is a  component of Ambedkar Hastshilp Vikas Yojana, and under 
which loans are provided to the artisans, should be restru ctured and the 
provision of buyback arrangements of finished products against loans availed by 
artisans, should also be suitably incorporated into it.  

E. Raising ceiling under Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Yojana 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9  Para 62) 
17. The Committee, keeping in view the ever increasing medical expenses 
recommended that the ceiling under the Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Yojana should 
be raised from Rs.15,000 to atleast Rs.1,50,000 per annum per family.  The 
Committee  also recommended that the critical illnesses like cancer, heart problems, 
brain surgery etc. should also have been  brought within the ambit of the scheme with 
appropriate financial ceiling. 
  
18.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry stated that: 
`The recommendations concerning raising the ceiling of coverage as well as 
inclusion of critical illness has been examined. It is felt that these 
enhancements in the coverage of benefits may yield in substantial hike in the 
annual premium, which at present is Rs.800/ - per annum per artisan. Out of 
this, the general category artisan contributes Rs.150/ - and an artisan 
belonging to NER, SC, ST & BPL categories contributes Rs.75/ -. The 
Government of India contributes the balance annual premium and Service Tax 
on the total premium. If the sharing of the future premium between the artisan 
and GOI is kept in the existing proportion, there would be an apparent hike in 
the artisan’s share of the annual premium as well, which all artisans may not 
be able to afford. Therefore, in view of the recommendation,  action has been 
initiated for a new add -on feature to be introduced in the scheme for covering 
10 critical illnesses viz., Cancer, Paralysis, Myocardial Infarction (Heart Attack), 
Bye pass Surgery, Kidney failure, Stroke, Tuberculosis etc., with a financial cap 
of Rs.1.5 lakh per annum per artisan family. Artisan who is willing to pay the 
higher premium could opt for this feature.  A suitable proposal in this regard 
has been submitted to the Planning Commission.’ 
 
19. The Committee find  that in order to cover critical illnesses under Rajiv 
Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Yojana, the Ministry have proposed to introduce a new 
add-on feature with a financial cap of Rs.1.5 lakh per annum per artisan/family.  
The Ministry have further stated that the artisan who is willing to pay the higher 

premium could opt for this feature.  The Committee are astonished to note such 
business like attitude of the Ministry where the poor artisans are being treated 
as customers.  Instead of providing them adequate healt h coverage, which is a 
part of social security measure, the Ministry are, in a way, trying to sell 
insurance policy to them.  The Committee observe that such a cursory approach 
of the Ministry does not reflect the seriousness of  the issue it merits.  The p lea 
of the Ministry that enhancing financial ceiling from the existing Rs.15,000/ - to 
Rs.1,50,000/- for providing general health coverage and covering critical 
illnesses under the scheme, may yield in substantial hike in the annual premium 
which all artisans may not be able to afford, is not acceptable to the Committee.  
At present, the premium is being shared by the Government of India and the 
artisan.  Life Insurance Corporation (LIC), through which the scheme is being 
implemented being a public sector co mpany,  should not shirk its social 
responsibility towards the handicrafts artisans who are from the disadvantaged 
strata of society. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their  recommendation and 
urge upon the Ministry to act in a positive manner and extend the critical illness 
cover to the handicrafts artisans and also enhance the financial ceiling to atleast 
Rs.1,50,000/-.    With regard to sharing of premium, the Committee desire that 
Government of India and LIC may share the hiked premium on the lines o f 
welfare schemes being implemented in Handloom Sector.  Such a philanthropic 
step will not only extend the desired insurance coverage to the needy artisans 
but they will also be spared of the extra financial obligations arising due to the 
extended coverage.    
     

F. Enhancement of age of artisans under Bima Yojana 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11  Para 69) 
 
20. The Committee, in the light of the fact that the artisan of higher age group were also 
contributing to the development of the handicrafts sector and the life expectancy in our 
country has also considerably gone up in their Report, recommended that the age for the 
purpose of insurance coverage under  the Bima Yojana should be enhanced at least upto 70 
years.   
  
21. In their action taken reply, the Ministry stated that : 
`Based on the recommendations of the Committee, a proposal was made to LIC of 
India on 22.08.2008, requesting consideration of, among others, the following issues: 
- Enhancing the age limit from 60 years to 70 years 
- Increase in Children Education Allowance from Rs.300 per quarter per 
child  to 2 children to Rs.500. 
  
On the issue of increa sing the age limit to 70 years, LIC has asked for likely 
number of persons to be covered under the scheme. The same is being furnished to 
them.’ 
 
22. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry have on the 
recommendation of the Committee have submitt ed a proposal to LIC for 
the welfare of the artisans of higher age group, who were, so far, deprived 
of Life Insurance cover and similarly, LIC has requested the Ministry to 
provide likely number of persons to be covered under the Scheme.  The 
Committee de sire that the Ministry should provide the requisite data to 
LIC at the earliest so  that, after completing other necessary procedural 
formalities, the artisans upto the age of 70 years may also get the benefits 
of the Scheme.  

  
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1,   Para 8) 
 The Committee take note of the fact that formulation of various schemes in 
handicraft sector and corresponding budgetary allocations are just not adequate to tap 
full potential of the artisans in the country. Based on the census of artisans conducted 
in th e year 1995 -96, the schemes framed cover only miniscule of artisans and the 
relative allocation under the schemes is also not fully utilized. The expenditure under 
the schemes which cover common artisans like Training and Extension, Design and 
Technology U pgradation, Marketing Support and Services and Research and 
Development has been far from satisfactory during the entire Tenth Plan. After 
noticing the trend of less budgetary utilization, a series of measures were stated to be 
taken by the Government incl uding rationalization of planning schemes and 
introduction of 11 generic schemes. Despite all these measures, even from the lesser 
allocation of Rs.425 crore for the handicraft sector during the Tenth Plan Period, 
approximately Rs.50 crore could not be spe nt due to lack of proper and adequate 
planning of the schemes. Identical reasons like non - receipt of viable proposals from 
implementing agencies, non settlement of pending utilization certificates, non 
completion of SIDC projects, less demand from impleme nting agencies etc. have been 
given for non fulfillment of targets and less utilization of  budgetary allocations 
repeatedly.  
The allocation for the 11
th 
Plan period is Rs.1257 crore practically trebling it 
from the one allocated during the Tenth Plan Peri od. As the Government has been 
unable to undertake any census of artisans after the last census done in 1995 -96, 
schemes for development and welfare of handicraft sector and artisans will have to be 
formulated on the basis of the figures of last census. Ta king cue from the past 
experience the Government should ensure that reasons cited for non fulfillment of 
targets resulting in less budgetary utilization are pre-empted before the formulation  of 
schemes for artisans and handicraft sector during the current  Plan Period.  The 
Committee also recommend that enhanced targets alongwith the matching budgetary 
allocations  under each of the scheme having impact on wider segment of artisans 
should be fixed. The Committee also expect that wide publicity of the scheme s would 
be given among the targeted groups and the monitoring of the schemes be done at 
regular intervals to ensure that the targets fixed for the schemes are achieved in a time 
bound manner and funds allocated are gainfully utilized. 
 

Reply of the Government 
  
 The targets are fixed on year -to-year basis and are subject to periodical review 
and assessment to determine if any revision is required.  The budgetary allocation in 
the first two years of the 11 th Five Year Plan namely 2007 -08 and 2009 -10 is as pe r 
the amounts approved in the SFC/EFC & CCEA note of the respective schemes.  
  
 Every scheme has now a component of publicity and separate budget is 
earmarked for it.  Wide publicity of the schemes amongst the target groups through 
newspaper advertisement s at National, Regional and local levels is a regular and 
continuous feature now.  Publicity of schemes is also made through 
workshops/seminars being organized at local, State and National levels.  The 
monitoring of the schemes being implemented is regular ly undertaken through field 
officers and the officers from the Headquarter Office. These efforts are being initiated 
to ensure proper implementation of the schemes and to strengthen the implementation 
further. 
 
  As regards full utilization of the allocated outlays, it is submitted that as a 
result of measures taken concerning monitoring and publicity of the schemes, it is 
hoped that outlays in the handicraft sector will be fully utilized under each of the 
schemes. 
 
 With regard to the recommendatio n regarding coverage of the schemes 
having impact on wider segment of artisans, it is submitted that additional measures 
like taking up theme based clusters (five theme based craft categories already 
finalized) and Mega Clusters such as at Moradabad and Na rsapur would result in 
delivery of services through these schemes to a significantly larger artisanal base in 
the entire country. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3  Para 18) 
 
 The Committee not e that there have been numerous schemes for the welfare of 
artisans. Even though the Government has harped on increasing budget allocations 
year after year, the Committee are not satisfied as most of these schemes have not 
been able to come up to the expec tations of artisans as the benefits of these schemes 
have not reached to the majority of them. The Committee are unable to understand 
the reasons for fixing the targets on lower side under the Schemes. During the entire 
Tenth Five Year Plan, only 1.48 lakh  artisans under the Ambedkar Hastshilp Vikas 
Yojana, 1.17 lakh artisans under Marketing and Support Promotion Scheme/Export 
Promotion Scheme, 2.93 lakh under Bima Yojana, 0.50 lakh under Design Scheme 
and 1.54 lakh artisans under the ID card Scheme could b e covered. The reason given 
by the Ministry that the coverage under these schemes is directly proportional to the 
budgetary outlays approved by the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission and 
hence the small percentage of total artisans covered is attr ibutable to the outlays 
approved under these Schemes, contradicts with their version as there have been 
under utilization of funds during each plan year of the last Five Year Plan. The 
Committee are of the strong view that adequate spadework should be done  ensuring 
that benefits of the developmental and welfare schemes reach the maximum number 
of beneficiaries. Considering the enhanced allocations during  11 th 
 
Plan, the 
Committee recommend that all out efforts should be made to cover the entire strength 
of artisans within the current Five Year Plan, particularly under the welfare schemes. 
For the purpose, the targets under each of the schemes should be revised a ccordingly 
and if need be the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission should be urged 
to enhance the budgetary allocations to meet the increased targets.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. It will be t he sincere 
efforts of the Government to cover large number of handicraft artisans through the six 
plan schemes approved for the 11th Plan. 
 
 
 
 

 The Committee’s recommendations with specific reference to coverage of larger 
number of artisans under the Welfare Scheme has also been noted and it is submitted 
that in the first 2 years of the plan period, physical coverage under the Welfare 
Scheme has been achieved more than what had been envisaged in the projections 
under the Welfare Scheme submitted for approval before the beginning of the 11th Plan 
as indicated below: 
Year Physical target projected in CCEA 
Note(lakhs) 
Actual physical target 
prescribed/ achieved 
(lakhs) 
Janashree 
Bima 
Yojana 
(JBY) 
Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi 
Swasthya Bima 
Yojana 
(RGSSBY) 
JBY RGSSBY 
2007- 08 1.00 8.00 0.98 8.82 
2008- 09 1.00 8.00 9.82 10.10 
  The increased physical coverage had been due to the reason that the actual 
annual premium under the Health Scheme determined after a competitive bidding 
process at the beginning of the Plan period had come out to be significantly lower 
than what was assumed while making physical and financial projections under 
scheme submitted for approval at the beginning of 11th Plan.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 in Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4  Para 28) 
 The Committee note that the handicraft sector is a highly decentralized and 
dispersed sector. As per the census conducted in the year 1995 -96, a total number 
of 45.83 lakh artisans are working as household units out of the total strength of 
47.61 lakh artisans. The strength of artisans in the country at present is estimated 
to be 67 lakh. The Government did not sought a separate data of artisans working 
by forming Cooperative Societies/Clusters in the last census and hence their data 
is not available. This reflects the non seriousness of the Government regarding 

organizing the handicraft artisans. Although, efforts are being made by the 
Government to organize the artisans, yet these efforts are limited and half hearted 
considering the total strength of artisans in the country. During the last three years 
267 clusters have been formed as a result of Government efforts covering only, 
1,06,974 artisans which is a small portion of the Government data of 65 lakh 
artisans in the country. The Committee feel that the  Government assistance can be 
better channelised and utilized through Cooperative fold vis -à-vis targeting the 
individual artisan. For the purpose, handicrafts sector needs to be organized by 
bringing maximum number of artisans under the Cooperative fold. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that a well planned strategy be chalked out to form 
Cooperative Societies/Clusters all over the country in a time bound manner so as 
to bring the benefits of various welfare schemes to the artisans in a cohesive  and 
assured way. It will be more appropriate if the work on the formation of 
Cooperatives is taken up simultaneously with the census operations by launching 
proper awareness programmes among the artisans regarding benefits of joining the 
Cooperatives.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 This recommendation of the Committee has already been accepted and adopted. 
Accordingly, the enumeration questionnaire has been suitably modified whereby 
data/information on Cooperative Societies and Clusters of the artisans shall also be 
captured. Upon the census findings becoming available, requisite strategies would be 
formed and implemented in such a manner that the recommendations of the 
Committee concerning formation of Cooperative Societies and clusters for the 
handicraft artisans all over the country could be implemented.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5  Para 35) 
 The Committee note that the role of NGOs in the implementation of 
developmental schemes for handicraf t sector is very vital. According to the 
Government, their involvement is essential due to the fact that they have their 
presence through out the whole country at the grassroot level and are well familiarized 
about the issues relating to the artisans in th e entire country and particularly in far 
flung areas. For implementing the welfare and developmental schemes aimed at 

welfare of artisans, these NGOs are provided financial assistance and are required to 
submit utilization certificates after spending it fo r the purposes  it was released to 
them. The Committee are dismayed to note the lack of proper monitoring mechanism 
on the functioning of these NGOs to ensure that the amount released to NGOs is spent 
purposefully. Besides, situation regarding receipt of utilization certificate from NGOs is 
far from satisfactory. The NGOs are one of the eligible agencies entrusted with the 
responsibilities of implementing the various Schemes in the handicraft sector. 
Therefore, not only the verification of the amount spent by them is essential but the 
achievement of physical target set out for each of the NGO by the Government will 
ensure their accountability in fulfilling their obligation towards handicraft sector. Non 
submission of utilization certificate by NGOs is indica tive of the fact that the fund 
released to them have either being not utilized properly or could have mis -utilised. 
Despite the pendency of about 835 utilisation certificates for submission by different 
NGOs since long time, no NGO has been taken to task o r blacklisted for its act of 
omission. This is a very serious lapse on the part of the Government as it involves the 
public money about which no accountability is being ensured. The non -receipt of 
utilization certificates on time restricts the timely relea se of further funds and 
hampers the growth of the sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
a thorough scrutiny of the proposals of NGOs should be done before involving them as 
implementing agencies. Their past performance, infrastructure, technical expertise 
and financial position should also be taken into consideration before entrusting any 
offer to them. The Committee further recommend that the submission of the utilization 
certificate alongwith the evaluation of the target achieved shoul d be responsibilities of 
field formations of Office of DC (Handicrafts). They should also be held responsible 
alongwith the defaulting NGOs against whom punitive action be initiated including 
blacklisting them.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee contained in this para are being 
followed in the Office of DC (Handicrafts). To illustrate, it is submitted that the 
proposals of NGO as well as the competence of the NGO are scrutinized and 
ascertained at the applicati on stage and at the field level itself. There is an elaborate 
grading system through which the capacity and capability of the NGO is ascertained 
by awarding a score against different identified performance parameters. A cut -off 
grade has also been prescrib ed to ensure that only capable NGOs are shortlisted as 
implementing partners for different schemes. While assessing their capability, their 
past performance, infrastructure, technical expertise and financial position are also 
taken into account. 
  
 There a re suitable standing instructions to the field formations making them 
responsible for physical inspection of the activity under implementation and to ensure 
not only proper utilization of the funds released but also for arranging scrutiny of their 

utilization certificates and other related documents. To ensure compliance with the 
guidelines and standing instructions by the implementing agencies/NGOs, no 
reimbursement proposal is considered unless it is accompanied with field inspection 
reports by the Assist ant Director. Besides, additional checks have also been 
introduced to ensure proper utilization of grants by the NGOs. As an example, each 
applicant NGO under he Marketing Support Scheme & Design and Technology 
Upgradation Scheme is expected to disclose th e list of artisans in advance at the stage 
initial proposal itself. The presence of the pre -disclosed artisans during the 
implementation stage is physically verified during the field inspection. A minimum 
presence of 80% pre -disclosed artisans during the i mplementation of the activity has 
been prescribed to become entitled for reimbursement of balance grants. 
Reimbursements are made, curtailed or recoveries made according to the actual 
number of artisans who participated in the activity. This arrangement ensures that the 
NGO really caters to the pre -identified artisans who shall receive prescribed benefits 
under the Schemes. 
  
 The NGOs in whose case the actual presence is 50% or below, are black listed, 
apart from action for recovery of the first installment released. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7,  Para 44) 
 The Committee observe that our country produces varieties of handicrafts items 
marked by area specific characteristics. The artisans of dif ferent regions give special 
dimensions prominently featuring their local artistic creations in the making of 
different crafts. However, in the absence of an appropriate identification mark it 
becomes difficult for a buyer to distinguish it from rest of the  handicrafts made by 
machines or imported depriving the artisans of the rightful and legitimate dues worth 
their products. The Indian traditional crafts do have the recognition all over the world 
since long. Our handicraft products are being exported to al l the major countries in 
the world. Yet, our share of exports of handicrafts in the world’s is only 1.6% which is 
very low. Considering the total artisanal population and vast range of products 
manufactured in the country, there is a tremendous scope for i ncreasing our 
handicrafts exports ensuring that the benefits also percolates down to the artisans. On 
one hand, the artisans are unaware about the worth of their product due to their lack 
of proper exposure to the markets while on the other hand they are b eing exploited by 
the agents and middlemen for want of identification mark having the price value of the 
product in it. Even though the Government maintains that handicraft represents a 
very wide range of products made out of a diverse range of raw materia ls and 
combination thereof and employing a  variety of processes, tools and technologies, it 
has not taken initiative to develop a generic trademark for the handicrafts. The quality 

of the raw material of different handicraft items can be quantified, the products can be 
labeled after these meet the laid down criteria for the eligibility of the Handicraft mark. 
The Committee are of the opinion that there is need for proper identificati on of the 
handicrafts products to give a thrust to the exports and for ensuring that the artisans 
get a good value of their produces. They, therefore, strongly recommend that 
expeditious steps should be taken by the Government to develop a trademark namely  
`Handicraft Mark’ for handicraft items and, if possible, also displaying its price in it. 
Such a trademark would definitely enable handicraft products to develop a niche with 
a distinct identity both in domestic and international markets.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Suitable proposals for undertaking the work for developing modalities for 
handicrafts trade mark, in case of feasibility, have been invited from competent 
organizations. The services of NID Ahmedabad  have requisitioned to undertake the 
exercise for Handicrafts Mark. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10  Para 63) 
 The Committee observe that under Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana, 
efforts have been made to enable the artisans community to have access to the health 
care facilities. However, not only the identification of ailments and the amount 
earmarked for their treatment speak volumes about the shortsightedness of the 
Government on such an important issue, but the limit of four persons of a family for 
benefits under the Scheme has raised questions about the thinking of the Government 
in so far as concept of the family in our society is concerned. Under the Scheme, four 
persons of a family  comprising self and any other three members of the family from 
amongst the dependent parents, spouse and children are covered. The choice between 
the parents and children, at times may be very difficult to make. The Committee are 
unable to understand the logic behind this concept as it may obliquely alter the edifice 
of the family bondage. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the ceiling 
of four persons of a family for benefits under the Scheme be done away with 
henceforth. The concept of a fa mily should invariably include dependent parents and 
thus taking into account the two children, self and spouse, the ceiling should atleast 
be extended to six persons for the purpose of insurance coverage under the Scheme.  
 

Reply of the Government 
 
 It is submitted that after the first 2 years of implementation of RGSSBY with a 
provision of covering an artisan with 3 family members i.e. total 4, the average family 
size has been reported to be as under:- 
   
   2006-07 -  2.92 members 
  2007-08 –  3.12 members 
 
 Thus, it is evident that even the existing provision of 4 family members has not 
been optimally availed by the beneficiary artisans.  
 
 Therefore, keeping in view the recommendations of the Parliamentary 
Committee, it is proposed to introduce an additional add -on feature in the existing 
scheme wherein the family size for the purpose of availing benefits under the scheme, 
in those cases where parents will be included as family members, shall be additional 
to the approved family size of 1+3. That is , if both the parents are included, then the 
family size for the beneficiary artisan shall be 6  (1+5) as has been recommended by 
the Committee. 
 A suitable proposal in this regard has been submitted to the Planning 
Commission. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12,  Para 70) 
 The Committee observe that Shiksha Sehyog Yojana is one of the components of 
the Bima Yojana for the handicraft artisans. Under the Scheme educational assistance 
in the form of scholarship at the rate of Rs.300/ - per quarter per child, for maximum 
to two children, studying in class 9 th to 11 th 
 
Standard is given to the children of 
insured artisans. The Committee appreciated the objective of the Scheme, but express 
their apprehension regarding its practicality. Although it aims at promoting education 
among the children of artisans, yet pegging it for students of class 9 th to 11th 
 
makes it 
unrealistic and impractical. It is common knowledge that the percentage of children of 
artisans reaching upto class 9 th 
 
and beyond is very low and hence the purpose of 
launching schemes largely remain unfulfilled. To make the Scheme meaningful with 
the intent to upgrade the education of artisans offsprings, it should be made 

applicable from the beginning of the schooling of the student i.e. from the Ist standard 
to the 12 th 
 
standard. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the scholarships 
should be provided at the initial stage of schooling, i.e. from 1 st 
 
Class onwards so that 
the artisans are motivated to start the schooling of their children and are encouraged 
to continue till their wards become conscious enough to pursue their career 
profession.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Based on the recommendations of the Committee, a proposal was made to LIC of India 
on 22.08.2008, requesting consideration of, among others, the following issues: 
 - For enhancing the age limit from 60 years to 70 years 
 - To increase Children Education Allowance from Rs.300 per quarter per 
child  to 2 children to Rs.500. 
 Before the response of LIC of India is described, it is imperative to mention here 
that Janashree Bima Yojana is not a scheme specifically for the handicraft artisans. 
 
 On the issue of increasing the age limit to 70 years LIC has asked for likely number of 
persons to be covered under the scheme. The same is being furnished to them. 
 As regards providing scholarships under Shiksha Sahayog Yojana  from the 
initial stage of schooling i.e. from Class 1 st onwards as against Class 9 th to 12th as at 
present, LIC has responded that the change in the classes to which scholarship is 
provided under Shiksha Sahayog Yojana or the quantum of scholarship cannot  be 
decided by LIC of India. This is a Central Government Scheme managed by LIC and 
any change in the scheme cannot be done in isolation to any scheme but would be 
applicable to all the Janashree Bima Yojana scheme. The LIC has further intimated 
that the JBY scheme would be reviewed again in next year and depending upon claim 
experience the benefits can be reviewed.  In view of the above response from LIC, it 
would be the endeavor of the Office of DC (Handicrafts) to again pursue with LIC to 
accept the prop osals emanating from the recommendations of the Committee, at the 
time of review in the next financial year.   
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 

  
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDTIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
       N I L 
 
 

CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8,  Para 55) 
 The Committee observe the emphasis of the Government on the Human 
Resource Development of artisans is extremely lop -sided keeping in view the number 
of artisans in the country vis-à-vis training activities underaken. During the year 
2005-06 1,100 participants in 11 events, 300 participants in 3 events in the year 
2006-07 and 2,460 participants in 18 events in the year 2007 -08 were imparted 
training. Under Special Handicraft Training Project, training imparted to artisans 
declined ever y succeeding year as 2,660 participants were trained during the year 
2005-06, 760 during the year 2006 -07 and 600 during the year 2007 -08. But the 
position under the schemes Training in Innovative Designs and Training of 
artisans/SHG leaders/NGO in capacit y building is extremely poor as for the years 
2005-06, 2006-07 not a single person was trained under both the schemes. Similarly, 
during the year 2007 -08 not a single person was trained under the scheme Training 
through Guru Shishya Parampara. There has al so been no fixed periodicity of these 
trainings as they were stated to be organized on a need based manner. In future also, 
workshops and seminars  are proposed to be organized only in such a fashion.  The 
manner in which need for such workshops/seminars i s decided and what is the 
criteria for such a decision has not been explained. Training to artisans is given 
primarily to upgrade their skills and make them aware about the conditions prevailing 
in the sector and how to cope with the fast growing and  ever changing market 
requirements. Hence, an adhoc approach on this important aspect of artisans activity 
will not make our artisans competitive and sustainable. Besides, our artisans also face 
resource crunch in carrying out their vocation. Under no scheme of the Government 
financial assistance, subsidy or loan is provided to artisans to enhance their 
professional skills. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that training of 
artisans is of utmost importance for their sustainable growth and to achieve th is, 
though in a phased manner, a proper and well thought out strategy be devised to 
continue it on a regular basis. The publicity of  such programmes be adequately given 
amongst the artisans for achieving maximum coverage and to make them aware about 
the benefits of these trainings. The proposal for soft loan to artisans under Design and 
Technological Upgradation Scheme be also mooted with the provision of buy back 
arrangements of finished products against such loan.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 This is already taken care of, under different components of the existing Human 
Resource Development Scheme implemented by this office.  
 

 The range of these trainings provided varies from skill development under the 
tutelage of Mastercraftperson and speci alized institutional trainings.  A wide publicity 
of all the schemes including that of the HRD Scheme is regularly ensured through 
press advertisement for creating awareness among the stake- holders.   
 
 As regards soft loan to artisans under Design & Tech nology Upgradation 
Scheme, it is submitted that as of now there is no such enabling provision in the 
existing approved schemes of this office. However, under the Ambedkar Hastshilp 
Vikas Yojana there is a component of Credit Guarantee Scheme through which the 
Government of India bears the cost of Guarantee Fee and Annual Service Charges, 
which is paid to Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for micro, medium and small 
enterprises for obtaining guarantee cover in respect of the credit sanctioned to the 
handicraft art isans by different Member Lending Institutes (MLIs) i.e. Banks. This 
arrangement is applicable in respect of credit sanctioned to both artisans and SHGs. 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.16 in Chapter-I of the Report)

CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2,  Para 13) 
 The Committee find that the last census to ascertain actual number  of 
handicrafts artisans was conducted in the  year 1995 -96 and thereafter no fresh 
survey  has been carried out even after a gap of more than a decade. Now, in the 11 th 
Plan the Office of the DC (Handicrafts) has decided to conduct a fresh survey in which  
20% districts will be covered every year. Based on the outcome of the census of 20% 
districts each year, estimated/projected population of artisans will be determined. In 
this way, it is proposed to get the actual data of artisans by the end of the Eleven th 
Five Year Plan. This process of census is cumbersome and skewed as it will not bring 
out the exact figures of artisans in the country because by the time census of last 
phase takes place, the figure in areas wherein the census was carried out in the fir st 
phase might have changed drastically. The present decision of the Government has 
perhaps not considered the very fact that the number of artisans in the country may 
not be more than a crore and the pockets of their concentration are also easily 
identifiable. Hence, to prolong the census of artisans during the entire 11 th Plan period 
defies all logic. The implementation of  developmental and welfare schemes based on 
assumption of figures of artisans will not be of any consequence as the quantum of 
money and machinery cannot be determined in the absence of correct data resulting in 
non fulfillment of the target fixed under the schemes. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that it will be in the fitness of things if a one time survey is carried out to 
cover the entire strength of artisans all over the country and the current process of 
covering 20% of the districts every year shoul d be continued thereafter to keep the 
data updated. Since the artisans are scattered across the country including in far 
flung and hilly areas. The existing set up in the Ministry of Textiles may not have 
adequate infrastructure and expertise, the services  of other specialized agencies, like 
National Sample Survey Organization (NSS) may be requisitioned  for conducting a 
realistic scientific census operations. This will not only help in expediting the work of 
census, but a region wise data base will also be prepared for implementation of the 
schemes effectively in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee to have one time 
survey i.e. 100% census conducted, has been referred to the competent authority, for 
approval.  Since the methodology of conducting 100% census is a shift from the 

existing policy of conducting census of 20% districts every year, the change in policy 
has to be decided by the competent authority and requires subsequent approvals 
including from Planning Commission.  This process will take more time.  It has, 
therefore, been decided to  carry on with the census on the basis of present policy 
covering further 20% districts in the country this year i.e. 2008 -09 and the 
recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee to conduct 100% census, 
shall be implemented w.e.f. the next financ ial year i.e. 2009 -10 after the acceptance 
and approvals of the competent authority as aforesaid.   
  
 A proposal in this regard has been submitted to the Internal Finance Wing and 
will be taken up there-after with Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance etc. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6,  Para 39) 
 The Committee observe that the Government has introduced a new provision in 
the 11 th Plan paving the way for providing travel assistance to the artisans who 
participate in the marketing events organized by the Office of the DC (Handicrafts) 
from time to time and are coming from the distance of more than 500 kms. Altho ugh 
this is a welcome step as it will encourage the artisans of distant areas to take part in 
the marketing events, yet the proposal is bereft of ground realities and will perhaps act 
as dampener to the local artisans where the Expo is being organized. The  distance 
limit of more than 500 kms is impracticable. Keeping in view the poor financial 
position of the artisans and escalating transport expenses due to continuous hike in 
fuel prices, the distance of even 100 kms. is beyond the reach of artisans to tra vel at 
their own cost. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the limit of distance 
considered for providing travel assistance to the artisans should be reduced to at least 
100 kms so that it does not prove an obstacle for the needy artisans to exhibit t heir 
skills. Similarly, some arrangements like plying special buses can be arranged for the 
artisans residing/working within the radius of 100 kms. of exhibition venue. These 
steps will help in maximizing the participation of artisans benefiting them.  
 

Reply of the Government 
  
 During the 11 th Five year Plan the facility of payment of TA/DA to artisans 
which earlier was paid to artisans from some identified and difficult localities has been 
extended to all the artisans who come to participate in a market related activity from a 
distance of and more than 500 kms. from and to their place of residences.    
  
 The acceptance of the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Labour to relax the rules for payment of TA/DA to artisans participating 
in Market related programmes of this of fice reducing the distance from approved 500 
Kms to 100 Kms. requires the approval of the competent authority. 
 
 A proposal in this regard has been submitted to the Planning Commission. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.13 in Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9,  Para 62) 
 The Committee observe that the Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana was 
launched by the Government in March, 2007 with the objective to fi nancially enable 
the artisans community to have access to the health care facilities at an annual 
premium of Rs.150 for artisan of the general category and Rs.75/ - for artisans 
belonging to SC/ST/BPL/NER. The Scheme is being implemented through Life 
Insurance Corporation of India (LIC). The annual coverage per family is four persons  
comprising self and any other three members of the family from amongst the 
dependent parents, spouse and children. The annual coverage per family is Rs.15,000 
under the Scheme. The Committee are of the opinion that the cap of Rs.15,000 per 
family under the Scheme is, however, too meagre taking in account the present day 
medical expenses. There have been classification of various ailments and the monetary 
ceiling for their treatme nt. However, the classification of ailment and provision of 
money is far from satisfactory. Provision for Rs.75/ - for eye treatment, Rs.250/ - for 
dental treatment and Rs.500/ -for baby coverage are few illustrations highlighting the 

casual approach in decid ing these issues. Although, the  Committee understand the 
limited scope of maneuverability due to financial constraints, yet earmarking of the 
paltry sum is an exercise in futility keeping in view the procedure involved in getting 
reimbursement and the cost of treatment. The Committee feel that the artisans belong 
to the disadvantaged strata of the society and most of them are very poor. Due to their 
improper, unhygienic working conditions and poor life style, they are more prone to 
occupational diseases inc luding critical illness not to say of normal diseases. The 
Health Scheme, currently in operation, ignores a very vital aspect of the health care as 
it does not include treatment for critical illnesses. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that keep ing in view the ever increasing medical expenses, the ceiling 
under the scheme should be raised to atleast Rs.1,50,000 per annum per family. The 
Committee further recommend that the critical illnesses like cancer, heart problems, 
brain surgery etc. should also be brought within the ambit of the Scheme with 
appropriate financial ceiling.  
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations concerning raising the ceiling of coverage as well as 
inclusion of critical illness has been examined. It is felt that these enhancements in 
the coverage of benefits may yield in substantial hike in the annual premium, which at 
present is Rs.800/- per annum per artisan. Out of this, the general category artisan 
contributes Rs.150/ - and an artisan belonging to NER, SC, ST & BPL categories 
contribute Rs.75/-. The Government of India contributes the balance annual premium 
and Service Tax on  the total premium. If the sharing of the future premium between 
the artisan and GoI is kept in the existing proportion, there would be an apparent hike 
in the artisan’s share of the annual premium as well, which all artisans may not be 
able to afford. 
 Therefore, in view of recommendation of the Parliamentary  Committee, action 
has been initiated for a new add -on feature to be introduced in the scheme for 
covering 10 critical illnesses such as Cancer, Paralysis, Myocardial Infarction (Heart 
Attack), Bye pa ss Surgery, Kidney failure, Stroke, Tuberculosis etc., with a financial 
cap of Rs.1.5 lakh per annum per artisan family. Artisan who is willing to pay the 
higher premium could opt for this feature.  
 
 A suitable proposal in this regard has been submitted to the  Planning 
Commission. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 

 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.19 in Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para 69) 
 
 The Committee note that Bima Yojana  for Handicraft artisans has been 
launched by the Government to provide Life Insurance protection to handicraft 
artisans in case of natural/accidental death or total/partial disability due to accident. 
This Scheme is being implemented through Life Insuranc e Corporation (LIC) of India. 
The artisans between the age group of 18 to 60 years are eligible to be covered under 
the Scheme. The annual premium under the Scheme is Rs.200/ - of which Rs.40/ - is 
to be contributed by the artisan, Rs.60/- by the Government of India, and Rs.100/- by 
LIC. The Committee are of the opinion that the handicrafts is an art and even the 
artisans of higher age groups are also practicing their skills and are contributing to 
the development of the sector. More so, they also work as tra iners for the young 
generations using their vast experience and traditional skills. Hence, to exclude them 
from the coverage of insurance not only negates their past contribution to the sector 
but also harbours the misplaced presumption that the artisans b eyond the age of 60 
are incapable of any work. This notion will undermine the efficacy, talent, 
resourcefulness and innovations of the sector because primarily all the activities here 
revolve around the person and his skill. Nonetheless, life expectancy in  our country 
has also considerably gone up and hence restricting it to the age of 60 in such  
circumstances will not be beneficial to the artisans. The Committee, therefore strongly 
recommend that the age for insurance coverage under the Scheme should be 
enhanced at least upto 70 years as this will also enable the Government to fulfill its 
socio-economic obligations. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the concrete 
steps taken in this regard at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Based on the recommendations of the Committee, a proposal was made to LIC of India 
on 22.08.2008, requesting consideration of, among others, the following issues: 
 - For enhancing the age limit from 60 years to 70 years 
 - To increase Children Education Allowance from Rs.300 per quarter per 
child  to 2 children to Rs.500. 
 
 Before the response of LIC of India is described, it is imperative to mention here 
that Janashree Bima Yojana is not a scheme specifically for the handicraft artisans. 

 
 On the issue of increasing the age limit to 70 years LIC has asked for likely  
number of persons to be covered under the scheme. The same is being furnished to 
them. 
 As regards providing scholarships under Shiksha Sahayog Yojana from the 
initial stage of schooling i.e. from Class 1 st onwards as against Class 9 th to 12th as at 
present, LIC has responded that the change in the classes to which scholarship is 
provided under Shiksha Sahayog Yojana or the quantum of scholarship cannot be 
decided by LIC of India. This is a Central Government Scheme managed by LIC and 
any change in the scheme cannot be done in isolation to any scheme but would be 
applicable to all the Janashree Bima Yojana scheme. 
 
 The LIC has further intimated that the JBY schem e would be reviewed again in 
next year and depending upon claim experience the benefits can be reviewed. 
 
 In view of the above response from LIC, it would be the endeavor of the Office of 
DC (Handicrafts) to again pursue with LIC to accept the proposals e manating from the 
recommendations of the Committee, at the time of review in the next financial year.   
           (Ministry of Textiles  O.M. NO.2/26/2008-Parl.  dated  24.2.2009) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.22 in Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
New Delhi;                          HEMANAND BISWAL 
11th November, 2009                                         CHAIRMAN, 
20 Kartika, 1931 (Saka)              STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.  
    
  

 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  ON LABOUR HELD ON 
11TH NOVEMBER, 2009.  
 
The Committee met from 1400 hrs. to 1545 hrs in Committee Room No. `139’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to have oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labour  and Employment on `The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2009’  
and `The Employees’ State Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2009’ and to consider and adopt 
draft Action Taken Reports. 
  
PRESENT 
    Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri M. Anandan 
3.      Shri P. Balram 
4.      Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5.      Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
6.      Shri Hassan Khan 
7.      Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8.      Shri P. Lingam 
9.      Shri Hari Manjhi 
10.  Shri P.R. Natarajan 
11.  Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
12. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
13. Shri Rajaram 
14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
15. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
   
SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
           2.     Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
  3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
 4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Under Secretary 
    

  
 
2.  xx   xx   xx 
3.  xx   xx   xx 
4.  xx   xx   xx 
5.  xx   xx   xx 
6.  xx   xx   xx 
7.  xx   xx   xx 
8. The Chairman then informed the Members regarding consideration and adoption 
of following draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirtieth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on 
the `Functioning of the Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation’. 
 
(ii) Action taken by the Government on the Recomme ndations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Labour 
on the `Development Schemes for Handicrafts Sector’. 
 
(iii) Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty -Fifth Repo rt (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Labour on `General conditions of weavers in the 
country – A case study of Sircilla concentration zone of weavers’. 
 
9.  The Committee, then, took up the draft Reports for consideration.  The 
Committee adopted the draft Reports without any amendments/modifications.   
 
10. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to present the same to the 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
xx     Not pertain to this Report.  
  

                 APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNM ENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-THIRD REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations     12 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have          
been accepted by Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1,3,4,5,7,10 and 12)          7  58.33% 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s  replies-     NIL  NIL   
   
       
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which  Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration-(Sl. No. 8)            1   8.33% 
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which     
final replies of Government are of interim in  nature       
        4    33.33% 
(Sl. Nos.2,6,9, and 11)                            ---------- 
              100% 
                              ------------ 

  
 