 
23 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
`THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 2011' 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
    NEW DELHI 
               December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 


 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
`THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 2011' 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.12.2011     
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.12.2011  
             
 
 
          LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
        NEW DELHI 
               December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 


COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2011-12) 
 SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
2. Shri Raj Babbar 
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
4. Shri Virendra Kumar 
         5. Shri Pakauri Lal 
6. Shri Narahari Mahato 
         7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
8. Shri P. Balram Naik 
9. Ms. Mausam Noor 
10. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Shri S. Pakkirappa 
13. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
14. Ms. J. Shantha 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
*16. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
     21. Vacant 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
23. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
25. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
        28. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
        29. Shri Rajaram 
        30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri G. N. Ratanpuri 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*   Nominated w.e.f 25th November, 2011. 
 
 
 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
                
1.    Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director  
3.    Smt. Archana Srivastva - Committee Officer 
     
   
   
   
 
  

CONTENTS 
PAGE (S) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE    (iii)  
    
INTRODUCTION        (v)   
 
REPORT        
 Chapter-I           
 Chapter-II          
Observations/Recommendations     
 
ANNEXURES 
(i) The Inter-State Migrant Workmen ( Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 
2011' 
 (ii) Minutes  of  the sittings  of   the  Standing  Committee   
  on Labour held  on 3.10.2011 and 14.12.2011.    
   
   
 
  

INTRODUCTION 
                     
          I,  the  Chairman, Standing Committee on Labour (2011 -12), 
having been authorized by the Committee do present this Twenty 
Third Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on the Inter-State Migrant Workmen 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Amendment 
Bill, 2011' 
 
2.  The Government introduced `The Inter -State Migrant 
Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Amendment Bill, 2011'  in the Rajya Sabha on  18.08.2011 which 
was referred to the Committee on 24.08.2011 by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha under Rule 331E(b) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and report. 
3. The Committee examined representatives of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment on 03.10.2011 and took their evidence on 
the Bill. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their 
sitting held 14th December, 2011. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of 
the Ministry of Labo ur and Employment for furnising detailed 
written notes on the subject and giving the information as desired 

by the Committee in connection with the examination of the Bill 
and rendering evidence before the Committee. 
 
6. The Committee would also like to pl ace on record their deep 
sense of appreciation of the valuable assistance rendered to them 
by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type 
in the body of the Report.                   
  
 
New Delhi;                          HEMANAND BISWAL 
14th December, 2011                                               CHAIRMAN  
23 Agrahayana, 1933(Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
 
  

REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 The Government introduced the Inter -State Migrant Workmen 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditio ns of Service) Amendment 
Bill, 2011 in the Rajya Sabha on the 18th August, 2011 further to 
amend the parent Act enacted by Parliament in 1979.  T he Inter-
State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions 
of Service) Act, 1979   was enacted t o s afeguard the interests of 
migrant workers.  The Act applies to every establishment and every 
contractor who employs or who employed five or more Inter -State 
Migrant Workmen on any day of the preceding 12 months.   The Act 
provides for:- 
(a) Registration of all principal employers/contractors 
employing migrant labour.   
(b) Licensing of contractors – no contractor can recruit any 
migrant labour without obtaining license from the 
appropriate Government.  
(c)  Issue of passbook affixed with a passport -sized photograph 
of the workman indicating the name and the place of the 
establishment where the worker is employed, the period of 

employment, rates of wages, etc. to every inter -state    
migrant workman. 
(d) Payment of minimum wages fixed under the Minimum 
Wages Act, 1948.  Principal employer to nominate a 
representative to be present at the time of disbursement of 
wages to the migrant workman by the contractor. 
(e) Payment of equal wages for inter -state migrant workmen 
performing similar nature of work along with t he local 
labourers. 
(f) Payment of journey allowance including payment of wages 
during the period of journey. 
(g) Payment of displacement allowance. 
(h)  Suitable residential accommodation. 
(i) Medical facilities free of charge. 
(j) Protective clothing. 
(k) Reporting by the contractor the incidence of fatal accident 
or serious injury of such workman to the specified 
authorities of both the States and also the next of kin of the 
workman.    
2. As per census 2001, around 31.4 crore persons migrated for 
various reasons within the country. Out of these, 2.99 crore 
migrated for reasons of employment.  The system of employment of 

inter-state migrant labour is an exploitative one. Such migrant 
labour is recruited from various parts of a particular State through 
contractors or agents for work outside that State in large 
construction and other projects. This system lends itself to various 
abuses. 
3. A Task Force was therefore, constituted by the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development for amendment of Labour Laws 
concerning women and children , which recommended that the title 
of the „Inter State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1979‟ be changed to „Inter State Migrant 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act , 
1979‟ in order to make it gender neutral.  This recommendation of 
the Task Force w as accepted and accordingly the title of the Act is 
proposed to be changed as „Inter State Migrant Workers (Regulation 
of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979‟ t o make it 
gender neutral and also to substitute the words 'worker‟ and 
„workers‟ in place of words „workman‟ and „workmen‟.     
                                                                                                                               
4.        The Committee now proceed with the examination of the 
Bill referred to them in the succeeding chapter. 

CHAPTER II 
 
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE ANALYSIS OF `THE INTER -STATE 
MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT AND 
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011’ 
 
 The Ministry in their explanatory note, furnishing reasons for 
proposed amendments, stated that :- 
 The original Act is called Inter State Migrant Workmen 
 (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 
 1979.  The amendment is proposed to make the Act gender  
 neutral.  
 
2.2 In this context, when the Committee, during the briefing 
meeting, desired to know as to whether there had been any such 
instances where any woman worker had been denied justice or 
exploited on the basis of th e nomenclature of the Act,  the 
representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment replied 
in the negative. 
 
2.3 Substitution of certain expressions - Throughout the 
principal Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for the words 
“workman” and “wor kmen”, wherever they occur, the words 
“worker” and “workers” shall respectively be substituted, and such 

other consequential amendments as the rules of grammar may 
require shall also be made. 
 
2.4 Asked to furnish the number of registered principal 
employers/contractors as per the provisions of the Act, the Ministry  
furnished the following State -wise list of number of registered 
principal employers/contractors: 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
States 
No. of 
Principal 
Employer 
No. of 
Contractor 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
46 07 
2. Bihar 56 20 
3. Chandigarh   
4. North Eastern 
States 
46 179 
5. Gujarat -- 20 
6. Himachal 
Pradesh 
07 01 
7. Haryana -- -- 
8. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
-- -- 
9. Jharkhand -- -- 
10. Karnataka -- -- 
11. Kerala 53 -- 
12. Maharashtra 10 17 
13. Madhya 
Pradesh 
-- -- 
14. New Delhi -- -- 
15. Orissa 05 09 
16 Punjab -- -- 
17. Rajasthan 11 07 
18. Tamil Nadu 06 23 
19. Uttar Pradesh -- -- 

20. Uttaranchal  -- -- 
21.  West Bengal -- -- 
22. Chattisgarh -- 02 
 
 The Ministry further stated as under :- 
 
 "As per the Act. every principal employer of an establishment 
 to  which the Act applies is required to obtain certificate of 
 registration from registering officer of the appropriate 
 government. Similarly every contractor who proposes to recruit 
 or employ inter  state migrant worker is required to obtain a 
 license from the specified authority. The Central Government 
 and State Governments appoint registering officers and 
 licensing officers and define their respective limits of 
 jurisdiction and powers." 
 
2.5 When asked about the r eported cases where the principal 
employers/ contractors hir ed migrant labour without the 
licences/approval of the appropriate Government  and the action 
taken against them, the Ministry informed that there were 25  
principal employers and 83 contractors and action against them 
was initiated by way of filing complaints against the erring 
employers in the appropriate court. 
 
2.6 Regarding the number of migrant labour all over the country, 
the representatives of the Ministry deposed before  the Committee 
that :- 

 
 "I must admit that as of now we do not have an annual  data 
 of how many people migrate from one State to the other.  We  
 do not have that data. But through this project, we are 
 trying to understand the whole process of migration  and in 
 this we have worked out a Tripartite MoU between the State of 
 Orissa, the State of Andhra Pradesh and the Central 
 Government where we will set up a Joint Group which will 
 actually monitor and see whether it is good to be replicated 
 further. 
   
 They further informed: 
  
 "We have recently constituted a Committee, which  is 
 examining the scope and how the amendments will  be made 
 in the laws.  After taking a comprehensive view first we  will 
 take further actions.  We find the same situations 
 everywhere like Delhi as  commented  by the honorable 
 members." 
2.7 When asked the details of the major recommendations made 
by the Task Force which submitted its report to the Government in 
June, 2006 and what is the status of recommendations made by 
the Task Force, the Ministry furnished the following statement: 
 

 
Recommendations  Implementation status 
1.         The Workmen’s 
Compensation Act, 1923: 
(a) The title of the Act should be 
made gender neutral, namely the 
Workers’ Compensation Act. 
(b) Provide for medical examination by 
a female practitioner free of 
charge, at the discretion of women 
worker. 
 
 
(a)The matter is being examined in the 
Ministry alongwith other amendments.  
 
 
(b) The matter is under consideration in 
the Ministry. 
2. The Child Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986: 
(a) To provide for 50% of the members 
on the Child Labour Technical 
Advisory Committee as women, 
 
 
 
(b) Include the education of child labour 
in Sec. 13(a). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) No child below the age of 11 years 
should be employed at all in any 
establishment/occupation/process, 
even where children upto 14 years 
are permitted to work under 
regulated conditions. 
 
(d) Providing a minimum penalty of Rs. 
2000 under the Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
(e) The fines be used for education of 
 
 
 
(a) Recommendations of the Task Force 
were discussed in Central Monitoring 
Committee.  The Central Monitoring 
Committee recommended that 33% 
of the seats in the Technical Advisory 
Committee be reserved for women.    
(b) The Working Group formed to look 
into issues  of amendment of Child 
Labour Act has recommended that 
education of child labour as one of 
the objectives for framing rules under 
Section 13.  Views of the State 
Government have also been 
obtained.  
 
(c) The Working Group did not agree 
with the Task Force 
recommendations.   
 
 
 
 
 
(d) The Act provides for imprisonment 
and or fine ranging from Rs. 10,000/- 
to Rs. 20,000/ - which is higher than 
that recommended by the Task 
Force.  Hence proposal was not 
accepted.   

Child Labour. 
 
 
(e) The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the 
case of M.C. Mehta V/s. State of 
Tamil Nadu in 1996 has directed the 
state Governments to set up child 
labour welfare fund in which fines 
collected from the employers are to 
be utilized for the welfare of child 
labour and their families.   
3. Bonded Labour System (Abolition) 
Act, 1976: 
(a) To provide for more representation of 
women in the Vigilance Committees 
under the Act. 
(b) Provide for seeking cooperation and 
participation of women’s agencies to 
channelize sufficient credit to  the 
freed-bonded women labourer. 
(c) Vigilance Committees to collect 
gender and age disaggregated data 
on bonded labour. 
 
(d) Enhancement of the fines under the 
Act. 
(e) Provide for forfeiture of 
moveable/immovable property of the 
convicted person for realization of 
other fine imposed, cancellation or 
suspension of license, permit etc. 
(f) Utilization of fines realized for the 
rehabilitation of freed bonded labour. 
 
 
(a), (b) & (c) Ministry has written to the 
State Governments t o provide greater 
representation to women in  the 
vigilance committees constituted at 
District and sub -division level and also 
to provide gender and age -wise 
disaggregated data of bonded labour.  
 
 
 
 
  
(d) & (e) Recommendations were not 
accepted as the penalty prescribed under 
the Act is adequate.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
(f) A Centrally Sponsored Plan Scheme 
for Rehabilitation of bonded labour is in 
operation under which an assistance Rs. 
of 20,000/ - per bonded labour is 
provided.  Contribution for this 
assistance is shared equally between the 
Centre and the State.   
4. Contract Labour (Regulation and 
Prohibition) Act, 1970: 
(a) To provide for representative of 
DWCD on the Central Board to take 
care of the women’s interest, 
 
 
(a) &(b) The Ministry has requested to 
nominate their representative to the 
Central Advisory Contract Labour Board.  

(b) To provide for half the members of 
the Central Advisory Board and State 
Advisory Board as women. 
 
 
 
(c) To provide separate rest room facility 
and toilets for women. 
Ministry has also written to Ministry of 
Railways and Mines to nominate w omen 
as their representatives. The Ministry has 
also requested  State Governments to 
provide greater representation to women 
in State Advisory Contract Labour Board.  
(c) The Act already provides for 
provisions of rest rooms, toilets etc.    
5. Inter -State Migrant Workmen 
(Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1979: 
(a) The title of the Act should be made 
gender-neutral namely the Inter -State 
Migrant Workers Act and  
(b) Provide for grant of maternity leave to 
female Inter -State Migrant Workers 
and crèches for children of migrant 
workers. 
 
 
 
 
(a) The bill for amendment has been 
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 
18.08.2011.  
  
(b) Under Section 21 of Inter -State 
Migrant Workmen Act, 1979, the 
Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 is 
applicable to migrant workers, which 
has provision for maternity leave to 
female migrant workers.  Providing 
for crèche facility is already available 
under the provisions of the Act.   
6. Equal Remuneration Act, 1976: 
To provide for appointment of 50% 
women officers to decide 
claims/complaints, 
 
Ministry has written to state 
Governments to provide for 
appointments of more women officers 
to decide the cases of 
claims/complaints under the Equal 
Remuneration Act, 1976. 
7. The Payment of Wages Act, 1936: 
(a) An employed person shall not make a 
nomination in favour of a person other 
than a member of his family.  The 
definition of family should also be 
incorporated in Section 2 of the Act. 
(b) Make suitable revision of the wage 
levels to which the Act applies. 
 
(c) The fines prescribed should be revised 
in the light of the current income -
levels in the country. 
 
 
(a) The Payment of Wages Act  was last 
amended in 2005.  The 
recommendations of the Task Force 
will be considered at the time of next 
amendment of the Act.  
 
 
(b) The wage level upto which the Act is 
applicable has now been enhanced 
from Rs. 1600/- to Rs. 6500/-. 
(c) The Act has been amended and there 
has been 7.5 times enhancement in 

the penalty over and above the 
existing penalty.  
  
8. The Plantations Labour Act, 
1951:- 
(a) No child below the age of 11 years 
shall be allowed to work in plantation 
falling under the Act. 
 
(b) Provision of crèches facilities. 
 
(c) More women Inspectors may be 
appointed; one -third Welfare Officers 
should be women, education facilities 
for children below the age of 14 years 
etc. 
 
 
(a) The matter is under consideration of 
the Govt.  
 
 
(b) Provision is already available.   
 
(c) Ministry has written to state 
governments to appoint more 
women inspectors and welfare 
officers under the Act.   
9. Minimum Wages Act, 1948:- 
    To provide for 10% of the Inspectors 
to be appointed under the Act as Women.  
Doctors/Teachers/Panchayat Memb ers 
should be made Inspectors under the Act.   
No need to amend the Act.  Ministry has 
written to state Governments to provide 
for greater representation to women as 
Inspectors under the Act.   
10. Factories Act, 1948:- 
(a) Restrictions on working of women an d 
young persons in cleaning, lubricating 
and adjusting machinery in motion.  
Prohibition of employment of women 
in dangerous operations. 
(b) Separate lunch rooms and rest rooms 
for women. 
 
 
(c) Creche facility in the factories. 
 
 
(d) Permitting women to work in night 
shift in the factories etc. 
 
(a) These provisions have been included 
under Section 22 of the proposal of 
comprehensive amendments to the 
Factories Act.  
 
 
(b) These provisions have been included 
under section 47 in the proposal of 
comprehensive amendments to the 
Factories Act.   
(c) There is already provision for crèche 
facility in an establishment 
employing 20 or more women.   
(d) The bill has been introduced in the 
Parliament on 16.10.2005.   
11. Employee’s State Insurance Act, 
1948: 
That the ESIC Act may be amended to 
provide for the benefits under this Act 
to employees in all such 
establishments which are covered by 
the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961. 
The two Acts are mutually exclusive.  
The benefits of ESIC Act can not be 
extended to employees which are 
covered under the Maternity Benefit Act.  
Therefore, there is no need to amend 
the Act.   

12.Maternity Benefit Act, 1961: 
     To provide various maternity benefits 
available to Central Government 
employees, such as maternity leave (fully 
paid) 135 days to female workers  and 
paternity leave for 15 days to male 
workers under the Maternity Benefit Act, 
1961, also. 
The Ministry has already initiated action 
to amend the Maternity Benefit Act to 
increase the amount of medical bonus 
from Rs. 250/ - to Rs. 1000/ - to women 
workers.   
 

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 The Committee note that the Government propose 
to amend the Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation 
of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979 
through the present Bill only to the extent by 
substituting the words `workman and `workmen' with 
that of  `worker' and `workers' in order to make it 
gender neutral.  The proposed amendment is pursuant 
to the recommendation made by the Task Force 
constituted by the Government of India to suggest 
amendments in the labour laws concerning women and 
children. The Committee were informed by the 
representatives of the Ministry that a Committee has 
already been constituted to take a comprehensive view 
on the amendments required in the existing Act.  The 
Committee also learnt that the Government have no 

data on the num ber of migrant workers in each State.  
Besides, the Government do not even have the 
information regarding licensed/unlicensed contractors 
in the States.  More so, the Government have not made 
any concrete and fruitful efforts to ensure that 
contractors and  employers mandatorily register the 
workers under them so that they can avail of social 
benefits under the Act.  The Committee have also not 
come across any reported case(s) of gender 
discrimination under the present Act.  The Committee 
are convinced that by mere substitution of the words 
`workman' and `workmen' with `worker' and `workers' 
will neither ameliorate the conditions nor address the 
substantial issues like registration, passbook, payment 
of minimum and equal wages, journey and 
displacement allowance, free medical facilities, suitable 
residential accommodation etc. of the migrant workers.  

The Committee are of the considered view that 
Government should wait for the recommendations of 
the Committee already constituted to have 
comprehensive review of  the Inter -State Migrant 
Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1979. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Bill should be returned to the Government with a 
request to bring a comprehensive amendment Bill so 
that the prob lems of the migrant workers could be 
addressed in entirety.   
 
New Delhi;                          HEMANAND BISWAL 
14th December, 2011                                               CHAIRMAN  
23 Agrahayana, 1933(Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
 
 
  

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 3RD OCTOBER, 2011.  
 
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to  1300 hrs. in Committee 
Room No.53, Parliament House, New Delhi to have briefing by the 
representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment on  ` The 
Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2011' 
  
  PRESENT 
  Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.     Shri Raj Babbar 
3.     Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4.     Shri Narahari Mahato 
5.     Shri Hari Manjhi 
6.     Shri P. Balram Naik 
7.     Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
8.     Shri Sanjay D. Patil 
9.     Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
10. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
11. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
12. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
13. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
15. Shri Rajaram 
16. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
   
 

SECRETARIAT 
        1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
3.  Shri Arvind Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
4.     Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Under Secretary 
 
 
Witnesses 
Ministry of Labour and Employment 
Sl.No Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Dr. Mrutyunjay Sarangi, Secretary (L&E) 
2. Shri Anil Swarup Director General  (Labour 
Welfare) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman  welcomed and congratulated Shri 
Mrutyunjay Sarangi on his appointment as Secretary ,  Ministry of 
Labour & Employment .  The Chairman then welcomed the other 
representatives of the Ministry convened for briefing the Committee 
on "The Inter -State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment 
and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2011 ".  After 
introduction by the represent atives of the Ministry, the Committee 
were briefed on the amendment proposed in the Bill. Thereafter, the 
Members sought clarifications on the amendment proposed.  The 

Members pointed out mainly, the following deficiencies and 
concerns:- 
(i) the nomenclature of the Bill in Hindi indicated as though the 
Bill had been passed by the Parliament; 
(ii) lack of data regarding inter-state migration of workers; 
(iii) need for ensuring essential facilities to the migrant workers as 
per provisions of the Act; 
(iv) the other recommendations of the Task Force constituted by 
the Government on the subject and the status of 
implementation of their recommendations; 
(v) known cases of violation of the existing Act and action against 
the defaulting contractors; 
(vi) compulsory registration of migrant workers by contractors; 
(vii) issuance of Identity Cards to migrant workers; 
(viii) the problem faced by the Government while implementing this 
enactment during the past 30 years and the experience of the 
Government; 

(ix) infiltration of labour from some neighbouring countries; and 
(x) need for a comprehensive review of the existing Act. 
 3. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of the 
Ministry for free and frank replies to the queries of the Members on 
the subject.  The Cha irman also directed the Secretary to furnish 
written replies to the queries raised by the Members which could 
not be replied during the meeting,  within a fortnight along with the 
replies to the List of Points handed over to him. 
 
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 14TH DECEMBER, 2011.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs in Room 
No.116, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt 
the draft Reports on `The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011‟  and `The 
Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2011'  of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment.  
PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   2.  Dr. Virendra Kumar 
   3.   Shri Pakauri Lal 
   4.   Shri Narahari Mahato 
   5.   Shri Hari Manjhi 
   6.   Shri P. Balram Naik 
   7.   Shri Jayaram Pangi 
   8.   Shri S. Pakkirappa 
   9.   Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
10.    Ms. J. Shantha 
11.    Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 12.   Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
 13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
  14. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha  
 15.  Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
 16.  Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 17.  Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 
 
 
 
  

  SECRETARIAT 
          
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
3. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Under Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the draft Reports on  `The Mines (Amendment) 
Bill, 2011‟  and `The Inter -State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2011'   
  
3. The Co mmittee took up the draft Reports for consideration. 
The Committee  adopted the draft Reports without any modification.   
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the 
same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 