5 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2014-2015) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action Taken by the Government  on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in 
their First Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for  Grants 
(2014-15)] 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
April,  2015/Vaisakha , 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 


2 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2014-2015) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in 
their First Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2014-15)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23rd April, 2015  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  23rd April, 2015 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April,  2015/Vaisakha , 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
CONTENTS 


3 
 
       
                   PAGE(s)  
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government‟s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 22nd  
  April, 2015.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
  Observations/Recommendations contained in the First  
  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
   

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2014-15) 
 
  DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR-CHAIRPERSON   
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar     
  3. Shri Ashok Dohare      
  4. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey     
  5. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara  
  6. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud    
  7. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah    
  8. Shri C.N. Jayadevan     
  9. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli    
  10. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar    
  11. Shri Hari Manjhi      
  12. Shri R. Parthipan      
  13. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore    
  14. Shri YS Avinash Reddy     
  15. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira)      
         16. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh     
  17. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav    
         *18. Chh. Udayan Raje Bhonsle 
         **19. Dr. Arun Kumar 
        ***20. Vacant 
       ****21. Vacant 
            RAJYA SABHA 
  22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay     
  23. Shri P. Kannan      
  24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha    
                     25. Haji Abdul Salam      
  26. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen     
  27. Shri R.K. Sinha 
             ***** 28. Shri Rajaram       
           ****** 29. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
         *******  30. Shri P.L. Punia 
         ******** 31. Vacant 
         ______________________________________________________________________________       
* Nominated w.e.f. 7th October, 2014.  
**   Nominated w.e.f. 25th March, 2015. 
*** Vacancy occurred vice Shri Giriraj Singh appointed as Minister for State w.e.f           
 9th November, 2014 
**** Vacancy occurred vice Shri Kapil Krishna Thakur expired on 13.10.2014. 
*****    Re-nominated w.e.f. 8th January, 2015. 
******     Nominated w.e.f.29th January, 2015. 
    *******    Nominated w.e.f 12th March, 2015.   
  ********    Vacancy occurred vice Shri G.N. Ratanpuri retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f    
           15.2.2015. 
   
 
 

5 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh   -  Additional Secretary 
 2.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Director  
 3.    Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Deputy Secretary 
 4.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Under Secretary 
 
 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
                  I,  the  Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2014 -15) having 
been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this Fifth Report on 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained  in their First Report on Demands for Grants (2014 -15) of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 
15th December, 2014.  The Ministry of Labour and Employment furnished their 
replies on 24th March, 2015 indicating action taken on the recommendations 
contained in that Report.  The Committee at their sitting held on 22 nd April, 2015 
considered and adopted the Draft Report.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/Observations 
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
 22nd  April, 2015                                          CHAIRPERSON                 
2 Vaisakha,1937 (Saka)                  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their First Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014 -15) of the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment. 
  
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 nd 
December, 2014. It contained 10 Recommendations/Observations. Replies of 
Government in respect of all the recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government –                                                                                            
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 9  and 10   
 
 Total: 07 
 Percentage:70 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government‟s reply – 
Para No.7 
 Total:01 
 Percentage:10 
 
 
   
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Para No. 4 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature- 
Para No.8 
 
 
 
 Total:01 
 Percentage:10 
 
 
 
Total:01 
 Percentage:10 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Note in respect of 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter I and final action taken 
replies in respect of the recommendation contained in Chapter V for which 
interim reply has been given by the Government may be furnished to them at 
the earliest.  
 
 

8 
 
A. Utilization of Funds 
 
(Recommendation at Para No. 1) 
 
4 In their First Report the Committee had observed that there had been annual 
under-spending consecutively during the 12th Five Year Plan. The Committee noted 
that the Ministry of Labour and Employment were not able to utilize even 50% of the  
allocation made by the Planning Commission Resultantly, the Planning Commission 
had to prune the allocations at the RE stage down to the level of previous year‟s 
spending. Taking note of the spending for the year 2013 -14 which decreased to 
1597.51 crore, the Committee desired that the implementation machinery be 
strengthened so as to utilize the allocated funds to the maximum extent possible. 
 
5. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Labour and Employment stated 
that f ollowing steps have been initiated to improve implementation of the scheme 
and for better utilization of funds: 
(i) Implementation Manual inter -alia Guidelines, Progress Report Formats, 
other norms for the schemes have been prepared and provided to the 
stakeholders. 
(ii)  Interaction with the stakeholders including states has increased with 
frequent review meetings.   
6. While acknowledging the measures initiated by the Ministry to improve 
the utilization of earmarked funds and implementation of the schemes 
undertaken, the Committee, however, desire that monitoring aspect should be 
intensified and accountability fixed to ensure that the measures initiated for 
the purpose are drawn to their logical conclusion. 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
B. Transfer of RSBY to M/o Health & Family Welfare 
(Recommendation at Para No. 4) 
7. The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that despite handling, 
implementing and running RSBY so well by the Ministry  of Labour & Employment , 
the Scheme was reportedly proposed to be transferred to the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare for implementation. Unaware of any plausible logic over the decision, 
the Committee  had opined  that it m ight not be in the best interest of the poor 
workers as their welfare could better be safeguarded by the Ministry of Labour than 
by the Ministry of Health. The Committee urged felt that the RSBY  scheme should 
stay with the Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
8. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Labour 
& Employment have stated that t he decision to transfer RSBY from Ministry of 
Labour and Employment to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been 
taken by the Government for providing Health Care Services. This was based on 
following principles: 
(i) Provision of health services is the core competence of Ministry of Health 
and Family welfare. 
(ii) Issuance of card has to be separated from service delivery to avoid possible 
conflict of interest. 
 The Ministry have further submitted that the Committee of Secretaries 
decided that identification, registration and related activities for unorganized 
workers would be carried out by Ministry of Labour & Employment, as per 
provisions of the Social Security Act for Unorganized Workers Act, 2008. They would 
be issued a Card which would facilitate access to benefits under various schemes 
including RSBY. 
9. The Committee are constrained to note that despite the serious 
reservations expressed by them in the earlier Report against the transfer of 
RSBY to th e Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment are in the process of transferring the Scheme to the Health 

10 
 
Ministry on the plea that "Provision of health services is the core competence 
of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare " and "Issuance of card has to be 
separated from service delivery to avoid possible conflict of interest".  It is 
pertinent to mention here that the role and responsibility of the Central 
Government in administering/implementing the Scheme is just confined  to 
contribute 75% of the annual premium to be paid to the Health Insurance 
Provider whereas the selection of such Insurance Provider, formation of the 
Projects and determining the Insurance Trust/Cell, Mother NGO etc. to 
monitor/supervise the Scheme besid es contributing the remaining 25% of the 
annual premium are entrusted with the State Government/Implementing 
Agency.  Therefore, the Ministry's contention of transferring the Scheme to 
the Health Ministry on the plea of "core competence" of that Ministry i s not 
tenable.  Similarly, the other plea of possible conflict of interest for 
transferring the Scheme does not convince the Committee.  While rejecting 
outright the Labour Ministry's move to transfer the Scheme, the Committee 
impress upon the Ministry to revisit their decision so as to maintain status-
quo and keep the labour oriented Scheme under their own administrative 
control in the interest and for the welfare of millions of labourers. 
C. Alternate employable skills to Beedi Workers 
(Recommendation at Para No.5) 
10. Taking note of the global crusade against the use of tobacco and its harmful 
effects, the Committee in their First Report had desired that the Ministry should 
explore other avenues and possibilities for the beedi workers, who wish to quit th is 
profession, with alternative employable skills which they fit in, according to their 
age, qualification etc.  The Committee also desired that such workers might also be 
assisted financially or technically to find alternative employment. 
11. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Labour 
& Employment have submitted that c ognizant of the slow decline of Beedi Industry, 
Ministry of Labour & Employment had initiated a visionary scheme to provide 
Vocational Training to Beedi Workers since the year 2008-09 so as to empower them 
with the skill to find an alternative and sustainable livelihood. The scheme is a non -

11 
 
plan scheme funded by the Beedi Workers Cess fund specially created for welfare of 
Beedi Workers. This is being implemen ted by Labour Welfare Organization of the 
Ministry through its field offices. The vocational trainings are financed by the Beedi 
Workers‟ Cess fund and include modular employable schemes approved by the 
DGE&T in the Ministry of Labour and Employment. The s kill trainings are imparted 
through Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs), Khadi Village Industries Commission, 
Regional Vocational Training Institutes for Women and reputed NGOs. 
12. While taking note of the steps taken by the Ministry for imparting 
vocational training to the willing beedi workers with a view to enable them to 
find alternate and sustainable employment, the Committee desire that some 
kind of awareness/publicity campaign should be launched to educate the poor 
and illiterate beedi workers abo ut the distinct advantages of availing such 
straining programmes for their own sustenance and livelihood. 
D. Upgradation of infrastructure facilities in DGFASLI 
(Recommendation at Para No. 9) 
13. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that the  
recommendations of IIT Roorkee for upgradation of infrastructure facilities in 
DGFASLI besides enhancing the manpower, needs immediate action so as to bring 
the organization at par with the peer group all over the World.  The Committee 
therefore, desired that the major recommendations of IIT Roorkee, wherever feasible, 
be implemented without further delay. 
14. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Labour 
& Employment have stated that t he infrastructure facilities are being upgraded in 
the Labour Institutes under DGFASLI. The construction of a Technical Block was 
completed in the financial year 2013 -14 at RLI Chennai. The hostel facilities at CLI, 
Mumbai have been upgraded. The construction of Integrated Knowledge Centre at 
Mumbai has been initiated. The CPWD had initially given preliminary estimate of 
13.57 crore which was approved by the SFC. The estimate has now been revised to 
Rs 32 crore. A RCE proposal is being initiated for the approval of the same. 

12 
 
15. The Committee ap preciate to observe that the Ministry have moved 
forward with the recommendations of IIT Roorkee, which is a step in the right 
direction.  The Committee trust that the momentum will be maintained 
unabated.  They, however, exhort the Ministry to ensure that   the process of 
approval of the RCE proposal reportedly being initiated be completed in a time 
bound manner to arrest further escalation in the construction cost of the 
Integrated Knowledge Centre at Mumbai. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No.1) 
 
  The Committee find that against the plan proposal of Rs.34914.72 crore 
of the Ministry of Labour & Employment, the Planning Commission made an 
allocation of R s.13223.00 crore for the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012 -17) which is 
only 37.88% of the proposed outlay. Against the allocated outlay, during 1st year of 
Twelfth Five Year Plan i.e., 2012-13, the Ministry was allocated Rs.2470.00 crore by 
the Planning Commis sion including civil works component of Rs.66.12 crore. In 
addition to this, an amount of Rs.118.56 crore was provided by Ministry of Finance 
from their National Social Security Fund. Thus, the total allocation available during 
2012-13 adds up to Rs.2588.5 6 crore [Rs.2470 crore + Rs.118.56 crore]. However, 
this was subsequently decreased to Rs.2118.56 crore at the RE stage but 
surprisingly, the Ministry could expend only Rs.1702.89 crore. Similarly, during the 
year 2013-14, an allocation of Rs.2524.00 crore  including civil works component of 
Rs.77.90 crore was made which was again reduced to Rs.1700.00 crore at the RE 
stage whereas the actual expenditure was Rs.1597.51 crore. The Committee observe 
that there has been under -spending consecutively during the 1 2th Five Year Plan. 
The Committee note from the allocation made by the Planning Commission each 
year that it is the Ministry of Labour & Employment who are not able to utilize the 
allocation even to the extent of 50% as a result Planning Commission had to revise 
it downwards at the RE stage down to the level of last year‟s spending. Taking note 
of the spending for the year 2013 -14 which decreased to 1597.51 crore, the 
Committee desire that the implementation machinery be strengthened so as to 
utilize the allocated funds to the maximum extent possible. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  Ministry of Labour and Employment has initiated following steps to 
improve implementation of the scheme and for better utilization of funds: 
 
(iii) Implementation Manual inter -alia Guidelin es, Progress Report Formats, 
other norms for the schemes have been prepared and provided to the 
stakeholders. 
(iv)  Interaction with the stakeholders including states has increased with 
frequent review meetings.   
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M.No. G-25015/1/2014-B&A dated  
16.3.2015 ) 

14 
 
 
(Recommendation No.2) 
 
   The Committee note that the Government have taken several steps to 
ease the procedural complexities in implementation of various 
schemes/programmes run by them viz. de -duplication, collection  and collation of 
data, digitization etc. Appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry, the Committee, 
desire that they may be apprised, in due course, of the impact of these measures in 
improving the service delivery and in smooth and efficient implementation of various 
schemes/programmes of the Ministry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(a) Ministry of Labour and Employment  has introduced payment of stipends/ 
scholarship to beneficiaries through Direct Benefit Transfer in respect of 
following schemes with the objective of transparency and efficient delivery of 
funds directly in the bank accounts of the beneficiaries: 
(i) Scholarship to the children of beedi workers (Non -Plan). 
 
(ii) Housing subsidy to beedi workers (Non -Plan). 
 
(iii) Stipend to children in the special schools  under the National Child 
Labour Project (NCPL) [Central Sector Scheme] . 
 
(iv) Stipend to trainees under the scheme of Welfare of SC /ST job seekers 
through Coaching, Guidance and Vocational Training centres (CGC) 
[Central Sector Scheme]. 
 
(b) DGET, MoLE has launched a digital platform to improve the functioning of 
vocational training delivery in India. The system is designed as a self -service 
digital platform to deliver various services to current and prospective trainees 
of the Vocational Training System, Ap prenticeship Trainees, 
Employers/Establishments, ITIs and other Institutions,  as well as 
States/UTs. 
 
The NCVT -MIS portal has automated the entire process for key DGE&T 
schemes such as the Craftsmen Training Scheme (CTS), and Apprentice 
Protsahan Yojana (APY). For example, details of about 10 lakh CTS 
candidates who took admission in 2014 across 11,000+ ITIs are now available 
online, and their examination hall tickets generated from the portal. The 
portal will drastically reduce the turnaround time in awa rding the certificates 
which earlier took years. 
  
(c)  The Government has recently taken a number of initiatives to address the 
issue of complexity in compliance by the industry because of multiplicity of 
labour laws and enforcement agencies.  The steps taken  by the Government 
include the Governance reforms through use of technology under which the 

15 
 
Ministry of Labour & Employment has developed a unified Web Portal „ Shram 
Suvidha Portal‟, catering to four major Organisations under the Ministry, 
namely Office of Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), Directorate General of 
Mines Safety, Employees‟ Provident Fund Organization and Employees‟ State 
Insurance Corporation. There are 4 main features of this Portal: 
 Unique labour identification number (LIN) is allotted to  Units to facilitate 
online registration 
 
 Filing of self -certified and simplified Single Online Return by the industry. 
Units will only file a single consolidated Return online instead of filing 
separate Returns. 
 
 Transparent Labour inspection scheme through computerized system based 
on risk based criteria and uploading the inspection reports within 72 hours 
by the Labour inspectors. 
 
 Timely redressal of grievances will be ensured with the help of the portal.   
 
 Common Registration under 5 Central Labo ur Acts, integrated with DIPP‟s E -
Biz Portal, has been taken up. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M.No. G -25015/1/2014-B&A dated  
16.3.2015 ) 
(Recommendation No.3) 
  The Committee find that there has been under utilization of funds 
under the sub-Heads of (i) Social Security for Unorganised Sector Workers Scheme; 
upto 35% (ii) Skill Development Initiative; upto 78%and (iii) World Bank Assisted 
Vocational Training upto 99.9%, etc. due to requirement of less funds towards 
Central share to the State Govern ments and non receipt of utilization certificates. 
The Committee were informed that a policy decision has been taken to release the 
funds for implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes to State Governments. 
The Committee observe that non/underutilizatio n of funds meant for Schemes is a 
common feature in some of the States which defeats the very purpose of these 
schemes as intended benefits do not reach to the target groups. The Committee also 
feel that one of the reasons for underutilization of funds cou ld be shortage of 
manpower in States.The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government to 
re-visit the decision so that atleast a strong institutional mechanism is put in place 
to ensure that the funds are not diverted nor under -utilized by the State  
Governments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(a) Most of the saving/surrender of fund is noticed in the main scheme of the 
Ministry i.e. Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana(RSBY). This accounts for more 
than 55% of our plan Budget. This scheme requires a lot of coordination work 
with State Governments and thi s year scheme was under revamp which 
resulted in reduction of pace of expenditure in the scheme.  It has now been 

16 
 
decided by the Government that the Health service delivery part of the scheme 
will be implemented by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare w.e .f. 
01.04.2015. This Ministry will take care of issuance of cards to the 
beneficiaries.  
(b) EFC/SFC approval of several schemes in Skill Development Mission has been 
obtained in last one year which will lead to implementation of schemes and 
utilization of funds in remaining period of the 12th Five year plan. 
(c) Efforts are also being made to improve utilization of funds as mentioned at 1 
above. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M.No. G-25015/1/2014-B&A dated  
16.3.2015 ) 
 
  (Recommendation No.5) 
 
  The Commit tee take note of the global crusade against the use of 
tobacco and its harmful effects. The workers engaged in beedi making/industry 
often succumb to ill effects of tobacco and need be provided with alternative 
employable skills which they fit in, accordin g to their age, qualification, status, 
health and financial conditions. The Committee desire that the Ministry should 
explore other avenues and possibilities to save not only the existing workers, who 
wish to quit this profession, but also the next generat ion of beedi workers 
dissuading them from taking up this profession. The Committee desire that such 
workers may also be assisted financially or technically to find alternative 
employment. 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Cognizant of the slow decline of Beedi Industry, Ministry of Labour & 
Employment had initiated a visionary scheme to provide Vocational Training to 
Beedi Workers since the year 2008 -09 so as to empower them with the skill to find 
an alternative and sustainable livelihood. The scheme is a non -plan scheme funded 
by the Beedi Workers Cess fund specially created for welfare of Beedi Workers. This 
is being implemented by Labour Welfare Organization of the Ministry through its 
field offices.  
 
          The vocational trainings are financed by the Beedi Workers‟ Cess fund 
and include modular employable schemes approved by the DGE&T in the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment. The skill trainings are imparted through Industrial 
Training Institutes (ITIs), Khadi Villag e Industries Commission, Regional Vocational 
Training Institutes for Women and reputed NGOs. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M.No. G-25015/1/2014-B&A dated  
16.3.2015 ) 
 
 
 

17 
 
 
(Recommendation No.6) 
 
  The Committee were informed that there are 21 Vocational 
Rehabilitation Centres (VRCs) all over India for providing vocational training to 
eligible persons with disability (PwD) to train them in the trades of local need. 
However, keeping in view the number of PwD vis -à-vis the number of available 
VRCs, the Committee find the numbers are extremely inadequate to meet the 
present and future demand. The Committee are, therefore, of the considered view 
that there is an immediate need to establish more VRCs, at least one in each 
State/UT for the present and further the number of VRCs be gradually increased 
considering the population and area of States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The scheme of VRCs was framed in such a way that the Government of 
India would establish a VRC as a Model Centre for rehabilitation o f Persons with 
Disability (PwD) and the States could replicate the model at other locations 
depending on their needs and from their own resources. 
 
  21 VRCs in 20 States have been established by the Ministry of Labour 
and employment. Three more VRCs are p roposed to be established during 12 th Five 
Year Plan period. 
 
  The competent authority has approved the proposal of creation of three 
VRCs at Dehradun, Shillong and Dimapur.  Establishment of VRCs in remaining 
States/UTs depends on the “In principle approval” of the State/UT Governments 
and availability of adequate budgetary allocations. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M.No. G-25015/1/2014-B&A dated  
16.3.2015 ) 
 (Recommendation No.9) 
 
  The Committee note that DGFASLI is engaged in conducting t raining 
programmes/ workshops/ seminars/conferences, etc. for professional 
delegates/management representatives from industries within and outside India 
and also for the government officials. The Committee observe that the 
recommendations of IIT Roorkee fo r upgradation of infrastructure facilities in 
DGFASLI besides enhancing the manpower, needs immediate action so as to bring 
the organization at par with the peer group all over the World. They, therefore, 
desire that the major recommendations of IIT Roorke e, wherever feasible, be 
implemented without further delay. 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The infrastructure facilities are being upgraded in the Labour Institutes 
under DGFASLI. The construction of a Technical Block was completed in the 
financial year 2013-14 at RLI Chennai. The hostel facilities at CLI, Mumbai have 
been upgraded. The construction of Integrated Knowledge Centre at Mumbai has 
been initiated. The CPWD had initially given preliminary estimate of 13.57 crore 
which was approved by the SFC. T he estimate has now been revised to Rs 32 crore. 
A RCE proposal is being initiated for the approval of the same. 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M.No. G-25015/1/2014-B&A dated  
16.3.2015 ) 
 
(Recommendation No.10) 
 
  The Committee note that DGFASLI conduct Seminars, Workshops, 
Training Programmes and Appreciation and Promotional Programmes for creating 
awareness on Occupational Safety and Health in factories and docks. However, 
DGFASLI does not obtain any feedback or a ssessment from trainees on the impact 
of the training provided to them. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
feedback must be obtained from the trainees/organizations sending their officers for 
training in DGFASLI as it will immensely help in restructu ring/modifying the 
training pattern in the changing scenario eventually making DGFASLI as a 
pioneering organization in the field.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The present feedback system is being upgraded into more systematic 
and scientific manner to colle ct and compile the feedback and assess the impact of 
training. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M.No. G-25015/1/2014-B&A dated  
16.3.2015 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
(Recommendation No.7) 
 
  The Committee view that progress/improvement of any scheme depends 
upon their critical appraisal periodically. The Committee find that evaluation/review 
of the schemes is done by the Planning Commission/NSSO. T he Committee desire 
that all evaluation review of Schemes undertaken by the Planning 
Commission/NSSO in respect of Labour Bureau/VV Giri National Labour Institute, 
CBWE, Child Labour and DGE&T be submitted to the Committee alongwith the 
corrective action taken by the Government. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
        No such evaluation/review of the scheme has been done by Planning 
Commission/NSSO in respect of Labour Bureau/VV Giri National Labour Institute, 
CBWE, Child Labour and DGE&T.  
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M.No. G-25015/1/2014-B&A dated  
16.3.2015 ) 
 
 
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No.4) 
 
 
  The Committee note that the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) 
which provides smart card based cashless health insurance cover of Rs.30,000/ - 
p.a. on family floater basis to the workers of un-organised sector became operational 
w.e.f. 1st  April, 2008. The Committee also note that till 30 th April 2014, 3.71 crore 
smartcards had been issued to the beneficiaries spread over 28 States/UTs. The 
Committee were also informed that the Labour Ministry has also been working on a 
two-phase revamp of the RSBY to make it more transparent and accountable with 
third-party audits and a call centre for grievances. Further, according to the 
Ministry Aam Aadmi Bima Yojana and Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension 
Scheme are also proposed to be me rged with RSBY. However, despite handling, 
implementing and running RSBY so well by the Ministry, this Scheme is reportedly 
proposed to be transferred to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for 
implementation. The Committee are unaware of any plausib le logic over this 
decision and feel that it may not be in the best interest of the poor workers as the 
welfare of this class could be better safeguarded by the Ministry of Labour than by 
the Ministry of Health. The Committee strongly feel that the RSBY mu st stay with 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment only. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
  The decision to transfer RSBY from Ministry of Labour and Employment 
to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been taken by the Government for 
providing Health Care Services. This was based on following principles: 
(iii) Provision of health services is the core competence of Ministry of Health 
and Family welfare. 
(iv) Issuance of card has to be separated from service delivery to avoid possible 
conflict of interest. 
The Committe e of secretaries decided that identification, registration and related 
activities for unorganised workers would be carried out by Ministry of Labour & 
Employment, as per provisions of the Social Security Act for Unorganised Workers 
Act, 2008. They would be  issued a Card which would facilitate access to benefits 
under various schemes including RSBY. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M.No. G-25015/1/2014-B&A dated  
16.3.2015 ) 

21 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Recommendation No.8) 
 
  The Committee find that there are nearly 118 vacancies in DGFASLI, 
out of which some vacancies date back to the year 1992. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the existing manpower strength of DGFASLI is far from 
adequate to carry forward effectively and efficiently the core activities of the 
organization. As per information submitted by the Ministry, the activities in 
disciplines like Industrial Physiology, Ergonomics, Industrial Ps ychology, etc. have 
come to a standstill. The Committee also note that an evaluation study of DGFASLI 
was also undertaken by IIT Roorkee in the year 2012 to assess the required 
manpower. One of the major recommendations of the study was to increase the 
number of posts to 735 from 358 (recommended by Staff Inspection Unit in the year 
2009). The Committee feel that the DGFASLI has a crucial role especially when the 
Government have proposed so many amendments in „The Factories Act, 1948‟. 
However, with the exi sting strength, DGFASLI cannot do justice either to the work 
in hand or to the impending work in the light of the amendments to the Factories 
Act. The Committee, therefore, desire that not only the existing vacancies be filled 
up without further delay but also immediate follow up action be taken on the study 
conducted by IIT Roorkee. The Committee also desire that pending the filling up of 
vacancies by the UPSC, in the meantime, some via media be explored for filling up 
of these vacancies as a temporary mea sure, so that the work of the organization is 
not hampered. 
 
Reply of the Government 
        The evaluation study of DGFASLI was undertaken by IIT Roorkee in the 
year 2012. The recommendation of the Committee is under active consideration of 
the Ministry. Efforts are being made to fill up the vacancies. The recommendations 
made in the Report submitted by IIT Roorkee for enhancement of manpower are 
being examined with reference to the laid down polices of Govt. of India. A proposal 
to this effect is being ta ken up for enhancing the manpower requirement along with 
full functional justification. The proposal will be processed in a time bound manner 
along with cadre review and filling up of the vacancies. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M.No. G-25015/1/2014-B&A dated  
16.3.2015 ) 
 
New Delhi;               DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR, 
22nd April, 2015                                        CHAIRPERSON,                 
2 Vaisakha,1937 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

22 
 
 
Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 22 nd April, 2015 from 1400 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in 
Committee Room `E‟,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  - Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  4. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  5. Shri R. Parthipan 
  6. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
     
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  7. Haji Abdul Salam 
  8. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
  9. Shri P.L. Punia 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
  3. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
 At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised them 
that he convened the meeting at 1400 hrs. to facilitate the Members' timely presence 
in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha.  The Chairperson then informed the Members that, 
subject to adoption of the Draft Reports slated for consideration by the Committee, 
he would like to get the Reports presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 23rd 
April, 2015.  The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions 
on the Draft Reports. 
 
2. The Committee then took up for consideration the following Draft Reports and 
adopted them after some discussions: 
 
  (i)  Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
  of the Committee contained in their First Report on Demands for Grants 
  (2014-15) of the Ministry of Labour and Employment;  
 (ii)  Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
  of the Committee contained in their Second Report on Demands for 
  Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Textiles;  
 (iii)   Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Labour and   
  Employment; and  
 (iv)  Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Textiles.  
 
3. The Draft Reports were adopted by the Committee without any change. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light of 
consequential changes that might arise out of factual verificat ion of the Draft Reports and 
to present the same to both the Houses. 
5. XX    XX     XX 
The Committee then adjourned. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX  Do not pertain to this report 
 

24 
 
 
 APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations       10   
II. Recommendations/Observations which have  07       70%   
 been accepted by Government 
 (Rec. Sl. Nos.1, 2, 3,  5, 6, 9 & 10)  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the  01  10  
  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government‟s replies-  
 (Rec. Sl.No.7) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
 which Government‟s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration –           01   10% 
  (Rec.  Sl. No. 4) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which      01  10% 
 final replies of Government are of interim in  nature   
 (Rec. Sl.No.8)      
                      ----------- 
                   100% 
                                         ----------- 
  
 
  
 