i 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
 (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Twenty-Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Cess funds and 
their Utilisation for Workers' Welfare'] 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
      
July, 2018/ Shravana, 1940 (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
38 

ii 
 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Twenty-Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Cess funds and 
their Utilisation for Workers' Welfare'] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  24.07.2018 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  24.07.2018 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2018/ Shravana, 1940 (Saka)  
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iv) 
INTRODUCTION        (v) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on  
04.07.2018.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
  
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
 DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA - CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
17. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
18. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
19. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
23. Shri N. Gokulkrishnan 
24. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
25. Shri P.L. Punia 
26. Shri Rajaram 
27. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
28. Ms. Dola Sen 
29. Dr. Banda Prakash 
30. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
31. Shri Madanlal Saini 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Ms. Rhimjhim Prasad   -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Smt. Anita B. Panda   - Director 
 3.    Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Additional Director 
 4.    Shri Mohinder Paul Rana  - Executive Assistant  

v 
 
     INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (201 7-18) having 
been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this Thirty-
Eighth Report on 'Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-
Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Cess funds and their Utilisation for 
Workers' Welfare'. 
 
2. The Twenty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 10th August, 2017 . The Ministry of Labour and Employment 
furnished thei r replies indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report on 12th April, 2018. 
The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held 
on 4th July, 2018. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommend ations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;                DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA  
19th July, 2018                        CHAIRPERSON,  
28th Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-
eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "Cess funds and their Utilisation for 
Workers' Welfare". 
 
2 The Twenty-eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 201 8. It contained 27  Observations/ 
Recommendations. Replies of the Government in respect of all these 
Recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government –                                                                                            
Rec. Para Nos. 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 2.18, 2.19, 
3.7, 3.8, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 3.23, 3.24, 
3.25, 4.3 and 4.12 
 
Total:18 
Percentage: 
66.67 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – Nil 
Total:00 
Percentage:00 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Rec. Para No. 2.5, 2.15, 3.22 and 4.11.  
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature- 
Rec. Para No. 2.10, 3.9, 3.26, 4.4 and 4.8 
 
Total:04 
Percentage:14.81 
 
 
 
Total:05 
Percentage:18.52 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Note s in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action 
taken replies in respect of the Recommendation s contained in Chapter V 
of this Report, for which interim replies have  been given by the 
Government, may be furnished to them at the earliest.  

2 
 
I. Registration of Workers 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.5) 
4. In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed as under:  
 "The Committee note that after the promulgation of the Building and Other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 
1996, the implementation of the Act was started after the year 2000 in some 
States and others followed suit late, i.e. around 2007. The Committee further note 
that there is no frequency prescribed under the Rules so formulated for meeting of 
the State Advisory Committees. They feel that in the absence of any set timeline 
for meeting, the purpose of constitution of State Advisory Committees got 
defeated. They, therefore,  recommend that as prescribed for Central Advisory 
Committee to meet twice a year, the same should be made mandatory for the 
State Advisory Committees also so that the agenda before them should be cleared 
atleast within six months." 
5. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:  
 "Section 4 of the Building and Other Construction Workers’ (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996, provides for c onstitution of the 
State Building and Other Construction Workers’ Advisory Committee by the State 
Government to advise the State Government on such matter arising out of the 
administration of this Act as may be referred to it.  The Act prescribes 
composition of the Committee.  
 Similarly, Section 3 of the Act provides constitution of the Central Building 
and Other Construction Workers’ Advisory Committee by the Central Government 
to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the 
administration of this Act as may  be referred to it.  The Act provides composition 
of the Committee.  Further, Rule 20 of the Central Building and Other 
Construction Workers’ (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Central Rules, 1998 made under the Act prescribes frequency o f the meetings of 
the Central Advisory Committee. Under Rule 20(1), the Central Advisory 
Committee shall meet at such places and at such times as may be decided by the 
Chairperson of the Committee and shall meet at least once in six months.  
 The states ma y make rules incorporating the provisions on frequency of 
meeting of the State Advisory Committees in line with the Central Advisory 
Committee." 
6. Instead of initiating action upon the original recommendation of the 
Committee requiring that  it be made man datory for State Advisory 
Committees to meet twice a year , as is the case for Central Advisory 
Committee, the Ministry of Labour & Employment (MoLE) , in their action 

3 
 
taken reply, have merely reproduced Sections 3 and 4 of the Building and 
Other Construction Workers' (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1996. These  Sections deal with constitution of Central 
Building and Other Construction Workers' Advisory Committee by the 
Central Government as well as constitution of the State Building and Other 
Construction Workers' Advisory C ommittee by the State Government 
respectively. Not satisfied with the response, t he Committee would like to 
draw attention of the Ministry to  Section 60 of the Act, which stipulates 
that "The Central Gov ernment may give directions to the Government of 
any State or to a Board as to the carrying into execution in that State of 
any of the provisions of this Act " and hence reiterating their original 
recommendations, the Committee  desire that the Ministry must issue 
necessary directions to all State Governments/ UTs /State Boards under 
Section 60 to ensure that the State Advisory Committees must meet at 
least twice a year so that the agenda before them could be cleared within 
six months.  
(Recommendation Para No. 2.15) 
7. In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed as under: 
 "The Committee note that the registration of construction workers is being 
done manually which is time -consuming and   results in low registration. Thus a 
strong IT platform needs to be developed by the Ministry. Besides these workers 
are required for renewal of registration after every one or three years as per the 
requirement of BOCW Board. Hence, doing the work of registration/renewal 
increases many fold. The Commi ttee found that the system of registration of 
construction workers followed by Rajasthan was more practical, where the dual 
system of online and offline registration is available. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that other States may also follow this syst em to reduce the dependence on 
manual registration. Also the registration/renewal  should be done for three 
years." 

4 
 
8. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows: 
 "The BOCW (RECS) Ac t, 1996 provides for   registration of   building 
workers as beneficiaries.   Every building worker who has age of not less than 18 
years but not completed 60 years , has been engaged in any building or other 
construction work for not less than 90 days duri ng the preceding 12 months shall 
be eligible for registration as beneficiary of the Building and other Construction 
Workers’ Welfare Fund.  
 A national portal for building and other construction worker with a 
purpose to facilitate the registration in colla boration with States and Union 
Territories   has been developed and made live which can be accessed at 
https://bocw.shramsuvidha.gov.in." 
9. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that Ministry 
of Labour & Employment should familiarize all States/UTs with the 
practice adopted by the State Government of Rajasthan of having the dual 
system of online as well as offline registration of building and  
construction workers and urge them to follow the same , i n order to 
reduce the work load registration/renewal should be done for a three year 
period. Since the BOCW (R&CS) Act, 1996 is silent on the duration of the 
registration, the administrative Ministry  i.e Ministry of Labour & 
Employment can issue a clarification/ advisory/direction on the matter 
accordingly. The Committee  desire to apprised of the progress on the 
matter at the action taken stage. 
II. Collection of Cess 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.9) 
10.  In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed as under: 
 "The Committee are concerned to note that there is no proper system of 
collection of Cess and its transfer to the State Welfare Boards. They further note 
that all the States are having their own system for assessment/collection of Cess 
and transferring it t o the State Welfare Boards. The Committee opine that in the 
absence of any proper/fool proof system, there are chances of leakages. They 
therefore, desire that a fool -proof and uniform system of assessment and 

5 
 
collection of Cess and its transfer to State Welfare Boards may be developed at the 
Central Level for implementation by the States. They also recommend that, if need 
be, a professional agency be consulted for developing a software with an inbuilt 
provision of internal check at the earliest." 
11. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows: 
 "Cess assessment, collection and its utilisation under the Building and 
Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Act, 1996, is the respons ibility of 
States/ UTs. Cess is utilized under Section 22 by the State/ UTs through their 
State Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Boards constituted under 
the Building and Other Construction Workers (RECS) Act, 1996.   
 The Central Government  has been issuing directions under Section 60 of 
the Building and Other Construction Workers (RECS) Act, 1996, to the State 
Governments / UT Administrations from time to time for proper utilization of cess 
fund in terms of the provisions of the Act.  
  Further, the Central Government has constituted a Monitoring Committee 
on 09.09.2015 under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Labour and Employment) to 
monitor, inter -alia, the implementation of directions issued under Section 60 of 
the Act, with reference to uti lization of Cess fund for Welfare Schemes by the 
State Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Boards.  The Committee 
has been holding regular meetings with the Principal Secretary/ Secretary/ 
Labour Commissioners of all the States/ UTs to monitor  the progress.  States/ 
UTs have also been impressed upon that the basic objectives of the Act may be 
given top priority." 
12. The Committee while noting  that the Central Government has 
constituted a Monitoring Committee on 9th May, 2015 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (Ministry of Labour & Employment) to monitor  
the implementation of directions issued for  utilisation of Cess Fund for 
welfare schemes by the State Building and Other Construction Worker's 
Welfare Boards, feel that it is a step in the right direction for developing a 
fool-proof monitoring mechanism. They, at the same time, feel that use of 
technology to gather and analyse relevant data collected on the 
implementation aspects gives a definite edge to such efforts  and hence, 
reiterate development of a software with provision of internal check by a 
professional agency. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 

6 
 
impact of the Monitoring Committee on the collection of cess and its 
transfer to the State Welfare Boards. 
II. Utilisation of Cess 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.22) 
13.  In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed as under: 
"The Committee note that against the collection of  ₹32,632.96 crore an amount of 
₹7,516.52 crore had been spent by  the States/UTs on various welfare Schemes 
meant for the BOC Workers. The Committee desire to be apprised of the details of 
expenditure incurred Scheme-wise by the respective State Governments/UTs." 
14. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee , the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows: 
"The cess fund is required to be spent as per the requirements of the schemes 
formulated by the State Board. The Act provides for welfare measures like 
accidental assistance, pension, loans and advances for construction of a house, 
premia for group insuranc e schemes, education assistance, medical expenses, 
maternity benefits and other measures as may be prescribed.  
 The States/ UTs are mandated that the cess fund must be spent 
exclusively on the   schemes stipulated in the Act." 
15. The Committee had desire d to be apprised of the scheme -wise 
details of Rs.7,516.52 crore spent by States/UTs on various welfare 
schemes meant for BOC workers. As the Ministry have not furnished any 
details in their reply , the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that the said scheme-wise details be collected 
and furnished to them at the action taken Statement stage. 
II. Accounts and Audit 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.11) 
16.  In their  next original recommendation, the Committee had observed as 
under: 
 "The Committee note that as per the mandate of the Act all the BOCW 
Welfare Boards shall furnish an audited copy of accounts together with the 
auditor's report to the State Government. However, taking note of the intervention 

7 
 
of Hon'ble Supreme Court, the C ommittee cannot but believe that the State 
Welfare Boards had not adhered to the provisions of the Act. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that each and every State/UT be directed to furnish its audited 
copy of accounts from the year the cess collection star ted, to the State 
Government as well as the Central Government for their consideration within 
three months. They also desire that from now onwards every State/UT be directed 
to furnish their audited report to the State/Central Government annually. " 
17. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows: 
 "Section 27 of the Act makes it mandatory for the State Welfare Boards to 
maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual 
Statement of accounts in prescribed form and the accounts of the Boards are to 
be annually audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The annual 
report and auditor’s report are laid before the State Legislature by the State 
Government." 
18. In their original recommendation, t he Committee had observed that 
though every State/UT Welfare Board is directed  to furnish its auditor's 
report to the State Government, the intervention of Hon'ble Supreme Court 
on the matter, indicated that the State Welfare Boards had not adhered to 
the provisions of the Act. The Committee, therefore, had recommended  
that every State/UT be directed to furnish audited copy of their account 
from the year the cess collection started, to the State Governme nt as well 
as the Central Government for their consideration within three        
months and annually from now on. In their action taken reply, the Ministry 
have merely quoted the provisions of Section 27 of the BOCW Act which 
deals with maintenance of acco unt and other relevant records, preparation 
of annual statement of accounts by the State Welfare Board and furnishing 
of the same.  Dissatisfied with the  reply of the Ministry , the Committee  
reiterate that the Ministry must issue a directive to all States/U Ts  at the 
earliest to ensure that their respective State Welfare Board comply with 
the provisions of Section 27 of the BOCW Act without fail.  

8 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.11) 
The Committee note that the Ministry are relying upon the figure of estimated 
number of workers in construction industry based on Fifth Employment -
Unemployment Survey(EUS) conducted in the year 2015 -16, which shows 
decline in the number of workers regi stered in fourth EUS conducted in 2013 -
14. The Committee are of the view that the construction activities all over the 
Country have increased considerably during the given period, hence the decline 
in number of workers could be erroneous. They, therefore, desire that the 
implementing agencies may be directed to provide realistic figures so that the 
intended benefits may reach the ultimate beneficiary.  
Reply of the Government 
As per estimates of National Sample Survey (2011 -12) there are around 5.02 
crore building and other construction workers in India. As per the information 
received from the States, around 2.80 crore workers have been registered as 
beneficiaries with the Sta te Welfare Boards. States/ UTs have been requested 
during the meetings of the Monitoring Committee to register all eligible 
construction workers as beneficiaries to the Fund.   Moreover, directions under 
section 60 of the BOCW Act have been issued regardin g registration of BOC 
workers (copy enclosed as Annexure-I).  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.12) 
The Committee find that there is no separate mention about the naka workers. 
As per the provisions of the Act the eligibility criteria to be registered as 
construction worker is a person who is 18 -60 years of age and has been 
engaged in any building or oth er construction work for not less than ninety 
days during the preceding twelve months and he shall be eligible for 
registration as a beneficiary under this Act. The Committee note that regarding 
certification of construction workers, guidelines have been i ssued by  the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment according to which the States shall 
authorize all Gram Panchayats and Municipalities also to register construction 
workers under the Act. In addition, Assistant/ Junior Engineers of the various 
Engineering Departments like PWD, Irrigation, Water Supply, Power etc. shall 

9 
 
also be given power to register workers under BOCW (RECS) Act. The 
Committee opine that the naka workers who are not able to prove their days of 
working and are ignorant of the guidelines issue d by the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment in this regard may be guided by print/electronic 
media/CBWE to register themselves as construction workers and benefits 
thereof may also be publicized.  
Reply of the Government 
Directions under Section 60 of the B OCW Act were issued on 08.10.2015 
stating  that the Boards shall be competent to spend money on publicity and 
awareness generation through press and media under section 22(h) of the Act.  
However, expenditure on such campaign or activities shall be justifi ed to the 
extent it focuses on BOC workers only. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.13) 
The Committee note that majority of workers engaged in Building and Other 
Construction activities are migrants. As such they do not possess necessary 
documents required for registration,   leading to less number of registrations. 
Moreover, either the contractors or the workers do not come forward for their 
registration. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the BOCW Board may 
initiate action to contact the State Labour Authorities, who usually visit the 
construction sites for implementation of labour laws, to have information about 
the registration of workers at those sites. T he Committee also recommend that 
the Labour I -Cards be seeded with Adhaar Cards to avoid duplication of 
registration of those workers. The Committee further desire that wherever 
found necessary, Adhaar camps may also be organised for facilitation of 
issuance of Adhaar Cards for the workers who do not possess the same. 
Reply of the Government 
States/ UTs have been requested during the meeting of the Monitoring 
Committee held on 12.12.2017 that the registration of construction workers 
may as far as possible be linked with the Aadhar to avoid duplication of 
registration. BOCW Boards have been adv ised time and again to make 
arrangements for adequate publicity and awareness amongst the BOC workers 
including on-site publicity.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
  

10 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.14) 
The Committee find that as of now there is no proper mechanism available for 
giving publicity to the ongoing welfare schemes meant for the construction 
workers by the BOCW Board. They attribute this as one of the reasons for low 
registration of workers  as most of the workers are migrant, illiterate and 
ignorant about the benefits of the schemes available for them. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that wide publicity be given to the welfare schemes and 
the benefits of registering as a construction worker so that workers may   come 
forward on their own for registration. They also desire that the contractors of 
big construction sites be encouraged to publicise the benefits of registration 
amongst the workers and also try to get each and every constructio n worker 
engaged by him/her registered. The Committee further desire that information 
centers be set up at the district level also. 
Reply of the Government 
The BOCW (RECS) Act, 1996 provides welfare measure for construction 
workers by the State Governments/ UT administration through their Building 
and Other Construction Workers Welfare Board constituted under the Act.  
States are required to take all possible efforts to make aware construction 
workers of their rights available under the Act.  The Central Government issues 
directions from time to time to the State/ UTs for implementation of the Act in 
letter and spirit.  Directions under Section 60 of the BOCW Act were issued on 
08.10.2015 stating that the Boards shall be competent to spend money on  
publicity and awareness generation through press and media under section 
22(h) of the Act.  However, expenditure on such campaign or activities shall be 
justified to the extent it focuses on BOC workers only. The matter of awareness 
of the rights of the c onstruction workers and publicity of welfare schemes 
formulated by the States for construction workers was discussed in the 
meeting of the Monitoring Committee held on 12.12.2017.  It was reiterated 
that the awareness generation and wide publicity regardin g rights of 
construction workers and welfare schemes may be given due importance. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018)  

11 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.18) 
The Committee note that the welfare Schemes to be run under the BOCW 
Welfare Cess Act, 1996, differ from State to State. The Committee desire that 
the welfare schemes under the Act should be structured by the Central 
Government/Ministry of Labour & Employment who is the custodian of the Act 
so that a Pan-India uniformity may be maintained. 
Reply of the Government 
Section 22 (1) of the Act prescribed welfare measures for construction workers.  
As per the Section, the Board may- 
(a) provide immediate assistance to a beneficiary in case of accident 
(b) make payment of pension to the beneficiaries who have 
 completed the age of sixty years 
(c) sanction loans and advances to the beneficiary for construction of  
 a houses. 
(d) pay premia for Group Insurance Scheme of the beneficiaries. 
(e) give financial assistance for the education of children  
(f) meet medical expenses for treatment of major ailments  
(g) make payment of maternity benefit to the female beneficiaries; and  
(h) make provisions and improvement of such other welfare measures  
 and facilities as may be prescribed. 
Under Section 22(1)(h) of the Act, States are competent to make provisions and 
improvement of such other welfare measures and facilities than prescribed in 
clauses (a) to (g) of sub -section (1) of the Section 22 of the Act. However, 
Ministry of Labour & Employment under section 60 of the Act prepared a 
roadmap prescribing uniformity of welfare measures meant for construction 
workers and advised the states vide directions dated 08.10.2015 to follow the 
same. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
 
 
  

12 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.19) 
The Committee note that as per the Act, State Governments are free to adopt 
the best of the schemes run under the BOCW Act or by the State  Government  
in general. The Committee opine that this kind of arrangement would result in 
the inclusion of construction workers with other unorganised workers and the 
dedicated found could be utilised by the State Governments for running the 
schemes for all unorganised workers. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Schemes meant for construction workers may be separated from the other 
Schemes run by the State Governments.  
Reply of the Government 
The State governments are required that the welfare schemes funded from Cess 
fund should be exclusively for building and other construction workers only. 
Diversion of cess fund for welfare of other category of   workers is not 
permissible under the Act. 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL (Vol.  I) 
dated 19/03/2018 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.7) 
The Committee note that except State of Manipur all the States/UTs have 
notified the Cess Collecting Authorities dating back to the year 1999. However, 
in some States like Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Jharkhand, M aharashtra, Punjab, 
etc., the State Welfare Boards were constituted as late as 7 -8 years after the 
notification of Cess Collecting Bodies. The Committee further note that as per 
the provisions of the BOCW Act the proceeds of cess collected under sub -
section (2) shall be paid by the State Cess Collecting Authority to the Board 
within 30 days of its collection. The Committee apprehend that in the States, 
where the Welfare Boards were constituted on later dates, the amount of cess 
collected would not have eith er been spent for welfare of construction workers 
or set aside for the specific purpose by the respective State Governments. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry may identify such States where 
the Welfare Boards were constituted after notific ation of Cess Collecting 
Authority. They further desire that each of such States may also be directed to 
provide details of the cess collected and deposited with them between the 
period of notification of cess collecting bodies and constitution of the Stat e 
Welfare Board. 
 

13 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per the information available all States/ UTs have notified the cess 
collecting authority and constituted State Building and Other Construction 
Workers Welfare Board. As per the provisions of the Acts, States ar e obligated 
that the cess collected be deposited with the Fund/ Board within prescribed 
time limit. The states have been requested during meetings of the Monitoring 
Committee that the cess fund so collected be deposited with the Building and 
Other Construction Workers Welfare Fund within the statutory time limit. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018)  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.8) 
The Committee note from the figures provided by the Ministry that till 
31.03.2017 an amount of Rs. 32,632,96 crore had been collected by the States 
on account of cess from the works as defined in Para 3.4. The Committee are of 
the opinion that during the 20 years of promulgation of the Act, the figures of 
the amount collected  as given by the Ministry does not match with the 
construction activities carried out. They also opine that the given amount could 
alone be of Railways/NHAI/PWD/CPWD. The  Committee are of the view that 
had the cess been collected/deposited fairly, it coul d run into crores of rupess. 
They, therefore, desire that collection from each of the above source may 
thoroughly be checked and difference, if any, be collected and deposited with 
the State Welfare Boards. 
Reply of the Government 
States/ UTs are mandated to assess, collect and remit the cess under the 
Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 and the Building and Other Construction 
Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1996. The Ministry of Labour and Employ ment is 
regularly reviewing the improvements made by the States/ UTs towards 
assessment, collection, remittance and expenditure of cess.  States/ UTs have 
been requested that the cess fund be collected both from government and 
private organizations. Moreove r, States have been advised to put in place 
suitable mechanisms to ensure that cess is collected prior to the approval of 
the construction activities and to notify more cess collectors. A statement 
showing the state-wise position of the amount of cess collected and the amount 
spent as on 31.12. 2017 (provisional) is given below: 
 
 

14 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the States/UTs. Amount of cess 
collected               (Rs. in 
Crore) 
Amount spent      
(Rs. in Crore) 
1 Andhra Pradesh  1543.38 412.66 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 65.36 51.6 
3 Assam  695.97 167.2 
4 Bihar  1181.86 144.71 
5 Chhattisgarh  797.72 614.74 
6 Goa  120.3 107.7 
7 Gujarat 1758.37 122.13 
8 Haryana  2050.18 227.49 
9 Himachal Pradesh 383.79 72.36 
10 J&K 534.027 243.61 
11 Jharkhand 353.81 163.35 
12 Karnataka  4374.56 328.57 
13 Kerala  1535.86 1579.9 
14 Madhya Pradesh  2123.31 899.79 
15 Maharashtra  5685.33 385.45 
16 Manipur 21 10.99 
17 Meghalaya  117.22 2.37 
18 Mizoram 40.37 21.95 
19 Nagaland 20.06 3.34 
20 Odisha  1170 404 
21 Punjab  1065.92 496.76 
22 Rajasthan  1726.76 674.15 
23 Sikkim  83.89 22.17 
24 Tamil Nadu  2251.25 727.41 
25 Telangana 769.03 135.27 
26 Tripura  156.08 20.58 
27 Uttar Pradesh  3368.72 799.29 
28 Uttarakhand  170.41 31.21 
29 West  Bengal 1638.77 868.83 
30 Delhi  2547.94 151.57 
31 A & N Island  53.34 6.99 
32 Chandigarh  106.94 5.01 
33 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 29.61 0 
34 Daman and Diu 37.17 0.54 
35 Lakshadweep  6.76 0 
36 Puducherry 100.16 63.92 
Total 38685.227 
 
9967.61 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
 

15 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.10) 
The Committee note that as per the provisions of the Act all such construction 
activities incurring cost of above Rs 10 Lakh are bound to deposit cess@1% of 
the total construction cost. However, going through the collection, the 
Committee feel that fair co llection of cess from private bodies is not properly 
done. They opine that due to some reason, collection from small 
builders/private owners is being ignored. They, therefore, desire that the 
construction activities be properly monitored so that the propor tionate 
collection of cess may be enhanced.  
Reply of the Government 
The cess collection on the cost of construction and its assessment is done by 
the cess assessment and collecting authorities notified by the States. States/ 
UTs have been requested that c ess fund be collected both from government, 
public and private sector and penal action be taken against defaulters. 
Moreover, States have been advised to put in place suitable mechanisms to 
ensure that cess is collected prior to the approval of the constru ction activities 
and to notify more cess collectors. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.11) 
The Committee further recommend that the State Welfare Boards may have 
proper integration with the ESIC/EPFO for extracting the details of contractors 
engaged in construction activities for organised construction workers, and for 
unorganised construction workers, they should integrate with Labour 
Commissioners/Labour Offices to get the realistic data about the number of 
construction activities/ construction workers under their jurisdiction. 
Reply of the Government 
States/ UTs have been requested to register eligible BOC workers with ESIC 
and EPFO for issue of Pehchan Patra and UAN re spectively which would help 
the migrant BOC workers to avail social security benefits anywhere in the 
country since these will be based on Aadhar numbers and also linked to their 
bank account number.   
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
 
 

16 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.12) 
The Committee, while examining the subject, had noted that the model 
followed by Government of Rajasthan appeared to be effective in 
implementation of the BOCW(RECS) Act, 1996 and BOCW Welfare Cess Act, 
1996. They, therefore, desire that the Rajasthan model may be taken as an 
example and the State Welfare Boards be advised to devise their own models 
based on the same. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should 
tabulate the b est practices from all the States and circulate it to all the 
States/UTs. 
Reply of the Government 
During the meetings of the Monitoring Committee, States/ UTs have shared 
their experience towards implementation of the Acts.  Although the situations, 
conditions and affairs of the States differ from state to state, it was urged that 
best practices of a state be followed by other states.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.13) 
The Committee note that there are several agencies responsible for assessment, 
collection and deposition of cess with the BOCW Board. In the given scenario, 
the Committee opine that there is a wider scope for more collection and less 
deposition of cess with the BOCW Boards as there is no mechanism to monitor 
the collecting authorities. The Committee, therefore, desire that a few States 
may be taken up for auditing their assessment of cess viz -a-viz collection and 
deposition during atleast the last 2 to 5 years. 
Reply of the Government 
States/ UTs are mandated to assess, collect and remit the cess under the 
Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 and the Building and Other Construction 
Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1996. The Ministry of Labour and Employment is 
regularly reviewing the progress made by the States/ UTs towards assessment, 
collection, remittance and expenditure of cess. In the ongoing PIL, Writ Petition 
(Civil) No. 318 of 2006 before t he Hon’ble Supreme Court filed by M/s National 
Campaign Committee for Central Legislation on Construction Labour  V/s 
Union of India and others, CAG has been directed to audit the accounts of the 
BOCW Boards.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 

17 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.14) 
The Committee note that there are no proper guidelines for keeping the 
collected cess by the BOCW Boards. The collected cess is either being kept in 
the form of fixed deposits o r securities. The Committee recommend that 
uniform guidelines from the Ministry may be issued for management of cess 
fund so that every BOCW Board may keep the money according to the 
guidelines. 
Reply of the Government 
Under the provisions of the Act, the cess collected on the cost of construction 
shall be deposited with the State Building and Other Construction Workers 
Welfare Fund.  States/ UTs were impressed upon during the meeting of the 
Monitoring Committee that the cess fund be deposited with the Nati onalized 
Banks only, as per the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.   
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.23) 
The Committee note that the State Governments/UTs have been able to utilise 
only 23% of the total cess collection during the last 20 years. The Committee 
are of the view that if those States whose performance is good in utilization of 
cess fund, be segregated from others, the utilisation would be dismal. The 
Committee desire that the performance of each State/UT be judged 
independently so that the Ministry may help less performing States/UTs in 
finding the reasons for abysmal performance and encourage them to utilise the 
collected funds. 
Reply of the Government 
During the meeting of the Monitoring Committee, States/ UTs have shared 
their experience towards implementation of the Acts and they were requested 
that the best practices of other states be followed by other States so that the 
cess fund be utilized. It w as discussed in these meetings that Kerala and West 
Bengal were the best performing states while some states like Maharashtra 
were the poor performing states. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.24) 
The Committee opine that the amount of Rs 7,516.52 crore spent so far include 
5% expenditure incurred on salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the 

18 
 
members, officers and other employees for the Board. The Committee ar e of the 
view that after deducting 5%, an amount of Rs 7140.70 crore has been spent 
actually on the welfare of BOC Workers. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that expenditure on salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the 
members, officers and oth er employees for the Board need not be mixed with 
the expenditure incurred on welfare Schemes so that a real picture of the 
utilisation of funds may come out. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation has been noted and the States/UTs were requested that 
the utilization of cess fund be bifurcated between cess spent on welfare 
measures and cess spent on administrative expenses. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.25) 
The Committee observe that as per the Hon’ble Supreme Court Order dated 
04.09.2015 come of the State Governments/UTs have incurred expenditure on 
advertisements from the BOCW Cess fund. The Committee desire that such 
States/UTs be identified and the amount inc urred on advertisements be 
verified and deposited with respective State Welfare Boards. They also desire 
that suitable advisory cautioning the State Governments/UTs for such type of 
misuse of cess fund be issued by the Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
Reply of the Government 
The observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court were brought in the notice of 
the States and directions under Section 60 of the Act were issued on 
23.09.2015 requesting that the cess fund spent on advertisement be recouped 
into the cess Fund on immediate basis.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.3) 
The Committee note that as of now the Ministry do not have any data regarding 
the cases pending with the appellate authorities as the appellate authorities 
are being appointed by the State Governments. The Committee apprehend that 
there may be cases where the appellate authority would not have been 
appointed by the respective State Governments. They, therefor e, desire that all 
the State Governments be persuaded to appoint appellate authorities as early 
as possible. 

19 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Appellate Authority under rule 2 (h) of the Building and Other 
Construction Workers Welfare Cess Rules, 1998 is appointed by the 
appropriate Government. States have been advised to appoint appellate 
authorities.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M.  No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.12) 
The Committee note that Hon’ble Supreme Court had passed an order on 
8.5.2017 requesting CAG to file a tabular chart, within a period of six weeks 
from the date of Order,  containing (i) the amount collected under BOCW 
Welfare Cess Act since the enactment of the Act i.e., 1996 till 31st March, 
2017, (ii) the amount collected and transferred to BOCW Board till 31st March, 
2017, and (iii) the amount which has been collected b ut not yet transferred to 
the Boards. The Committee desire to be apprised of the current status in this 
regard. They also desire that the information furnished to the CAG may also be 
furnished to the Committee for their consideration. 
Reply of the Government 
CAG submitted its report to the Hon’ble Court, a copy of which is enclosed  
(Annexure-II).  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
  

20 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.5) 
The Committee note that after the promulgation of the Building and Other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 
1996, the implementation of the Act was started after the year 2000 in so me States 
and others followed suit late, i.e. around 2007. The Committee further note that there 
is no frequency prescribed under the Rules so formulated for meeting of the State 
Advisory Committees. They feel that in the absence of any set timeline for meeting, the 
purpose of constitution of State Advisory Committees got defeated. They, therefore, 
recommend that as prescribed for Central Advisory Committee to meet twice a year, 
the same should be made mandatory for the State Advisory Committees also so tha t 
the agenda before them should be cleared atleast within six months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Section 4 of the Building and Other Construction Workers’ (Regulation of Employment 
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996, provides for constitution of the State Building 
and Other Construction Workers’ Advisory Committee by the State Government to 
advise the State Government on such matter arising out of the administration of this 
Act as may be referred to it.  The Act prescribes composition of the Committee. 
Similarly, Section 3 of the Act provides constitution of the Central Building and Other 
Construction Workers’ Advisory Committee by the Central Government to advise the 
Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as 
may be referred to it.  The Act provides composition of the Committee.  Further, Rule 
20 of the Central Building and Other Construction Workers’ (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Central Rules, 1998 made under the Act 
prescribes frequency of th e meetings of the Central Advisory Committee. Under Rule 
20(1), the Central Advisory Committee shall meet at such places and at such times as 
may be decided by the Chairperson of the Committee and shall meet at least once in 
six months. The states may make  rules incorporating the provisions on frequency of 
meeting of the State Advisory Committees in line with the Central Advisory Committee.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.6 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 

22 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.15) 
 
The Committee note  that the registration of construction workers is being done 
manually which is time -consuming and results in low registration. Thus a 
strong IT platform needs to be developed by the Ministry. Besides these 
workers are required for renewa l of registration after every one or three years 
as per the requirement of BOCW Board. Hence, doing the work of 
registration/renewal increases many fold. The Committee found that the 
system of registration of construction workers followed by Rajasthan was more  
practical, where the dual system of online and offline registration is available. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that other States may also follow this system 
to reduce the dependence on manual registration. Also the registration/renewal 
should be done for three years.        
 
Reply of the Government 
The BOCW (RECS) Act, 1996 provides for   registration of   building workers as 
beneficiaries.   Every building worker who has age of not less than 18 years but 
not completed 60 years has been engaged in any building or other construction 
work for not less than 90 days during the preceding 12 months shall be eligible 
for registration as beneficiary of the Building and other Construction Workers’ 
Welfare Fund. A national portal for building and other const ruction worker 
with a purpose to facilitate the registration in collaboration with states and 
union territories   has been developed and made live which can be accessed at 
https://bocw.shramsuvidha.gov.in.   
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.9 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
  

23 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.22) 
 
The Committee note that against the collection of Rs 32,632,96 crore an 
amount of Rs 7,516.52 crore had been spent by the States/UTs on various 
welfare Schemes meant for the BOC Workers. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the details of expenditure incurred scheme -wise by the respective 
State Governments/UTs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The cess fund is required to be spent as per the requirements of the schemes 
formulated by the State Board. The Act provides for welfare measures like 
accidental assistance, pension, loans and advances for construction of a house, 
premia for group insuranc e schemes, education assistance, medical expenses, 
maternity benefits and other measures as may be prescribed. The States/ UTs 
are mandated that the cess fund must be spent exclusively on the  schemes 
stipulated in the Act.  
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employ ment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.15 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.11) 
The Committee note that as per the mandate of the Act all the BOCW Welfare 
Boards shall furnish an audited copy of accounts together with the auditor’s 
report to the State Government. However, taking note of the intervention of 
Hon’ble Supreme Court, the Committee cannot but believe that the State 
Welfare Boards had not adhered to the provisions of the Act.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that each and every State/UT be directed to furnish its 
audited copy of accounts from the year the cess collection started, to the State 
Government as well as the C entral Government for their consideration within 
three months. They also desire that from now onwards every State/UT be 
directed to furnish their audited report to the State/Central Government 
annually. 
 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
Section 27 of the Act makes  it mandatory for the State Welfare Boards to 
maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual 
Statement of accounts in prescribed form and the accounts of the Boards are 
to be annually audited by the Comptroller and Auditor Genera l of India. The 
annual report and auditor’s report are laid before the State Legislature by the 
State Government. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.18 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.10) 
 
The Committee note that the primary work relating  to registration of workers has not 
been given the desired priority/seriousness by the Ministry and the BOCW Boards. 
While tendering evidence before the Committee, Secretary, Labour had also admitted 
that there are around 4.6 crore construction workers whe reas only 2.5 crore workers 
have been registered. The Committee also opine that the estimated figures are based 
on the survey conducted by  NSSO  and not on the eligibility conditions prescribed 
under Section 12 of the BOCW Act. They, therefore, opine that  the number of workers 
would be much more than the estimated ones. They are not happy with the pace of 
registration of construction workers by the implementing agencies of the Act. They, 
therefore, desire that the States may be persuaded to cover/register the estimated 
number of construction workers in their respective States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per estimates of National Sample Survey (2011 -12), there are about 5.02 crore 
building and other construction workers in the country.  Section 12 of the Act 
provides for registration of building workers as beneficiaries by the State Building and 
Other C onstruction Workers’ Welfare Board constituted by the State Governments. 
Under the Section, every building worker who has age of not less than 18 years but 
not completed 60 years has been engaged in any building or other construction work 
for not less than  90 days during the preceding 12 months shall be eligible for 
registration as a beneficiary of the Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare 
Fund. As per the information available, 2,82,13,316 building and other construction 
workers have been registered with the State Building and Other Construction Workers 
Welfare Boards. States/ UTs have been impressed upon to accelerate the pace of 
registration of building and other construction workers as beneficiaries during the 
meetings of the Monitoring Commit tee headed by Secretary, Ministry of Labour & 
Employment. The Committee has been holding regular meetings with the Principal 
Secretary/ Secretary/ Labour Commissioners of all the States/ UTs to monitor the 
progress. The Committee has been held eight meetings so far. The most recent meeting 
was held on 12th December, 2017 under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, Ministry of 
Labour & Employment.    
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.9) 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that there is no proper system of 
collection of Cess and its transfer to the State Welfare Boards. They further 
note that all the States are having their own system for assessment/collection 
of Cess and t ransferring it to the State Welfare Boards. The Committee opine 
that in the absence of any proper/fool -proof system, there are chances of 
leakages. They therefore, desire that a fool -proof and uniform system of 
assessment and collection of Cess and its tra nsfer to State Welfare Boards may 
be developed at the Central Level for implementation by the States. They also 
recommend that, if need be, a professional agency be consulted for developing 
a software with an inbuilt provision of internal check at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Cess assessment, collection and its utilisation under the Building and Other 
Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Act, 1996, is the responsibility of States/ 
UTs. Cess is utilized under Section 22 by the State/ UTs through their State 
Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Boards constituted under 
the Building and Other Construction Workers (RECS) Act, 1996.  The Central 
Government has been issuing directions under Section 60 of the Building and 
Other Construction Workers (RECS) Act, 1996, to the State Governments / UT 
Administrations from time to time for proper utilization of cess fund in terms of 
the provisions of the Act. Further, the Central Government has constituted a 
Monitoring Committee on 09.09.2015 under t he Chairmanship of Secretary 
(Labour and Employment) to monitor, inter -alia, the implementation of 
directions issued under Section 60 of the Act, with reference to utilization of 
Cess fund for Welfare Schemes by the State Building and Other Construction 
Workers’ Welfare Boards.  The Committee has been holding regular meetings 
with the Principal Secretary/ Secretary/ Labour Commissioners of all the 
States/ UTs to monitor the progress.  States/ UTs have also been impressed 
upon that the basic objectives of the Act may be given top priority. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.12 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 

27 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.26) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry had issued directions under Section 60 
to the States/UTs for deposition of amount utilised for any other purpose than 
the mandated under Section 22 of the BOCW Act to be recovered from th e 
authorities concerned and deposit the same into the cess found on immediate 
basis. The Ministry have also reportedly requested for furnishing the 
compliance report in this regard. The Committee desire to be furnished with 
the details of expenditure incur red by the States/UTs on this account 
alongwith the details of amount recovered and deposited with the State Welfare 
Boards and also a copy of the compliance report as furnished to the Ministry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The observations of the Hon’ble Supr eme Court were brought in the notice of 
the States and directions under Section 60 of the Act have been issued in this 
regard.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.4) 
 
The Committee apprehend that there may be under assessment or over 
assessment of the cess for which cases might have been registered/pending 
with the various appellate authorities. The Committee desire that such cases 
with the appellate authorities may be enquired into so that the manipulations 
of various under/over assessments could be ascertained and the difference in 
the amount of cess collected may be deposited with the BOCW Board. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Suitable advisory has been issued to the States.   
 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
 
  

28 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.8) 
 
The Committee note that the cess collecting authorities have to transfer the 
cess collection to the State Welfare Boards within a period of 30 days. The 
Committee find that though there is a provision in the Act for penalty for non -
payment of cess by the employer, however, the BOCW Act is silent about the 
penalty provision for those cess collecting authorities who do not dep osit the 
cess proceeds with the State Welfare Boards within 30 days. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that a penalty provision must be spelt out so that the cess 
proceeds may be deposited with the Welfare Boards within the prescribed time 
period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Labour Codes on Occupation Health, Safety & Working Conditions (OSH) and 
on Social Security is being prepared in the Ministry incorporating various new 
provisions that are not available in the BOCW Act.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No. Z -20012/03/2017-BL     
(Vol. I) dated 19/03/2018) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA  
19th July, 2018                        CHAIRPERSON,  
28th Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   

29 
 
Appendix - I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-fourth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 4 th July, 2018 from 1200 hrs. to 
1250 hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Parliament House Annexe - Extension 
Building,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya, MP –  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar, MP 
3. Shri Ashok Kumar dohrey, MP 
4. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey, MP 
5. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara, MP 
6. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam, MP 
7. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, MP 
8. Shri C.N. Jayadevan, MP 
9. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli, MP 
10. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar, MP 
11. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore, MP 
12. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania, MP 
   RAJYA SABHA 
13. Shri Ram Narain Dudi, MP 
14. Shri P.L. Punia, MP 
15. Shri Rajaram, MP 
16. Shri Amar Shankar Sable, MP 
17. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan, MP 
18. Ms. Dola Sen, MP 
19. Dr. Banda Prakash, MP 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad - Joint Secretary (RP) 
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata - Additional Director 
   

30 
 
 
2. The Committee first took up following draft Reports for consideration:  
i. XX  XX  XX  XX 
ii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty -
eighth R eport (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ' Cess funds and the ir 
Utilisation for Workers' Welfare'; and  
iii. XX  XX  XX  XX 
3. After some deliberation, the Committee adopted both draft Action Taken 
Reports and authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light of 
consequential changes that might arise out of factual verification of the Draft 
Reports and to present the same to both the Houses. 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
5. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  
The Committee then adjourned. 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
XX Does not pertain to this Report. 
  

31 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY -
EIGHTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
   Total Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations/  27  
 Observations which have been accepted by 
Government (Rec. Para No. 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 
2.14, 2.18, 2.19, 3.7, 3.8, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 
3.13, 3.14, 3.23, 3.24, 3.25, 4.3 & 4.12)  
 
18 66.67% 
II. Recommendations/Observations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s replies- NIL 
 
   00 
 
  
00 
III. Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which 
requires reiteration       
(Rec.  Para No.2.5, 2.15, 3.22 & 4.11) 
 
 04       14.81% 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which final replies of Government are of 
interim in nature  
(Rec. Para No.2.10, 3.9, 3.26, 4.4 & 4.8)      
        
 05 18.52% 
   100%  
 
           
             
             
             
  
 
 