i 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016-17)] 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
      
                    December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
20 

ii 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2016-17) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands 
for Grants (2016 -17)' of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment] 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on  08.12.2016  
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on  08.12.2016 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
                    December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
                     
  


iii 
 
 
 CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iv) 
INTRODUCTION        (v) 
        
  CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government‟s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I. Minutes of the sit ting of the Committee held on  
07.12.2016.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
  
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 
 DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA-CHAIRPERSON   
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
17. Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
18. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
19. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
23. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan 
24. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
25. Shri P.L. Punia 
26. Shri Rajaram 
27. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
28. Haji Abdul Salam 
29. Ms. Dola Sen 
30. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
31. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri N. C. Gupta   - Joint Secretary  
 2.    Smt. Anita B. Panda   -  Director 
 3.    Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Additional Director 
 4.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Under Secretary 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2016 -17) having 
been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this Twentieth 
Report on 'Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and lai d in Rajya 
Sabha on 3 rd May, 2016. The Ministry of Labour and Employment furnished 
their replies indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report on 23 rd August, 2016. The Committee 
considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 7 th December, 
2016. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;              DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA  
 7, December, 2016                    CHAIRPERSON,  
 16 , Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
 
2 The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 3 rd May, 2016. It contained 24 Observations/ 
Recommendations. Replies of the Government in respect of all these 
Recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government –                                                                                            
Rec. Para Nos. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 
15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23 and 24   
 
 Total:20 
Percentage:83.32 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government‟s reply – 
Rec. Para No.4 
Total:01 
 Percentage:4.17 
 
   
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Rec. Para Nos. 2 and 3  
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature- 
Rec. Para No.20 
 
 
 
Total:02 
 
Percentage:08.34 
 
 
 
Total:01 
 Percentage:4.17 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Note s in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action 
taken reply in respect of the Recommendation contained in Chapter V of 
this Report, for which interim reply has been  given by the Government , 
may be furnished to them at the earliest.  

2 
 
I. Utilisation of Budgetary Allocations 
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
4. In their Seventeenth Report, the Committee had noted that the Ministry 
were unable to utilise even the 2015 -16 RE allocations which were drastically 
revised downwards, despite the fact that the working areas of the Ministry had 
also shrunk considerably.  The Committee had, therefore, recommended for 
identification of causes for persistent under -utilisation of funds be sides taking 
corrective/remedial measures for ensuring optimal utilisation of funds during 
2016-17. 
5. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:  
"The Budget Estimates for Ministry of Labour & Employment for the year 
2015-16 was ₹2153.02 crore under Plan Head.  Out of this ₹1000.00 
crore was allocated for “Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana‟ which was 
transferred to Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.  Another ₹380.44 
crore was for Trai ning Directorate which was later on transferred to 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneu rship. Thus, the effective 
allocation to Ministry of Labour & Employment for the year 2015 -16 was 
₹772.58 crore which included ₹ 320.00 crore for U-win Card scheme. The 
Plan budget estimates was further reduced to ₹339.70 crore at Revised 
Estimates 2015-16.  Ministry had been able to spend ₹ 278.90 crore (AE) 
during the financial year 2015-16 which is 82.10 % of RE. Table showing 
BE, RE and actual expenditure in respect of Child Labour, Labour 
statistics and Workers‟ Education schemes is as under.(₹ In crore) 
Sl. No Schemes BE RE Actual Expenditure 
(In Crore)  (In percentage 
against RE)  
1 Child Labour 250.00 99.50 93.21 93.68 
 2 Labour Statistics  43.32 43.32 30.78 71.05 
3 Workers‟ Education 21.20 16.00 11.30 70.63 
 
 Savings in Child Labour scheme were on account of less number of 
Project Societies (about 100) being operational during 2015 -16 due to 
mainstreaming of children. However, following steps have been taken to 
ensure optimal utilization of funds under Child La bour Scheme during 
2016-17:-  

3 
 
a) The Project Societies which have been closed are being revived by way of 
conducting fresh survey in those districts for estimating the incidence of 
child labour and opening the Project Society accordingly.  In this regard, 
funds for conducting survey have been released for about 70 districts. 
b) The guidelines for NCLP have been revised with effect from 1.4.2016.  
The revised guidelines provide for simplified procedural requirement for 
release of funds and expanding the coverage of scheme. 
c)  Formats for dealing with past -liability cases have been revised to solve 
old liability cases pending with Project Societies and to ensure smooth 
functioning of Project Society.  
d) A separate NCLP Portal providing for online submission of documents  
has been conceptualized and will become operational very soon.  This 
would further expedite the release of funds during 2016-17. 
e) Provision of a separate Monitoring Committee at Central Government 
level by name of “National Project Monitoring Cell” in the revised 
guidelines would also ensure strengthening of monitoring system of 
scheme at Central level.        
Actual Expenditure under Labour Employment Statistical System (LESS) 
during the Financial Year 2015 -16 was ₹30.78 crore. RE allocations 
could not be utilized fully as some of the surveys (Occupational Wage 
Survey, Employment-Unemployment Survey and Quarterly Employment 
Survey) could not be launched in 2015 -16. Launch of NSSO Survey was 
also delayed in 2015 -16. Now all surveys are in full swing and 
Employment-Unemployment Survey is likely to be launched in 
September, 2016. 
The reason for less spending of the plan budget of Central Board for 
Workers Education (CBWE) was due to the fact that posts of the 
Education Office rs lying vacant over the yea rs and had lapsed. The 
proposal for revival of 131 vacant posts (79 of Sr. Education 
Officer/Education Officers and 52 others) was referred to the Department 
of Expenditure for approval. The Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure has agreed for reviv al of only 52 posts which includes 14 
posts of Education Officers.   
The approval of this Ministry for revival of 52 posts was conveyed to the 
Board with direction for filling up these revived posts urgently. Process 
for revival of remaining posts has already been initiated." 
 

4 
 
6. The Committee note that the total allocation of ₹ 772.58 crore 
during 2015-16 BE has been brought down to ₹ 339.70 at the RE stage.  Of 
this around ₹61 crore was unspent.  They feel that more a ttention is 
required to be paid on Chi ld Labour Scheme and Workers Education 
Scheme where huge amount remained unspent.     The Committee would 
also like to be apprised of the fate and present status of the issuance of U -
WIN Cards, for which an amount of ₹320 Crore was allocated during 2015 -
16 BE.  
 
II. Under-utilisation of  Cess-Funds 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
7. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that there was gross 
under utilisation of  funds in all the five Cess -Funds which as per the Ministry, 
had occurred due to economy measures and a general instruction of the 
Ministry of Finance for 10% cut in Non -Plan expenditure.  While rejecting the 
submission made by the Ministry for under-utilisation of Cess Funds meant for 
the welfare of the workers belonging to the lowest strata of the society, the 
Committee had stressed that the implementing mechanism should be 
strengthened so that the Cess Funds collected could be fully utilised and the 
benefits of the welfare Schemes financed through the Cess Funds actually 
reached the intended beneficiaries. 
8. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:  
"Ministry has been able to spend ₹171.64 crore against total Budget 
Provision of ₹207.34 crore in all the five Cess Fun ds. In the four cess 
funds i.e. „Mica Mine labour welfare fund‟, „Iron Ore Manganese Ore 
Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare fund‟, „Limestone and 
Dolomite Mines Labour welfare fund‟ and „Cine Worke rs Welfare Fund‟, 
the entire Budget allocation of ₹37.34 Crore was utilised during the 

5 
 
financial year 2015 -16. Ministry had been able to spend ₹134.30 crore 
against the total budget provision of ₹170.00 crore earmarked for the 
Beedi Worke rs Welfare Fund. A Provision of ₹55.12 crore was made 
under BE 2015 -16 for housing subsidy for beedi worke rs. Out of this 
amount ₹13.80 crore only could be spent. The reason for less utilization 
of funds was due to poor documentation by the illiterate or less literate 
beneficiaries. 
 Government has taken following steps to i mprove expenditure 
under the Beedi Workers Cess Fund which has been allowed to continue 
beyond 01.04.2016:- 
i) Subsidy given to Beedi Worke rs for construction of houses under 
the Revised Integrated Housing Scheme has been enhanced from              
₹40,000 to ₹1,00,000 per house per family and which is to be further 
enhanced to ₹1.5 Lakh per house per family. 
ii) Scholarship scheme funded out of cess funds are now being 
implemented through e-scholarship platform.  
iii) As per the recommendation of the Expen diture Management 
Commission (EMC), in -principle decision for transfer of the 
hospitals/dispensaries run by the Labour Welfare Organization to the 
ESIC has been taken. The detailed modalities in this regard are being 
finalized." 
 
9. The Committee feel that a full fledged serious study of all 5 Cess 
Funds is required to be done.  The objective of the cess Funds/total Cess 
collected, plan to spend the same for the particular purpose and the 
project/implementation and performance must be  monitored regularly. 
The Committee feel that more efforts are required to spend the funds 
allocated for the beedi workers  welfare where only ₹ 13.80 crore has been 
spent against the provision of ₹ 55.12 crore.  An action plan for the 
housing of beedi work ers should be prepared in consultation with the 
competent authorities.  The  Committee further urge for early finalisation 
of the modalities to transfer dispensaries/hospitals run by the Labour 
Welfare Organisation to ESIC and apprise them of the actual tr ansfer, if 
any, subsequently. 

6 
 
III. Cess Collection 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
10. In their Seventeenth Report, the Committee had noted that the Cess 
collection under the Iron Ore, Manganese and Chrome Ore and Mines Labour 
Welfare Fund was less as compared  to extraction/consumption of Iron Ore.  
They had also noted that the inspection mechanism was not strong enough to 
detect evasion of Cess collection.  The Committee had, therefore, impressed 
upon the Ministry for putting in place an efficacious inspection  and monitoring 
method and taking appropriate action against the companies found delinquent 
in paying Cess dues. 
11. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:  
"The Labour Welfare O rganization, Ministry of Labour & Employment 
through its Welfare Commissione rs collects cess only in respect of iron 
ore, Manganese Ore and Chrome ore used for internal consumption in 
the country. This forms only a negligible part of the total production. 
Major part of the ore is being exported and the cess on this is collected 
by the Customs and Central Excise. This does not fall under the purview 
of the Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
It may also be mentioned here that the above cesses have now been 
abolished by the Finance Act 2016."  
 
12. As the Iron Ore, Manganese Ore and Chrome Ore Cesses have now 
been abolished by the Finance Act, 2016, the Committee desire that an 
alternate action plan should be prepared to run those welfare schemes, 
which were earlier financed through the Cess Funds for the benefit of the 
Mine Labourers. 
 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER-II  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that against the Mini stry's 
projection of Rs.34914 crore for Plan expenditure during the 12 th Plan Period the 
approved outlay was merely Rs. 13223 crore, whereas the Ministry have been able to 
utilize an amount of Rs.4855.24 crore only upto 31st January, 2016, i.e. 36.72% of the 
total allocation.  Such under - utilization of funds has been attributed mainly to the 
transfer of the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) to the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare,  transfer of the Training part to t he Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship and non-implementation of the  Scheme of issuance of U-WIN Cards 
to the workers of the unorganised Sector. The Committee are not inclined to accept the 
reasoning given by the Ministry for the abysmally low utilisation of funds in view of the 
fact that the transfer of RSBY and training part of DGE&T was effected during 2015 
and in the same year U -WIN cards was conceived and taken off. Needless to say by 
that time, much expenditure could have been incurred on the Plan Schemes had there 
been a realistic assessment and adequate monitoring done out of the total Budget 
allocation. Such a situation reflects poorly on the seriousness and sense of priority in 
addressing the issues pertaining to labour. The Committ ee have been advising the 
Ministry for the past few years to make the budgeting exercise more prudent and also 
to strengthen the monitoring mechanism so as to achieve maximum utilization of 
funds, and are displeased over the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry in this regard. 
The fact that there has been more than 50 percent reduction in the projection of the 
Ministry and mere 38 percent utilisation of the reduced Plan outlay speak volumes of 
the non -chalant approach of the Ministry towards financial man agement. The 
Committee are of the considered opinion that the Ministry, instead of taking recourse 
to untenable reasons, should remove the systemic deficiencies, firm up the budget 
proposals and endeavour to maximise the Plan outlays in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of Parliamentary Standing 
Committee and has started making its budgetary allocation more prudent and realistic 
so that desired targets are achieved. Expenditure is being reviewed on Monthly Basi s. 
Instructions have been issued to the all Bureau Heads to maintain good pace of 
expenditure throughout the year. 
 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
 
  

8 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 The Committee note that the Occupational Wage Survey (OWS) are conducted 
to assess the Employment structure, Wage Rates, Dearness Allowance and Average 
Daily Earnings by Occupation and Stratum, as per the statutory obligation pertaining 
to Article 8 of Part-II (Average Earnings and Wage Structure & Distribution) of the ILO 
Convention No. 160 on Labour Statistics. Accordingly, the first round of Occupational 
Wage Survey (OWS) was conducted by the Labour Bureau in 1958 -59 and, thereafter, 
up to the fourth round, it was conducted after an interval of five years on an average.  
The fourth and fif th rounds of OWS were conducted in 1985 -92 and 1993 -1999 
respectively. The Committee are concerned to find that the sixth round of OWS was 
conducted in the year 2009 after a gap of ten years and that too covering only 37 
industries out of the 56 industries proposed.  What further worries the Committee that 
though the proposal for conducting the seventh round was submitted to the Ministry 
in the year 2014, the Ministry gave their approval only in February, 2016. The 
Committee strongly deprecate the inordinat e delay in finalising the proposal and 
conducting OWS within a definite timeline, as such undue delays in conducting OWS 
are detrimental to the interest of the labourers.  The Committee, therefore, emphasise 
that henceforth, the Ministry should expeditious ly accord their approval and ensure 
that OWS is conducted invariably within a maximum period of five years, as is the 
extent practice, so that the basic requirements of wages, DA, etc., of the labour force 
are fulfilled. 
Reply of the Government 
 The observation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Labour in the 
17thReport on Demand for Grants has been noted for compliance. All out efforts are 
being made for completion of the 7th Round of Occupational Wage Survey at the 
earliest. 
 However, the pr esent status of the 7th Occupational Wage Survey is given 
below: 
i. Recruitment of Supervisor, Investigators on contract basis has been 
completed. 
ii. The work relating to collection of frame and sample design has been 
initiated. 
iii. Field survey has been launched from 15.07.2016. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
  

9 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that the data collected by the Labour Bureau is being used 
by the Central Ministries, Reserve Bank of India, NITI Aayog, National Skill 
Development Agency, International M onetary Fund, International Labour 
Organisation, Academic & Research Institutes and Research Scholars. However, the 
data collected by the Labour Bureau is not generally compared with the data collected 
by the NGOs/ Private Parties. The Committee feel the M inistry could consider 
scientific comparison of the data collected by the Labour Bureau with that of 
established/ reputed NGOs/ Research Institutes, which could help in policy and 
decision making process besides making the officers involved in collection o f data 
more careful and diligent in their approach so as to assure foolproof collection of data. 
The Committee also desire that the size and areas of surveys for collection of data 
should be changed/rotated frequently for a wider and scientific coverage. 
Reply of the Government 
 Labour Bureau conducts surveys like Occupational Wage Survey (OWS), 
Employment-Unemployment Survey, Quarterly Employment Survey (QES) and 
Contract Labour Survey at All India level, centre/ area specific and industry specific 
with different periodicity. The scope, coverage, methodology, schedules and instruction 
manuals are based on sound statistical methodology. All such surveys conducted by 
Labour Bureau are different from other agencies to avoid duplication. Hence, results / 
data generated through these surveys are not comparable. 
 Labour Bureau has never come across the survey of large scale which is also 
undertaken by NGO / Private parties. Therefore, the situation of comparison never 
arose. However, if situation arises the comp arison can be made in terms of concepts 
and definitions, methodology and objectives of the survey. 
 From the First Annual Employment -Unemployment Survey (EUS) (2009 -10) 
with a sample size of 46,000 households which was conducted across 28 States / UTs 
in 300 districts to the latest Fifth round of EUS (2015 -16) with a sample size of 1.56 
lakh households which has been conducted in all the 36 States / UTs by covering all 
the districts, there has been a consistent endeavour on the part of Labour Bureau to 
increase the sample size and widen the area covered by these surveys. In the case of 
Quarterly Employment Surveys also, it has been decided to conduct these surveys on 
a larger scale by enlarging the sample size (from 2000-2500 to 10,000 establishments) 
and sectors covered (from 8 selected labour -intensive and export -oriented sectors to 
18 sub-sectors in 8 major sectors) under the revamped survey. 
 Efforts will be made under Socio -Economic Surveys of Different Segments of 
Labour (SESDSL) component for enhancing the size and area of survey for collection of 
data for a wider and scientific coverage, as recommended by the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 

10 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 The Committee observe that during the current year, i.e. 2016 -17, a provision 
of Rs.141.50 crore has been made for the Unorganised Workers' Social Security Card 
which constitutes 25.73% of the total budget allocation of Rs.550 crore of the Ministry 
(keeping aside Rs.1000 crore for the Pradhan Mantri Rojgar Protsahan Yojana). The 
Committee note that a budget provision of Rs.320.52 was made during the previous 
year (2015-16) for issuance of U -WIN cards to the Unorganised Sector Workers which 
remained un -utilised as the Scheme could not take off. According to the Secreta ry, 
(MOLE), a pan India social security platform would be developed which is being looked 
into by the Cabinet Secretariat but there is neither any clarity on its character and 
size nor about the role and responsibility of the Ministry of Labour and Employm ent. 
As the Ministry themselves are not clear about the Scheme and which is yet to be 
conceived and implemented, the Committee do not find any justification for keeping 
idle for the whole year Rs.141.50 crore earmarked for the Scheme. The Committee 
apprehend that it may further aggravate the quantum of under - 44 utilised funds at 
the end of this fiscal and lead to reductions in the allocations for the next fiscal i.e. 
2017-18. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should exercise due 
diligence and propose allocations only for those schemes which have already been 
formulated, approved and are ready for takeoff so that the performance of the Ministry 
in terms of utilisation of Plan outlays shows improvement. 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
Government has directed Department of Electronic and Information Technology (DietY) 
to prepare a policy on the delivery of various public services using Aadhaar, Jan Dhan  
Yojana(JDY) account and existin g platforms without the issuance of new smart card. 
Accordingly, Ministry has withheld the work related to issuance of U -Win Smart 
Cards, as the Union Government is preparing an IT based, Aadhaar linked platform for 
delivery of various public services without the issuance of U-Win smart card. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 The Committee find that Voluntary Organisations/NGOs are being provided 
funds by way of Grants-in-Aid to take up projects for the benefit of women labour. The 
Scheme was introduced in the Sixth Plan and has continued ever since. During the 
12th Plan period , an allocation of Rs.375 lakh with Annual Allocation of Rs.75 lakh 
was proposed under the Scheme for organizing seminars, workshops, etc., for working 
women and educating them about their rights and duties under various labour laws of 
Central/State Governments. The Committee find that there is 'nil' expenditure under 
the Head 'Child/Women Labour', sub -head Grants-in-Aid to voluntary Agencies. The 
Ministry have clarified that a combined plan 45 allocation of Rs.50 lakh for Women 
Cell and Planning Unit was m ade, of which Rs.20 lakh was for Women Labour out of 
which an amount of Rs.17.63 lakh has been released upto 31.01.2016. When there is 
a specific Head for Women Labour and a provision of Rs.50 lakh has been earmarked, 

11 
 
there is hardly any plausible reason t o spend the amount from the other head. 
Moreover, the total expenditure under Women Cell and Planning Unit is Rs.17.63 lakh 
only which implies that no expenditure has been incurred on the Planning Unit. 
Taking a serious view of this, the Committee desire t hat henceforth this should not 
happen with the Budget Heads, and the expenditure should be met from the 
respective Heads specified for the purpose. The Ministry also owe an explanation for 
'nil' expenditure under the Planning Unit during the year 2015 -16. The Committee 
desire that adequate measures be taken to utilise the earmarked funds for the Scheme 
during 2016-17. 
Reply of the Government 
 It is clarified that a provision of Rs. 50 lakh was made under Detailed Head 
Grant-in-Aid to Research/Academic  Institution & Non -Governmental Voluntary 
Organization for undertaking Research in Labour related subjects under Accounting 
Code 2230.01.800.03.08.31. Funds provided under these Accounting Head are being 
used by Planning Unit and Women Labour Section for giving funds in the form of 
Grant-in-Aid to voluntary organization for undertaking research in labour related 
subjects. Women Labour Section has been able to spend Rs. 17.63 lakh against the 
allocation of Rs. 20.00 Lakh. Whereas, Planning Unit could not utilize t he funds due 
to non -receipt of proposals  to carry out labour related research from NGOs. The 
guidelines governing release of funds for conducting research were also under revision.  
 No provision was made for women Labour under any other Head of Account. 
Minor Head-113 under Major Head -2230 though named as „Improvement of Working 
Conditions of Child/Women Labour actually provides funds only for welfare of Child 
labour. However, recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 According to the Ministry, the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 provides for 
payment of equal remuneration to men and women workers; the enforcement of the 
Act is entrusted to the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) who heads the Central 46 
Industrial Relations Machinery (CIRM). But, according to the survey report on Wages 
and Earnings released by the Labour Bureau, women workers in various fields are 
paid considerably lesser wages vis -a-vis their male counterparts all over India.  The 
Committee do not agree with the Ministry's submission and emphasise that the 
enforcement of the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 entrusted to the CLC would not 
serve the purpose unless there is a vigorous monitoring by the Ministry. The 
Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to intensify their monitoring system 
to ensure that the Act is fully enforced by the agency concerned. 

12 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Regular inspections under Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 have been carried 
out to ensure equal wages to male and female workers. Two special drives of 
inspections programs have been carried out with effect from 15 November, 2015 to 15 
December, 2015 and 1st March 2016 to 31st March 2016.Emphasis was on 
enforcement of Equal Remuneration Act especially in unorganized sector, which led to 
increase in number of inspection in the year 2015 -16. After inspection, follow -up 
action like securing compliance and persecu tion launched and conviction etc. take 
some time and it is expected that in due course there would be substantial increase in 
these important areas of enforcement.  
 The details of inspections conducted by the organization of CLC(C) and follow 
up action thereon during the last two years are furnished below: 
 
S.No Particulars 2014-15 2015-16 
1 No of inspections conducted 1643 2340 
2 No. of irregularities detected  1682 1846 
3 Irregularities Rectified 2634 1502 
4 No. of Prosecutions Launched 535 178 
5 No of Convictions 762 472 
 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 The Committee note that, as of now, the Conciliation Officers/CLC(C) have no 
quasi-judicial powers to enforce implementation of the Memorandum of Settlement 
(MoS). The Committee feel that the feasibility of some sort of quasi  judicial powers to 
the Conciliation Officers/CLC(C) should be explored so that they can effectively take 
those who violate the Act to task and put an end to the tendency to pay minor 
monetary penalty and evade their duties and obligations. 
Reply of the Government 
 As per Section 11 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 Conciliation 
Officers/CLC(C) has the quasi-judicial powers as are vested in a Civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. A conciliation Officer may enforce the attendance of any 
person for the purpose of examination of such person or call for and inspect any 
document which he has ground for considering to be relevant to the industrial dispute 
or to be necessary for the purpose of verifyi ng the implementation of any award or 

13 
 
carrying out any duty imposed on him under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and for 
the aforesaid purpose. 
 Section 29 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947 provides provisions regarding 
Penalty for breach of settlement  or award. As per this Section, any person who 
commits a breach of any term of any settlement or award, which is binding on him 
under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day during 
which the breach continues after the conviction for the first and the Court trying the 
offence, if it fines the offender, may direct that the whole or any part of the fine 
realized from him shall be paid, by way of  compensation, to any person who, in its 
opinion, has been injured by such breach. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 The Committee note that no inspection is conducted to supervise the 
functioning of Assistant/Deputy Welfare Commissioners and their performance is 
evaluated through monthly Welfare Reports which are examined and, thereafter, 
suitable guidance is rendered to the officer concerned, whenever required. As surprise 
and periodic inspections are an integral part of the effective fun ctioning of any 
organisation, more so in the case of officers working for the poor and downtrodden 
people, the Committee recommend that periodic physical inspections be carried out to 
keep a vigil on the performance of the Asstt./Deputy Welfare Commissione rs so that 
timely corrective action could be initiated to protect and safeguard the interests of 
labourers/workers. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. A Committee has been 
constituted to make periodic physical inspe ctions of the work of the Assistant Welfare 
Commissioner/Dy. Welfare Commissioners to safeguard the interest of labourers/  
workers and to carry out the reformative work in time. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 The Committee find that prese ntly, no data is maintained the number of cases 
pending in the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum -Labour Courts (CGIT -
cum-LCs). The Committee need not emphasise that the working/efficiency of these 
Courts could be gauged properly by the number of c ases disposed vis -à-vis cases 
registered/pending and the basic performance parameter in this regard is proper 
maintenance of 48 data. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to take 
urgent requisite measures for maintenance of centralised data by the CGIT -cum-LCs 
subsequent to which adequate corrective measures, wherever required, may be 
initiated. 

14 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. All the Presiding 
Officers have been directed to send a monthly return o n pendency of cases to help the 
Ministry maintain a centralized data. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 The Committee find that no legal/financial support is provided to the 
petitioners for fighting their cases in these Courts. Most of the c ases which reach 
these courts relate to contract workers against contractors/principal employer. It is a 
known fact that the contract workers being poor and illiterate/semi -literate, dread to 
file complaints and fight court cases against the contractors/pr incipal employer who 
usually threaten to retrench/terminate their services. Needless to say, this compels 
other contract workers too to quietly bear various forms of exploitation by the 
contractors/ employers. The Committee, therefore, desire that aggrieve d contract 
workers be provided with legal support to fight court cases so that justice is meted out 
and a sense of confidence is instilled in them to raise complaints against take on the 
contractors/ principal employers, whenever they exploitation/harassment. 
Reply of the Government 
 Section 36 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, provides that, „No party to a 
dispute shall be entitled to be represented by a legal practitioner under the Act in any 
proceeding before a Court.‟ It also provides that, „In any proceeding before a Labour 
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, a party to a dispute may be represented by a 
legal practitioner with the consent of the other parties to the proceeding and with the 
leave of the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be.‟ 
 The above provision has been made with a view to provide level playing field to 
the workers since they may not be financially sound to afford the services of legal 
practitioners. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 The Committee note that a provision of Rs.6.65 lakh was made in the 2015 -16 
BE to all the CGITs for holding Lok Adalats during the year. The provision was 
reduced to Rs.1.50 lakh at the RE stage and out of this an expenditure of Rs.1.12 lakh 
has been incur red by the CGITs. The Committee further note that a total of 22 Lok 
Adalats were held during 2015 -16 wherein 237 cases were taken up and 111 cases 
were resolved/disposed of. In view of the pivotal role played by the Lok Adalats in 
disposing of the cases on  fast-track mode and providing succour, the Committee 
recommend that budgetary provisions for holding Lok Adalats be enhanced suitably 

15 
 
and the monitoring mechanism be strengthened to ensure maximum utilisation of 
funds so as to facilitate speedier disposal of the pending cases. 
Reply of the Government 
           The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. A provision of 
Rs.5.30lakhhas been made in BE 2016 -17 for holding of Lok Adalats. The Presiding 
Officers have been advised to hold more and more Lok Adalats to dispose of maximum 
number of cases. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 The Committee note that a new scheme namely the Pradhan Mantri Rojgar 
Protsahan Yojana is commence in the year 2016 -17 with an allocation of Rs.1000 
crore. The Committee further note that the contours of the Scheme are yet to be 
finalized. In view of the importance of the Scheme in 50 providing of large scale 
employment, the Committee desire that necessary ground work/formalities be chalked 
out and finalized at the earliest so that the earmarked funds are gainfully utilised and 
the very purpose of the Scheme is achieved. The Committee further desire that while 
finalizing the Scheme, special emphasis and preference be accorded to the 
contract/casual/muster roll workers so that their employment is formalized and they 
are brought under the social security net. 
Reply of the Government 
 The guidelines for the Scheme namely “Pradhan  Mantri Rojgar Protsahan 
Yojana” have been finalised and issued on 09.08.2016. The Scheme has been designed 
to incentivise employers for generation of new employment where Government of India 
will be paying the 8.33% EPS contribution of the employer for first three years in 
respect of new employees drawing pay up to Rs. 15,000 per month.  
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 The Committee find that the total active membership of EPFO is 3.8 crore which 
has remained almost the same during the last four years. The Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner (CPFC) has submitted that in the year 2010 the number of active 
members was 2.81 crore, which has increased to 3.8 crore as on 31.03.2015. As per 
the statistics of the Labour Bureau, about 12 million people join the jobseekers‟ queue 
every year. The Ministry, in their deposition befor e the Committee, also admitted that 
around one crore people get added to the employable workforce every year. In the 
given 51 circumstances, if 50,000 people get job each year, then there would have 
been a corresponding increase in the number of active mem bership. The Committee 
feel that there is approximately the same number of workers, i.e., around three crore 
who are entitled but are yet to be covered by the EPFO. The Committee recommend 
that the EPFO, ESIC and CLC (C) office may coordinate and reconcile  their figures so 

16 
 
that at least the number of workers registered with each organization may be covered 
under the EPFO/ESIC wherever applicable. 
Reply of the Government 
 The observation of the Committee has been noted.  The establishment data of 
ESIC as avai lable through the Shram  Suvidha Portal has been obtained. EPFO is in 
the process of analysing the data to verify the variation in membership between the 
data of EPFO & ESIC.  Based on the analysis necessary follow -up action will be taken 
by EPFO. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 The Committee note that there is no available data about the percentage of total 
industrial workforce and the number of persons entitled to be covered. Moreover the 
'Shram Suvidha Portal' could yet reportedly capture only a very insignificant part data 
of the vast workforce entitled to be covered under various labour laws including on 
EPF, ESI, etc. The CPFC has assured the Committee that they would make a study on 
this and that they are making strenuous efforts to cov er all the members outside this 
scheme and bring them is to the EPFO fold. The Committee further note that the 
EPFO is in the process of linking Aadhaar with UAN to avoid any duplication of 52 
membership. The Committee feel that this is a step in the right  direction and desire 
the EPFO to accord equal importance to the work of identification and coverage of 
workers of uncovered industries so that both the works are carried out 
simultaneously. 
Reply of the Government 
 Establishment wise data is not available  in respect of industrial worker. 
However, EPFO has taken following steps  for extending the coverage of industrial 
workers under the ambit of EPF and MP Act, 1952: 
a. EPFO has observed the months of April, 2016 and May, 2016 as “compliance 
for Construction Workers” months. During the exercise, office-wise targets were 
prescribed reflecting the minimum number of construction workers which must 
be enrolled by each office.  
b. EPFO has initiated efforts to cover workers in industries like fishing, coffee, 
tobacco, s pices, private university, dental and Medical colleges, NACO, BRO, 
NRHM societies etc. 
c. Central analysis and Intelligence Unit (CAIU) is collecting data from various 
sources like inspector of Factories, UGC, Medical Council of India, Dental 
Council of India, Export Units, Ministry of Commerce for spices, tobacco etc  to 
utilize it for extension of EPFO to these establishments.  
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
  

17 
 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that recently the EPFO has 
amended the rules where an employee who either moves to another company or leaves 
the job will not be allowed to withdraw the employer's share until retirement or in case 
of death. The Committee are not convinced with the Ministry's submission that the 
employer‟s contribution primarily goes to the pension fund and the amendment has 
been done keeping in view that the employee may get the money when he is not able to 
work, as it would apply only when full employment is there. The fact of the matter is, 
as on date, any em ployee who is retrenched or leaves the job for any reason and 
cannot get another job for life or to say for four -five years, there would be no 
contribution from either side and the biggest loser will be the temporary employee who 
will not be allowed to withdraw his accumulations. The Committee understand that 53 
Government has taken steps to roll back the provision. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the steps taken by the Government in this regard. The Committee also 
emphasise that ministry should exercise due diligence and vigil to ensure that 
whenever any reforms are proposed for the labour sector, such provisions should fully 
protect the interests of labourers/ workers. 
Reply of the Government 
Paragraph 68NNNN of EPF Scheme, 1952 introduced vide notification NO. GSR.158(E) 
dated 10.02.2016 where  by members were allowed to withdraw only his/her own 
share of contribution including interest in case of cessation of service, has since been 
withdrawn by the Government vide order dated 19.04.2016. The ob servations of the 
committee have been noted for future compliance. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 The Committee note that the Insured Persons (IPs) are entitled for 
unemployment allowance under this Scheme. The Ministry have, admitted be fore the 
Committee that from the date of implementation of the Act, this part has rarely been 
used. The Committee take a serious note of the gross violations of the statutory 
provisions by not giving unemployment allowance to entitled persons, most of whom  
are not even aware of this provision of the Act. The Committee call upon the Ministry 
to invariably adhere to the statutory provisions, besides giving wide publicity through 
the print and the electronic media so that the needy and entitled IPs are able 54  to 
approach the ESIC on their own for getting the stipulated allowance, whenever they 
are out of employment. 
  

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
 ESI Corporation is providing the Unemployment Allowance to those Insured 
Persons who have been rendered unemployed due to certain conditions mentioned in 
the ESIC Act.  IPs and their families will also be entitled for medical care from ESI 
dispensaries / hospitals for such periods, the unemployment allowance is payable in 
the first spell. 
 The detail in respect of the admi tted cases and amount disbursed under 
this scheme for the last five years is as under:-  
Year No. of cases admitted  Amount disbursed  
2011 876 Rs. 1,73,62,937 
2012 1348 Rs. 3,05,61,914 
2013 909 Rs. 3,03,37,681 
2014 888 Rs. 3,37,33,749 
2015 1354  Rs.  6,75,24,456 
 
 ESIC has made concerted efforts to make the scheme more popular amongst 
the Insured Persons and employers.  Advertisements have been published in National 
dailies from time to time. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 It is very surprising as well as disturbing that during evidence, the Ministry 
informed that where the contract workers are not members of the ESIC for any reason, 
the ESIC will cover them in the Rs.250/ - p.m. Scheme. The contract workers are 
already lawfully entitled for coverage under ESI Act and it is the obligation of Ministry 
and ESIC to bring all the contract workers under the coverage of ESIC. The Committee 
apprehend that if the ESIC ever tries to cover the contractor workers under the new 
Scheme, then most of the contractors would try to find an escape route from the 
existing set -up. Resultantly, the ultimate sufferer would be the worker. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the ESIC must ensure to bring under coverage 
all the contract workers in in dustries and establishments as per the ESI Act and 
should also 56 concentrate on covering the workers under uncovered unorganized 
sector. 
  

19 
 
Reply of the Government 
All contractual workers working in factories/establishments registered with ESI 
and drawing wages upto Rs. 15000/ - p.m are covered under ESI Act.  Inspections are 
conducted to take action against employers in case any default comes to notice.  
So far as contract workers under unorganized sectors are concerned, ESIC is 
formulating schemes on pilot basis for auto -rickshaw drivers, ri ckshaw-pullers, 
domestic workers and Aganwari/Asha workers. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
The Committee note that the ESIC is proposing to extend the medical facility to 
some of the chosen sections of unorganised workers on payment of Rs.250/- p.m. The 
Committee, during their study visits to different places, noticed that there is always a 
shortage of medicines for their IPs. In the present scenario, the Committee are 
concerned about the availability of m edicines to the beneficiaries. The Committee 
understand that one of the reasons for shortage of medicines is due to non -entering 
into a new Rate Contract. The Committee are concerned to observe that the Rate 
Contract in vogue was entered into in the year 2 011 and thereafter the same is being 
renewed year after year that too without any plausible reason. The Committee feel that 
sticking to the old Rate Contract and not revising the formulary will make the ESIC 
more dependent on local purchases, besides admin istering outdated medicines to the 
beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, urge that the ESIC may enter into a new Rate 
57 Contract at the earliest and make provisions for timely revision of formulary in its 
own interest. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
Reply of the Government 
1. A new Rate Contract No.139 has been finalized in replacement of earlier Rate 
Contract No. 136. 
2. Another Rate Contract No. 140 has already been floated to replace Rate Contract 
No 138. 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
The Committee note that a decision has been taken by the Ministry to take over 
12 hospitals and 292 dispensaries run by the Labour Welfare Organisation and hand 
them over to the ESIC. The Committee are aware that the condition of the hospitals 
and dispensaries which are proposed to be taken over is indeed pathetic. The Ministry 
have assured that there would be a marked improvement in the condition of these 
Hospitals and dispensaries after they are taken over. The Committee, while 
appreciating the optimism exuded by the Ministry, desire that  Ministry may take 
adequate steps to improve their conditions after the takeover, and that the Committee 
be apprised of the specific and qualitative improvements brought in these Hospitals 
and dispensaries. 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
Takeover by  ESIC of hospitals and dispensaries run by the Labour Welfare 
Organization was approved in-principle during 167th meeting of ESI Corporation held 
on 18th December, 2015.     
Following up on this agreement a meeting was convened by Labour Secretary, 
on 03.06 .2016 wherein it  was decided that ESIC would initially take over the 
administration of following DGLW hospitals/dispensaries as a pilot project for a period 
of one year: 
1. Telengana: Nirmal Dispensary 
2. Madhya Pradesh: Central Hospital, Sagar 
3. Bihar: Central Hospital, Biharsharif 
4. Andhra Pradesh: Chitoor Dispensary. 
The expenditure on running of these hospitals/dispensaries is proposed to be 
met from the Cess funds managed by DGLW.  The takeover of these hospitals/  
dispensaries is yet to be executed. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
During their study visit to Thiruvananthapuram in October 2015, the 
Committee were informed by the medical/para -medical staff that after the State 
Government run hospital was taken over by the ESIC, their seniority and pr omotional 
avenues were adversely affected as they were put 58 at the bottom of the seniority list. 
The Committee, while expressing their concern over the future prospects of the 
employees of the hospitals proposed to be taken over by the ESIC, desire that cases of 
such employees be considered sympathetically and adequate steps be taken to 
safeguard their promotional avenues. The Committee may be apprised of the steps 
taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The State Government employees have been absorbed in ESIC on same or 
equivalent post. They have been given seniority in the respective cadre from the date 
they are placed in that cadre under State Government. Fixation of seniority and 
further promotion of absorbed employees in ESIC is being done strictly as per “Terms 
of Absorption” drafted in consonance with the rules and guidelines provided by DoPT.  
In future, in cases of absorption of State Government employees, clearly drafted 
terms of absorption will be shared with such employees to enable them exercise their 
option for absorption or otherwise, accordingly. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER-III  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 The Committee note that the cess collection under the Iron Ore, Manganese and 
Chrome Ore, and Mines Labour Welfare Fund is less as compared to 
extraction/consumption of Iron Ore in particular, which is not being imported. The 
Committee are surprised to note from the Ministry's statement that the inspection 
mechanism is not very strong enough to detect such evasion of cess collection. 
Emphasising that a deficient inspection mechanism would defeat the very purpose of 
cess collection, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to put in place an efficacious 
inspection and monitoring method and take appropriate action against those 
companies found delinquent in paying cess dues. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Labour Welfare Organization, Ministry of Labour & Employment through its 
Welfare Commissioners collects cess only in respect of iron ore, Manganese Ore and 
Chrome ore used for internal consumption in the country. This forms only a negligible 
part of the total production. Major part of  the ore is being exported and the cess on 
this is collected by the Customs and Central Excise. This does not fall under the 
purview of the Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
 It may also be mentioned here that the above cesses have now been abolished 
by the Finance Act2016. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 The Committee further note th at during the Annual Plan 2015 -16, the Ministry 
have fallen short of utilising the Plan outlays in some other schemes as well, viz. Child 
Labours, Labour Statistics, Workers' Education, etc. where the BE even after 
substantial reduction in the proposals, c ould not be fully utilised. The Committee are 
surprised that though the working areas of the Ministry have shrunk considerably 
during the last year, they are still unable to utilize even the RE allocations to the 
maximum. Such consistent failure to utilize  the allocated fund has also contribute to 
reduction in Ministry of Labour's share in overall budget allocations. In view of the fact 
that the overall fund utilisation scenario would have been far worse had the proposed 
allocation been approved and granted  by the Ministry of Finance, the Committee 
recommend that the causes of persistent under -utilisation of Plan outlays should be 
identified and necessary corrective/remedial measures taken for ensuring optimal 
utilisation of funds during the 2016-17 fiscal. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Budget Estimates for Ministry of Labour & Employment for the year 2015 -
16 was Rs. 2153.02 crore under Plan Head.  Out of this Rs. 1000.00 crore was 
allocated for “Rashtriya  Swasthya Bima Yojana‟ which was transferred to Ministr y of 
Health & Family Welfare.  Another Rs. 380.44 crore was for Training Directorate which 
was later on transferred to Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. Thus, 
the effective allocation to Ministry of Labour & Employment for the year 2015 -16 was 
Rs. 772.58 crore which included Rs. 320.00 crore for U -win Card scheme. The Plan 
budget estimates was further reduced to Rs. 339.70 crore at Revised Estimates 2015 -
16.  Ministry had been able to spend Rs. 278.90 crore (AE) during the financial year 
2015-16 which is 82.10 % of RE. Table showing BE, RE and actual expenditure in 
respect of Child Labour, Labour statistics and Workers‟ Education schemes is as 
under. 
(Rs. In crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Schemes BE RE Actual Expenditure 
(In Crore) (In percentage 
against RE)  
1 Child Labour 250.00 99.50 93.21 93.68 
2 Labour Statistics  43.32 43.32 30.78 71.05 
3 Workers‟ Education 21.20 16.00 11.30 70.63 

23 
 
 
 
 Savings in Child Labour scheme were  on account of less number of Project 
Societies (about 100) being operational during 2015 -16 due to mainstreaming of 
children. However, following steps have been taken to ensure optimal utilization of 
funds under Child Labour Scheme during 2016-17:- 
a) The Project Societies which have been closed are being revive d by way of 
conducting fresh survey in those districts for estimating the incidence of child 
labour and opening the Project Society accordingly.  In this regard, funds for 
conducting survey have been released for about 70 districts. 
b) The guidelines for NCLP  have been revised with effect from 1.4.2016.  The 
revised guidelines provide for simplified procedural requirement for release of 
funds and expanding the coverage of scheme. 
c) Formats for dealing with past -liability cases have been revised to solve old 
liability cases pending with Project Societies and to ensure smooth functioning 
of Project Society.  
d) A separate NCLP Portal providing for online submission of documents has been 
conceptualized and will become operational very soon.  This would further 
expedite the release of funds during 2016-17. 
e) Provision of a separate Monitoring Committee at Central Government level by 
name of “National Project Monitoring Cell” in the revised guidelines would also 
ensure strengthening of monitoring system of scheme at Central level.        
 Actual Expenditure under Labour Employment Statistical System (LESS) during 
the Financial Year 2015 -16 was Rs. 30.78 crore. RE allocations could not be utilized 
fully as some of the surveys (Occupational Wage Survey, Employment -Unemployment 
Survey and Quarterly Employment Survey) could not be launched in 2015-16. Launch 
of NSSO Survey was also delayed in 2015 -16. Now all surveys are in full swing and 
Employment-Unemployment Survey is likely to be launched in September, 2016. 
 The reason for less spending of the plan budget of Central Board for Workers 
Education (CBWE) was due to the fact that posts of the Education Officers lying 
vacant over the years and had lapsed. The proposal for revival of 131 vacant posts (79 
of Sr. Education Officer/Ed ucation Officers and 52 others) was referred to the 
Department of Expenditure for approval. The Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure has agreed for revival of only 52 posts which includes 14 posts of 
Education Officers. The approval of this Minis try for revival of 52 posts was conveyed 
to the Board with direction for filling up these revived posts urgently. Process for 
revival of remaining posts has already been initiated. 
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
  

24 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 The Committee are distressed to note that the Ministry have been able to spend 
Rs.112.48 crore only against 39 Rs.207.34 crore in all the five Cess Funds. According 
to the Ministry the saving was due to economy measures and a general instruction 
from the Ministry of Finance for 10 % cut in Non-Plan expenditure. The Committee are 
of the considered view that the cess -funds are funds for specified and defined 
purposes based on scheme/proposal based expenditure for specific labour welfare. 
Instruction on economy measure cannot apply in the case of cess -funds to justify the 
failure to spend almost 50 percent of the available fund. The Committee understand 
that the general instructions are for those Ministries/Departments where the proposed 
allocation has not been reduced below 50% or it h as not been revised downwards at 
the RE stage. In the instant case, the allocation has been reduced to 30% at the RE 
stage and hence there was no need to follow the general instruction for 10% cut. While 
rejecting the submission made by the Ministry for un der-utilisation of cess funds 
meant for the welfare of the workers belonging to the lowest strata of the society, the 
Committee stress that the implementing mechanism should be strengthened so that 
the cess funds collected are fully utilised and the benefi ts welfare 40 Schemes 
financed through these funds actually reach the intended beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry has been able to spend Rs. 171.64 crore against total Budget Provision 
of Rs. 207.34 crore in all the five Cess Funds. In the fo ur cess funds i.e. „Mica Mine 
labour welfare fund‟, „Iron Ore Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour 
Welfare fund‟, „Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour welfare fund‟ and „Cine Workers 
Welfare Fund‟,the entire Budget allocation of Rs. 37.34 Crore was utilised during the 
financial year 2015 -16. Ministry had been able to spend Rs 134.30 crore against the 
total budget provision of Rs. 170.00 crore earmarked for the Beedi Workers Welfare 
Fund. A Provision of Rs 55.12 crore was made under BE 2015 -16 for housing subsidy 
for beedi workers. Out of this amount Rs. 13.80 crore only could be spent. The reason 
for less utilization of funds was due to poor documentation by the illiterate or less 
literate beneficiaries. 
 Government has taken following steps to im prove expenditure under the Beedi 
Workers Cess Fund which has been allowed to continue beyond 01.04.2016:- 
i. Subsidy given to Beedi Workers for construction of houses under the Revised 
Integrated Housing Scheme has been enhanced from Rs. 40,000 to Rs. 
1,00,000 per house per family and which is to be further enhanced to Rs. 1.5 
Lakh per house per family. 
ii. Scholarship scheme funded out of cess funds are now being implemented 
through e-scholarship platform.  
iii. As per the recommendation of the Expenditure Mana gement Commission 
(EMC), in -principle decision for transfer of the hospitals/dispensaries run by 
the Labour Welfare Organization to the ESIC has been taken. The detailed 
modalities in this regard are being finalized.   
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 

25 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 The Committee find that the ESIC is extending coverage on an experimental 
basis to some of the unorganised sector workers, viz. building workers, auto rickshaw 
drivers, domestic workers, and Anganwadi and Mid Day Meal Scheme workers on 
contribution of Rs.250/ - per month in which four family members would be covered 
and the benefits would be the same as are made available to the IPs. The Com mittee 
are of the view that the contribution amount of Rs.250/ - could be considered 
reasonable for building workers, auto rickshaw drivers and domestic workers keeping 
in view their earnings per month. But the prescription of a similar amount for the 
Anganwadi and Mid Day Meal Scheme workers who earn a maximum Rs.800/ - to 
Rs.1000/- p.m. is definitely on the higher side. As most of these Anganwadi. workers 
cannot afford to pay an amount of Rs.250/ - a month out of their meagre earnings, 
they will be reluctant  to opt for the Scheme and, resultantly, they will not be covered 
under any of the medical coverage schemes. The Committee, therefore, urge that the 
Anganwadi and Mid -Day 55 Meal workers should be allowed to pay at the same 
rate/percentage of their wage/ho norariums as is applicable to other IPs and the 
employer's contribution on that account should be borne by the Government of India 
to make them entitled for same facilities of ESI as available to other IPs. 
Reply of the Government 
 Regarding observations o f the Committee for payment of contribution by 
domestic workers, Aganwari and Mid -day Meal Scheme workers at the same rate / 
percentage of their wages / honorarium as applicable to other IPs, it is brought to the 
notice of the Hon‟ble Committee that these  workers do not come under the definition 
of “Employee” under Section 2(9) of ESI Act. However, to cover the sections of 
unorganized sectors like Aganwari, Asha, Mid -Day Meal Scheme‟s Workers under the 
ESI Act, a scheme, namely „Other beneficiaries and mem bers of their family‟s medical 
scheme 2010‟ was formulated by the Central Government. Under the said scheme the 
beneficiaries are required to pay user charges for availing the benefits under ESI 
Scheme. The average expenditure in providing primary and seco ndary care to a 
beneficiary comes to Rs. 200 p.m. The Government has in principle agreed to share 
the 50% of this expenditure i.e., Rs100 p.m per beneficiary out of its funds. Schemes 
in this regard, are under formulation.  
(No.G-25015/4/2016-B&A) 
 
New Delhi;              DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA  
 7, December, 2016                    CHAIRPERSON,  
 16 , Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

26 
 
Appendix - I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 
 
Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on  Wednesday, the  7th December, 2016 from 1700 
hrs. to 1915 hrs. in Room No. '139', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Kirit Somaiya    –    CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  3. Dr. Arun Kumar 
  4. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
  5. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
    
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  6. Shri Ram Narayan Dudi 
  7. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  8. Haji Abdul Salam 
  9. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
  10. Ms. Dola Sen 
  11. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
  12. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma  
        
   SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Shri N.C. Gupta  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director  
  3. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 
 

27 
 
 
PART - I 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee,  convened for consideration and adoption of a Draft Action 
Taken Report. Giving an overview of the Recommendations made/reiterated in 
the Draft Action Taken Report,  the Chairperson requested the Members to give 
their suggestions on them, if any. 
3. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the Draft Action Taken 
Report on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016 -
17) of the Ministry of Labour and Employment and adopted the same. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Report to 
both the Houses. 
 
PART-II 
 
XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX Do not pertain to this report. 
  

28 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations          24 
  
II. Observations/Recommendations which have     20           83.32%   
 been accepted by Government 
 (Recommendation Para. Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 
 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23  
 and 24  
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the     01                  4.17% 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government‟s replies - Para No. 4 
      
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of     02       08.34% 
 which Government‟s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration –                       
  (Recommendation Para. Nos. 2 and 3) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of       01         4.17% 
 which replies of Government are of interim  
 in nature- Para No. 20 
   
                         ----------- 
               100% 
                                    ------------ 
 
 