 
  9    
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2014-15) 
 (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
REVIEW OF URBAN HAATS 
   NINTH REPORT 
 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
      
 
 
                    August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 


 
NINTH REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2014-15) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
REVIEW OF URBAN HAATS 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2015     
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2015 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
                    August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
                      
 
 
   CONTENTS 
  PAGE (S) 
    
 


 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
     
INTRODUCTION          (v)   
 
      REPORT 
 
PART-I (I)   Introductory       1-2  
  (II) Objective and Achievements     2-8 
  (III) Implementation and Monitoring of the Scheme  8-11 
  (IV) Component of Mini Urban Haats    12-13 
  (V) Support/ Patronage to the Artisans/ Weavers  13-22 
  (VI) Coverage under Social Security Schemes   22-23 
                
PART-II OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS    24-34 
 
ANNEXURES 
  
 Appendix-I  Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held   
    on 17.6.2015. 
 Appendix-II  Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on   
    10.8.2015  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2014-15) 
 
  DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR-CHAIRPERSON   
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar     
  3. Shri Ashok Dohare      
  4. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey     
  5. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara  
  6. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud    
  7. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah     
  8. Shri C.N. Jayadevan     
  9. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli    
  10. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar    
  11. Shri Hari Manjhi      
  12. Shri R. Parthipan      
  13. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore    
  14. Shri YS Avinash Reddy     
  15. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira)      
  16. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh     
  17. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav    
         *18. Chh. Udayan Raje Bhonsle 
         **19. Dr. Arun Kumar 
        ***20. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
       ****21. Vacant 
             
   RAJYA SABHA 
    
  22. Shri P. Kannan      
  23. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha    
                     24. Haji Abdul Salam      
  25. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen     
  26. Shri R.K. Sinha 
                  $ 27. Shri Rajaram       
                 @ 28. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
               @@ 29. Shri P.L. Punia 
                   #30. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
                 ##31. Ms. Dola Sen
 __________________________________________________________________________       
 * Nominated w.e.f. 7th October, 2014.  
 **   Nominated w.e.f. 25th March, 2015. 
 *** Nominated w.e.f 23rd July, 2015 
**** Vacancy occurred vice Shri Kapil Krishna Thakur expired on 13.10.2014. 
 $ Re-nominated w.e.f. 8th January, 2015. 
  @        Nominated w.e.f.29th January, 2015. 
        @@ Nominated w.e.f 12th March, 2015.   
      # Nominated  w.e.f 7th May, 2015 
         ##       Nominated w.e.f. 13th May, 2015 
 
 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Additional Secretary 
 2.    Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Director  
 4.    Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Deputy Secretary 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
  I, the Chair person of the Standing Committee on Labour (2014-15) 
having been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this Ninth 
Report on “Review of Urban Haats” relating to the Ministry of Textiles.  
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Textiles on 17th June 2015 on the subject . The Committee wish to express their 
thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of Textiles for  appearing before the 
Committee and placing before them their views and also for providing detailed 
written notes on the subject as desired by the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting 
held on 10th August, 2015.  
 
5. For ease of reference , the O bservations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
10th August, 2015                                          CHAIRPERSON                 
19 Shravana,1937 (Saka)                  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT 
PART-I 
I INTRODUCTORY 
  The scheme of setting up of the “Urban Haats” was initiated in 
1997-98 with the objective of putting in place a permanent marketing 
infrastructure in towns/metropolitan cities to provide direct marketi ng 
facilities to the handicraft artisans/ handloom  weavers and enable them 
to sell their products ro und the year to a wider target of 
audience/customers. Another important objective of the haats is to 
provide adequate number of stalls selling authentic Indian cuisine of 
various regions in the country by rotation. The Food & Craft Bazaar will 
provide leis ure and recreational facilities for domestic as well as 
international tourists on the lines of Dil li Haat, which has already 
assumed a prominent status amongst important domestic/ international 
buyers/ tourists. The haats are to be constructed in an area of not less 
than 8,000 sq.m. and will have a display gallery, food court , etc. The 
stalls are allocated to artisans on a nominal rent; in addition, weavers can 
also participate in this scheme.  
2.  A synergy between rural development, textiles and tourism  is 
also achieved in  the setting up of  the Urban Haats . The huge demand 
from the national and international tourists for these haats provides 
significant opportunities for exposure of artisans and their produce/ 
crafts, employment generation for the local community, etc. 
3.  In view of the immense untapped potential of the Urban Haats 
in terms of development of the local area and provision of substantial 
avenues for employment generation amongst handicraft artisans/ 
handloom weavers, the Committee took up the subject for examination 
and report. In the process, the Committee obtained background material 

 
and detailed written repl ies from the Ministry of Textiles. T he Committee 
also took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry besides 
taking stock of the situation at the field level during their on -the-spot 
study visit to Mangalore in January, 2015 . Based on the written and oral 
deposition of the Ministr y and the inputs gathered during the f ield visits, 
the Committee looked into the subject as enumerated in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
II. OBJECTIVE AND ACHIEVEMENTS 
4.  As mentioned earlier, the main object ive of the scheme is to 
set up a permanent marketing infrastructure in towns/metropolitan cities 
to provide direct marketing facilities to the handicraft artisans/ handloom 
weavers and enable them to sell their products round the year to a wider 
range of target audience/customers. 
5.  In the above context, the Committee desired to know the 
measures taken to achieve the objective. In reply, the Ministry stated that 
Urban Haats have been set up in different parts of the country. On being 
asked about the number of Urban Haats that have been set up till date, 
the Ministry submitted that since  its inception, 48 Urban Haats were 
sanctioned out of which 13 were cancelled due to inadequate response 
from the Implementing Agencies (State Govt. Bodies).  Out of the 
remaining 35 Urban Haats , 26 Haats were functional and 09 Haats were 
under different stages of construction. 
6.  When the Committee sought the details of the functional, 
cancelled and under progress Urban Haats, the following information was 
furnished: 
 
 

 
List  of  Functional Urban Haats 
 
Sl. No. Name of the State Location Date of Sanction   
1.  Andhra Pradesh  Tirupati  31/03/2002 
 
2.  Chhattisgarh Raipur 26/03/2002 
3.  Delhi INA Dilli Haat 
Pitampura  
1993 
31/07/2006 
4.  Gujarat Bhuj 
Ahmedabad 
08/01/2003 
29/03/1999 
5.  Haryana Karnal 31/03/2002 
6.  Jammu & Kashmir Srinagar 
Jammu 
25/09/2002 
29/03/1999 
7.  Karnataka Mysore 
Mangalore  
01/09/2003 
17/03/2009 
8.  Madhya Pradesh Bhopal 19/06/2001 
9.  Maharashtra Navi Mumbai  29/11/2004 
10.  Nagaland  Dimapur 06/02/2004 
11.  Orissa Bhubaneswar 
Konark 
Puri 
29/03/1999 
27/02/2004 
06/02/2004 
12.  Rajasthan Ajmer 
Jodhpur 
Jaipur  
19/04/2006 
26/03/2002 
26/03/2002 
13.  Uttar Pradesh Varanasi 
Agra 
Bareilly 
Rampur  
29/08/2005 
29/03/1999 
13/12/2005 
23/12/2005 
14.  West Bengal  Durgapur 
Shantiniketan  
30/09/2008 
28/02/2011  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
7.  The Committee desired to know in particular as to whether 
any survey/study was conducted to find out the reasons for inadequate 
response from the Implementing Agencies because of  which 13 
sanctioned Urban Haats has been cancelled. In reply, the Ministry stated 
that no such survey/study had been conducted. 
8.  The Committee , then, desired  to know about the measures 
taken/proposed to stop recurrence of the cancellation of the sanctioned 
Urban Haats. In respose, the Ministry submitted that non-availability of 
land which was free from all encumbrances had been the main reason 
behind cancellation of th e projects. Therefore, to stop recurrence of 
cancellation of the sanctioned project s, the Office of Development 
Commission (Handicrafts) would take an undertaking from the State 
Governments that the land proposed for Urban Haats was free from all 
encumbrances before sanctioning the project. 
9.  Asked by the Committee to state the efforts made for 
encouraging the Implementing Agencies to set up the Urban Haats, the 
Ministry stated that the Office of Development Commission (Handicrafts) 
and Development Commis sion (Handlooms) regularly interacted with 
various Central/State Corporations and other bodies working in the field 
of handicrafts  whereby the Implementing Agencies were encouraged to 
take up viable projects. 
10.  The Committee desired to know the mechanism, in place , to 
determine the economic viability of the location of the Urban Haats and 
the consequential benefits to the artisans/craftsmen/weavers ; the 
Ministry, in response, stated as under: 
 “The location of setting up an Urban Haat, whethe r it is 
economically viable, beneficial to the 
artisans/craftsmen/weavers is proposed by the IA with the 

 
recommendation of concerned State Govt. as well as on the 
recommendation of Regional Director(H) of the concerned 
region. The proposals are then consid ered by the Committee 
under the Chairpersonship of DC (Handicrafts)/DC 
(Handlooms) taking in account various factors which might 
have a bearing on the success of the project”. 
11.  The Committee enquired whether there was any proposal to 
revive the cancelled Urban Haats. In reply, the Ministry, while responding 
in the negative, stated that the Implementing Agencies were , however, 
being encouraged to take up viable projects wherever these were found 
feasible. 
12.  Asked to state the status of the recovery of funds already 
released for the cancelled Urban Haats, the Ministry apprised the 
Committee that the Implementing Agencies had returned the released 
funds in most of the cases. In the remaining cases, the matter w as being 
regularly followed up and no further funds were being allocated to the 
Implementing Agencies for any project till the earlier funds were returned. 
III - IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING OF THE SCHEME 
13.  The Urban Haats are owne d, managed and operat ed by the 
Implementing Agencies such as the State Handicrafts/Handlooms 
Development Corporations/ Tourism Development Corp orations/ Urban 
local bodies. The DC(Handicrafts) monitor s the implementation of the 
Scheme by deputing field officers through its various offices for 
inspections to gauge the actual implementation of the Scheme. The se 
inspections ensure that funds are being spent by the Implementing 
Agency for the allotted the purpose and project is being implemented as 
per the Detailed Project Report. Based on their inspection and submission 

 
of report, further release of funds to the Implementing Agencies is 
considered. 
14.   In the above context, the Committee asked whether the  DC 
(Handicrafts) undertook any surprise visits to the field offices to gauge the 
actual implementation of the scheme at the ground level. In reply, the 
Ministry stated in the affirmative and also submitted that the field officers 
of the Office of DC (Hand icrafts) were deputed to monitor and gauge the 
actual implementation of the scheme as and when the need was felt. 
15.  Asked to state the periodicity of such visits, the Ministry 
responded that though no periodicity of such visits had been prescribed, 
the projects were closely monitored at various stages of the 
implementation of the scheme. 
16.  When asked by the Committee about the maintenance and 
upkeep of the infrastructure , after setting up of the Urban Haats, the 
Ministry stated that the Implementing Agency  concerned under the 
overall control of the Governing Council  comprising the Secretary (State 
Government) – In-charge HL/SC , Secretary (State Government) – In-
charge Tourism, Director of Handlooms and Textiles, DC (Handlooms), DC 
(Handicrafts) and Representative of Finance Department of State 
Government was  responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the 
Urban Haats.  
17.  The Committee queried whether there were any 
Guidelines/Rules laid down for the artisans/weavers who were allotted 
stalls on r otational basis to ensure no damage/destruction of the 
infrastructure. In reply, the Ministry stated that the use of facilities  was 
subject to the norms and Guidelines of the respective Implementing 
Agencies who owned, operated and maintained the Urban Haats. 

 
18.  The Committee were informed that based on the suggestions/ 
recommendations of the terminal evaluation of the Marketing  Support 
and Services Scheme conducted by  M/s AC Niels en ORG -MARG, 
corrective steps were taken to strengthen the scheme for effective 
implementation during the 12th Five Year Plan.  
19.  In the above context, the Committee enquired about the 
specific short comings/ drawbacks  that were reported in the terminal 
evaluation of the Marketing Support and Services scheme conducted on 
Urban Haats . In reply,  the Ministry stated that the only shortcoming 
reported by M/s AC Nielsen ORG-MARG was that the Urban Haats lacked 
proper infrastructure facilities and recommended that proper 
infrastructure must be provided to increase the sale of products. 
20.  Asked to state the corrective measures taken on the 
shortcomings pointed out in the evaluation report , the Ministry stated 
that in order to provide proper infrastructure facilities, the requirement of 
proper stalls, exhibition stalls, food courts, parking, toilet facilities, hostel 
facilities for artisans/weavers was being ensured at the planning stage 
itself and the Implementing Agency had  been instructed to ensure the 
provisioning of proper infrastructural facilities in the newly sanctioned 
Urban Haats. The Ministry f urther apprised the Committee that it ha d 
been proposed to provide additional fin ancial support to the existing 
Urban Haats to enable them to upgrade their infrastructure. 
 
21.  The Committee asked during evidence about the specific 
improvements brought in during the Twelfth Plan peri od to facilitate 
setting up, and proper functioning, of Urban Haats. In re sponse, the DC 
(Handicrafts) submitted as under: 

 
"... In terms of improvement, after the Eleventh Plan, a 
study was done which had recommended that proper 
infrastructure should be provided at these places. It was 
felt, sometimes, that the Urban Haat should  be at the 
most important and most preferred locality in a city. 
Earlier, the requirement was 18,000 square metres of 
land. Now, getting that much of land in a big city may 
not be possible; therefore, the requirement of la nd was 
reduced to 8,000 square metres so that we get land at a 
prominent good location. This will facilitate the setting 
up of Urban Haats at a very good location where 
marketing of the articles will be very easy and they will 
be having good sales." 
22.  He further submitted:  
"...Earlier, there used to be joint funding by the 
Development Commissioner (Handlooms) and the 
Development Commissioner (Handicrafts). We have now 
separated that. Now, both will be funding separate 
projects. That kind of distinction a nd division has been 
made so that there is no overlapping of the responsibility 
as well as funding."  
 
 
IV. COMPONENT OF MINI URBAN HAATS 
23.  The Committee were informed  that in order to extend the 
concept of Urban Haat to smaller cities and tourist networks, a 
component of Mini Urban Haat has been introduced during the 12 th Plan. 
The Mini Urban Haat will have at  least 10 stalls and an area of not less 

 
than 1,000 square metre.  The Committee were also informed that with a 
view to developing synergy between rural development, tourism and 
textiles, particularly handicrafts and handlooms promotion, a joint 
strategy has been evolved in January, 2015 by the Ministry of Textiles 
and Ministry of Tourism. An important component of this strategy is to 
develop way -side amenities on simil ar line as Mini Urban Haat, like on 
the lines of Chokidani, Suraj Kund Mela , etc. The Ministry further stated 
that no Mini  Urban Haat has been set up due t o non -receipt of any 
proposal from the Implementing Agencies. 
24.  The Committee enquired about the specific reasons for non -
receipt of any proposal for setting up of Mini Urban Haats . In response, 
the Ministry submitted as under: 
 “The main reason is that  Mini Urban Haat is a new 
component. The State Governments have been requested to 
take up these projects at strategic locations. Availability of 
land at strategic locations is another issue. Recently, State 
Government of Jammu and Kashmir has expressed int erest in 
setting up of a few Mini Urban Haats in the State.” 
25.  The Committee, then, enquired about any propos ed system to 
interlink Mini  Urban Haats with the Urban Haats so as to provide 
maximum exposure to every artisan/ weaver  to sell their products. In 
reply, the Ministry submitted that since no Mini Urban Haat had been set 
up so far in the country, the question of interlinking it with the Urban 
Haat did not arise. However, the same would be considered once Mini  
Urban Haats were established. 
V SUPPORT/ PATRONAGE TO THE ARTISANS/ WEAVERS 
 (i) Elimination of the Role of Middlemen and 
 Formation of Cooperative Societies. 

 
26.  In response to the concerns expressed by the Committee 
regarding the role of middlemen and formation of cooperatives in 
marketing the products of artisans/ weavers and to ensure extension of 
fair and reasonable profit margin to them , the Ministry submitted that all 
the programmes like Gandhi Shilp Baza ar/Craft Baza ar/Hiring of built 
up space in event s organized by other organization s/National handicrafts 
Fair/Participation in International fairs and Exhibition s abroad/Folk 
Craft Festival of India/Stand Alone Show were meant for handicraft 
artisans with no involvement of middlemen. The Ministry further stated 
that all the schemes for promotion and development of handicraft were 
meant for artisans directly. Every weaver was issued photo identity card 
for use at the time of allotment of stall and for the entire duration of the 
slot(s). 
 27.  Not satisfied with this response , when the Committee raised 
the issue of middlemen and formation of cooperatives again during 
evidence, the DC(Handicrafts) submitted: 
"...As far as middlemen are concerned, every Hon‟ble 
Member has expressed concern...that is true, and from 
that perspective the main solution, what the Government 
has thought about and also is a time tested one , is the 
cooperatives. In our cluster development scheme,  that is 
our objective that cooperatives should be formed as and 
when they are empowered and we should give the 
schemes directly to the cooperatives. That is what we 
have already initiated and it is being implemented. So, I 
hope that the middlemen issue will be tackled in that 
way though it may n ot be foolproof...there have been so 
many cases (of hijacking of the cooperatives by some 
people). But still that appears to be the best model as far 

 
as eliminating middlemen is concerned because 
cooperative societies ultimately represent the artisans 
themselves directly...so, we will go for that".  
28. The DC (Handicrafts) further elaborated: 
 "...Formation of cooperatives and federations of these 
artisans is the ultimate objective of our cluster 
development scheme. Each and everything is supposed to 
be do ne by the artisan cooperative societies. So far we 
have sanctioned about 1,600 clusters. Out of them a 
good number of cooperative societies have been formed. 
Yesterday, I was there in Himachal Pradesh where a good 
number of cooperatives are really survivin g and doing 
very well..."  
 (ii) Issue of I- Cards to Artisans/ Weavers 
29.  The Committee were informed that out of the indentified 68.86 
lakh artisans, I -Cards ha d been issued to around 25 lakh artisans. In 
that context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the efforts made by 
the Ministry for issuance of I -Cards to all the artisans. In reply, the 
Ministry inter-alia stated that issuance of Photo I -Cards started from 
2005 and the process w as continuing till date. In spite of shortage of 
staff in the field units, the officers conducted survey and arranged for 
issuance of I -Cards to nearly 24.50 lakh artisans , in addition to 
implementing many other schemes. The Ministry also stated that the 
Office of DC(Handicrafts) was in the process of decentralizing the process 
of issuance of I -Cards to the Regional Offices for early disposal of the 
cases. The Ministry further apprised that the work of conducting  the 3rd 
Handloom C ensus was entrusted to  the National Council of Applied 
Economic Research on 19.3.2008 and the work was completed on 
23.12.2009. As per the 3 rd All India Handloom Census (2009 -10), a total 

 
of 43.31 lakh Handloom Weavers have been identified and out of that, 
31.13 lakh weavers across the country have been issued photo identity 
cards. For the remaining, State Governments have been requested to 
issue the same. 
30.  The Ministry further submitted: 
“We are in the process of opening region -wise 
printing facilities instead of the present ce ntralized 
facility.  As such, the issuance of I -Cards will now be 
much faster. This office is also in the process of 
organizing awareness camps on Aam Admi Bima Yojana 
implemented by LIC as well as issuance of I -Cards at 
remote areas which will accelerate the process. As per 
the scheme targets fixed by the Government, 2 lakh I -
Cards will be issued every year during the 12 th Plan 
period." 
 
 
31.  The DC(Handicrafts) also submitted during evidence as under: 
  "Sir, as you suggested, we will be organising camps  
for ID cards as well as the welfare schemes like 
insurance scheme as much as possible. With the help of 
the District Administration and the Implementing 
Agencies, we will try to organise those camps at 
maximum number of places possible and try to take it 
forward.” 
   

 
(iii) Promotion of Artisans/ Weavers and their    
 Products 
 32.  As regards efforts made towards protecting the interest of 
handicraft artisans/ handloom weavers and ensuring maximum exposure 
to their products, the Ministry apprised that specific events like Gandhi 
Shilp Bazar, Craft Bazar, Hiring of built up space in event organized by 
other organization,  National Handicrafts Fair,  Participation in 
International Fairs and Exhibition s abroad, Folk Craft Festival of 
India/Stand Alone Show,  buyer-seller meet, etc. were being  organized to 
provide more interactions/ platforms to the artisans to sell their products. 
Similarly, various events s uch as National Level Handloom E xpos, State 
level Handloom E xpos, District Level events, craft melas , e tc. were 
organized to enable the weavers to sell their products. 
 33.  In this context, the Ministry also stated as under: 
  “The local artisans can tie up with big 
outlets/emporiums for effectively marketing their 
products through their participation in c raft 
bazaars/Gandhi Shilp Bazaars/exhibitions/fairs/ buyer-
seller meets, etc., organized from time to time in various 
parts of the country, where they find the opportunity to 
display and sell their product. These marketing events 
also enable the big outlet s/emporiums to interact 
directly with the artisans for buying their products. 
Similar events are also organized for weavers as well.” 
34.  In response to a specific query  by the Committee as regards 
the efforts made to introduce handicrafts/ handlooms boot hs/ kiosks at 
the Airports/ Railway Stations/ Tourist Centres for better marketing of 
the products produced by the artisans/ weavers, the Ministry stated that 

 
for setting up of booths/ kiosks at Airports/ Railways Stations, the matter 
might be taken up with the authorities concerned. 
35.  As regards the mechanism in place  to ensure extensive 
patronage to the artisans in terms of raw material support, no objection 
certificates, etc., the Ministry stated that to encourage and support the 
artisans/ weavers to pursue their activities, raw material banks have 
been established in various parts of the country depending upon the need 
to provide services like technology/raw material ass istance, etc. Further, 
testing labs have also been set up to provide compliance certification to 
handicraft products. Credit Cards were issued by banks which were 
facilitated by the A ssistant Director(H) in field units. The Yarn Supply 
Scheme envisages sup ply of all types of yarn to the handloom 
agencies/weavers at mill gate price through the National Handloom 
Development Corporation (NHDC) Ltd., Lucknow. 
36.  As regards ensuring that only authentic materials/ crafts and 
products are permitted and sold at reasonable price in the Urban Haats 
and genuine artisans/ weavers participate in the exhibitions held abroad, 
the Ministry stated: 
 “In case of the fairs/exhibitions sponsored by office 
of DC (Handicrafts)/DC (Handlooms), the field offices 
ensure that only  genuine artisans are deputed who are 
having artisans identity card with the details of crafts 
incorporated in the same. Further, surprise inspection is 
also carried out to prevent any misuse. Prices of the 
products vary from item to item according to the 
material and their labour cost and profit of the artisans 
and the same cannot be regulated and are governed by 
market forces.” 

 
37.  The Ministry further state d that  only artisans holding valid 
identity cards and who have been conferred Shilp Guru Award/National 
Award/National Merit Certificate were sponsored for participation in 
various fairs/exhibitions abroad. 
 (iv) Dissemination of information and interaction with   
 Artisans/ Weavers 
38.  When asked by the Committee about the mechanism put in 
place to disseminate information to the beneficiaries regarding 
exhibitions, melas, craft bazaars and other marketing support and service 
schemes with a view to increasing the sale of handicrafts goods, the 
Ministry stated that majority of exhibitions such as the Suraj Kund Mela, 
Mastercreations, etc. were established events being held on the same 
venue and during the same period every year and as such artisans  were 
well aware about them. Further, information to the beneficiaries 
regarding exhibitions, melas craft bazaar s, etc. with a view to increasing 
sale of handicrafts was being disseminated through newspaper 
advertisements, issue of public notices and organ ization of various 
awareness programmes by the field offices and also thr ough the 
organization of local/State level workshops organized from time to time. 
39.  The Ministry further submitted that in addition to the 
Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System facility 
already made available by the Department of Administrative Reforms and 
Public Grievances,  a centralized portal www.handicrafts.nic.in has been 
set up to receive and address complaints/grievances of the 
artisans/weavers. 
40.  Elaborating on the issue, the DC(Handicrafts) submitted in 
evidence: 

 
 "As far as portal is concerned, there is a proposal and as 
Hon'ble Members indicated, we shoul d have proper 
documentation. There are a good number of publications 
available. There is a very good book which was published 
by COHANDS in assistance with National Institute of 
Design. That is called „Handmade in India ‟ which lists all 
the age-old crafts which were there in India, their status 
today and the areas they were practi sed and their 
specialties. 'Handmade in India ‟ is available on our 
website... Besides this, there are various other 
publications." 
41.  The Committee , then, asked about the specific measures 
taken for involving the artisans in fairs and exhibitions and interacting 
with them. In response, the DC (Handicrafts) submitted during evidence: 
 "As far as involvement is concerned, for holding 
any fair or exhibition wh at we do is we float an 
advertisement in newspapers that whoever has not taken 
part in last one year and interested in taking part in this 
fair or exhibition should apply at the nearest Handicrafts 
Office. Once these applications come, then through a 
system of lottery, we select the artisans and send them 
to particular fairs and festivals. That is how we interact 
with the artisans. Also, we have field machinery to go to 
various clusters, talk to the people and also to NGOs..." 
42.  Asked by the Committee to state the provisions of TA/DA and 
other facilities extended to the artisans participating in the fairs/ 
exhibitions, the DC (Handicrafts) responded: 

 
 "Sir, whoever is selected for these fairs are given 
TA/DA to come from far flung areas to the place of 
exhibition-cum-sale. A sum of Rs.1,500/ - is given as 
TA/DA and also Rs.500/ - is given to cover their 
transportation cost . They are provided stalls and some 
nominal rent is charged which depends on the particular 
Urban Haat or the local Committee. Whatever th ey 
decide, a nominal fee is charged." 
 43.  The Committee, then, enquired about the stipend given to the 
weavers for attending any training or design development programme. In 
reply, the DC (Handicrafts) apprised that as per Guidelines an amount of 
Rs.100/- only was given per day to the weavers. Such a meagre amount 
dissuaded the weavers to attend the training programmes as they could 
get Rs.250/- per day under MNREGA. The DC(Handicrafts) further stated 
that the Guidelines were therefore under modification.   
44.  Asked to state the efforts made towards retaining and 
transmitting the knowledge and expertise of the artisans/ weavers from 
one generation to another, the DC (Handicrafts) submitted: 
"...As you rightly said, these topmost talent s in our 
country should not be los t. So, from that point of view, 
we take up Guru Shishya Parampara training which was 
very age -old system of training and transmitting the 
knowledge from one generation to another generation. 
These people are taking up Guru Shishya Parampara  
schemes. They are being motivated and a large number 
of people have taken this scheme and they have trained 
a good number of people. May be they require much 
longer training. We give it for one year. May be they 
required it for two years or so. There we ar e slightly 

 
falling short by saying that you do it one year itself 
because with limited resources whatever best can be 
possible, we are trying to do that..."        
45.  On the issue of involvement of NGOs in the overall 
development of artisans/ weavers, the DC(Handicrafts) submitted in 
evidence that earlier any NGO was entrusted with the job of receiving 
applications from artisans/ weavers, facilitating their training 
programme, etc. But now the Ministry was contemplating to entrust the 
job to State Corporations and really good and accredited NGOs. 
46.  Asked by the Committee to state  as to  whether the Ministry 
were grading the NGOs to ensure their credentials, the DC(Handicrafts ) 
submitted that earlier they used to grade the NGOs, but that was not very 
successful because of which the Ministry was planning to entrust the job 
of grading the NGOs to the Tata Institute of Social Sciences. 
VI. COVERAGE UNDER SOCIAL SECURITY SCHEMES 
47.  In response to the Committee‟s query regarding extension of 
social security schemes extended to the weavers/ artisans and the 
progress made to cover the artisans/ weavers under RSBY, the Ministry 
stated that handicraft artisans were covered under  the Rajiv Gandhi 
Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana  (RGSSBY), Aam Admi Bima Yojana for 
Handicrafts Artisans and Support to artisans in indigent circumstances . 
Similarly, the Handloom Weavers Comprehensive Welfare Scheme with 
the components of Health Insurance Scheme an d Mahatma Gandhi 
Bunkar Bima Yojana to access best health care benefits and life insurance 
benefits was implemented by the Office of D.C  (Handlooms) for the 
Handloom weavers.  
48.  The Ministry further stated that RSBY was being implemented 
by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare which cover ed BPL artisans 

 
only.  RSBY was being restructured and the matter ha d been taken up 
with the Ministries concerned for early settlement of the issues pertaining 
to coverage of handicraft (both APL/BPL) artisan s under RSBY. The 
Ministry also apprised that  the Health Insurance Scheme for handloom 
weavers was implemented by the Ministry of Labour & Employment on 
RSBY platform w.e.f. 1.10.2014 which has since been transferred to the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare w.e.f. 1.4.2015. 
 
 
49.  Elaborating on the issue, the DC(Handicrafts) submitted 
during evidence: 
“...For handicraft there was a different health insurance 
scheme. Now a decision has been taken by the 
Government to merge it with the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, RSBY portal. It will be done through 
RSBY but their system or mechanism is not yet in place. 
As soon as it com es in place, we will immediately 
implement that...” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. The Committee  note that the main objective of the scheme of 
setting up of the Urban Haats is to establish a permanent marketing 
infrastructure in towns/ metropolitan cities to provide direct 
marketing facilities to the handicrafts artisans/ handloom weavers 
and enable them to sell their products  round the year to a wider 
targeted audience/ customers. In pursuance of that objective, the 
Ministry have been facilitating setting up of Urban Haats , which are 
owned, managed and operated by Implementing Agencies such as the 
State Handicrafts/ Handlooms Development Corporations/ Tourism 
Development Corporation s / Urban local bodies. The Committee's 
examination of the subject has brought to the fore the fact  that 
substantial improvements are warranted in the implementation of 
the scheme for actualising those objectives. The Committee have 
accordingly given their considered opinion in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
2. The Committee are deeply concerned to find that since the 
inception of the Scheme, out of the 48 Urban Haats sanctioned, as 
many as 13 were cancelled due to inadequate response from the 
Implementing Agencies (State Government Bodies). Out of the 
remaining 35 Urban Haats, 26 Haats are functional and 09 Haats are 
under different stages of construction. The Committee are distressed 
to note that out of the 09 under progress Urban Haats, s ome projects 
which were sanctioned way back in 2003 (Hazaribag project), 2007 

 
(Indore and Agartala projects) and 2008 (Jhansi project) are yet to be 
completed. The Committee take a serious view of such inordinate 
delay in the completion of the projected Ur ban Haats and urge the 
Ministry to impress upon the Implementing Agencies concerned to 
initiate urgent requisite measures and expedite the completion of 
the under progress Urban Haats so that the intended objective of 
establishing direct marketing faciliti es for the benefit of the 
handicraft artisans/ handloom weavers is accomplished. 
 
3. The Committee reiterate that they are anguished to note that 
13 sanctioned Urban Haats were cancelled due to inadequate 
response from the Implementing Agencies. Though the  Ministry have 
stated that non -availability of land which is free from all 
encumbrances has been the main reason behind cancellation of the 
projects, the Committee are surprised to observe that no survey/ 
study has been conducted by the Ministry to find ou t the root cause 
of the poor response from the Implementing Agencies concerned to 
set up the sanctioned Urban Haats. It , in effect, implies that the 
Projects were sanctioned without taking various basic factors into 
consideration because of which 13 sanctioned Urban Haats had to be 
cancelled. This fact is corroborated by the Ministry's statement that 
henceforth the office of DC (Handicrafts) will take an undertaking 
from the State Governments that the land proposed for Urban Haats 
is free from all encumbran ces. While expressing their displeasure 
over the inadequate efforts on the part of the Ministry leading to the 
cancellation of 13 sanctioned Urban Haats in States like 
Maharashtra, U.P., Gujarat, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Punjab , 
etc., the Committee  impress upon the Ministry to undertake 
periodical studies/ surveys and plug the extant loopholes before 
sanctioning projects so as to put an end to the avoidable practice of 

 
cancelling sanctioned projects as well as to encourage the 
Implementing Agencies for taking up viable projects for the socio -
economic development of the poor artisans/ weavers. 
4.  The Committee note that there is no proposal before the 
Ministry to revive the cancelled Urban Haats. So far as recovery of 
the funds released for such Haats is concerned, the Committee find 
that funds were released in 08 cases out of the 13 cancelled Urban 
Haats. In 03 cases , the released funds have been recovered whereas 
in the remaining 05 cases the Ministry have requested the 
organisations concerned t o refund the released amount along  with 
penal interest. To the Committee's dismay , the Ministry have 
submitted before the Committee that in most of the cases, the 
Implementing Agencies have returned the released funds whereas 
the facts and figures , also  submitted by the Ministry themselves , 
prove otherwise. Therefore, the Committee stress that the Ministry 
ought to intensify their efforts for speedy recovery of these funds. 
 
5. The Committee are informed that the DC(Handicrafts) 
undertakes surprise visits t o the fields offices to gauge the actual 
implementation of the scheme as and when the need is felt based on 
the feedback of the monitoring done by the field officers. But the 
Committee are concerned to note that the periodicity of such visits 
has not been prescribed. In view of the fact that DC(Handicrafts) 
along with DC(Handlooms) are part of the Governing Council under 
whose overall control the scheme is being monitored, the Committee 
emphasize that the periodicity of surprise visits of DC(Handicrafts) 
to the field offices should be prescribed so as to ensure effective and 
better implementation of the scheme as well as proper maintenance 
and upkeep of the infrastructure set up for the purpose. 

 
 
6. The Committee note that the terminal evaluation study of th e 
marketing support and services schemes conducted by M/s AC 
Nielsen ORG-MARG had pointed out that the Urban Haats lacked 
proper infrastructure facilities and as such had recommended that 
proper infrastructure must be provided to increase the sale of 
products. Based on the suggestion, the Ministry are reportedly 
taking corrective measures and have instructed the Implementing 
Agencies to ensure the provisioning of proper infrastr ucture for the 
newly sanctioned Urban Haats. Further, additional financial suppo rt 
to the existing Urban Haats is being proposed to enable these Haats 
to upgrade their infrastructure. The Committee feel that these are 
steps in right direction and should be pursued vigorously as deficient 
infrastructure facilities will defeat the very purpose and objective of 
the scheme. The Committee further desire that similar evaluation 
studies/ surveys should be carried out by third parties  from time to 
time so that shortcomings, if any, are rectified expeditiously and the 
scheme is drawn to its logical conclusion. 
 
7. The Committee appreciate that during the 12th Plan , some 
improvements like reduction in the area of land required to set up 
Urban Haats, augmentation and upgradation of the infrastructure , 
etc. have been effected. Further, in order to avoid overlapping of 
responsibility and funding , the join t funding system by 
DC(Handicrafts) and DC(Handlooms) has been separated. While 
commending the innovative measure s initiated, the Committee 
would like the Ministry to strengthen their monitoring s ystem so 
that further improvements can be effected to make the Urban Haat 
endeavour a real success. 

 
 
8. The Committee observe that in order to extend the concept of 
Urban Haats to smaller cities and tourist networks, a component of 
Mini Urban Haat has been  introduced during the 12th Plan. The 
Committee also note that consequent upon a joint strategy evolved 
by the Ministry of Textiles and the Ministry of Tourism in January, 
2015, it is proposed to develop way -side amenities like Chokidani, 
Suraj Kund Mela , etc. on similar line s as Mini Urban Haat. But the 
Committee note with concern that not a single Mini Urban Haat  has 
been set up so far in the country, reportedly due to non -receipt of 
any proposal from the Implementing Agencies. The Ministry have 
reasoned that since Mini Urban Ha ats is a new component and land 
is not available at strategic locations, the Implementing Agencies 
have not forwarded any proposal for the purpose. The Committee are 
not convinced with the reasoning of the Ministry ,  keeping in min d 
the fact that it is more than three years since the component of Mini 
Urban Haat was conceptualised. Needless to say, by this time , the 
scheme should have gathered momentum. Moreover, as per the 
Ministry's own admission, the State Government of Jammu & 
Kashmir ha s recently expressed interest in setting up a few Mini 
Urban Ha ats in the State. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to motivate and encourage the Implementing Agencies in 
evincing interest to set up Mini Urban Haats so that the poor 
artisans and weavers in small towns are enabled to avail the much 
needed facility to directly market their products. 
 
9. The Committee note with serious concern the alleged 
exploitation of the poor and illiterate artisans/ weavers by the 
middlemen. The DC (Hand icrafts) have submitted before the 

 
Committee that formation of cooperatives and federations of such 
artisans is the ultimate objective of the Ministry's cluster 
development programme by which the role of middlemen could be 
eliminated. The Committee, theref ore, call upon the Ministry to 
make strenuous efforts toward s forming as many cooperatives and 
self-help groups as possible to eliminate the middlemen from the 
scene and protect the genuine interests of the artisans/ weavers. It 
is also imperative to ensur e that these cooperatives are not hijacked 
by vested interests and the very purpose of setting up the 
cooperatives is not defeated. 
 
10. The Committee are perturbed to note that though the process 
of issuance of I -Cards commenced in the year 2005, till dat e out of 
the identified 68.86 lakh artisans only about 25 lakh artisans could 
be issued I -Cards. Similarly, out of the 43.31 lakh identified 
Handloom weavers, I -Cards have been issued to around 31.13 lakh 
weavers across the country since 2009. The Ministry  have reasoned 
that despite shortage of staff in the field units, they have been able 
to issue I -Cards to that many artisans/ weavers. The Ministry have 
further submitted that as per the scheme and the target fixed by the 
Government, 2 lakh I-Cards will be issued every year during the 12th 
Plan period. The Committee do not accept the contention of the 
Ministry for non -issuance of I -Cards to all the artisans/ weavers, 
firstly because the issue of shortage of staff has to be resolved by the 
Ministry themselves, and, secondly, the prescription of issuance of 2 
lakh I-Cards every year should not in any way prevent the Ministry 
from issuing more than 2 lakh I-Cards every year. Moreover, if only 2 
lakh I-Cards are issued every year, it will take many more years to  
provide I -Cards to the remaining identified artisans/ weavers. 
Therefore, instead of furnishing unacceptable reasons for the delay 

 
on their part, the Ministry should urgently decentralise the process 
of issuance of I-Cards and organise awareness camps wit h the help of 
District Administrations and Implementing Agencies to proactively 
accelerate issuance of I -Cards to the left out artisans/ weavers in a 
time bound manner so that they are not only able to avail facilities 
like social security schemes but also participate in fairs/ exhibitions, 
both within and outside the country.   
 
11. The Committee note that specific events like the Gandhi Shilp 
Bazaar, Craft Bazaar, Nati onal Handicrafts Fair, Exhibitions, etc. are 
being organised to provide more interactions/ platforms to the 
artisans to sell their products. Similar events are also organised for 
the weavers as well. Further, to encourage and support the artisans/ 
weavers to pursue their activities, raw material banks have been 
established in various parts of the country, depending upon the need 
to provide services like technology, raw material assistance, etc. The 
Committee also appreciate that testing labs have been set u p to 
provide compliance certifications to handicraft products and credits 
cards are issued to the artisans/ weavers by the Banks with the help 
of the Office of the DC(Handicrafts). While taking note of the various 
initiatives taken by the Ministry to suppo rt and encourage the 
artisans/ weavers, the Committee would like the Ministry to 
strengthen the monitoring mechanism at the field level to ensure 
that efforts made for the purpose do not remain on paper only and 
the intended benefits are actually availed by the artisans/ weavers. 
 
12. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry should 
make consistent efforts to facilitate an effective tie -up of the local 
artisans with big outlets/ emporia in the fairs/ exhibitions organised 

 
wherein the artisans can di rectly interact with, and sell their 
products to, the big outlets. As discussed during the study visit of 
the Committee to Mangalore in January 2015, the Committee also 
impress upon the Ministry to take up with the authorities concerned  
the matter of intr oducing/ setting up of booths/kiosks at major 
tourist hubs, Airports, Railway Stations, etc. for better marketing of 
the products of the artisans. 
 
13. The Committee note that for selection of artisans to participate 
in fairs/ exhibitions, the Ministry flo ats an advertisement in 
newspapers stating that whoever has not taken part in any fair/ 
exhibition in the previous one year and is interested in taking part 
should apply at the nearest Handicrafts Office. Once the applications 
are received, the artisans ar e selected through a system of lottery 
and sent to particular fairs and festivals. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that the selection procedure of the artisans' 
participation in fairs/ festivals should be made more transparent and 
foolproof so that the same group of artisans is not repeatedly picked 
up and each and every artisan in the country may get an opportunity 
to showcase his/her product in popular Melas/ Bazaars. 
 
14. The Committee observe that information to the artisans/ 
weavers regardi ng exhibitions, melas, craft bazaars and other 
marketing support and service schemes is disseminated through 
newspaper advertisements, issue of public notices and organisation 
of various awareness programmes by the field offices and also 
through the organi sation of local/ State level workshops organised 
from time to time. The Committee feel that these are steps in the 
right direction and should be continued with. At the same time, the 

 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Textiles may tie up with 
the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting to explore the feasibility 
of disseminating such information also through Radio and Television 
advertisements so as to make sure that artisans/ weavers living in 
remote and rural areas are also benefited. 
 
15. The Commit tee observe that there is a centralised portal to 
receive and address complaints/ grievances of the artisans/ weavers. 
The Committee desire that a dedicated Helpline telephone number 
should also be put in place to address various professional queries of 
the artisans/ weavers, besides redressing their grievances. 
 
16. The Committee note that a book titled 'Handmade in India' 
listing all the age-old crafts which existed in India, their status today 
and areas they were practised and their specialities is being 
published for the benefit of the artisans/ weavers. As most of  the 
artisans/ weavers may not have access to such publications, the 
Committee desire that the DC(Handicrafts) and DC (Handlooms) 
should organise periodic interactive sessions with the artisans/ 
weavers from different parts of the country and encourage the m to 
exchange ideas/ techniques amongst themselves to hone their skills 
and improve marketing strategies, besides introducing particular 
area specific products to other areas as well. The Committee also 
recommend that the Guru Shishya Parampara  training programme 
being organised by the Ministry for a duration of one year at present 
be increased to at least two years so that the knowledge, technique 
and expertise of one generation are effectively passed on to the next 
generation and, thus, the age-old talents are retained. 

 
 
17. The Committee note that a sum of Rs.1500/ - is given as TA/DA 
and Rs.500/ - as transportation allowance to the artisans for 
participating in fairs/ exhibitions. They are also provided stalls, but 
some nominal rent is charged which depend s on the particular Urban 
Haat or the local Committee. The Committee desire that a uniform 
criterion should be prescribed in charging rent for the stalls provided 
so that artisans of a particular area/ region could not be 
discriminated against and victimis ed by the local Committees. The 
Committee further desire that the Ministry should consider 
enhancing the amount of TA/DA and transportation allowance so 
that artisans from far flung areas are  reimbursed at least the actual 
fare and encouraged to attend fairs/ exhibitions. 
 
18. In this context, the Committee is constraint to note that a 
paltry sum of Rs.100/- per day is given as stipend to the weavers for 
attending any training or design development programme. Needless 
to say, it dissuades the weavers from a ttending such programmes as 
they can get at least Rs.250/ - per day under MNREGA. As the 
Guidelines in this regard are under modification, the Committee 
would like to impress upon the Ministry to finalise the Guidelines 
soon and ensure that the stipend amou nt is reasonably enhanced so 
as to motivate the weavers to attend training programmes. 
 
19. The Committee note that, in the past, the Ministry used to 
entrust any NGO with the job of receiving and processing 
applications from artisans/ weavers, facilitatin g their training 
programmes, etc. However, now, in its place, the Ministry are 

 
contemplating to entrust the job to State Corporations and 
accredited NGOs, based on the impending grading of such NGOs by 
the Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS). The Comm ittee desire 
that the Ministry should expedite the grading of NGOs by TISS and 
based on the inputs received, they may entrust the job pertaining to 
the artisans/ weavers to graded and accredited NGOs of established 
credentials. 
 
20. The Committee observe t hat the handicraft artisans are 
covered under the Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana 
(RGSSBY) and Aam Admi Bima Yojana and are also being supported 
in indigent circumstances by the Ministry. Similarly, the Handloom 
Weavers Comprehensive Welfare Schem e with the components of 
Health Insurance Scheme and Mahatma Gandhi Bima Yojana to 
access best healthcare and insurance benefits are extended to the 
Handloom Weavers. So far as the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
(RSBY) is concerned, the Committee note that  the scheme has been 
transferred to the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and they are 
in the process of restructuring the scheme. The Committee desire 
that the Ministry of Textiles should keep track of the developments 
and as soon as a system or mechani sm is put in place regarding the 
governance of the RSBY scheme, efforts should be made to cover 
handicrafts artisans and handloom weavers (both APL & BPL) under 
the scheme. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard from time to time. 
New Delhi;      DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
10 August, 2015           CHAIRPERSON 
19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)      STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
 

 
Appendix - I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2014-15) 
 
Minutes of the 24th Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 17 th June, 2015 from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. 
in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar – Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Ashok Dohare 
  4. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  6. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
  7. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
  8. Dr. Arun Kumar 
   
      
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  9. Ms. Dola Sen 
  10. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
  11. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  12. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
  13. Shri Rajaram 
  14. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
  15. Shri P.L Punia 
     
   SECRETARIAT 
           1.  Shri Devender Singh  - Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Director 
  3. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 

 
Witnesses 
Representatives of the Ministry of Textiles  
  1. Shri Samir Kumar Biswas  DC (Handicrafts) 
 2. Shri Navraj Goyal   ADC (Handicrafts) 
 3. Shri P.K Thakur    Director (Handicrafts) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Textiles to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to take their evidence on the subject „Review of Urban Haats‟. 
Impressing upon the witnesses to keep the proceedings of the Co mmittee 
`Confidential', the Chairperson asked the DC (Handicrafts) to brief the 
Committee on the status of the setting up of Urban Haats and Mini Urban 
Haats and the achievements made towards establishing a permanent 
marketing infrastructure in towns/ metr opolitan cities to provide direct 
marketing facilities to handicraft artisans/ handloom weavers. 
3. The DC(Handicrafts) accordingly gave a power -point presentation 
highlighting inter-alia the achievements made on the objectives of setting 
up of Urban Haats  and Mini Urban Haats, the financial assistance 
provided under the Scheme, the ownership/management issues, synergy 
with tourism, etc. The DC(Handicrafts) and other representatives of the 
Ministry also attended to the queries of the Members  who expressed their 
serious concern over a number of issues viz. exploitation of the artisans/ 
weavers by the middlemen, non -issuance of I -cards to all the 
artisans/weavers, non-coverage of the artisans/ weavers under the RSBY 
Scheme, non -formation of cooperatives to pro tect the interest of the 
artisans/ weavers, etc. 
 
4. As some queries required detailed/ statistical reply, the Chairperson 
asked the DC(Handicrafts) to submit written replies to the unanswered 

 
queries as well as to the questionnaire which would be sent to them by 
the Secretariat. The Chairperson thanked the DC(Handicrafts) and his 
colleagues for appe aring before the Committee and furnishing them the 
available information. 
The witnesses then withdrew 
 
 [A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

 
Appendix - II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2014-15) 
 
Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 10 th August, 2015 from 10 00 hrs. to 1 030 hrs. in  
Room No. `139‟,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  - Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
     
  1. Shri Ashok Dohare 
  2. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  3. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  4. Shri Hari Manjhi 
  5. Shri R. Parthipan 
  6. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  7. Shri kodikunnil Suresh 
  8. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
   
     
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  9. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
  10. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
  11. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  12. Smt. Dola Sen 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Deputy Secretary 
  2. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 
 

 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and informed them regarding adoption of two Draft Reports slated 
for consideration by the Committee. Giving an overview of the main/important 
Recommendations contained in both the Draft Reports,  the Chairperson 
requested the Members to give their suggestions on them, if any. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the following Draft 
Reports and adopted them after some discussion: 
 
  (i)  Review of Urban Haats; and 
 
(ii)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
   
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the 
light of consequential changes that might ar ise out of factual verification  of the 
Draft Reports and to present the same to both the Houses. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX  Do not pertain to this report 
 