   4   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2014-15) 
 (SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
       REGULARISATION OF CASUAL WORKERS/ 
ARTISTS OF RADIO KASHMIR, CBS RADIO KASHMIR 
AND DOORDARSHAN KENDRA, SRINAGAR 
  
                  FOURTH  REPORT 
 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
                    March, 2015/Phalguna, 1936 (Saka) 
      
    
 
 
 


2 
 
 
 
FOURTH  REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2014-15) 
 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
       REGULARISATION OF CASUAL WORKERS/ 
ARTISTS OF RADIO KASHMIR, CBS RADIO KASHMIR 
AND DOORDARSHAN KENDRA, SRINAGAR 
  
 Presented to Lok Sabha on   18th March, 2015     
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18th March, 2015 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
                    March, 2015/Phalguna, 1936 (Saka) 


3 
 
                       
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE (S) 
    
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
     
INTRODUCTION          (v)   
 
      REPORT 
 
PART-I (I)   Introductory  
  (II) Study visit to Srinagar 
  (III) Engagement on contract basis 
  (IV) Wages 
  (V) Coverage under Social Security 
  (VI) Vacancies / Formulation of RRs/ setting up of Prasar   
   Bharati Recruitment Board      
         
PART-II   OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
ANNEXURE 
 
 Annexure   List of the emoluments paid to the casual workers on  
    assignment basis. 
 
APPENDICES 
 Appendix-I  *Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Committee held  
    on 31.10.2011. 
  Appendix-II  *Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Committee held  
    on 30.1.2012. 
 Appendix-III *Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee held  
    on 30.10.2012. 
 Appendix-IV *Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Committee held  
    on 29.5.2013. 

4 
 
 Appendix-V  *Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee held  
    on 19.9.2014. 
 Appendix-VI *Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Committee held 
    on 11.2.2015. 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 * Not appended with this cyclostyled copy. 

5 
 
  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2014-15) 
 
  DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR-CHAIRPERSON   
 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
          *2. Vacant 
  3. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar     
  4. Shri Ashok Dohare      
  5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey     
  6. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara  
  7. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud    
  8. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah    
  9. Shri C.N. Jayadevan     
  10. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli    
  11. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar    
  12. Shri Hari Manjhi      
  13. Shri R. Parthipan      
  14. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore    
  15. Shri YS Avinash Reddy     
  16. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira)      
        **17. Vacant      
  18. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh     
       ***19. Vacant    
  20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav    
      ****21. Chh. Udayan Raje Bhonsle 
   RAJYA SABHA 
  22. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay     
  23. Shri P. Kannan      
  24. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha    
    *****25. Vacant    
   ******26. Shri Rajaram  
           27.  Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  28. Haji Abdul Salam      
  29. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen     
  30. Shri R.K. Sinha      
         ******* 31. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
         ______________________________________________________________________________       
*   Vacancy occurred vice Shri Tariq Anwar nominated to Standing Committee on 
 Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice w.e.f. 11th September, 2014. 
** Vacancy occurred vice Shri Giriraj Singh appointed as Minister for State w.e.f 
 9th November, 2014 
*** Vacancy occurred vice Shri Kapil Krishna Thakur expired on 13.10.2014. 
****  Nominated w.e.f. 7th October, 2014.  
*****    Vacancy occurred vice Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati resigned from the     
 membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 1st November, 2014 
******  Re-nominated w.e.f. 8th January, 2015. 
 ******* Nominated w.e.f.29th January, 2015. 

6 
 
 
  
 SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri Devender Singh   -  Additional Secretary 
 2.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Director  
 3.    Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Deputy Secretary 
 4.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
      
   
  

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2014 -15) 
having been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this 
Fourth Report on 'Regularisation of Casual Workers/Artists of Radio 
Kashmir, CBS Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar'. 
2. Based on the representation received from the casual/contract 
workers, announcers/artists (approx 300) of Doordarshan Kendra, 
Srinagar, Commercial Broadcasting Service (CBS) Radio Kashmir and 
Radio Kashmir, Srinagar,  the Committee s elected this Subject for 
detailed examination. The Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and  
Prasar Bharti Broadcasting Corporation on 31.10.2011; 30.01.2012; 
30.10.2012; 29.05.2013 and 19.09.2014 a nd that of the Ministry of 
Personnel Public Grievance and Pensions (Department of Personnel and 
Training) on 29.05.2013.                       
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting 
held on 11th February, 2015.  
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives 
of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Prasar Bharti 
Broadcasting Corporation and the Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievance and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) for 
tendering oral evidence and placing before the Committee the detailed 
written notes and post evidence information as desired by the Committee 
in connection with the examination of the Subject.  
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold type in 
the body of the Report. 
 
New Delhi;       DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR  
12 March, 2015       CHAIRPERSON,  
21 Phalguna, 1936 (Saka)   STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

8 
 
REPORT 
PART-I 
 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
 
In exercise of the mandate conferred on the Standing 
Committee on Labour to examine various issues relating to the 
working conditions, health, safety, welfare and social security of the 
casual/contract/temporary workers in the 
Departments/Organizations under the administrative control of the 
Government of India, the Committee took  up a representation, for 
detailed examination, received from the casual/contract workers, 
announcers/artists (approx 300) of Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar, 
Commercial Broadcasting Service (CBS) Radio Kashmir and Radio 
Kashmir, Srinagar. The said representation inter-alia highlighted 
that these people worked for the Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar, 
CBS Radio Kashmir and Radio Kashmir, Srinagar at the time of 
insurgency (during 1990 onw ards) for different assignments like 
announcers, drivers, cooks, helpers, typists, programme staff, 
newsreaders etc. as regulars workers either left the State or stayed 
away from work due to insurgency. It was further stated that while 
engaging these casua l assignees, they were promised that they 
would be absorbed in regular services in due course as they were 
risking their lives in serving these organizations and the nation. But 

9 
 
even after 20 years of continuous service in these organizations, 
they have not been regularized. 
2. The gist of the important points contained in the above said 
representation is as under: 
(i) The casual assignees devoted the prime period of their lives to 
these organizations in the hope that they would be regularized. 
Now they are ove r-age and cannot apply or be considered for 
jobs elsewhere. 
(ii) They worked for so many years in these organizations but 
never got any social security viz. EPF or ESI benefits and other 
facilities. 
(iii) They are paid very low wages. There had been no criteria for 
dispensation of wages for similar nature of jobs. The casual 
workers had been engaged at rates decided according to the 
whims/sweet will of the appointing authority.  
(iv) The wage rates had not been revised periodically and these 
assignees continue to get same wages for years. 
(v) The casual workers (programme staff) are engaged and paid 
only for six days though they are made to work for 30/31 days 
in a month. 
(vi) There have been instances of regularization of some casual 
assignees, giving temporary status to some others and leaving 
out the rest without adopting any transparent procedure. 

10 
 
(vii) The practice of giving 29 -30 days booking to the retired 
employees is followed in Srinagar Station ignoring the interest 
of the casual assignees who have been working there for the  
last 20 years. 
(viii) These casual assignees are exploited and even threatened by 
the regular employees/officers. 
3. In view of the serious and sensitive nature of the points 
enumerated in the said representation, the Committee obtained a 
factual note on each po int from Prasar Bharati.  The factual note 
inter-alia stated as under: 
"As of now there is neither any provision in the rules nor any 
scheme for regularizing casual employees engaged in AIR.  
However, Prasar Bharati is in the process of formulation of 
Recruitment Regulations for its employees.  Prasar Bharati 
has proposed relaxation in age by the number of years they 
have put in their service as casual in the new Recruitment 
Rules, to enable them to be considered for a regular 
appointment, as and when v acancy arises and the new RRs 
are put into operation." 
4. After perusing the factual comments of Prasar Bharati, a 
detailed questionnaire was framed and written reply obtained from 
Prasar Bharati/Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. The 
Committee also t ook oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati on five occasions. 

11 
 
5. Based on the written and oral deposition of the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati, as well as the inputs received during the 
Committee's field visit to Srinagar, the Commit tee analyzed the 
main/important issues which have been enumerated in the 
succeeding paragraphs.  

12 
 
II. STUDY VISIT TO SRINAGAR 
6. In the month of June, 2012, the Committee undertook a study 
visit to Srinagar, where the Committee heard the views/suggestions 
of the representatives of the Casual Artists/Assignees/Workers of 
Radio Kashmir, Srinagar, CBS Radio and Doordarshan Kendra, 
Srinagar.  They informed the Committee as under:- 
(i) They work for 8 -9 hours a day, are skilled but only get 
 between  Rs. 3000-5500 per month. 
(ii) They have been working with unwavering loyalty, risking 
 personal life along with that of their family, but getting 
 meagre wages/remuneration. 
(iii) They requested that the casual announcers who get 
booked  for 29 days in a month be enga ged on contract 
basis. 
(iv) They are exploited by officers and are made to do menial 
 works which were not part of their regular work. 
7. After considering the matter threadbare, the Committee found 
the problem of these workers extremely precarious warrant ing 
intervention by the Government of India to remove or mitigate the 
injustice caused to them by the apathy and inaction on the part of 
the Managements of Radio Kashmir/CBS Radio/Doordarshan 
Kendra Srinagar.  The Committee desired urgent action on the 
following points :- 

13 
 
(i) The Casual Announcers who are/were getting bookings 
for 29 days in a month be engaged on contract basis and 
it may also be ensured that they are engaged on same 
basis till they attain the age of 60 years or as long as 
these three organizations continue to function in J&K. 
(ii) These workers be covered under social security schemes 
viz. ESI and EPF. 
(iii) No worker be laid off at the local level and proposals, if 
any, for laying off such worker may invariably be sent to 
Prasar Bharati Corporation for appropriate action. 
(iv) Differences in wages of Casual workers performing 
similar nature of jobs be eliminated. 
(v) These workers be paid wages at par with the rates 
prescribed by the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
under the Minimum Wages  Act for similar nature of jobs 
and skill sets. 
(vi) Casual Announcers who are booked for six days but work 
for all 30/31 days of a month be paid their actual dues 
without any delay. 
(vii) Uniform policies be adopted for regularizing all the casual 
announcers/artists/workers. 
(viii) The staff strength in Radio Kashmir/CBS Radio and 
Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar be increased taking into 

14 
 
account the special circumstances in the region to 
absorb all the Casual Announcers/Artists/Workers who 
have been working there since the days of insurgency. 
(ix) A proposal for regularization of Casual Announcers/ 
Artists/Workers against the vacancies spread all over the 
country be formulated and sent to DOPT for approval.  A 
copy of the proposal may also be submitted t o the 
Committee. 
(x) The DOPT be requested to expedite the process of 
approving the Recruitment Rules of Prasar Bharati which 
are pending with them for over a year. 
8. Responding to the above suggestions of the Committee, the 
Ministry in their written communication stated as under:- 
 The scheme for engaging casual artist on contract basis has 
been worked out and is being examined from legal and 
financial perspective before being put up to Prasar Bharati 
Board for a decision. 
 Directions have been issued to al l the Kendras not to lay off 
casual workers at local level and all such proposals be 
invariably sent to Prasar Bharati Corporation. 
 The approval of DOP&T for relaxing the provisions of DOPT 
scheme for regularization of Temporary Status Workers is 
awaited. 

15 
 
 Recruitment Rules of Prasar Bharati are being forwarded to 
Ministry of I&B for approval. 
 Various irregularities pertaining to engagement of the casual 
assignees be sorted out and responsibilities be fixed in respect 
of irregular actions by the officials co ncerned at the level of 
CEO, Prasar Bharati. 
9. As per assurance given by Prasar Bharti, an inquiry was 
instituted by a Committee comprising senior officers of AIR and 
Doordarshan to look into various irregularities pertaining to 
engagement of the Casual A ssignees.  The main findings of the 
Committee so constituted are as under :- 
 No specific guidelines were followed by the Directors of 
the Kendra for booking of casuals from 1991 onwards 
and their engagement has been made directly as 
militancy was at its pe ak. No eligible senior has been left 
out from regularization. The Kendra has provided earlier 
about the actual number of engagement of casual already 
forwarded: 56(37+19 TSWs) + 120 (other casual 
assignees) = 176.  But the actual number of casual 
labourer plus casual assignees 213 are working at 
present.  144 casuals were discontinued in 2004 (which 
was shown wrongly by the Kendra as "177 discontinued" 
earlier) as per the Court order and seven casual 
assignees were discontinued recently as their 
performance was not satisfactory. 

16 
 
 No specific procedure for booking of casuals was 
followed.  Most of the time it is the discretion of the 
Director of the Kendra who handpicked the persons and 
assigned to different sections.  Sometimes, Programme 
Officers suggested certain names for their sections which 
were approved by the Director of the Kendra.  There are 
no records available about the selection of such Casuals 
and approvals of the Head of Office.  Only one or two 
loose sheets are available where Programme Executiv e 
(Co-ordination) took approval of the Director. 
 The vacancy position of posts from 1990 onwards are not 
available. Based on the details that there are vacancies of 
114 in 2009, 146 in 2010 and 137 in 2011 against the 
sanctioned strength of 421 in all grad es.  But the 
Casuals have been engaged irrespective of the staff 
strength based on the discretion of the Head of the 
Kendra to meet the additional programme and 
transmission hours from 1997 and 2000 when the 
Kashmir Channel was started, additional transmis sion of 
12 hours and 24 hours respectively.  
 There is no prescribed basis for grant of remuneration 
and the fee paid varies from person to person but the 
hike of remuneration of some Casual Assignees increased 
without any basis and no specific reason was r ecorded 
anywhere. 

17 
 
 No permission has been obtained from the Directorate for 
engaging these casuals but the proposal has been 
approved by the Head of Office from time to time on the 
recommendations of Programme Officers.  The main 
reason for engaging Casuals in the Programme Section is 
due to increased production & transmission of 12 hours 
in DD Kashmir in January 1997 and 24 hours in 2000 as 
per the instructions of Directorate. 
 There is no regular appraisal system based on the 
performance.  For this no speci fic reason has been 
mentioned in the files regarding increasing the 
remuneration except in one or two files where it was 
mentioned due to increase in cost of living and inflation. 
 144 Casuals were discontinued during 2004 as per the 
order of the court.  On e Casual was re -engaged by RNU 
amongst 144.  However, after their disengagement 98 
new persons were engaged duly approved by the Head of 
Offices from time to time. 
 All casuals being engaged on assignment basis only for 
10 days in a month to assist the Prog ramme Officers 
based on the discretion of the Head of Office.  No 
permission has been obtained for engagement of 10 days 
from the Directorate or 29 days.  The Regional News Unit, 
DD, Srinagar has provided only Minutes of the Meeting 
with the Directorate of ficials at DDK, Srinagar on 

18 
 
10.12.1999 as the basis for engaging the casuals in view 
of the militancy in the valley. 
 Only one type of contract i.e. speech/talk contract is 
being used as per DD Manual for all the Casuals on 
assignment basis only and payment s are made under 
sub head PPSS.  For other casual labourers there is no 
contract, only payment vouchers are available in the 
Account Section. 
 The contract is being issued by the Contract Issuing 
Authority on the basis of approval of Head of Office and 
the expenditure so incurred on these casuals is being 
debited under sub head PPSS. 
 One casual driver Mr. Gh. Hassan Sofi was killed in 
terrorist attack in 1997 and compensation of Rs. 5 lakh 
was given to his kins.  His adopted son Gh. Mustafa had 
been engaged as casual Video Editor and remuneration of 
Rs.7500 is being paid per month.  No compassionate 
appointment was made in this case. 
 Even though, the Kendra was showing 117 Casual 
Assignees working in different sections, 10 days in a 
month and some of them working continuously on all the 
days etc. it is seen from the Gate Attendance Security 
Register, which was seized by the Committee, the 
attendance has not exceeded more than 69 persons on 
any day.  On an average, the number varies between 50 
to 69.  The attendance also taken by the Committee both 

19 
 
the days where the people physically present  : 3.11.2011 
= 81 Verified between 5 & 5 PM; 4.11.2011 = 58 + 8 in 
Mess =64 verified between 10.30 AM to 12.00 Noon 
 Thus it indicates that as per the list given by the Kend ra, 
some persons are not regularly reporting for duty and 
during the informal discussions, it was found that some 
of them are working at the residences of the certain 
officers but nobody provided specific details.  It is also 
revealed that most of the Casu al Assignees are related to 
the staff either directly or indirectly.  But nobody came 
forward to provide any specific details.  Most of the 
Casual Assignees do not posses  suitable qualification or 
skills to work in the Programme Sections. 
 Hence it is sugg ested that a regular procedure may be 
introduced based on the requirement and programme 
exigencies of the Kendra.  All the existing Casuals may be 
re-screened by a Committee of the Officials by co -opting 
the outside experts in the field of television produ ction to 
select suitable persons with a fresh notification for 
suitable people and weed out all unsuitable existing 
persons picked up without any rationale in the past. 
10. In view of the above submission of the Ministry/Prasar Bharati 
to the Standing Comm ittee's suggestions and the findings  of the 
Committee constituted by Prasar Bharati, the Committee desired to 
be apprised of the latest status of the issues concerned and the 

20 
 
concrete measures initiated by the Ministry/Prasar Bharati to 
mitigate the plight of the Casual Assignees. 
11. As mentioned earlier, the enquiry Committee Report pointed 
out that no specific procedure for booking of casuals was followed.  
Most of the time it is the discretion of the Director of the Kendra 
who handpicked the persons an d assigned to different sections.  
Sometimes, programme officers suggested certain names for their 
sections which were approved by the Director of the Kendra.  There 
are no records available about the selection of such Casuals and 
approvals of the Head of Office.  Only one or two loose sheets are 
available where Programme Executive (Coordination) took approval 
of the  Director. 
12. In the above context, when the Committee desired to hear the 
views of the Ministry, the then Secretary, Ministry of Information  
and Broadcasting deposed in evidence: 
 "I think we need to make it clear that this problem has arisen 
 because there was no transparency in appointing them.  This 
 is on record and this should be brought on record.  There was 
 an enquiry...when inspection  was made, the number of 
 people actually present was much less than they have 
 been.  So, this  problem has arisen". 
13. Asked to state the steps taken by the Ministry to stem the rot, 
the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting responded: 
 "It has been dealt with at the level of Prasar Bharati". 

21 
 
14. When the Committee desired to hear the views of Prasar 
Bharati on the matter, the CEO, Prasar Bharati submitted in 
evidence that what happened was that on the plea of insurgency in 
Kashmir many undesirable things were done and when insurgency 
ended in the year 2000, some station Directors did not act properly. 
15. Asked to state the specific action taken by the Prasar Bharati 
against the delinquent officials, the CEO, Prasar Bharati stated: 
 "...they have retired.  If you fix responsibility, they can move 
 the  Court because pension cannot be attached...(however), 
 the  Deputy Director General is right now under 
 suspension..." 
16. The CEO, Prasar Bharati further submitted: 
 "...we have to get out of  this ..." I would like to submit to the 
 hon. Committee that the present administration of the 
 Ministry  has tried its best to help us.  The Committee's 
 strictures if I may use the word, and advices have been 
 helpful to us.  We would request you and al so submit that 
 we are on the same side  and we both are trying to recoup 
 from a historic problem...". 
III. ENAGAGEMENT ON CONTRACT BASIS 
17. As mentioned earlier, the Committee, subsequent to their field 
visit to Srinagar, had desired that the casual ann ouncers who were 
booked for 29 days in a month should be engaged on contract basis 

22 
 
and it should also be ensured that they are engaged on the same 
basis till they attain the age of superannuation. 
18. Responding to the above suggestions of the committee, t he 
Prasar Bharati responded that a scheme for engaging all such 
ineligible casual artisans on contract basis, as suggested by the 
Committee, had been worked out and was being examined from 
legal and financial angles before being put up to Prasar Bharati 
Board for a decision. 
19. Prasar Bharati further submitted that in those cases where 
there was regular and sustained requirement of casuals, they could 
be considered for engagement on yearly contracts, under the 
contractual policy already put in place in October, 2012. 
20. As regards consideration for regularization of all such casual 
workers at one go and the weightage being given to the workers 
having substantial number of years of service, the Prasar Bharati 
informed that the process of verification of the se lists was in 
process.  The workers with temporary status, if any, as per DOPT 
guidelines of 1993 would be considered for regularization under the 
scheme.  For those who were not covered under this scheme, orders 
have been issued not to dis -engage anybod y.  It has, also been 
decided by Prasar Bharati Board that casuals shall be granted 
relaxation of age in the matter of direct recruitment to the post 
against which they were being booked provided they fulfilled other 
eligibility conditions such as educatio nal qualification etc. as laid 
down in the relevant recruitment regulation.  The relaxation would 

23 
 
be equal to the number of years of service rendered by them as 
such casual.  Working for a minimum of 120 days in a calendar 
year would be considered as one year service. 
21. In the above context, when the Committee desired to hear the 
views of the Department of Personnel and Training, a representative 
of the DOPT submitted in evidence: 
 "Our Rules on casual labour are of 1988 which provide that 
 casual labour should not be put on regular nature of job.  
 Despite that so many Ministries and Departments are 
 deploying them and they have not been regularized.  There is a 
 distinction of casual labour that the work may not be of 
 regular nature. There are RRs for r egular posts and 
 constitutionally they should be recruited against those posts.  
 As on date there are no Group D posts, after the Sixth Pay 
 Commission they all  have been distinguished as Group C 
 posts for which there are  recruitment rules and we ask all the 
 Departments to go to SSC and recruit through them.  In 1993 
 a scheme was launched  that the casual labourers who have 
 been working for 10 years be conferred 'Temporary Status', 
 thereafter, they be regularized.  For any three Group D 
 vacancies, two vacancies be filled up amongst them as they 
 have the qualifications and they know the work they can do it  
 well.  This would be the temporary status during which they 
 will get monthly wages and when they are regularized they will 
 get pension.  During Temporary Status they will get GPF, 

24 
 
 Medical, Leave and monthly wage.  Regularization is important 
 because in that case they get pension.  Thereafter,  there were 
 some Court judgments.  We intimated them that the 1993 
 Scheme should be taken as one time arrangement and it 
 should not be continued...Thereafter, the recommendations of 
 Sixth Pay Commission were implemented in which the Group 
 D  posts were abolished.  We went to Department of 
 Expenditure  about these tempor ary status  employees.  
 They asked us for the number of such employees.  We 
 circulated orders three times to know about the number of 
 such workers  so that exemption could be granted.  
 Thereafter, we regularized them as MTS.   However, I&B had 
 not given any number.  First time we came to  know about 
 Prasar Bharati that there are 203 casual labourers  who have 
 yet not been regularized. "  
22. The Committee were informed that a proposal for relaxing the 
provisions of DOPT scheme of 1993 for regularizat ion of TSWs was 
referred by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to the 
DOPT on 27.01.2012.  Asked to state the latest status of the matter, 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting submitted as under: 
 "A proposal for relaxing the provisions o f DOP&T scheme of 
 1993 was referred by Ministry of I&B on 27.01.2012 to DOP&T 
 for regularization and posting of the Temporary Status 
 Workers  (TSW) engaged in Kashmir to the available vacancies 
 in other Stations as a one-time measure.  DOP&T vide its O.M 

25 
 
 dated 12.12.2012 had sought some clarifications from this 
 Ministry.   These clarifications were furnished to DOP&T vide 
 O.M dated 11.1.2013. DOP&T vide its O.M dated 18.3.2013 
 sought additional clarifications from the Ministry.  The 
 aforesaid O.M o f DOP&T was referred to Prasar Bharati for 
 clarifying the position.  Prasar Bharati vide its communication 
 dated 23.10.2013 has informed that the matter of 
 regularization of Temporary Status  Workers under DOP&T 
 scheme of 1993 was approved by the Prasa r Bharati  subject 
 to legal opinion and in the legal opinion,  the approval has 
 been conveyed to the Directorate for  regularization of eligible 
 TSWs.  They have also informed that the  approval of the 
 Government is no longer required and Ministry may treat the 
 issue as closed.  Prasar Bharati has further informed that they 
 have regularized 201 TSWs, including 37  TSWs of DDK, 
 Srinagar.  In addition, on directions of CAT, Chandigarh 
 Bench, TSW status has been conferred on 19  workers in 
 DDK, Srinagar.  However, the matter is subjudice  before the 
 Hon'ble High Court of J&K, Srinagar. The remaining 
 casual workers, who are not eligible for grant of TSW status, 
 are  being paid at rates prescribed by the State Government 
 under the Minimum Wages Act."  
 
 
 

26 
 
IV. WAGES 
23. The casual workers of CBS Radio Kashmir alleged that the 
wages at revised rates which were being paid to DDK Srinagar and 
Radio Kashmir were being denied to them. 
24. When the Committee sought clarifications from the Prasar 
Bharati on the above issue, they submitted that casual workers at 
Radio Kashmir including CBS were being paid as per the rates 
prescribed by the Labour and Employment Department, 
Government of J&K. 
25. The petitioners further alleged that there were differ ences in 
the wages paid to the casual workers, performing similar nature of 
jobs.  In this context, the Committee desired to know the reasons 
for such anomalies.  In reply, Prasar Bharati submitted that there 
was no difference in the wages of casual worker s performing similar 
nature of jobs. 
26. Not convinced, the Committee desired to have the complete list 
of the emoluments paid to the casuals working on assignment 
basis.  The Ministry furnished the details as shown at Annexure. 
27. A perusal of the above details furnished by the Ministry 
revealed that there were glaring anomalies in the emoluments paid 
to the Casual Assignees working in the same section and 
presumably performing similar nature of jobs in transport, scenic, 
graphic and camera sections. 

27 
 
28. Asked to clarify the contradictory statements made before the 
Committee, the Ministry, quoting the enquiry Committee Report, 
submitted that there was no prescribed basis for grant of 
remuneration and the fee paid varied from person to person but the 
hike of remuneration of some Casual Assignees increased without 
any basis and no specific reason was recorded anywhere. 
29. Regarding the casual announcers who were booked and paid 
for six days but worked for 30/31 days, the Prasar Bharati clarified 
that casual announcers were booked for six days in a month so that 
their total booking for a year did not exceed 72 days as per the 
existing policy.  However, in case any casual announcer was booked 
for more than six days in a month, he shall be paid accordingly. 
30. Elaborating the matter, the representative of Prasar Bharati 
submitted in evidence :- 
"In India, there is problem that casual announcers 
cannot be engaged for more than six day a month. If we 
do it above six days,  it will not come under law and 
nobody will allow it,  but we take work from them for 15 -
20 days...I agree that it is  there for the last 15 -18 years 
and this is not right also.  But it is uniform policy and it 
is there for the last 52 years.  We are trying to revise it 
and we are consulting DOPT.” 
31. Asked to state whether Prasar Bharati had ensured that the 
Casual Assignees were paid wages for the actual number of days 

28 
 
they worked, Prasar Bharati replied in affirmative and also stated 
that necessary instructions in this regard had been issued. 
 
V. COVERAGE UNDER SOCIAL SECURITY 
32. On the issue of covering the Casual Assignees/workers under 
social security schemes such as ESI and EPF, the Prasar Bharati 
apprised that the advice of Ministry of Labour & Employment was 
sought on the matter and the Ministry advised as under :- 
"ESI :  Casual assignees/workers seem to be entitled for  
  the  same, if the establishment is covered under  
  the ESI Act,  1948. 
Bonus :  Casual workers are entitled to payment of bonus in  
  an accounting year provided he/she has worked in  
  the establishment for not less than thirty working  
  days in that year. 
EPF :  Ministry of Labour & Employment observed that the 
  Employees Provident fund and Miscellaneous   
  Provisions Act, 1952 extends to the whole of India  
  except the State of  Jammu & Kashmir, therefore,  
  they have no comments on the issue, however, the  
  opinion of the  EPFO would be worthwhile." 
 

29 
 
 33. When the Committee asked the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting to e xplain whether the ESI and Bonus facilities had 
already been extended to the casual worker as advised by the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment, the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting submitted that they had asked Prasar Bharati to take 
necessary action  to extend the ESI and Bonus facilities to the 
casual workers, as per the advice fo the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment.  The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting further 
stated that on the issue of entitlement of EPF to casual 
assignees/labourers of J &K, though they had made a reference to 
the EPFO (as per the advice of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment), the EPFO's views were still awaited despite reminder 
by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
VI. VACANCIES/FORMULATION OF RRs/SETTING UP  OF 
 PRASAR BHARATI RECRUITMENT BOARD 
34. The Committee were informed that due to acute shortage of 
staff and fresh recruitment  not having taken place for almost two 
decades  due to non -finalization of the Recruitment Regulations 
(RRs) and non-constitution of Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board, as 
envisaged in Section 10 of Prasar Bharati Act, 1990, coupled with 
non-sanction of staff for new projects and facilities that have come 
up after formation of Prasar Bharati, Casuals were being engaged to 
run the Sta tions and Kendras as well as production and 
transmission of programmes.  

30 
 
35. In response to a specific query of the Committee the then 
Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting submitted in 
evidence that around 14/15 thousand posts have lapsed in  Prasar 
Bharati due to vacancies persisting for many years.  Supplementing 
his colleague, the CEO, Prasar Bharati submitted that at one point 
of time Prasar Bharati had around 41000 personnel to man 
200/225 Radio Stations and DDKs.  But the position has be come 
so precarious that the staff strength has been reduced by 15/16 
thousand whereas the Stations/Kendras have been more than 
doubled. 
36. Asked to state the specific steps taken to fill up the vacant 
posts, the CEO, Prasar Bharati apprised that a Group o f Ministers 
was constituted by the Government of India under the 
Chairmanship of the then Finance Minister to look into the matter.  
The Group of Ministers recommended 3452 posts for the Prasar 
Bharati out of which 1150 posts had to be filled up at the fir st 
instance.  The CEO, Prasar Bharati further stated that the number 
of posts determined by the GOM was almost like a rigged pole as it 
was based on the 2007 -2009 vacancies.  Since the last five years 
many new Relay and FM Stations and Terrestrial Transmitters have 
been opened. 
37. As regards deployment of retired personnel to man the 
Stations/Kendras, the CEO, Prasar Bharati clarified that experience 
and efficiency were the basic requirements to run the 
Stations/Kendras smoothly.  Since there were lot of v acancies in 

31 
 
key posts, the Prasar Bharati was compelled to engage retired 
hands on a monthly remuneration of around 20/25 thousand of 
rupees.  The CEO, Prasar Bharati emphatically submitted that he 
and his predecessors were doing it for the sake of the Organization. 
38. When asked about the number of cadres for which Recruitment 
Regulations (RRs) were to be framed, the Prasar Bharati informed 
that initially they proposed framing Recruitment Regulations (RRs) 
for 198 categories of employees.  Following consultations with DOPT 
and the Department of Expenditure (DOE), the Prasar Bharati have 
now decided to reduce the number of cadres to 125.  It has also 
been decided by the Ministry that the Regulations would be 
scrutinized and notified in batches.  It has furt her been decided to 
take up those Regulations that have direct recruitment component 
in them for notification in the first batch.  In this regard, after 
incorporating suggestions of DOPT and DOE, the Prasar Bharati 
have prepared and forwarded to the Minist ry, RRs in respect of six 
categories of employees which were required to be referred to DOE 
for their concurrence.  The DOE have now concurred for RRs of four 
categories of employees.  These four categories of RRs were being 
notified in consultation with the Ministry of Law. 
39. The Ministry of I&B stated that the Recruitment Regulations 
(RRs) in respect of nine categories of employees of Prasar Bharati 
viz. Cameraman Grade -II, Engineering Assistant, Head 
Clerk/Assistant, Technician, Programme Executive (PE X), 
Transmission Executive (TREX) and News Reader -cum-Translators 

32 
 
(Grade-I, II & III) have already been notified after second stage 
consultation with Department of Expenditure (DOE) and Ministry of 
Law.  The RRs in respect of other categories were reported ly at 
different stages of inter -Ministerial consultation among DOE, I&B 
Ministry and Prasar Bharati. 
 
 
  

33 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. The Committee's examination of the subject has revealed 
some disquieting aspects pertaining to the state of af fairs in 
Radio Kashmir, CBS Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, 
Srinagar which inter-alia include opaque procedure and gross 
mal practices in the appointment of casual assignees, lack of 
uniform policies in regularization of the casual 
announcers/artists/workers, exploitation of the casual 
workers; disparities in the payment of wages/emoluments to 
the casual assignees performing similar nature of jobs, payment 
of wages to these casual assignees for 06 days only though they 
work for entire month, non -coverage of the casual workers 
under any social security schemes viz. ESI and EPF, etc.  Based 
on the clarifications of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting/Prasar Bharati/DOPT and inputs gathered during 
the field visit to Srinagar, the Committee  have given their 
considered recommendation and observations in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 

34 
 
2. The Committee note that pursuant to their suggestions 
subsequent to the first -hand knowledge gathered during their 
study visit to Srinagar, the Ministry/Prasar Bharati have 
initiated some specific measures which inter-alia include 
working out a scheme for engaging eligible casual artists on 
contract basis, issue of directions to all the Kendras not to lay 
off casual workers at local level, expediting the formulation of 
Recruitment Rules for Prasar Bharati, sorting out various 
irregularities pertaining to the engagement of the casual 
assignees, etc. The Committee however note with concern that 
almost nothing concrete beyond assurances has come up, 
though the Ministry of In formation & Broadcasting and Prasar 
Bharati had assured to engage the casual artists on long term 
contract till they attain the age of superannuation. The 
Committee, therefore reiterate that the measures initiated be 
implemented with full fidelity and expe ditiously considering 
the protracted plight of these  aggrieved casual assignees. 
 

35 
 
3. The Committee note that the casual workers/artists of 
Radio Kashmir, CBS Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra 
Srinagar worked in extreme conditions at the time of 
insurgency (1990 onwards) for different assignments like 
announcers, drivers, cooks, helpers, typists, programme staff, 
newsreaders etc. as regulars workers either left the State or 
stayed away from work due to insurgency. These casual 
workers contributed immense ly towards running successfully 
the public broadcasting/telecasting services in the insurgency 
prone State, even risking their lives. One such casual worker 
reportedly lost his life when the DDK, Srinagar was attacked by 
the terrorists. The Committee note with profound concern that 
even after more than 20 years of continuous, dedicated and 
commendable services, these casual assignees have not been 
regularized though they were repeatedly assured at the time of 
their engagement that they would be absorbed in regular 
services in due course.  These casual assignees have already 
given the prime period of their lives to these organizations 
without taking up any other assignment and in the hope that 
one day they would be regularized.  Considering  length of their 

36 
 
service, age, proficiency in their respective fields, dedication 
and devotion to duty in severely hostile and adverse  
conditions all these years, the Committee are of the considered 
view that these assignees deserve special, sympathetic and 
favourable consideration.  The Committee, therefore, urge that 
those casual assignees who have rendered decades of service 
should either be adjusted against the existing vacancies or 
some posts be created for them, as an exception and on special 
consideration, so that al l of them are regularized before 
attaining the age of superannuation. 
 
4. The Committee are perturbed to find the unabated gross 
malpractices committed for years together in the appointment 
of casual assignees and their subsequent exploitation in Radio 
Kashmir, CBS Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, 
Srinagar.  It is a matter of serious concern that no specific 
procedure for booking of casuals was ever followed nor any 
records were maintained regarding the selection of such 
casuals. The Committee take ser ious note of the fact that 

37 
 
certain persons were given regular employment, out of turn  
bypassing the normal recruitment porcess. The then Secretary, 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting candidly admitted that 
there was no transparency in appointing them.   As regards, 
remedial action taken, the Committee are informed that 
directions have been issued to all the Kendras to invariably 
send all the proposals for appointment/laying off the casual 
workers to the Prasar Bharati Corporation.  So far as fixing of 
responsibilities is concerned, the CEO, Prasar Bharati has 
apprised that on the plea of insurgency in J&K, irregularities 
were committed by some Station Directors, who have since 
retired and it would be difficult to take action against them.  
He has, howeve r, assured the Committee that every possible 
step would be taken to improve the situation.  According to the 
Committee, it appears that earlier neither the Ministry nor the 
Prasar Bharati cared to find out the apparent irregularities 
committed by J&K Kendr as.  However, now that assurances 
have been given by both the Ministry and Prasar Bharati to 
stem the rot in the regional Kendras, the Committee trust that 
a robust mechanism would be put in place and monitoring 

38 
 
system strengthened so as to foster transpar ency and stop 
recurrence of irregularities, as experienced in J&K Kendras.  
 
5. The Committee are constrained to note that there were 
glaring anomalies in the payment of wages to the casual 
assignees performing same/similar nature of jobs. Surprisingly, 
the Ministry/Prasar Bharati have stated in their written 
submission that "there is no difference in wages of casual 
workers performing similar nature of jobs" though the detailed 
list of wages paid to the casual workers, as furnished by Prasar 
Bharati, speak s to the contrary.  For example, in the 
coordination section, some casuals are getting Rs.3000/ - p.m. 
whereas some are getting Rs.4000/ - p.m.  Similarly in the 
Transport Section some are getting Rs.4000/ - p.m, some 
Rs.6000/-p.m and some other Rs.8000/ -p.m.  Similar 
discrepancies have been observed in Scenic Section, Camera 
Section, Graphic Section, Editing Section etc.  The Committee 
deprecate the misleading statement given by the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati and would like to caution them to 
exercise utmost car e in future while deposing before the 

39 
 
Committee.  The Committee also emphasize that the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati should take immediate measures to 
find out cases of disproportionate wages being paid to the 
casuals and ensure that uniform and equal wages/emo luments 
are paid to the casual assignees performing same/similar kind 
of jobs. 
6. The Committee note with serious concern the low wages 
being paid to the casual assignees and non revision of their 
wages periodically.  However, they draw some satisfaction f rom 
the orders issued by the Ministry/Prasar Bharati to enhance, by 
at least 65 per cent the fee being paid to the causal assignees 
in AIR and Doordarshan.  The Committee would like to be 
assured that there is no aberration in the effective 
implementation of the said order by any Regional 
Kendra/Station.  The Committee would also like the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati to ensure that periodical revision of 
wages being paid to the casual assignees is carried out 
earnestly and the Committee be apprised.  
 

40 
 
7. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the 
casual workers (programme staff) were booked and paid wages 
only for six days but made to work for 30/31 days in a month.  
The Committee are not satisfied with the contention of the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati that casual announcers are booked for 
six days in a month so that their total booking for a year does 
not exceed 72 days as per the existing policy.  Equally 
unconvincing is the assurance that "in case any casual 
announcer is booked for more than six day s in a month, he 
shall be paid accordingly", as many instances of irregularities 
on this count have been brought to the notice of the 
Committee.  Therefore, instead of disregarding the gravity of 
the issue, the Ministry/Prasar Bharati should seriously look  
into the matter and ensure payment of actual wages to the 
casual assignees proportionate with the number of days they 
are made to work so as not only to honour the Labour Laws of 
the land but also to give fillip to the enabling Principles of 
State policy contained in our Constitution.   
 

41 
 
8. The Committee find that pursuant to a circular issued by 
the DOPT for regularization of contract/casual workers, some 
casual assignees were regularized, some of them were 
converted to Temporary Status Worker (TSW) and the rest were 
left out.  It is thus apparent that no transparent procedure was 
adopted to honour the DOPT circular in regularising the 
contract/casual workers.  The Committee are of the firm view 
that performing similar nature of job for the same duration 
with equal proficiency should be the only criteria for 
regularization/conferment of TSW  status upon the 
casual/contract assignees and there should  absolutely be no 
pick and chose policy or other extraneous consideration for the 
purpose.  The Committee, t herefore, exhort the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati to take urgent requisite measures to 
rectify the aberrations and put in place a transparent system so 
that justice is done to all the affected casual assignees. 
 
 

42 
 
9. The Committee were informed that the Ministry /Prasar 
Bharati sought approval of DOPT for relaxing the provisions of 
DOPT scheme for regularization of Temporary Status Workers, 
which is still awaited.  The Committee desire that the matter 
be seriously pursued with the DOPT, if required, by preparing a  
fresh proposal highlighting inter-alia the special circumstances 
in which these casual assignees were engaged, the number of 
years of service rendered by them despite severe adverse 
circumstances etc. so that the TSWs are regularized at an early 
date and the requisite financial benefits are extended to them 
in due course. 
 
10.  The Committee note that as per the comprehensive policy 
for contractual engagements formulated and implemented in 
September, 2012, all the casual assignees were allowed to 
appear fo r examination by relaxing the age, for the post for 
which they were engaged. But, the proposed examination could 
not be conducted as the Recruitment Rules of Parasar Bharati 
could not be formulated/finalised. The Committee find that the 

43 
 
said comprehensive policy was finalised as late as in 2012 and 
even then the examination to enable the casual and 
contractual assignees to become regular workers could not be 
held which does not speak well about the seriousness of the 
Ministry towards these hapless assigness.  Needless to mention, 
had the comprehensive policy been finalised earlier, the 
contractual/casual assignees would have got the benefit of age 
on their side.  After serving the sensitive Kendras at J&K for 
decades, most of the contractual/casual assignees  must be in 
their late forties, to say the least.  In the considered view of 
the Committee it would be unfair to expect such older people 
to compete with the freshers in the examination for 
appointment as regular workers.  On the other hand, by virtue 
of the years of service rendered and experience gathered, the 
contractual/casual assignees can commendably accomplish the 
job assigned vis-a-vis as regular workers who may take time to 
gain the requisite experience.  Hence, taking into consideration 
the vast experience and dedicated service rendered by them in 
hostile conditions, the Committee urge that they may be 
considered for regularization for the rest of their service period 

44 
 
and such relaxation, may be made as a onetime appreciable 
gesture so that they ge t all the financial benefits available to  
regular employees and are able to lead a peaceful retired life. 
 
11. The Prasar Bharati came into existence in the year 1997.  
At the time of formation of Prasar Bharati, there were 198 
categories of posts for which the Recruitment Rules (RRs) were 
to be formulated and got to be approved by the Ministry of 
I&B/DOPT.  Subsequently, following consultations with DOPT 
and the Department of Expenditure (DOE), the Prasar Bharati 
decided to reduce the number of cadres to 125.  The 
regulations were to be scrutinized and notified in batches. The 
Committee note with profound concern that even after lapse of 
18 years, the Prasar Bharati have been able to formulate and 
notify only 09 RRs.  Consequently, the Prasar Bharati 
Recruitment Board, whose constitution depends on the 
finalization of all the Recruitment Rules, has not seen the light 
of the day even after 18 years of the formation of the 
Broadcasting Corporation. The matter has been inordinately  

45 
 
delayed to say the least.  Cautioning the Ministry/Prasar 
Bharati against the such unacceptable callousness, whatever 
reasons notwithstanding, the Committee exhort that, instead 
of leaving things to take their own course, the Ministry/Prasar 
Bharati should initiate and expedite urge nt and effective 
measures to finalize all the remaining RRs at the earliest so 
that the Recruitment Board is constituted and over 
dependence on SSC/UPSC for recruitment in Prasar Bharati is 
minimized significantly. The Committee are hopeful that such 
finalization of the RRs and consequential formation of the 
Recruitment Board would take due care and protect the 
interest of casual, contractual and regular employees. 
 
12. The Committee are anguished to note that the staff 
strength of Prasar Bharati has been reduced by 15/16 thousand 
due to retirement of employees and non-filling up of the vacant 
posts whereas the number of Stations have doubled over the 
years.  Worse, hundreds of posts have lapsed causing immense 
difficulties in the smooth running of the Stati ons.  The 

46 
 
Committee are given to understand that though Prasar Bharati 
is perceived to be an autonomous organization,  due autonomy 
has not been accorded to the State Broadcasting Corporation.  
In view of the yeomen services rendered by the Doordarshan 
Kendras and All India Radio Stations to the nation over many 
years, it is high time the Government should recognize their 
contribution, identify the grey areas that impede their 
functioning and take effective measures including creation of 
adequate posts and according due autonomy to Prasar Bharati, 
with necessary safeguards, so that they function seamlessly 
and compete with the private channels effectively. 
 
13. The Committee find that during the transitional years, 
Prasar Bharati engaged retired personnel as  a stop gap 
arrangement to run Prasar Bharati, they being experienced and 
proficient.  The practice is still going on and in Srinagar 
Station 29-30 days booking are given  to the retired employees.  
This has reportedly created a resentment amongst the 
casual/contractual assignees that they are being 

47 
 
ignored/overlooked despite toiling hard for many years in 
hostile conditions.  While recognizing the unquestionable 
dedication and proficiency of the retired employees, the 
Committee would like Prasar Bharati to appoint them in such a 
manner that the casual/contractual assignees, working for 
many years, do not feel victimized. 
 
14. The Committee are happy to note that pursuant to the 
advice of the Ministry of Labour and Employment to cover the 
casual announcers/a rtists/workers under ESI and Bonus, the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has asked Prasar 
Bharati to take necessary action in the matter.  The Committee 
trust that Prasar Bharati would take urgent action to cover all 
the casual assignees working in  various Regional Kendras, 
especially in J&K, under ESI and Bonus schemes.  As regards 
extending EPF facilities to the casual assignees, the Committee 
are informed that the facility extends to the whole of India 
except the State of J&K, as per EPF and Misc ellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952.  The Committee would, however, like the 

48 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting/Prasar Bharati to 
explore the feasibility of extending any other similar or special 
social security to the casual assignees working in the J&K 
Kendras so that they are benefited appropriately and 
commensurately .         
 
New Delhi;                       DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR  
12 March, 2015                                                         CHAIRPERSON            
21 Phalguna,1936 (Saka)                              STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
 
 
  
  

49 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 31ST OCTOBER, 2011.  
 
 The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room 
No.53, Parliament House, New Delhi (i) to hear the views of the representatives 
of the Ministries of Information and Broadcasting, Labour and Employment, 
and Prasar Bharti Broadcasting Corporation on regularization of casual 
workers/Artists of Radio Kashmir, CBS Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan 
Kendra, Srinagar and (ii) to have evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas and ONGC on `Deployment of Contract/Casual 
Workers/Sanitation workers  for perennial nature of jobs in ONGC and 
contribution of emplo yer (ONGC, Gujarat Region) to Employees Provident 
Fund'. 
 
  PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.     Shri Raj Babbar 
3.     Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4.     Shri Hari Manjhi 
5.     Shri P. Balram Naik 
6.     Shri Jayaram Pangi 
7.     Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
8.     Shri S. Pakkirappa 
9.     Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
10. Smt. J. Shantha 
 
  RAJYA SABHA  
11. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
12. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
13. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
14. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
15. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
16. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
17. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 

50 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
        1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
3.  Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5.       Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Under Secretary 
 
 
Witnesses 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Official   Designation 
1.  Shri Ravi Mathur  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Swarup Director General Labour 
Welfare 
3. Shri S.K. Verma Director 
4. Shri K.C. Pandey Additional CPFC (Compliance) 
5. Shri M.P. Sinha Additional CPFC 
6. Shri R.K. Kukreja RPFC-I (Compliance) 
7. Shri Gyanendra Singh RLC (Central) Ahmedabad 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & 
BROADCASTING 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Official   Designation 
1.  Shri Uday Kumar Verma   Secretary 
2. Shri Rajiv Takru Additional Secretary 
3. Ms. Supriya Sahu Director (BC) 
4. Ms. G. Jayanthi Director (BAP) 

51 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE PRASAR BHARATI BROADCASTING 
CORPORATION 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Official   Designation 
1.  Shri Rajiv Takru  CEO 
2. Shri L.D. Mandloi Director General All India 
Radio 
3. Shri Tripurari Sharan Director General, 
Doordarshan 
4. Shri G. Jayalal General Manager (P), Prasar 
Bharati 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry 
of Information & Broadcasting, Prasar Bharati and Ministry of Labour and 
Employment who appeared before the Committee on the issues concerning the 
contract and casual labour particularly their conditions of wor k, health, safety, 
welfare and social security etc.  The Members expressed their concerns mainly 
on the following issues:- 
 
i. Differentiation between the Casual Artists, Casual Artists on 
assignment basis and the Casual Labourers 
ii. Number of workers in each of  these categories in Radio Kashmir 
and Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar and duration  of their 
employment 
iii. Steps taken by Prasar Bharti for regularization of their services 
iv. Number of vacancies in Prasar Bharti all over India in Group C and 
D categories vis-à-vis in J&K 
v. Special provisions for these workers in view of extraordinary 
working condition in J&K 
 
vi. Recruitment Rules, relaxation for existing casual workers 
vii. Status of Associations' Forum of AIR and Doordarshan 
  
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Info rmation & Broadcasting and 
Prasar Bharati clarified the Ministry's position in the matter and responded to 
the queries of the members.  

52 
 
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministries and Prasar 
Bharti for free and frank replies to the querie s of the Members on the subject.  
The Chairman directed the Secretary to furnish written replies to the queries 
raised by the Members which could not be replied during the meeting, within  
fortnight. 
 
5. XX   XX   XX   XX 
6. XX   XX   XX   XX 
7. XX   XX   XX   XX 
8. XX   XX   XX   XX 
9. XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
10. A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX  Not related to this Report. 
  

53 
 
APPENDIX-II 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 30TH JANUARY, 2012.  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to have (i) further evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Prasar 
Bharati Broadcasting Corporation on regularization of casual workers/Artists 
of Radio Kashmir, CBS Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar; and 
(ii) evidence of the represent atives of Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) and 
Rourkela Steel Plant on the issue of rehabilitation of legal heirs of deceased 
employees of Rourkela Steel Plant. 
  
 PRESENT 
   Shri Hemanand Biswal – CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   2.  Dr. Virendra Kumar 
   3.  Shri Narahari Mahto 
   4.  Shri Hari Manjhi  
   5.  Ms. Mausam Noor 
   6.  Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 7. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 8. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 9. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
 10. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
 11. Shri Rajaram 
 12. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 
 
 

54 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
        1. Shri Ashok Sajwan  - Additional Director 
2. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & 
BROADCASTING AND PRASAR BHARATI 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer 
Designation 
1. Shri Rajiv Takru Additional Secretary 
2. Ms. Supriya Sahu Joint Secretary 
3. Shri L.D. Mandloi DG, AIR 
4. Ms. G. Jayanthi Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry 
of Information & Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati Broadcasting Corporation 
who appeared before the Committee on the issues concerning the 
regularization of casual workers/Artists of Radio Kashmir, CBS Radio Kash mir 
and Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar.  The Members expressed their concerns 
mainly on the following issues:- 
 
 
(i) Regularization of casual workers engaged as programme executives, 
transmission executives and announcers who have been working for 
the last 20 years. 
(ii) Engaging casual announcers & casual production artists on contract 
basis. 
(iii) Payment of requisite dues to casual announcers. 
(iv) Exploitation of casual workers engaged in staff canteens by senior 
officers. 
(v) Engagement of fake casual workers as found in the enquiry report of 
the AIR and Doordarshan. 
(vi) Engagement of casual workers without following proper selection 
procedure. 
(vii) Non-payment of minimum wages. 
(viii) Payment of wages at different rates to casual workers employed on 
jobs of similar nature. 

55 
 
(ix) Non-maintenance of attendance registers of Group 'D' employees. 
 
 
 
3. While responding to the queries of the members, the representatives of 
the Ministry of Information &  Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati assured the 
Committee that the whole matter was being looked into and corrective steps 
being taken by them to rectify the irregularities.  
4. The Chairman directed the CEO, Prasar Bharati to take immediate action 
on the concerns raised by the Members. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
5. XX    XX   XX 
 
6.  XX    XX   XX 
7.  XX    XX   XX 
8.  XX    XX   XX 
9. XX    XX   XX 
10. XX    XX   XX 
11. A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX  Not related to this Report. 
  

56 
 
APPENDIX-III 
Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 30 October, 2012 from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in 
the  Room No.G-074,  Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ismail Hussain 
3. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4. Shri Narahari Mahato 
5. Shri Hari Manjhi 
6. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
7. Shri K. Sugumar 
8. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
 
 
   RAJYA SABHA  
 
           9.    Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
     10.   Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
            11.    Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
            12.   Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
            13.    Shri Rajaram 
            14.   Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
    15.   Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
 
          1. Shri P.V.L.N Murthy   - Director 
 2.  Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
  3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja   - Deputy Secretary 

57 
 
Witnesses 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & 
BROADCASTING AND PRASAR BHARATI 
Sl. No. Name of the Officer   Designation 
 
1. Shri Uday Kumar Verma Secretary 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Singh JS (B) 
3. Mrs. Jayanthi G. Director –BA (P) 
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF PRASAR BHARATI 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Officer   Designation 
 
1. Shri Jawahar Sircar CEO 
2. Shri V.A.M. Hussain Member (P) 
3. Shri L.D. Mandloi  DG, All India Radio 
4. Shri Tripurari Sharan DG, Doordarshan 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Uday Kumar Verma, 
Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Shri Jawahar Sircar, 
CEO, Prasar Bharati and other representatives of the Ministry and invited their 
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker.  
 3. The Secretary, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting apprised the 
Committee of the steps taken by Prasar Bharati for the welfare of casual 
workers/assignees working in Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar,  Radio Kashmir 
and CBS Radio.  
 
 

58 
 
4. The Members, thereafter, raised various issues and sought clarifications 
on:-  
 
(i) The status of the proposal sent to DoPT for pooling the  vacancies. 
(ii) Delay in framing and implementation of Recruitment Rules of 
 Prasar Bharati. 
(iii) Deemed abolition of vacancies in Prasar Bharati 
(iv) The extent of age relaxation to be given to the casual 
 workers/assignees & provision of social security benefits for  them. 
(v) Procedure for intake of casual workers. 
(vi) Action ta ken by Prasar Bharati against those involved in improper 
 appointments of casual employees. 
(vii) Making the casuals work for 25 -30 days but paying them for 6 days 
 only. 
  
 The Members were of the unanimous view that DoPT may also be called 
for evidence along with officials of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
on the issue. 
 
5. The Chairman thanked the Secretary, Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting, CEO, Prasar Bharati and other officials for giving valuable 
information to the Committee on the subject. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew.) 
 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record]. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX  Not related to this Report. 
  

59 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 29th May, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1720   hrs. in 
Committee Room `E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Shri Dara Singh Chauhan – CHAIRMAN 
   MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ismail Hussain 
3. Dr. Virendra Kumar 
4. Shri Narahari Mahato 
5. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
6. Shri Mahendra Kumar Roy 
7. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
8. Shri K. Sugumar 
9. Shri Ashok Argal 
10. Smt. J. Shantha 
11. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
13. Shri Thaawar Chand Gehlot 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
15. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
16. Shri Rajaram 
 17. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
 18. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 

60 
 
 
 
2. XX   XX   XX   XX 
3. XX   XX   XX   XX 
4. XX   XX   XX   XX 
Part-I 
Witnesses 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & 
BROADCASTING AND PRASAR BHARATI 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer Designation 
 
1. Shri Uday Kumar Varma Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Singh Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Jawhar Sircar Executive Member 
4. Shri V.A.M. Hussain Member 
5. Shri B.B. Pandit Member 
6. Shri L.D. Mandloi DG, AIR 
7. Shri Tripurari Sharan DG, Doordarshan 
8. Smt. Aparna Vaish ADG 
9. Shri V.K. Jain ADG 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer Designation 
 
1. Ms. Mamta Kundra Joint Secretary (Establishment) 
2. Shri J.A.Vaidyanathan Director (Establishment) 
 
 

61 
 
5. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of 
the Ministry of Information &  Broadcasting, Prasar Bharati Broadcasting 
Corporation and DOPT and invited their attention to the provisions contained 
in Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker.   
6. The Secretary, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting briefed the 
Committee a bout the initiatives taken by them after the meeting of the 
Committee held on 30th October, 2012.  
7. The following points were raised :-  
(i) Clarification sought from the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
regarding eligibility of casual labourers who hav e worked more 
than six days in a month against the prescribed six days working, 
for bonus, ESI and EPF.  
(ii) Conferment of status of temporary workers – referred to DOPT. 
(iii) Regular recruitment and age relaxation to the existing casual 
workers. 
(iv) Framing of Recruitment Rules. 
8. The Chairman directed the Secretary to send written replies to the 
unanswered queries of the members to the Secretariat within one week.  
9. The Chairman then thanked the Secretary and other officials for giving 
valuable info rmation to the Committee and responding to the queries of the 
Members.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
10. XX   XX   XX   XX 
11. XX   XX   XX   XX 
12. XX   XX   XX   XX 
13. XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 [A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record] 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
XX  Not related to this Report 

62 
 
APPENDIX-V 
Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 19th September, 2014 from 1130 hrs. to 1320 hrs. 
in Room No.63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  – Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  4. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
  5. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
  8. Shri R. Parthipan 
  8. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  9. Shri Giriraj Singh 
  10. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
   
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  11. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
  12. Shri Ranbir Singh Parjapati 
  13. Shri Rajaram 
  14. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  15. Haji Abdul Salam 
  16. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
   
   SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
   2.  Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
 

63 
 
Witnesses 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & 
BROADCASTING AND PRASAR BHARATI 
Sl. No. Name of the Officer   Designation 
1. Shri  Jitendra Shankar Mathur Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Abha Shukla Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Harcharan Kaur Deputy Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE PRASAR BHARATI 
Sl. No. Name of the Officer   Designation 
1. Shri Jawhar Sircar CEO 
2. Shri F. Sheheryar Director General, All India Radio 
3. Ms. Vijayalaxmi Chhabra Director General, Doordarshan 
4. Ms. Aparna Vaish Additional Director General, 
Prasar Bharati 
5. Shri V.K. Jain Additional Director General, 
Doordarshan 
6. Dr. Sanjay Dubey Additional Director General, All 
India Radio 
7. Shri Om Prakash OSD, Prasar Bharati 
8. Shri Ashok Kumar Consultant, Prasar Bharati 
 
 At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Additional Secretary and 
other officials of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Prasar Bharati 
Broadcasting Corporation and invited their attention to the provisions 
contained in Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker.   
2. The following points were raised :-  

64 
 
(i) Regarding creation of posts for regularization of workers . 
(ii) Augmentation of Radio/TV stations which have doubled as of now 
and the manpower has been reduced to 50%. 
(iii) Coverage of casual/contract workers in ESI & EPF and also 
eligibility of casual labourers who have worked more than six days 
in a month against the prescribed six days working, for bonus.  
(iv) Conferment of status of temporary workers – referred to DOPT. 
(v) Regular recruitment and age relaxation to the existing casual 
workers. 
(vi) Framing of Recruitment Rules. 
3. The Chairperson directed the Additional Secretary to send written replies 
to the unanswered queries of the members to the Secretariat within one week.  
4. The Chairperson then thanked the Additional Secretary and other 
officials for giving valuable information to the Committee and responding to the 
queries of the Members.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept for record] 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

65 
 
APPENDIX-VI 
Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 11 th February, 2015 from 1130 
hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room `A’,  Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  - Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara 
  4. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  6. Shri Hari Manjhi 
   
    
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  7. Shri G.N. Ratanpuri 
  8. Shri Haji Abdul Salam 
  9. Shri Rajaram 
  10. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
  3. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee and apprised them that the sitting had been convened to 
consider and adopt the draft Report on `Regularisation of casual workers/ 
artists of Radio Kash mir, CBS Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, 
Srinagar'.   Observing that the concerns expressed by the Members during 

66 
 
evidence on various aspects of the subject have been addressed in the draft 
Report, the Chairperson gave an overview of the important 
Observations/Recommendations contained therein. The Chairperson then 
invited suggestions from the Members on the draft Report.  
 
3. The Committee, then took up the draft Report for consideration and after 
some discussions adopted it. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the draft Report in 
the light of consequential changes that might arise out of factual verifications 
of the draft Report and to present the same to the House. 
 
5. XX   XX   XX  
 
 
   The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
 
XX Not related to the Report 
 
 
 
  

67 
 
 
  

68 
 
 
