1 
 
15 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action T aken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Review of Urban 
Haats] 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
      
 
                    March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) 


2 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2015-16) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Review of Urban 
Haats] 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.03.2016  
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.03.2016 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
                    March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) 
                     


3 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE             (4) 
INTRODUCTION        (5) 
        
CHAPTER I Report…………    
 
CHAPTER II Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government ………… 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations w hich the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply........... 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been  accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration........… 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  replies 
of the Government  are interim in nature........... 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on  11.03.2016.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report ( Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) 
 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 
 DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR-CHAIRPERSON   
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
17. Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
18. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
19. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
23. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
24. Shri P.L. Punia 
25. Shri Rajaram 
26. Haji Abdul Salam 
27. Ms. Dola Sen 
28. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
29. Shri R.K. Sinha 
30. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
31. Shri N. Gokulkrishnan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  -  Additional Secretary 
 2.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Director  
 3.    Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Additional Director 
 4.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Under Secretary 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
           I,  the  Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2015 -16), having 
been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this Fifteenth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninth Report (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Review of Urban Haats relating to the Ministry of Textiles. 
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and  laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 12th August, 2015. The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth  
Report on 6th November, 2015 .  The Committee  considered and adopted the 
Draft Report at their sitting held on 11th March, 2016.  
3. An analysis of t he action taken by  the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Labour (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
11 March, 2016                                             CHAIRPERSON 
21 Phalguna,1937 (Saka)                STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Review of Urban Haats. 
  
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
12th August, 2015. It contained 20 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of 
the Government in respect of all the R ecommendations have been received and 
are categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government –                                                                                            
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
19 and 20  
  
 Total: 15 
 percentage:75 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – 
NIL 
  
NIL 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Para No. 3, 10, 13 and 18 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature- 
Para No.12 
 
 
 
Total: 04 
 Percentage:20 
 
 
 
 
Total:01 
 Percentage: 5 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Note in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action 
taken replies in respect of the R ecommendation contained in Chapter V 
for which interim reply has been given by the Government ma y be 
furnished to them at the earliest.  
 

7 
 
I. Delay in setting up of some Urban Haats 
 (Recommendation Para No. 2) 
4. In their earlier Report, the Committee  had observed that nine Urban 
Haats were under different stages of construction. Expressing concern  towards 
the inordinate delay in completion of some projects which were sanctioned way 
back in 2003 (Hazaribag Project), 2007 (Indore and Agartala projects) and 2008 
(Jhansi project) , the Committee urged the Ministry to impress upon the 
Implementing Agencie s concerned to initiate urgent requisite measures and 
expedite the completion of the under progress Urban Haats so as to accomplish 
the intended objective of establishing direct marketing facilities for the benefit 
of the handicraft artisans/ handloom weavers.  
 
5. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows: 
 "It is submitted that the matter has been taken up with the 
respective implementing agencies on various occasions and will be 
followed up in future also." 
 
6. The Committee note the assurance given by the Ministry that they 
have been taking up the matter of delay in the completion of Urban Haats 
with the respective Implementing Agencies and they will continue to 
follow up the matter in fu ture too. Since the sanctioned p rojects have 
been languishing since long despite persuasions by the Ministry, the 
Committee are of  the firm opinion that the matter needs to be pursued 
more vigorously with the Implementing Agencies concerned so that there 
is no further time and cost overrun and the said Urban Haats are set up 
for the benefit of artisans and weavers. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the concrete progress made in this regard within three 
months of the presentation of this Report. 

8 
 
 
II. Cancellation of 13 Sanctioned Urban Haats 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
7. In their earlier Report, the Committee  had expressed their displeasure 
over the inadequate efforts of the Ministry in conducting adequate 
survey/study to find out the root cause of th e poor response of the 
Implementing Agencies concerned to set up the sanctioned Urban Haats 
leading to the cancellation of  13 such sanctioned Urban Haats in States like 
Maharashtra, U.P., Gujarat, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, etc.  The C ommittee, 
therefore, impressed upon the Ministry to undertake periodical studies/surveys 
and plug the extant loopholes so as to avoid cancellation of sanctioned 
projects, besides encouraging the Implementing Agencies to set up the target ed 
Urban Haats. 
 
8. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have merely stated "Noted". 
 
9. The Committee are quite unhappy  to note the casual reply of the  
Ministry to such an important r ecommendation. The Ministry have not 
stated any specific  action taken by them to conduct periodic 
studies/surveys to ascertain the r oot cause of the poor response of  the 
Implementing Agencies in settin g up the sanctioned Urban Haats.  The 
Committee, therefore, again exhort the Ministry to undertake the 
requisite studies/surveys so as  to avoid the recurrence of cancellation of 
sanctioned Urban Haats for want of adequate response from the 
Implementing Agencies. The Committee also impress upon the Mini stry 
to desist from giving casual  replies like "Noted" , etc. to the considered 
suggestion of the Committee while furnishing Action Taken Notes in 
future. 
 

9 
 
III. Non-Setting up of Mini Urban haat 
 (Recommendation Para No. 8) 
10. In their Ninth Report, the Committee had observed that a concept of Mini 
Urban Haat had been introduced during the 12 th Plan in order to extend the 
facilities of Urban Haats  to smaller cities and tourist n etworks.  Consequent 
upon a joint strategy evolved by the Ministry of Textiles and the Ministry of 
Tourism in January, 2015, way -side ameni ties like Chokidani, Suraj Kund 
Mela, etc. were to be developed on similar lines as Mini Urban Haat.  However, 
the Committee noted with concern that not a single Mini Urban Haat had been 
set up , reportedly because of  non-receipt of any proposal from the 
Implementing Agencies due to non-availability of land at strategic locations. As 
per the Ministry’s own admission, the State Government of Jammu & Kashmir 
had recently expressed interest in setting up a few Mini Urban Haats in the 
State. The Committee  had, th erefore, urge d the Ministry to motivate and 
encourage the Implementing Agencies in evincing interest to set up Mini Urban 
Haats so as to extend the much need ed facility to  the poor artisans and 
weavers in small towns to directly market their products. 
 
11. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows: 
 " Noted. States are being requested from time to time." 
12. The Committee  are not convinced with this reply of the Ministry 
because even if the States are being requested by them from time to time, 
not a single mini Urban Haat has been set up so far in the c ountry 
defeating the very purpose of the joint strategy evolved in January, 2015 
between the Ministries of Textiles and Tourism.   Since almost all the 
States are promoting tourism, the concept of Mini Urban Haat would be an 
added interest for the tourists, especially foreign tourists besides being a 
source of income for artisans/weavers residing in small towns . The 

10 
 
Committee, therefore,  urge that some kind of motivation and 
encouragement be considered and given to the Implementing Agencies to 
indentify and make available land at strategic lo cations for setting up of 
Mini Urban Haats so that poor artisans/weavers are able to avail the 
opportunity of showcasing and directly marketing their products.  The 
Committee would also like to be informed of the progress made in setting 
up Mini Urban Haats in the State of Jammu & Kashmir which has evinced 
interest in this regard. 
 
IV. Delay in issuance of Identity Cards 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 
13. In their Ninth Report, t he Committee had noted that issuance of Identity 
Cards had been started in 2005 and out of the identified 68.86 lakh Handicraft 
artisans, only about 25 lakh artisan could be issued I -Cards. Similarly, out of 
the 43.31 lakh identified Handloom weavers, I -Cards had been  issued to 
around 31.13 lakh weavers across the country since 2009. Expressing concern 
over the slow pace of issuance of I -Cards to the artisans/weavers, t he 
Committee had suggested that the Ministry should urgently decentralize the 
process of issuance of I -Cards and organise awareness camp s with the help of 
District Administration and Implementing Agencies to proactively accele rate 
issuance of I-Cards to the left out artisans / weavers in a time bound manner 
so that they were not only able to avail facilities like social security schemes 
but also  to participate in fairs/ exhibitions, both within and outside the 
country.  
14.       In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
of Textiles have stated as follows: 
"As per third Handloom Census (2009 -10) there are 43.31 lakh handloom 
& allied workers acro ss the country.  Of this, 38.46  lakh are 18 years & 

11 
 
above (Adult) to whom photo identity cards were required to be issued.  
However, on the request of some NER S tates, Manipur in particular, 
Plastic Identity Cards (PIC) were not printed.  Similarly, for some border 
area States like West Bengal requested for no t issuing PICs to avoi d 
migration from the adjoining S tates.  Thus, only 31.13 lakh I -Cards have 
been prepared and distributed through States concerned. State 
Governments concerned have now been asked to conduct survey and issue 
I/card themselves for the left out handloom weavers/allied workers. 
  For handicraft artisans, advertisement has been published in 
leading Newspapers regarding submission of fresh application form of 
I.Card of handicrafts artisans at concern M&SECs/field offices of the 
DC(Handicrafts). 
  Proposal is under consideration for decentralising the process of 
preparing of I.Cards of handicrafts artisans.  
  Awareness drive/Camps are being planned at each M&SEC/Field 
office for I.Cards for handicrafts artisans." 
 
15. The Committee are deeply  concerned to note that out of  the 38.46 
lakh Adult Handloom Weavers and allied workers, photo I-Cards have been 
issued to only 31.13 lakh such workers. What worries the Committee is 
the reported reservations on the part of some States like Manipur and 
West Bengal in issuing Plastic Identity Cards (PICs) to the Handloom 
Weavers on the premise of avoiding m igration of such workers from  
adjoining States. The   Ministry of Textiles on their part have now asked 
the State Governments to conduct survey and issue I -Cards themselves 
for the left out Handloom weavers and allied workers. The Committee fail 
to understand as to why  the Ministry acceded to such reque sts from the 
State Governments, apparently without taking up the matter at the Chief 
Minister/Chief Secretary level . The Committee, therefore, urge  the 
Ministry to take up the matter with appropriate authorities so that I -

12 
 
Cards are issued to the remaining 7.33 lakh adult Handloom Weaver s and 
allied workers at an early date. 
16. The Committee find that there are 43.31 lakh Handloom and allied 
workers across the Country as per the Third Handloom Census (2009 -10) 
whereas I-Cards are required to be issued to 38.46 lakh workers who are 
adults (18 years and above). The Committee are left wondering about the 
fate of the remaining 5 lakh odd Handloom/allied workers who have not 
attained the age of 18. Needless to say, i f persons below the age of 18 are 
legally permitted to work in the Handloom in dustry, they should also be 
issued I-Cards by the Government. If such persons are not permitted to 
work, the Ministry should have taken up the matter at the appropriate 
fora. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to look into the matter 
and take appr opriate action as they deem fit under intimation to the 
Committee. 
17. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that out of the 
identified 68.86 lakh Handicraft Artisans, I -Cards have been issued to 
only 25 lakh such artisans. The Committee are  distressed to note that in 
their Action Taken Note the Ministry have not updated the position which 
implies that no more I-Cards have been issued to the artisans between the 
presentation of the Committee's earlier Report and submission of the 
Ministry's Action Taken Note. The Committee call for an explanation on 
this matter from  the Ministry, especially  on the abysmally slow pace of 
issuing I -Cards to the Handicraft artisans.  It is no cons olation that 
advertisement has been published in leading newspapers for submission of 
fresh applications for issuance of I Cards to the artisans.  The Committee 
are of the considered view that the efforts made in this regard have to be 
further intensified , including publicity through the NGOs, Training 
Partners, Self Help Groups, Service Centres , etc.  who have direct  and 
regular interactions with the artisans and who  are in a better position to 

13 
 
explain to them the advantages of possessing I-Cards and  the 
consequential benefits of Social Security Schemes.   
 
V. Participation of Artisans in Fairs/Exhibitions 
(Recommendation Para No. 13) 
 
18. In their earlier Report, t he Committee had noted that selection of 
artisans to participate in fairs/ exhibitions was done through a lottery system 
on the basis of applications received in response to the advertisements in 
newspapers with the stipulation that the interested artisans who had not taken 
part in any fair/ exhibitions in the previous one year should apply at the 
nearest Handicrafts Office. The Committee had recommended that the selection 
procedure of the artisans’ participation in fairs/ festivals should be made more 
transparent and foolproof so that the same group of artisans is not repeatedly 
picked up and each and every ar tisan in the country get an opp ortunity to 
showcase his/her product in popular Melas/ Bazaars. 
 
19. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have as follows: 
" For participation of artisans in the exhibitions/fairs, an advertisement 
is floated in the leading newspapers.  After receiving applications, the 
same are scrutinized at various stages and due care is given that there is 
no repetition and allotment be mad e to genuine artisans by following 
approved guidelines.  Moreover, preference is also given to the award 
winning artisans/weavers for participation in the melas/event." 
 
20. While taking note of the Ministry's submissions,  the Committee , 
however, desire that in addition to giving advertisements in leading 
newspapers, publicity for participation in Fairs/  Melas/ Exhibitions 
should also be made through the electronic media, NGOs , etc. so that 
maximum number of artisans/weavers become  aware of such Fa irs/ 
Melas/ Exhibitions and can  participate in them .  The Committee also 

14 
 
desire that apart  from according preference to  award winning 
artisans/weavers, the Ministry should endeavour and encourage the 
participation of upcoming artisans/weavers so as to enable them to 
showcase their products and display their talent/expertise in popular 
Melas/Bazars. 
 
VI. Dedicated Helpline Telephone number for redressal of 
complaints/gtrievances 
(Recommendation Para No. 15) 
21. Observing the system of a centralised portal, the Committee , in their 
Ninth Report, had desired that a dedicated Helpline telephone number should 
also be put in place to address various professional queries of the artisans/ 
weavers, besides redressing their grievances.  
22. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows: 
"The Department of Administrative Reform and Public Grievances, 
Government of India has a centralized portal for public grievances 
namely CPGRAMS wherein artisans/weavers can also address 
complaints/grievance. 
For any enquiry/grievances, telephone number of nodal officer is given 
on each and every publicity material.  The applicant is free to get his 
grievance if any, brought in the notice of the nodal officer and he/she 
can also contact nearest Handicraft Marke ting & Service Extension 
Centres and Weaver’s Service Centre." 
 
23. The Co mmittee note that  artisans/weavers can lodge their 
complaints through a centralised portal as well as  through the nodal 
officer and S ervice Centres for redressal.  The Committee, in their earlier 
recommendation, had suggested the creation of a special Helpline number 
for addressing various professional queries of  artisans/ weavers, besides 
redressing their grievances.  The Committee  feel that it should not be 
that difficult for the Ministry to create a dedicated H elpline to receive 

15 
 
and address  varied professional queries of  artisans/ weavers. They, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should make an endeavour to set up a 
dedicated Helpline number on the lines of the "Kisan Helpline" so that the 
professional queries of artisans/weavers can be appropriately attended to 
by experts in the field. 
 
VII. Inadequate Stipend Provision 
(Recommendation Para No.18) 
 
24. In their earlier Report , the Committee had been constrained to note that 
a paltry sum Rs. 100/ - per day was  being given as stipend to weavers for 
attending any training or design development programme,  which dissuaded 
them from attending such programmes as they could get at least Rs. 250/- per 
day under MNREGA. As the Guidelines in this regard were  under modification, 
the Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to finalise the Guidelines soon 
and ensure that the stipend amount was reasonably  enhanced so as to 
motivate the weavers to attend training programmes.  
25. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows: 
"Presently, stipend to the trainees is being given as per the rates 
prescribed for semi -skilled workers by the O/o Chief Labour 
Commissioner, Ministry of Labour & Employment, vide their order dated 
30.03.2015." 
26. The Committee do not subscribe to the reasoning offered by the 
Ministry, as the rates of stipend for semi-skilled workers may differ from 
State to State which amounts to  discrimination towards the weavers  
residing in States where the stipend amount may be comparatively lower.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that  the rate of stipend should be 

16 
 
made uniform all over India and be fixed by the DC (Handicraft) who has 
pan-India jurisdiction. The Committee further urg e the Ministry to 
finalise the guidelines expeditiously so that the rate of stipend is suitably 
enhanced across the country which in turn would encourage and motivate 
the weavers to attend the training programmes to hone their skills. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
 11 March, 2016                                             CHAIRPERSON 
 21 Phalguna,1937 (Saka)                STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 The Committee  note that the main objective of the scheme of setting up 
of the Urban Haats is to establish a permanent marketing infrastructure in 
towns/ metropolitan cities to provide direct marketing facilities to the 
handicrafts artisans/ handloom weavers and enable them to sell their products  
round the year to a wider targeted audience/ customers. In pursuance of that 
objective, the Ministry have been facilitating setting up of Urban Haats, which 
are owned, managed and operated by Implementing Agencies such as the State 
Handicrafts/ Handlooms Development Corporations/ Tourism Development 
Corporations / Urban local bodies. The Committee's examination of the subject 
has brought to the fore the fact that substantial improvements are warranted 
in the implementation of the scheme for actualising those objectives. The 
Committee have accordingly given their considered opinion in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
Reply of the Government 
Due attention is being given on the opinion of Committee. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to find that since the inception of 
the Scheme, out of the 48 Urban Haats sanctioned, as many as 13 were 
cancelled due to inadequate response from the Implementing Agencies (State 
Government Bodies). Out of the remaining 35 Urban Haats, 26 Haats are 
functional and 09 Haats are under different stages of construction. The 
Committee are distressed to note that out of the 09 under progress Urban 
Haats, some projects which were sanctioned way back in 2003 (Hazaribag 
project), 2007 (Indore and Agartala projects) and 2008 (Jhansi project) are yet 
to be completed. The Committee take a serious view of such inordinate delay in 
the completion of the projected Urban Haats and urge the Ministry to impress 
upon the Implementing Agencies concerned to initiate urgent requisite 
measures and expedite the completion of the under progress Urban Haats so 

18 
 
that the intended objective of establishing direct marketing facilities for the 
benefit of the handicraft artisans/ handloom weavers is accomplished. 
Reply of the Government 
 It is submitted that the matter has been taken up with the respective 
implementing agencies on various occasions and will be followed up in future 
also. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 The Committee note that there is no proposal before the Ministry to 
revive the cancelled Urban Haats. So far as recovery of the funds released for 
such Haats is concerned, the Committee find that funds were released in 08 
cases out of the 13 cancelled Urba n Haats. In 03 cases, the released funds 
have been recovered whereas in the remaining 05 cases the Ministry have 
requested the organisations concerned to refund the released amount along 
with penal interest. To the Committee's dismay, the Ministry have sub mitted 
before the Committee that in most of the cases, the Implementing Agencies 
have returned the released funds whereas the facts and figures, also submitted 
by the Ministry themselves, prove otherwise. Therefore, the Committee stress 
that the Ministry o ught to intensify their efforts for speedy recovery of these 
funds. 
Reply of the Government 
Noted for compliance. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 The Committee are informed that the DC(Handicrafts) undertakes 
surprise visits to the fields offices to gauge the actual implementation of the 
scheme as and when the need is felt based on the feedback of the monitoring 
done by the field officers. But the C ommittee are concerned to note that the 
periodicity of such visits has not been prescribed. In view of the fact that 
DC(Handicrafts) along with DC(Handlooms) are part of the Governing Council 
under whose overall control the scheme is being monitored, the C ommittee 

19 
 
emphasize that the periodicity of surprise visits of DC(Handicrafts) to the field 
offices should be prescribed so as to ensure effective and better implementation 
of the scheme as well as proper maintenance and upkeep of the infrastructure 
set up for the purpose. 
Reply of the Government 
Noted for compliance. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 The Committee note that the terminal evaluation study of the marketing 
support and services schemes conducted by M/s AC Nielsen ORG-MARG had 
pointed out that the Urban Haats lacked proper infrastructure facilities and as 
such had recommended that proper infrastructure must be provided to 
increase the sale of products. Based on the suggestion, the Ministry are 
reportedly tak ing corrective measures and have instructed the Implementing 
Agencies to ensure the provisioning of proper infrastructure for the newly 
sanctioned Urban Haats. Further, additional financial support to the existing 
Urban Haats is being proposed to enable th ese Haats to upgrade their 
infrastructure. The Committee feel that these are steps in right direction and 
should be pursued vigorously as deficient infrastructure facilities will defeat 
the very purpose and objective of the scheme. The Committee further de sire 
that similar evaluation studies/ surveys should be carried out by third parties 
from time to time so that shortcomings, if any, are rectified expeditiously and 
the scheme is drawn to its logical conclusion. 
Reply of the Government 
 It is submitted the  matter has been taken up with the respective 
implementing agencies. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
Recommendation No. 7) 
 The Committee appreciate that during the 12th Plan, some 
improvements like reduction in the area of land required to set up Urban 

20 
 
Haats, augmentation and upgradation of the infrastructure, etc. have been 
effected. Further, in order to avoid overlapping of responsibility and funding, 
the joint funding system by DC(Handicrafts) and DC(Handlooms) has been 
separated. Whil e commending the innovative measures initiated, the 
Committee would like the Ministry to strengthen their monitoring system so 
that further improvements can be effected to make the Urban Haat endeavour 
a real success. 
Reply of the Government 
 Action has been taken accordingly and state -wise officers have been 
nominated for monitoring. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 The Committee observe that in order to extend the concept of Urban 
Haats to smaller cities and tourist networks, a component of Mini Urban Haat 
has been introduced during the 12th Plan. The Committee also note that 
consequent upon a joint strategy evolved by the Ministry of Textiles and the 
Ministry of Tourism in January, 2015, it is proposed to develop way -side 
amenities like Chokidani, Suraj Kund Mela, etc. on similar lines as Mini Urban 
Haat. But the Committee note with concern that not a single Mini Urb an Haat  
has been set up so far in the country, reportedly due to non -receipt of any 
proposal from the Implementing Agencies. The Ministry have reasoned that 
since Mini Urban Haats is a new component and land is not available at 
strategic locations, the Im plementing Agencies have not forwarded any 
proposal for the purpose. The Committee are not convinced with the reasoning 
of the Ministry,  keeping in mind the fact that it is more than three years since 
the component of Mini Urban Haat was conceptualised. Needless to say, by this 
time, the scheme should have gathered momentum. Moreover, as per the 
Ministry's own admission, the State Government of Jammu & Kashmir has 
recently expressed interest in setting up a few Mini Urban Haats in the State. 
The Committee,  therefore, urge the Ministry to motivate and encourage the 
Implementing Agencies in evincing interest to set up Mini Urban Haats so that 
the poor artisans and weavers in small towns are enabled to avail the much 
needed facility to directly market their products. 
 

21 
 
Reply of the Government 
Noted. States are being requested from time to time. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 The Committee note with serious concern the alleged exploitation of the 
poor and illiterate artisans/ weavers by the middlemen. The DC (Handicrafts) 
have submitted before the Committee that formation of cooperatives and 
federations of such artisans is the ultimate objective of the Ministry's cluster 
development programme by which the role of midd lemen could be eliminated. 
The Committee, therefore, call upon the Ministry to make strenuous efforts 
towards forming as many cooperatives and self -help groups as possible to 
eliminate the middlemen from the scene and protect the genuine interests of 
the artisans/ weavers. It is also imperative to ensure that these cooperatives 
are not hijacked by vested interests and the very purpose of setting up the 
cooperatives is not defeated. 
Reply of the Government 
 To eliminate the role of middleman, Office of the Development 
Commissioner for Handicrafts has initiated various steps/schemes.  In this 
series Government of India is emphasizing of e -commerce to enable the 
artisans/weavers to sell their products directly. Moreover, cooperatives and 
direct artisans/weavers are given preference and middle man are discouraged. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 The Committee note that specific events like the Gandhi Shilp Bazaar, 
Craft Bazaar, National Handicrafts Fair, Exhibitions, etc. are being organised to 
provide more interactions/ platforms to the artisans to sell their products. 
Similar events are also organised for the weavers as well. Further, to encourage 
and support the artisans/ weavers to pursue their activities, raw material 
banks have been established in various parts of the country, depending upon 
the need to provide services like technology, raw material assistance, etc. The 
Committee also appreciate that testing labs have been set up to provide 

22 
 
compliance certifications to handicraft products and credits cards are issued to 
the artisans/ weavers by the Banks with the help of the Office of the 
DC(Handicrafts). While taking note of the various initiatives taken by the 
Ministry to support and encourage the artisans/ weavers, t he Committee 
would like the Ministry to strengthen the monitoring mechanism at the field 
level to ensure that efforts made for the purpose do not remain on paper only 
and the intended benefits are actually availed by the artisans/ weavers. 
Reply of the Government 
Noted for compliance.  Field Offices are being monitored. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 The Committee observe that information to the artisans/ weavers 
regarding exhibitions, melas, craft bazaars and other marketing support and 
service schemes is disseminated through newspaper advertisements, issue of 
public notices and organisation of various awareness programmes by the field 
offices and also through the organisation of local/ State level workshops 
organised from time to time. The Committee feel that these are steps in the 
right direction and should be continued with. At the same time, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry of Textiles may tie up with the Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting to ex plore the feasibility of disseminating such 
information also through Radio and Television advertisements so as to make 
sure that artisans/ weavers living in remote and rural areas are also benefited. 
Reply of the Government 
Noted please. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 The Committee observe that there is a centralised portal to receive and 
address complaints/ grievances of the artisans/ weavers. The Committee 
desire that a dedicated Helpline telephone  number should also be put in place 

23 
 
to address various professional queries of the artisans/ weavers, besides 
redressing their grievances. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department of Administrative Reform and Public Grievances, 
Government of India has a centralized portal for public grievances namely 
CPGRAMS wherein artisans/weavers can also address complaints/grievance. 
 
 For any enquiry/grievances, telephone number of nodal officer is given 
on each and every publicity material.  The applicant is free to  get his grievance 
if any, brought in the notice of the nodal officer and he/she can also contact 
nearest Handicraft Marketing & Service Extension Centres and Weaver’s 
Service Centre. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 The Committee note that a book titled 'Handmade in India' listing all the 
age-old crafts which existed in India, their status today and areas they were 
practised and their specialities is being published for the benefit of the 
artisans/ weavers. As most of  the artisans/ weavers may not have access to 
such publications, the Committee desire that the DC(Handicrafts) and DC 
(Handlooms) should organise periodic interactive sessions with the artisans/ 
weavers from different parts of the country and encourage the m to exchange 
ideas/ techniques amongst themselves to hone their skills and improve 
marketing strategies, besides introducing particular area specific products to 
other areas as well. The Committee also recommend that the Guru Shishya 
Parampara training programme being organised by the Ministry for a duration 
of one year at present be increased to at least two years so that the knowledge, 
technique and expertise of one generation are effectively passed on to the next 
generation and, thus, the age-old talents are retained. 
Reply of the Government 
 Schemes being run by DC(Handicrafts) have been reviewed and suitably 
amended.  Publicity efforts would be augmented. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 

24 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 The Committee note that a sum of Rs.1500/ - is given as TA/DA and 
Rs.500/- as transportation allowance to the artisans for participating in fairs/ 
exhibitions. They are also provided stalls, but some nominal rent is charged 
which depends on the particular Urban Haat or the local Com mittee. The 
Committee desire that a uniform criterion should be prescribed in charging 
rent for the stalls provided so that artisans of a particular area/ region could 
not be discriminated against and victimised by the local Committees. The 
Committee furth er desire that the Ministry should consider enhancing the 
amount of TA/DA and transportation allowance so that artisans from far flung 
areas are reimbursed at least the actual fare and encouraged to attend fairs/ 
exhibitions. 
Reply of the Government 
 However under National Handicraft Development Programme (NHDP) 
payment of TA has been increased from Rs.1500/ - to Rs.2000/ -. In case of 
artisans from NER, TA is proposed Rs.3000/ - per artisans.  Besides DA @ 
Rs.100/- per day has been incorporated. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 The Committee note that, in the past, the Ministry used to entrust any 
NGO with the job of receiving and processing applications from artisans/ 
weavers, facilitating their training programmes, etc. However, now, in its place, 
the Ministry are contemplating to entrust the job to State Corporations and 
accredited NGOs, based on the impending grading of such NGOs by the Tata 
Institute of Social Sciences (TISS). The Committee desire that the Minist ry 
should expedite the grading of NGOs by TISS and based on the inputs received, 
they may entrust the job pertaining to the artisans/ weavers to graded and 
accredited NGOs of established credentials. 
Reply of the Government 
 M/s Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) has been recently sanctioned 
a sum of Rs.3,76,200/- per month during the current financial year 2015-16 to 
streamline the procedure for empanelment of NGOs with TISS in Handicraft 
sector. 
 

25 
 
 Generally under the National Handloom Development Programme no 
financial assistance is given to Non -Governmental Organizations.  However, if 
any Non -Governmental Organization is involved in handlooms activities, the 
same is considered after due recommendation of State Government. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 The Committee observe that the handicraft artisans are covered under 
the Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana (RGSSBY) and Aam Admi Bima 
Yojana and are also being supported in indigent circumstances by the Ministry. 
Similarly, the Handloom Weavers Comprehensive Welfare Scheme with the 
components of Health Insurance Scheme and Mahatma Gandhi Bima Yojana to 
access best healthcare and insurance benefits are extended to the Handloom 
Weavers. So far as the Rasht riya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) is concerned, 
the Committee note that the scheme has been transferred to the Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare and they are in the process of restructuring the 
scheme. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Textiles sh ould keep track 
of the developments and as soon as a system or mechanism is put in place 
regarding the governance of the RSBY scheme, efforts should be made to cover 
handicrafts artisans and handloom weavers (both APL & BPL) under the 
scheme. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress made in 
this regard from time to time. 
Reply of the Government 
 Sanction order has been issued for releases of funds for the year 2015-16 
for mastercrafts persons who are getting financial assistance under the scheme 
for support to artisans under indigent circumstance. 
 
 Ministry of Textiles is in constant touch with Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare for speedily implementation of Handloom Weavers 
Comprehensive Welfare Scheme and Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swas thya Bima 
Yojana (RGSSBY) by Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY).  Progress of the 
implementation of schemes is being reviewed in various meeting.  The progress 
in this regard would be apprised to the Committee from time to time.  
Regarding coverage of handicrafts artisans and handloom weavers (both APL & 
BPL) under the scheme, the committee observation has been noted for future 
compliance. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 

26 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 The Committee reiterate that they are anguished to note that 13 
sanctioned Urban Haats were cancelled due to inadequate response from the 
Implementing Agencies. Though the Ministry have stated that non -availability 
of land which is free from all encumbrances h as been the main reason behind 
cancellation of the projects, the Committee are surprised to observe that no 
survey/ study has been conducted by the Ministry to find out the root cause of 
the poor response from the Implementing Agencies concerned to set up the 
sanctioned Urban Haats. It, in effect, implies that the Projects were sanctioned 
without taking various basic factors into consideration because of which 13 
sanctioned Urban Haats had to be cancelled. This fact is corroborated by the 
Ministry's statement that henceforth the office of DC (Handicrafts) will take an 
undertaking from the State Governments that the land proposed for Urban 
Haats is free from all encumbrances. While expressing their displeasure over 
the inadequate efforts on the part of the Mi nistry leading to the cancellation of 
13 sanctioned Urban Haats in States like Maharashtra, U.P., Gujarat, West 
Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Punjab, etc., the Committee impress upon the 
Ministry to undertake periodical studies/ surveys and plug the extant 
loopholes before sanctioning projects so as to put an end to the avoidable 
practice of cancelling sanctioned projects as well as to encourage the 
Implementing Agencies for taking up viable projects for the socioeconomic 
development of the poor artisans/ weavers. 
Reply of the Government 
Noted. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 The Committee are perturbed to note that though the process of issuance 
of I -Cards commenced in the year 2005, till date out of the identified 68.86 
lakh artisans only about 25 lakh artisans could be issued I -Cards. Similarly, 

28 
 
out of the 43.31 lakh identified Handloom weavers, I-Cards have been issued to 
around 31.13 lakh weavers across the country since 2009. The Ministry have 
reasoned that despite shortage of staff in the field units, they have been able to 
issue I -Cards to that many artisans/ weavers. Th e Ministry have further 
submitted that as per the scheme and the target fixed by the Government, 2 
lakh I -Cards will be issued every year during the 12th Plan period. The 
Committee do not accept the contention of the Ministry for non -issuance of I -
Cards to all the artisans/ weavers, firstly because the issue of shortage of staff 
has to be resolved by the Ministry themselves, and, secondly, the prescription 
of issuance of 2 lakh I -Cards every year should not in any way prevent the 
Ministry from issuing more than 2 lakh I -Cards every year. Moreover, if only 2 
lakh I-Cards are issued every year, it will take many more years to provide I -
Cards to the remaining identified artisans/ weavers. Therefore, instead of 
furnishing unacceptable reasons for the delay on th eir part, the Ministry 
should urgently decentralise the process of issuance of I -Cards and organise 
awareness camps with the help of District Administrations and Implementing 
Agencies to proactively accelerate issuance of I -Cards to the left out artisans/ 
weavers in a time bound manner so that they are not only able to avail facilities 
like social security schemes but also participate in fairs/ exhibitions, both 
within and outside the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 As per third Handloom Census (2009 -10) there are 43.31 lakh handloom 
& allied workers across the country.  Of this, 38.468 lakh are 18 years & above 
(Adult) to whom photo identity cards were required to be issued.  However, on 
the request of some NER states Manipur in particular, Plastic Identi ty Cards 
(PIC) were not printed.  Similarly, for some border area States like West Bengal 
requested for not issuing PICs to avoid migration from the adjoining states.  
Thus, only 31.13 lakh I -Cards have been prepared and distributed through 
States concerne d.  State Governments concerned have now been asked to 
conduct survey and issue I/card themselves for the left out handloom 
weavers/allied workers. 
 
 For handicraft artisans, advertisement has been published in leading 
Newspapers regarding submission of fr esh application form of I.Card of 
handicrafts artisans at concern M&SECs/field offices of the DC(Handicrafts). 
 
 Proposal is under consideration for decentralising the process of 
preparing of I.Cards of handicrafts artisans.  
 
 Awareness drive/Camps are being planned at each M&SEC/Field office 
for I.Cards for handicrafts artisans.  
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 

29 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 The Committee note that for selection of artisans to participate in fairs/ 
exhibitions, the Ministry floa ts an advertisement in newspapers stating that 
whoever has not taken part in any fair/ exhibition in the previous one year and 
is interested in taking part should apply at the nearest Handicrafts Office. 
Once the applications are received, the artisans are  selected through a system 
of lottery and sent to particular fairs and festivals. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that the selection procedure of the artisans' participation in 
fairs/ festivals should be made more transparent and foolproof so t hat the 
same group of artisans is not repeatedly picked up and each and every artisan 
in the country may get an opportunity to showcase his/her product in popular 
Melas/ Bazaars. 
Reply of the Government 
For participation of artisans in the exhibitions/fairs, an advertisement is 
floated in the leading newspapers.  After receiving applications, the same are 
scrutinized at various stages and due care is given that there is no repetition 
and allotment be made to genuine artisans by following app roved guidelines.  
Moreover, preference is also given to the award winning artisans/weavers for 
participation in the melas/event. 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 In this context, the Committee is constraint to note th at a paltry sum of 
Rs.100/- per day is given as stipend to the weavers for attending any training 
or design development programme. Needless to say, it dissuades the weavers 
from attending such programmes as they can get at least Rs.250/ - per day 
under MNREGA. As the Guidelines in this regard are under modification, the 
Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry to finalise the Guidelines 
soon and ensure that the stipend amount is reasonably enhanced so as to 
motivate the weavers to attend training programmes. 
Reply of the Government 
 Presently, stipend to the trainees is being given as per the rates 
prescribed for semi -skilled workers by the O/o Chief Labour Commissioner, 
Ministry of Labour & Employment, vide their order dated 30.03.2015. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 

30 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 The Committee further recommend that the Ministry should make 
consistent efforts to facilitate an effective tie -up of the local artisans with big 
outlets/ emporia in the fairs/ exhibitions organised wherein the artisans can 
directly interact with, and sell their products to, the big outlets. As discussed 
during the study visit of the Committee to Mangalore in January 2015, the 
Committee also impress upon the Ministry to take up with the authorities 
concerned  the matter of introducing/ setting up of booths/kiosks at major 
tourist hubs, Airports, Railway Stations, etc. for better market ing of the 
products of the artisans. 
Reply of the Government 
 Noted for compliance.  Concerted efforts are being made by taking up the 
matter with the concerned authorities. 
 
(U.O.No.1/49/2014-Parl.,   Dated 05.11.2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                           DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
11 March, 2016                                           CHAIRPERSON 
21 Phalguna,1937 (Saka)                STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

31 
 
APPENDIX-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 
Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on 11th March, 2016 from 1030 hrs. to 1 100 hrs. in  
Room No. `131’ (Chairperson's Chamber),   Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  - Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
     
  2. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
  3. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  4. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  5. Shri R. Parthipan 
  6. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  7. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
       
   RAJYA SABHA 
  8. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  9. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
  10. Shri P.L. Punia 
  11. Shri Rajaram 
  12. Haji Abdul Salam 
  13. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
  14. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan   - Addl. Secretary 
           2. Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
  3. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Addl. Director 
  4. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 

32 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee,  convened for consideration and adoption of two Draft Action 
Taken Reports. Giving an overview of the Recommendations made/reiterated in 
both the Draft Action Taken Reports,  the Chairperson requested the Members 
to give their suggestions on them, if any. 
3. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the following Draft Action 
Taken Reports and adopted them after some discussions: 
 
(i)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(ii)  Draft Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Ninth Re port (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Review of Urban Haats'. 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Reports to both 
the Houses. 
 
   
The Committee then adjourned. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX  Do not pertain to this report 
 
  

33 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations          20 
  
II. Observations/Recommendations which have     15           75%   
 been accepted by Government 
 (Recommendation Para. Nos., 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7,  
 8, 9, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19 and 20)  
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the     00                00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s replies-  
     NIL 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
 which Government’s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration –              04        20% 
  (Recommendation Para. Nos. 3,10, 13 and 18) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of       01        5% 
 which replies of Government are of interim  
 in nature   
 (Recommendation Para. Nos. 12)      
                         ----------- 
               100% 
                                    ------------ 