 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
[
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fortieth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Overseas
Workers including Nurses and Maids, Issues and Regulatory 
Framework' pertaining to the Ministry of External Affairs and 
Ministry of Labour & Employment
FIFTY
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
February, 2019/ Magha, 1940 (Saka) 
51
 
i
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR
 
(2018
-
19)
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fortieth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Overseas
 
Employment of Women 
Workers including Nurses and Maids, Issues and Regulatory 
Framework' pertaining to the Ministry of External Affairs and 
Ministry of Labour & Employment
]
 
FIFTY
-
FIRST REPORT
 
      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI
 
     
 
February, 2019/ Magha, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fortieth 
Employment of Women 
Workers including Nurses and Maids, Issues and Regulatory 
Framework' pertaining to the Ministry of External Affairs and 

 
FIFTY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
[
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Overseas Employment of Women 
Workers including Nurses and Maids, Issues and Regulatory 
Framework' pertaining to the Ministry of External Affairs and 
Ministry of Labour & Employment
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.0
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  07.02.2019
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
February, 2019/ Magha, 1940 (Saka) 
ii
 
FIFTY
-
FIRST REPORT
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR
 
(2018
-
19)
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Overseas Employment of Women 
Workers including Nurses and Maids, Issues and Regulatory 
Framework' pertaining to the Ministry of External Affairs and 
Ministry of Labour & Employment
]
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.0
2.2019
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  07.02.2019
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
February, 2019/ Magha, 1940 (Saka) 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Fortieth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Overseas Employment of Women 
Workers including Nurses and Maids, Issues and Regulatory 
Framework' pertaining to the Ministry of External Affairs and 
 

iii
 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
 
                       
PAGE No.
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
(iv)
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
Report………………………………………………..
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
 
 
 
 
 
accepted by the Government………………………….
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
Observations/Recommendations which the 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the 
 
 
 
 
Government’s re
ply……………………………………..
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
 
 
 
 
 
which replies of Government have not been 
 
 
 
 
 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
 
 
 
 
 
reiteration…………………………………………………
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
Observations/Recommendations in respec
t of
 
 
 
 
 
 
which  replies of the Government  are interim 
 
 
 
 
in nature   ……………………………………………….
 
 
APPENDICES
 
 
I.
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on  
31.01.2019.
 
 
II.
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 
06.02.2019.
 
 
III.
 
Analysis of the 
Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Fortieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
 
 

iv
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
(2018
-
19)
 
 
DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA
 
-
 
CHAIRPERSON
 
MEMBERS
 
 
 
Lok Sabha
 
 
2.
 
Shri Udayanraje 
Pratapsingh Bhonsle
 
3.
 
Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar
 
4.
 
Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey
 
5.
 
Shri Satish Chandra Dubey
 
6.
 
Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara
 
7.
 
Shri Satish Kumar Gautam
 
8.
 
Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud
 
9.
 
Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah
 
10.
 
Shri C. N. 
Jayadevan
 
11.
 
Shri Bahadur Singh Koli
 
12.
 
Dr. Arun Kumar
 
13.
 
Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
 
14.
 
Shri Hari Manjhi
 
15.
 
Shri R. Parthipan
 
16.
 
Shri Dayakar Pasunoori
 
17.
 
Shri Hariom Singh Rathore
 
18.
 
Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira)
 
19.
 
Shri Kodikunnil Suresh
 
20.
 
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav
 
21.
 
Vacant
 
 
Rajya Sabha
 
 
  
22.
 
Dr. Banda Prakash
 
23.
 
Shri Ram Narain Dudi
 
24.
 
Shri N. Gokulakrishnan
 
25.
 
Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway
 
26.
 
Shri P.L. Punia
 
27.
 
Shri Rajaram
 
28.
 
Shri Amar Shankar Sable
 
 
29.
 
Ms. Dola Sen
 
30.
 
Shri Madanlal Saini
 
31.
 
Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
        
 
1.    Ms. Rhimjhim Prasad
 
 
 
-
 
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
2.    Shri P.C. Choulda
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
3.    Shri C. Vanlalruata
 
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
4.    Shri Mohinder Paul Rana
 
 
-
 
Executive 
Assistant
 

v
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (201
8
-
1
9
) having 
been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this 
Fifty
-
First
 
Report on 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
 
Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fortieth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Overseas Employment of Women Workers including 
Nurses and Maids, Issues and Regulatory Framework' pertaining to the 
Ministry of External Affairs
.
 
2.
 
The 
Fortieth
 
Report was presented to
 
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 
9
th
 
August, 2018
. The Ministry of 
External Affairs
 
furnished their replies 
indicating Action Taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the 
Fortieth
 
Report on 
14th November, 2018.
 
The Committee considered a
nd 
adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 
6th February, 2019.
 
3.
 
An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fortieth
 
Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix
-
II.
 
4.
 
For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
    
DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA 
 
6
th
 
February
, 2019
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
    
  
CHAIRPERSON, 
 
17
th
 
Magha, 1940
 
(Saka)
   
      
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOU
R
 
 
 

1
 
 
REPORT
 
CHAPTER
-
I
 
 
This Report deals with action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Fortieth
 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Overseas Employment o
f Women Workers 
i
ncluding Nurses 
a
nd Maids, Issues 
a
nd Regulatory Fr
amework
 
pertaining to
 
the Ministry of External Affairs
.
 
 
2
 
The 
Fortieth
 
Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 
9
th
 
August
, 2018
. It contained 20
 
Observations/ Recommendations. 
Replies of the Government in respect of all these Re
commendations have been 
received and are categorized as under:
-
 
 
(i)
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
–
                                                                                           
Rec. Para Nos. 
1.11, 
2.3, 2.28, 2.30, 2.31, 2.32, 
2.33, 2.35, 3.11, 3.29, 3.31 and 3.32
 
 
Total:
12
 
Percentage:
60%
 
 
(ii)
 
Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply 
–
 
Nil
 
Total:00
 
Percentage:00
 
 
 
(iii)
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration 
–
 
Rec. Para No. 
1.12, 2.29
 
and 3.30
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government
 
are interim in nature
-
 
Rec. Para No. 
2.34, 3.12, 3.13, 3.37 and 3.43
 
 
Total:0
3
 
Percentage:
 
15%
 
 
 
 
Total:0
5
 
Percentage:
25%
 
 
 
3.
 
The Committee desire that Action Taken Note
s
 
in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action 
taken repl
y
 
in respect of the Recommendation contained in Chapter V 
of 
this Report, 
for which interim reply has been given by the Government
,
 
may be furnished to them at the earliest.
 

2
 
 
I.
 
Decline in Number of Emigration Clearances
 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.12)
 
4.
 
In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed as under: 
 
"
The Committee note that prior to the economic slowdown in Gu
lf Cooperation 
Council (GCC) countries, there was  a steady increase in the number of Indians 
emigrating for employment. The high point was the year 2013 wherein 8.19 lakh 
Emigration clearances were granted by Protector of Emigrants Offices. However, 
the s
ubsequent years witnessed a decline 
i.e
 
in 2015 it fell to 7.84 lakh, in 2016 
it was further reduced to 5.21 lakh and in 2017, the figure had fallen down to 
3.91 lakh. While the reasons for economic slowdown in GCC countries is beyond 
the purview of the ME
A, yet, the Committee are of the firm opinion that even in 
times of an economic slowdown, there will always be a demand for cheap and 
skilled blue collar workers, albeit in a reduced scale. Further, Indian Workers 
are facing stiff competition from those co
ming from other Asian countries like 
Bangladesh, Nepal, Philippines etc. The Committee exhort upon the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment through the MEA and in particular the Overseas Indian 
Affairs Division to undertake an in depth study of this issue and c
ome out with 
factors responsible for a substantial decrease in the number of Indian overseas 
workers in last five years. The need of the hour is to ensure that Indian blue 
collar workers do not lose out good employment opportunities overseas to those 
comin
g from other countries. This would ensure that Indian workers continue to 
be in high demand in the GCC countries, thereby assuring a steady flow of 
foreign exchange remittance to India, but would also reduce  the number of 
workers being sent, illegally by 
unregistered and unscrupulous recruiting 
agents.
"
 
5.
 
In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
External Affairs 
have stated as follows:
 
 
 
 
"
Besides the economic slowdown, crackdown on the illegal agents in cooperation 
with the 
State Governments and successful operation of e
-
Migrate system, 
which made it difficult to get emigration clearance with forged documents and 
coordinated efforts to prevent human trafficking are also responsible for reduced 
number of legal emigration clear
ance during the recent years. The Ministry 
prefers to send the Indian workers abroad safely and securely, than competing 
with other neighboring countries in sending them.  The Ministry closely 
monitors the evolving situations in the GCC countries. The numb
er of resident 
Indian Community in GCC countries is by and large stable and in fact there has 
been a marginal increase. Ministry also works in close coordination on labour 
and manpower related issues with GCC countries.
"
 
 

3
 
 
6.
 
The Committee observed that the
re was a continuous decline in the 
emigration clearances granted by Protector of emigrants from 8.19 lakh in 
2013 to 7.84 lakh in 2015, 5.21 lakh in 2016 and 3.91 lakh in 2017. 
While acknowledging that economic slowdown in Gulf Cooperation 
Council (GCC) Co
untries was the main factor, but which was beyond the 
purview of the Ministry of External Affairs, alongwith 
the staff 
competition posed by blue collar workers from other Asian countries like 
Bangladesh, Nepal, Philippines, etc, the Committee had recommend
ed 
that the Ministry of External 
Affairs and in particular its Overseas
 
Indian 
Affairs Division undertake an in depth
 
study of the issue and come out 
with such measures which would ensure that Indian blue collar workers 
are in constant demand in the GCC countries. However, on perusal of the 
action taken reply of the Ministry of External Affairs, the Committee are 
anguish
ed to note that the reasons attributed for decline in number of 
Indian blue
-
collar workers in the GCC nations has been attributed to 
economic slowdown in the nation alongwith crackdown on  illegal agents 
in cooperation with the State Governments and succes
sful operation 
of e
-
Migrate system, which made it difficult to get emigration clearance with 
forged documents. The reply of the Ministry of External Affairs befuddles 
the Committee. 
They, therefore, caution the Ministry of External Affairs 
to exercise due 
diligence before 
 
furnishing any reply to Parliament and 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that Ministry of External Affairs 
conduct an in depth study to know the reasons for drop in demand of blue 

4
 
 
collar workforce from India in the GCC countries and 
come up with 
concrete measures which would check this slide and ensure that the 
demand for skilled blue
-
collared workforce from India to the GCC 
Countries 
increases year after year
.
 
II.
 
Sharing of Details of ECR and ECNR Passport Holders
 
(Recommendation Pa
ra No. 2.29
)
 
7.
 
In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed as under: 
 
"
The Committee note that the Ministry of External Affairs has complete details of 
Emigration Check Required (ECR) category workers for the 18 ECR countries. 
However, it
 
came out during oral evidence that the Ministry of External Affairs 
are not in possession of any data of Indians going to these nations on Tourist 
Visas and then overstaying illegally and seeking employment in these countries. 
Also, Ministry of External A
ffairs have no details of those Indian citizens visiting 
these 18 ECR countries or any other country, who are holders of Emigration 
Check Not Required (ECNR) as details of ECNR Passport Holders going abroad 
falls under the domain of the Ministry of Home Af
fairs. Also, lack of adequate co
-
ordination between the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs 
further aggravates the issue. In the unfortunate event of any Indian citizen 
staying on illegally in a foreign nation and meeting some misfort
une, the 
Ministry of External Affairs is not in the position to promptly extend help to that 
particular Indian citizen due to lack of details. The Committee feel that the time 
has finally dawned for establishing close cooperation between the Ministry of 
Ex
ternal Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs in terms of sharing details of ECR 
and ECNR passport holders going abroad, either for employment or tourism. The 
Committee desire that this issue be dealt with the requisite alacrity so that 
online and offline da
ta sharing between Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry 
of Home Affairs on ECR and ECNR passport holders visiting abroad is available 
in real time. This would not only address the issue of persons overstaying on 
tourist visas to obtain employment but 
would also enable the Ministry of 
External Affairs to come to the rescue of stranded Indian workers abroad at the 
earliest.
"
 
8.
 
 
In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
External Affairs 
have stated as follows:
 
The concern of 
the Committee has been noted.  As a first step, the Ministry is 
soon making it mandatory on a pilot basis, for the ECNR passport holders going 
abroad on employment purposes, to any of the notified ECR countries, to 
register themselves on e
-
Migrate portal. 
  
The MEA is coordinating closely with 

5
 
 
the MHA for making available the data on the persons going overseas on visit 
visas.  However, MEA takes this opportunity to assure the Committee that MEA 
extends all possible help through its Missions, whenever any In
dian worker, 
ECR or ECNR, needs help of any kind.
 
9.
 
The Committee were informed that the Ministry of External Affairs 
are not in possession of any data of Indians travelling to the 18 ECR 
Countries on Tourist visas and then overstaying illegally and seeki
ng 
employment therein, as well as data on Indians travelling abroad on ECNR 
Passport, as these fell within the domain of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
However,
 
moved by the plight of those Indians who overstayed illegally in 
a foreign nation and unfortunat
ely met with some misfortune, the 
Committee had desired that offline and online sharing of data between 
Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs should start at 
the earliest
, so as to curb this illegal practice and come to the rescue of 
our citizens in good time. However, in their action taken reply, the 
Ministry of External Affairs have merely stated that it is soon
 
making it 
mandatory on a 
pilot basis for the ECNR passport holders going abroad on 
employment purposes, to any of the notif
ied ECR countries to register 
themselves on the e
-
migrate portal and is closely coordinating with 
Ministry of Home Affairs
 
for making available data on persons going 
overseas on tourist visas. Being of the considered opinion that this action 
is too little 
and has not been tackled with the alacrity it warrants
, th
e 
Committee
 
desire the Ministry of External Affairs take up this issue of 
illegal overstay by Indians travelling abroad on tourist 
visas and then 
facing any misfortune with the Ministry of Home Affa
irs at the highest 

6
 
 
level 
and thereby ensure data sharing between the two agencies at the 
earliest. They further desire to be apprised about the progress achieved in 
this regard.
 
III.
 
Upper Age Limit for Women Seeking Employment as Domestic Help 
in ECR Coun
tries
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.30)
 
10.
 
 
In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed as under:
 
"
Keeping in view the vulnerability of Indian women employed as domestic help in 
the 18 ECR countries, the Committee desire that the Ministry of
 
External Affairs 
in consultation with the Ministry of Labour & Employment fix an upper age limit 
for women who wish to seek employment as Domestic Service worker in the ECR 
countries. This so, as the Committee have noted that at present only a lower age 
l
imit of 30 years has been prescribed and in the absence of a prescribed upper 
age limit, the same is liable for exploitation by unscrupulous agents.
"
 
11.
 
 
In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
External Affairs 
have stated 
as follows:
 
"
The recommendation of the Committee is noted.  It may be mentioned that in 
some countries like Bahrain, Muscat and Qatar, the upper age limit of DSWs 
has been fixed by the respective local Governments to 60 years and beyond that 
age, no work v
isa can be issued.
"
 
12.
 
On observing that no upper age limit had been prescribed for Indian 
women desirous of working as domestic help in the 18 ECR Countries and 
which was 
liable
 
for exploitation by unscrupulous 
agents, the Committee 
had desired that the Ministry of External Affairs in consultation with 
Ministry of Labour & Employment 
fix an upper age limit herein. However, 
rather than complying with the Committee's instant recommendation the 
Ministry of External 
Affairs in their
 
action taken reply submitted tha
t 
in 
some countries, namely Bahrain, Muscat and Qatar, the upper age limit of 

7
 
 
sixty years of Domestic Service Worker (DSW) has been fixed by respective 
local governments.
 
Taking a cue from this reply, the Co
mmittee 
are of the 
considered opinion that if some countries can fix the upper age limit for 
DSWs, then why cannot the same be fixed by the Ministry of External 
Affairs. Accordingly, they reiterate that the Ministry of External Affairs in 
consultation with
 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment
 
fix the upper age 
limit for Indi
an
 
women desirous of working as DSW in 18 ECR countries at 
the earliest and thereby ensure their safety and security.
 
 
 
 
 

8
 
 
CHAPTER
-
II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
G
OVERNMENT
 
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
1.11
)
 
In the last few years India has emerged as a leading global service provider for 
highly skilled, semi
-
skilled and unskilled workers. Owing to the high j
ob 
proficiency, Indian workers are in high demand at various countries. The blue 
collared workers fall into the category of unskilled and semi
-
skilled workers 
and the white collared workers fall into the category of highly skilled workers. 
The blue collare
d workers are generally seeking employment in West Asia i.e. 
the Gulf Countries and the white Collared workers look for work in the United 
State of America. The Committee note that Countries of the West Asia Region 
have been designated by the Government of
 
India (GoI) as Emigration Check 
Required Countries (ECR) as in these Countries, protection/welfare of 
emigrants/workers is not strong. In order to protect these workers from 
exploitation and to ensure their safety and well being, particularly as their lev
el 
of education is low, these workers are required to obtain an Emigration 
Clearance from office of Protector of Emigrants (POE) and the same is affixed 
on their passports. However, in spite of this, there have been numerous 
instances wherein workers inclu
ding maids have faced harassment and 
exploitation in these countries. Moved by their plight, the Committee have 
taken up this Subject for a holistic view and recommended remedial course of 
action through the Ministry of Labour & Employment, Ministry of Ext
ernal 
Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs as well as State Governments in coordination 
with each other so that all emigrant workers from India have a safe and gainful 
stay during the course of their overseas employment and on its completion, are 
able to retu
rn safely to their homeland.
 
Reply of 
the 
Government
 
"The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) is the nodal Ministry for safety, security 
and welfare of the Indian emigrant workers and framing rules and regulations 
for overseas employment. The Ministry ties up with Ministries of Labour & 
Employment 
Ministry of
 
Home Affairs as well as State Governments whenever 
the need for a coordinated effort is necessitated
. MEA has a tie up with Bureau 
of Immigration, Ministry of Home Affairs, for clearance of emigrants before 
boarding flights to foreign countries, through o
nline e
-
Migrate system. MEA 

9
 
 
also coordinates with different other Ministries as and when issues arise in 
overseas employment such as Ministry of Shipping, for overseas deployment of 
Seafarers, Ministries of Home Affairs and Women and Child Development on 
t
he issue of human trafficking etc.  Following are the initiatives taken by the 
Ministry of External Affairs to 
ensure safe migration of Indians abroad:
 
Coordination with State Governments on tackling issues of illegal agents:
 
MEA has convened a series of H
igh Level Meetings of Ministers and senior 
officers of States to sensitize them about the menace of illegal agents and how 
to take stringent action against them. Last such meeting was held with State 
NRI Affairs’ Ministers
 
on 10
th
 
January 2018 in New Delhi
 
chaired by the 
External Affairs Minister
 
Measures for reducing complaints 
–
 
general practices in Missions/Posts 
abroad:
 
a)
 
Attestation by the Missions/Posts abroad
: Each and every data on e
-
Migrate is accessible by the Indian Missions in ECR countries. As a 
precautionary measure, MEA has advised all Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
not to attest any Work Agreement of Indian women workers holding 
Emigration Check Require
d (ECR) category of Passports below the age of 30 
years who seeks any kind of employment in Gulf countries to prevent them 
from emigrating.  
 
 
b)
 
Bank Guarantee
: 
In case of direct recruitment, the Foreign Employer is 
required to deposit a Bank Guarantee equiv
alent to US $2500 for recruiting 
each woman worker
 
holding ECR category Passport
, in the respective Indian 
Mission. 
 
This is to safeguard female emigrant’s welfare and to protect their 
interests.
 
 
c)
 
Verification of Foreign Employers
: The Foreign Employers
 
(FEs) are 
registered in the e
-
Migrate system thus enabling them to generate demands 
for recruitment only after the Mission/Post abroad is satisfied about their 
antecedents. Action is also taken against errant FEs on receipt of 
complaints from emigrants an
d such FEs are blacklisted. Till date 662 FEs 
have been blacklisted.
 
 
d)
 
Minimum Referral Wages (MRWs):
 
Based on the recommendations of all 
Indian Missions/Posts in the ECR countries, the Government had fixed the 
MRWs for different job categories for diffe
rent countries so as to avoid any 
complaints of lower wages being offered by the FEs. The Government is in 

10
 
 
the process of reviewing the MRWs based on the prevailing salary structures 
in those countries.
 
 
e)
 
Job Contract
: The e
-
Migrate system has ensured th
at a well laid down job 
Contract between the employer and the employee is signed before he travels 
overseas. 
 
Initiatives taken by the Ministry to prevent exploitation of Indian emigrant workers in 
destination countries:
 
 
i.
 
Most of the complaints are address
ed by the Indian Missions by taking them 
up with the concerned local authorities.  Complaints pertaining to 
employment are taken up by the Indian Missions with the concerned foreign 
employer/Labour officials in that country.
 
ii.
 
The on
-
line MADAD portal enable
s the emigrant workers and their family 
members to register their consular grievances online and track their 
redressal. 
 
iii.
 
Grievances related  to Overseas Employment in notified Emigration Check 
Required (ECR) countries including gulf countries, can also be 
logged in 
directly by emigrants/relatives or through the Overseas Workers Resource 
Centre (OWRC) on eMigrate portal. These grievances are settled by 
respective jurisdictional Protectors of Emigrants (PoEs) as per laid down 
procedures.
 
iv.
 
Missions in Gulf 
countries also conduct Open Houses on a regular basis 
where workers can seek redressal of their grievances.
 
v.
 
A multi
-
lingual 24X7 Helpline of Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra (PBSK) 
earlier known as Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) in New Delhi 
prov
ides information, guidance and grievance redressal on all issues and 
problems pertaining to overseas employment of Indian nationals in several 
Indian languages.
 
vi.
 
Missions in Gulf countries have also established 24x7 helplines and Toll 
Free help lines for th
e benefit of Indian workers to seek help.
 
vii.
 
Indian Workers Resource Centres (IWRCs), renamed as Pravasi Bharatiya 
Sahayata Kendras (PBSKs) have been set up at Dubai and Sharjah (UAE), 
Riyadh and Jeddah (Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) and Kuala Lumpur 
(Malaysia), t
o provide guidance and counselling on all matters pertaining to 
overseas Indian workers.
 
viii.
 
Migrant Resource Centres, renamed as Kshetriya Pravasi Sahayata Kendras 
(KPSK) have also been setup in Delhi, Kochi, Hyderabad, Chennai and 

11
 
 
Lucknow to assist emigrants
 
or their relatives to redress their 
problems/complaints regarding overseas employment. 
 
ix.
 
The Missions utilize the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) to provide 
assistance to overseas Indian nationals in times of distress. 
 
x.
 
Suitable accommodation to distr
essed Indian nationals has been setup in 
Bahrain, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar, UAE and Malaysia to 
provide temporary accommodation.
 
xi.
 
Labour and Manpower Cooperation MoUs/Agreements are already in place 
with the six Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) 
countries that provide the 
institutional framework to comprehensively discuss and review labour 
related issues.
 
xii.
 
The Ministry keeps a watch on the situations in various countries and, 
whenever and wherever considered necessary, issues advisories to Indians 
against visiting those countries. Presently, 
Emigration Clearance
 
has been 
suspended for 
Yemen, Iraq and Libya due to fragile and conflict
-
prone 
situation there.
 
 
Emigration Management Bill
 
The process of drafting and formation of Emigration Management Bill is 
continuously being monitored by the External Affairs Minister.  A Committee 
has already been constituted to undertake a comprehensive examination of the 
Emigration Management framework.
  
Ministry is working towards drafting the 
Bill at the earliest possible in consultation with all concerned stakeholders 
aimed at evolving a comprehensive Emigration Management framework.  
 
 
Revision of Indian Community Welfare Fund guidelines 
 
 
The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), set up in 2009, is aimed at 
assisting Indian nationals abroad in times of distress and emergency in the 
most deserving cases on a means tested basis. ICWF stands extended to all 
Indian Missions and Posts abroad and
 
is primarily funded by levying service 
charge on various consular services rendered by Indian Missions and Posts 
abroad. 
 
 
Recently, the ICWF guidelines have been revised w.e.f. September 1, 2017. The 
revised guidelines have considerably expanded the scope of on
-
site welfare 
activities for the benefit of distressed Indian nationals that could be extended 
through the Fund. They
 
also provide enhanced delegation of financial powers to 
Indian Missions and Posts abroad. The guidelines cover three key areas namely 

12
 
 
Assisting Overseas Indian nationals in distress situations, Community Welfare 
activities and Improvement in Consular serv
ices. 
 
 
Apart from assisting Indian nationals in distress abroad, ICWF has been a 
critical support in emergency evacuation of Indian nationals in conflict zones 
and in extending assistance to undocumented workers in the Gulf region. 
There are more than 120
,000 beneficiaries of ICWF till date. This includes over 
70,000 beneficiaries of the Fund during the last four years.  
 
 
 
Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY)
 
The Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) is a mandatory insurance scheme 
for Emigration Check Req
uired (ECR) category workers going to ECR countries 
for overseas employment. The Scheme, launched in 2003 with successive 
revisions in 2006, 2008 and more recently in 2017, is aimed at strengthening 
the welfare and protection of Indian workers.  
 
The stren
gthened PBBY, effective from August 1, 2017, is a major milestone in 
broadening the scope and ensuring the effective implementation of the scheme. 
Issues faced in  implementation viz scope of coverage, no information to 
nominees , no facility for on
-
line r
enewal and difficulty in certification of 
accidental death/permanent disability while in employment aboard have been 
comprehensively addressed in consultation with all stake holders. 
 
Presently, PBBY provides an insurance cover of 10 lakhs in case of accid
ental 
death or permanent disability and some other benefits at a nominal insurance 
premium of Rs. 275/ Rs. 375 for a period of two/three years. The scheme also 
provides for global coverage irrespective of employer and location and has 
facility for online r
enewal. With enabling provisions for certification of 
accidental death/permanent disability by Indian Missions and Posts abroad in 
the new scheme, realization of compensation claims has become a swift and 
hassle
-
free process.
 
The revised scheme is simpler 
and more beneficial for 
emigrant workers and is aimed at ensuring an expeditious settlement of 
claims.
 
 
Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
 
 
Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY) is among the key priorities of the Ministry 
towards enhancing skill
-
sets of pot
ential emigrants. A Memorandum of 
Understanding for implementation of the Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY) 

13
 
 
was signed with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
(MSDE) in July 2016 towards implementation of the scheme. 
 
 
It comprises of
 
two components i.e. domain
-
skill training along with basic 
language training to be provided by MSDE and Pre
-
Departure Orientation 
(PDO) for enhancing soft skills of potential emigrants in terms of culture, 
language, traditions, local rules and regulations
 
of the destination country; 
welfare & protection measures by Government of India etc to be provided by 
MEA. National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) is the implementing 
partner of the project. 
 
 
In addition, One
-
day PDO Programs have also been rolled
 
out in two Centres 
each in New Delhi and Mumbai on a pilot basis. Over 
25,962 
prospective 
emigrants have been imparted PDO so far. State governments are also being 
encouraged to initiate PDO programs in major labour sending districts.
 
 
India Centre for Migration, which serves as a research think
-
tank of the 
Ministry, has also organized 
11
 
workshops focusing on safe and legal migration 
and organized Training of Trainers  (ToT) programmes on PDO  in major labour 
sending States. 
 
 
Amnesty S
cheme in Kuwait
 
Kuwait Government had declared general amnesty for workers with expired 
residencies, allowing them to return home without penalties from 29 January 
to 22 February 2018 which was later extended till 22 April 2018. 
 
During the Amnesty period,
 
around 14000 Indian nationals returned to India 
while about 6000 got their residency status regularized. Thus, around 20,000 
Indian nationals availed the Amnesty scheme.  Indian Embassy had extended 
full support to all those stranded Indian nationals who 
were eligible to avail of 
the Amnesty offer. In addition, all possible assistance including through the 
Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) and community volunteers, were 
provided to deserving stranded Indians.
 
Amnesty Scheme in UAE
 
The UAE Government has
 
declared a three
-
month long general amnesty to 
foreign violators of the country’s residency laws starting from August 1, 2018 
to October 31, 2018.
 

14
 
 
It has been reported that the office of Federal Authority for Identity and 
Citizenship of the UAE Government
, under the scheme called 'Protect Yourself 
via Rectifying Your Status', will grant the foreigners violating the residency law, 
a three
-
month grace period starting from August 1, 2018 to either leave the 
country voluntarily without prosecution, or rectify 
their legal status by paying 
the required fee. Our Mission will extend all possible assistance and support to 
Indian nationals in this regard. 
 
Visit of Kuwaiti Delegation to India regarding residency permits for Indian 
Engineers in Kuwait
 
 
Public 
Authority for Manpower (PAM), a government body under Ministry 
of Labour in Kuwait vide its Notification of 11
th
 
March 2018 made mandatory 
the requirement of obtaining No Objection Certificate (NOC) from Kuwait 
Society of Engineers (KSE) for renewal of res
idencies of all expatriate engineers. 
KSE, on its part, made issuance of NOC to Indian engineers subject to the 
recognition/accreditation of their engineering degrees by National Board of 
Accreditation (NBA) of India. In this regard, a delegation comprisin
g 
representatives from the Public Authority for Manpower (PAM), and Kuwait 
Society of Engineers (KSE) visited India from June 25
-
29, 2018 to understand 
the higher technical education system in India and various technical bodies 
that accredit engineering in
stitutions. The delegation paid a courtesy call on 
Hon’ble Minister of Human Resource Development and held delegation level 
talks. 
 
The Kuwaiti delegation also visited regulating authorities such as AICTE, 
UGC, NBA and other prestigious technical institute
s. It was agreed that a 
master list of all the accredited educational institutes would be shared with the 
Kuwaiti side which would facilitate the process at the Kuwaiti end.
 
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
 
(
Recommendation Para No.
 
2.3
)
 
The Committee note that consequent to the enactment of the Emigration 
Act, 1983, w.e.f 30th December, 1983, the Protector General of Emigrants 
(PGE) is the authority responsible for protecting and safeguarding the interests 
of Indian workers proceeding abr
oad for employment, as well as a registering 
authority to issue Registration Certificate (RC) to the Recruitment Agent (RA) 
for overseas manpower exporting business. At present 1611 active recruiting 
agents from Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kerala, which are
 
registered with 

15
 
 
PGE. While applauding the work of the PGE, the Committee cannot but 
contemplate the enormity of the task at hand. Being of the considered opinion 
that a lot needs to be done for safeguarding the interest of the vulnerable blue 
collar worke
rs both in India, as well as overseas, the Committee cannot but 
stress upon the pivotal role to be played by PGE so that they are ever ready to 
safeguard the interests of emigrant India workers at all times. They, therefore, 
recommend that the PGE adopt a 
pro
-
active approach and use all available 
resources i.e. human and technological, to ensure safety and security of 
migrant India workers especially in the Emigration Check Required (ECR) 
Countries.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The concern of the Committee is 
appreciated.  There has been a 
considerable improvement in safeguarding the interest of the overseas ECR 
workers with the prompt and relentless efforts on the part of PGE and the 
Indian Missions.  The PGE also has at his disposal the e
-
Migrate portal, whic
h 
enables instant action against erring recruitment agents on time, in 
Suspension of RAs, grant of Fresh Registration Certificates, Renewals, 
approvals for opening Branch Offices, blacklisting of Foreign Employers etc. 
The recommendation of the Committee i
s noted and the Ministry would strive 
to put in more coordinated effort in this regard.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
2.28
)
 
During the course of the detailed examination of the subject, the 
Committee observed that the Ministry of Labour & Employment is the nodal 
department for protecting and safeguarding interests of workers and hence has 
a mandate for safeguarding the interest
s of India Emigrant Workers. On their 
part, the Ministry of External Affairs claim to be the nodal Ministry for safety, 
security and welfare of Indian emigrant workers, framing rules/regulations for 
overseas employment. The Committee note that at present t
he Ministry of 
External Affairs does not have any tie up with the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment on the issue of overseas emigrant workers. Not at all satisfied at 
the prevalent state of affairs, the Committee feel that the Ministry of External 
Affairs an
d the Ministry of Labour & Employment need to come together on the 
issue of protection and security of emigrant Indian workers, including women. 
They are also of the opinion that the Ministry of Labour & Employment should 
be the nodal Ministry for educatin
g workers seeking overseas employment 
about details of the prevalent labour laws, social security laws as well as 

16
 
 
minimum wages prevalent in a particular country. The Indian Missions/Posts 
in various Countries can facilitate the process owing to the locati
ons in various 
Countries. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of External 
Affairs and the Ministry of Labour & Employment must work together on this 
vital aspect urgently by setting up a Joint Committee of both the Ministries 
which can be
 
co
-
chaired/alternatively chaired by the Secretaries of both the 
Ministries and should comprise of members from all line 
Ministries/Departments/Organisations viz. Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship, Ministry of Home Affairs, State Governments
, etc. The 
progress achieved herein may be reported to the Committee.
 
Reply of the Government
 
Ministries. Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) 
has informed that the Recommendations /Observations of the Committee have 
been noted by them
 
for compliance.  Ministry of Women and Child 
Development (MWCD) has also stated that though it is not directly associated 
with the recommendation, if a decision is taken by Ministry of External Affairs 
and Ministry of Labour and Employment on setting
-
up o
f Joint Committee 
comprising member of the line Ministries/Department, MWCD shall not have 
any objection to being a member to the Committee.
 
 
The issues relating to the protection and welfare of emigrants and 
overseas employment are being handled by MEA. T
he Ministry works in close 
coordination with all stakeholders, particularly with MHA & MSDE and MoLE, 
whenever issues concerning these Ministries arise. MEA looks forward to 
working with MoLE on labour related matters for value addition in policy 
matters. 
However, it may be noted that PDOT Programme, by its very nature is 
directed at overseas employment, rules and regulations in destination 
countries 
–
 
an area where inputs from Indian Missions/Posts are more relevant 
for deciding the PDOT contents.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
2.30
)
 
The Committee are in complete agreement with the suggestion of the 
Ministry of External Affairs that there is an urgent need for setting up a cell
 
for 
emigrant workers in all States/UTs and appointment of a Nodal Officer who 
would be in constant touch with officials of Ministry of External Affairs 24x7. If 
this is accomplished, it would not only ensure better co
-
ordination between 
States/UTs and the
 
Ministry of External Affairs, but would ultimately benefit 

17
 
 
the blue collar Indian emigrant workers as all their details would be passed on 
by their respective State Government to the Ministry of External Affairs. The 
Committee are also of the firm opinion
 
that this cell should insist upon all 
emigrant workers to deposit a copy of their passports alongwith the details of 
their overseas employer with this nodal agency, as well as keep a similar copy 
at home with their family members/relatives. Further, the S
tate nodal agency 
should impress upon all emigrant workers of their State/UT to contact the 
Indian embassy upon their arrival in their country of employment and contact 
the embassy officials once in two months, so that the embassy is kept abreast 
about the
ir latest employment details and in case of any emergency, swiftly 
come to their aid. The Committee, therefore, recommend that immediate action 
be taken to issue necessary advisory in order to ensure that the said nodal 
agency is set up in all States/UTs a
t the earliest. They further desire to be 
apprised of the progress achieved in this regard.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The Minister of External Affairs in June, 2015 had written to all Chief 
Ministers of the States requesting them to establish a separate Depa
rtment for 
NRI affairs, in the absence of which, the Ministry find it difficult to liaise with 
the State Governments to redress the grievances of Indian workers abroad on a 
regular basis.  Later, two high level meetings were conducted under the 
Chairperson
ship of EAM with the NRI Affairs Ministers of State Governments 
on 8th May, 2017 and 10th January, 2018 respectively on safe and legal 
migration, wherein it was agreed that the State Governments will appoint 
‘Nodal Officer’ in their respective States who w
ill liaise with MEA on all issues 
concerning Indians abroad, including overseas employment. These Nodal 
Officers will also pursue the matter with their police authorities for submitting 
enquiry report on complaints involving illegal agents, which have been
 
forwarded to them. Most of the State Governments have appointed a ‘Nodal 
Officer’ in their States.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
2.31
)
 
The Committee express their satisfaction on noting that the Ministry of 
External Affairs has signed a Memorandum of Understanding on 2nd July, 
2016, with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship for 
implementation of the Pravasi Kaushal Vikas
 
Yojana (PKVY). This scheme aims 
at enhancing the skill set of potential emigrant workers in select sectors and 
job roles in line with international standards to facilitate overseas employment. 

18
 
 
The initial focus of the Scheme is on sectors that are in dema
nd in ECR 
countries i.e. domestic workers, drivers and construction workers. 
Subsequently, the scheme will be expanded. The Committee, also note that 
under Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY), the role of Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship is
 
technical top up i.e. domain training and 
certification, benchmarked to international standards. The  responsibility of 
Ministry of External Affairs is Pre
-
Departure Orientation which includes 
language and soft
-
skill training modules for migrant workers. 
Also, National 
Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) is the implementation partner. While 
appreciating the novel initiative of both the Ministries to enhance the overall 
employment quotient of the migrant Indian worker, the Committee desire that 
both Minist
ries should strive hard in this endeavour so that Pravasi Kaushal 
Vikas Yojana (PKVY) is successful in achieving its mandate.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee was shared with all the 
concerned Ministries. Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
(MSDE) has informed that the Recommendations /Observations of the 
Committee have been noted by them for compliance.  The technical top up 
under PKVY is being imparted by the National Skill Development Corporation 
(NSD
C) through the India International Skill Centres (IISC). In the pilot phase 
14 IISCs were launched and the model of training & certification was tested. 
Post the pilot phase, the IISC policy has been reviewed and the IISC program 
would now be re
-
launched t
hrough a market linked model with a focus on skill 
testing.  The MEA is working closely with MSDE towards the implementation of 
PKVY.
 
The Pre Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) is presently being 
imparted through four centres in Delhi and Mumbai. Two mo
re PDOT centres, 
one each in Lucknow and Cochin, are scheduled to be started in November 
2018 itself.
 
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
2.32
)
 
The Committee note that under Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY), 
Sixteen India International Skill Centres (IISCs) have been set up on a pilot 
basis in various parts of the Country. These centres exclusively focus on 
skilling, assessment and qualificatio
ns that are internationally acceptable. 
Training is imparted in various sectors including domestic workers, retail, 

19
 
 
tourism and hospitality, capital goods, healthcare, construction, automotive 
and security. As per the figures furnished to the Committee, ab
out 538 
candidates have been imparted training in the fifteen centres as one centre is 
not functional. However, the extremely low rate of international placement i.e. 
8 candidates from the 538 candidates is cause of concern to the Committee, as 
in the year
 
2017, around 3.91 lakh Indians were granted Emigration Clearance 
to work in the ECR countries. This yawning gap between number of Indian 
migrant workers granted emigration clearance to work in ECR countries viz
-
a
-
viz candidates imparted training in IISCs 
and then receiving international 
placement is one which needs to be addressed. The figures clearly reveal that 
majority of the potential migrant workers are still not aware of the existence of 
IISCs and the qualitative improvement that it is likely to brin
g in their job 
prospect. The Committee, therefore, exhort upon the Ministry of External 
Affairs and Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship to work upon 
this lacunae in real earnest, as to ensure that not only the number of 
candidates imparted tra
ining by IISCs witnesses a quantum increase, but also 
the international placement of IISC pass outs increases. They also desire that 
an action plan be formulated at the earliest and the Committee be apprised of 
the same.
 
Reply of the Government
 
Ministry of
 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) has replied 
that the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for 
compliance.
 
To enhance the scale and outcome of IISCs, NSDC has proposed a new 
market driven model with a focus on skill
-
 
testing in line with overseas 
employer requirements.
 
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
2.33
)
 
In regard to one day Pre
-
Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) 
programme, the Committee have been informed that Ministry of External 
Affairs alongwith Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship launched 
the same as the need was felt to orient potenti
al migrant workers with regards 
to language, culture, do's and don'ts in the destination country. The one day 
PDOT programme was piloted in 2 locations of Bombay and Delhi each and 
since its inception on 10th January, 2018, training has been imparted to ov
er 

20
 
 
8,000 candidates. However, one glaring omission which came to the notice of 
the Committee was that the Ministry of Labour & Employment was not made a 
party to PDOT by the Ministry of External Affairs. Expressing their surprise at 
this omission, they des
ire that Ministry of External Affairs also involve Ministry 
of Labour & Employment for imparting training on the labour laws of the 18 
ECR countries especially with regard to Minimum wages, social security and 
hours of work, etc., at the earliest.
 
Reply of
 
the Government
 
Interaction with Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
(MSDE) is a regular process towards modification of the curriculum and 
content of the PDOT program to include any relevant inputs from Ministry of 
Labour & Employment, or any
 
other source, regarding labour laws of the 18 
ECR countries especially with regard to Minimum wages, social security and 
hours of work etc.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
2.
35
)
 
The 
Committee desire that PDOT be imparted to all Indian migrant 
workers who have been given Emigration Clearance to work in ECR countries. 
Further, the contents of the training should be imparted in a vernacular 
medium, so as to facilitate easy comprehension 
and maximum information 
absorption by the candidates of the PDOT.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The Committee’s recommendation for expanding the duration of PDO 
programme has been noted.  The Ministry is working towards expanding the 
network of PDOT centres acro
ss the country and is working in close 
coordination with NSDC and the State Governments so as to utilize the State 
Government infrastructure, wherever available, for imparting PDOT. The 
Ministry has also organized workshops on safe and legal migration, tra
ining of 
trainers programme for Pre Departure Orientation in different parts of the 
country aimed at raising awareness and towards capacity building of 
concerned State authorities to undertake the task of imparting PDOT. MEA 
assures the Committee that the 
very objective of PDOT programme is to ensure 
that not a single emigrant leaves India without this valuable familiarization 
training. Once the training infrastructure is adequately developed, this PDOT 
training will be made mandatory before departure for o
verseas employment.
 

21
 
 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE) has replied 
that the one
-
day Pre
-
Departure Orientation Training  (PDOT) was  launched  in 
January, 2018. As on 6th November, 2018, a total of 25,962 migrant workers 
have been train
ed and imparted PDOT in four centres in Delhi and Mumbai.
 
 
In the next phase of expansion, PDOT centres are slated to open in 
Lucknow, Kochi, Hyderabad and Chennai.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
3
.11
)
 
The Committee note that Indian women are primarily employed in the 
ECR countries either in the capacity of Domestic Service Workers (DSW) or as 
Nurses. They are also aware that women domestic workers are particularly 
vulnerab
le to exploitation in these countries where welfare and security of 
migrant workers is generally weak. In particular, women travelling to 18 ECR 
countries on a non ECNR visa are the most prone to exploitation. However, the 
Committee are concerned to note t
hat while the Ministry of External Affairs 
agree that exploitation of Indian migrant workers takes place, data furnished 
by their hundred odd Missions/Post largely points to a 'Nil' figure on this 
aspect. The Committee express their serious concern over th
e cause of safety 
and security of migrant Indian women workers, especially the ones seeking 
employment as domestic helps and housemaids and recommend that Ministry 
of External Affairs in conjunction with other agencies work towards a system 
which sensitise
s the Missions/Posts on the matter concerning safety and 
security of Indian women workers working abroad.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted.  Most of the complaints 
of Domestic Service Workers (DSWs) are addressed by the 
Indian Missions by 
taking them up with the concerned local authorities.  Complaints pertaining to 
employment are taken up by the Indian Missions with the concerned foreign 
employer/Labour officials in that country.  Suitable accommodation for 
distressed DS
Ws has been setup in Bahrain, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, 
Qatar, UAE and Malaysia to provide them temporary shelter. Whenever 
complaints of distressed Indian women workers are received involving 
registered RAs, the RA’s Registration Certificates are s
uspended till they do not 
take prompt action and rescue the women workers in distress.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 

22
 
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
3
.29
)
 
The Committee have been informed by the Ministry of 
External Affairs 
that those women workers who have taken the ECR route for employment as 
domestic maids and had the misfortune of encountering problems on job were 
located, rescued and repatriated by the Ministry of External Affairs, as their 
details were 
readily available. However, in the case of women who emigrated 
under dual visa and subsequently encountered problems, the Ministry of 
External Affairs could not come to their rescue speedily, due to lack of details, 
as they were not registered on the e
-
Mig
rate portal. In some cases, by the time 
Ministry of External Affairs was finally able to trace those women in distress, 
they were beyond help. While empathizing with these victims, the Committee 
are of the firm opinion that this issue needs a two pronged s
trategy i.e. at 
domestic and international level. At the domestic level, a foolproof mechanism 
needs to be put in place urgently, which would take stringent action against 
recruiting agencies including in the practice of illegal emigration of women. 
Second
ly, before departure a thorough check of the documents must be carried 
out to bring out cases of dual visas and lastly, Ministry of Labour & 
Employment and Ministry of External Affairs must create awareness amongst 
all potential emigrant workers that for t
heir own safety and security, they must 
go through proper channel, i.e. the ECR route, so as to go to their chosen 
nation of work with confidence and a sense of security. In this regard, the 
Committee would like to draw attention to the campaign iniated by
 
the Ministry 
of External Affairs in the  State of Telangana for educating the potential 
overseas workers about taking necessary precautions before leaving India and 
contacting Indian Missions/Embassies in the countries where they are 
employed.  They, ther
efore, desire that such efforts must be replicated in the 
States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Tamil Nadu and all other States from where 
women workers emigrate in large numbers. On the diplomatic front, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry of External Affair
s must engage in a serious 
and continuous dialogue with the concerned 18 ECR countries and impress 
upon them the need to do away with the alleged malpractice of issuance of 
double visas. The sooner this malpractice is put to an end, it would be 
mutually be
neficial for all the concerned parties. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry of External Affairs initiate a prompt and affirmative action on their 
suggestion and apprise them of the progress achieved herein.
 
Reply of the Government
 
As already brought to the notice of the Committee, through two high level 
meetings chaired by EAM herself, the MEA requested the State Governments to 

23
 
 
launch a media outreach campaign for ‘Safe & Legal Migration’. A CD 
containing various media themes was ha
nded over to the concerned 
officials/officers accompanying various State Ministers concerned for carrying 
out a state
-
wide publicity campaign to promote safe and legal migration.
 
 
During the financial year 2017
-
18, media campaign on ‘Safe and Legal 
Migrati
on’ of Indian workers for overseas employment was run through All 
India Radio, Doordarshan, Lok Sabha TV and NFDC (87 private FM radio 
stations). As maximum people who go for overseas employment are from UP, 
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Himachal Prade
sh, Uttarakhand, 
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Delhi, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, 
Kerala, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Maharashtra, Odisha and 
Karnataka, this media campaign on ‘Safe and Legal Migration’ was run through 
in these States and 
in different regional languages including Oriya, Kannada, 
Bangla, Tamil, Malayalam, Punjabi, Marathi and Telugu. A 40
-
second ad on 
‘Safe and Legal Migration’ was run through the above
-
mentioned channels in 
these States. Separately, at the request of the Mi
nistry, several State 
Governments including UP have run the media campaign in different cinema 
halls and cable TV networks at their own cost. 
 
 
40
-
second ad on ‘Safe and Legal Migration’ in Hindi and different 
regional languages for one month on prime chan
nels and DD News have been 
aired. Several popular private regional channels like ABN Andhrajyoti, Asianet 
News, Manoranjan Movies, News 18 UP/Uttarakhand, News 18 
Punjab/Haryana/Himachal Pradesh, ETV Telangana News, News 18 
Bihar/Jharkhand, Colors Bangla, 
ETV Telangana News, Bhojpuri Cinema, 
Dangal, PTC News, PTC Punjabi, India News, Mathrubhumi News, MH One 
News, Mazhavil Manorama, Puthiya Thalaimurai TV, News Nation, Vissa 
Television, Vijay TV, Asianet, KTV, Gemini TV, Sun TV, Total TV, Zee 
Hindustan and 
Zee Rajasthan News have been included to reach vulnerable 
sections of the society.
 
 
The Ministry has also published the ads in Hindi and different Indian 
regional languages through Bureau of Outreach and Communication (BOC) in 
regional and popular newspape
rs.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
 

24
 
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
3
.31
)
 
The Committee note that as informed by the Ministry of External Affairs 
that it has not come across any instance/s of Registered Recruiting 
Agents 
(RAs) indulging in the business of illegal emigration. However, the Committee 
opine that the role played by unregistered agents cannot be  afforded to be 
overlooked. These unregistered agents are the ones who are indulging in the 
malpractice of ille
gal immigration. Expressing serious concern at the prevalent 
state of affairs, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs 
along
-
with the concerned State Governments/UT Administrations take speedy 
and cogent measures to control this malai
se at the earliest. They further desire 
that the law enforcement agencies at Central and State level play a proactive 
role herein, so as to catch the culprits and ensure that stringent provisions of 
Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Code of Criminal Procedure (C
RPC) are slapped on 
them. In this regard, the setting up of Nodal Agency at State/UT level as earlier 
recommended by the Committee assumes significance as it would be an 
important link between the Centre/ State agencies.
 
Reply of the Government
 
In case of 
illegal emigration through an unregistered Agent, the 
concerned Police Authority in the State is requested to take action as ‘Law & 
Order’ is a subject of State Government(s). Simultaneously, the concerned 
Indian Mission abroad is requested to take up the 
issue with the Foreign 
Employer to resolve the grievance of the emigrant as early as possible and if 
required, to arrange for his/her repatriation.
 
 
Section 27 of Emigration Act, 1983 provides that prosecution shall not be 
instituted against any person in 
respect of any offence under Emigration Act, 
1983 without the previous sanction of the Central Government, however, no 
prosecution shall be required when an offence has been committed in respect 
of an emigrant or an intending emigrant and the complaint is 
filed by such 
emigrant or intending emigrant, or on behalf of such emigrant or intending 
emigrant, by the father, mother, husband, wife, son, daughter, brother, sister 
or guardian of such emigrant or intending emigrant, or if such emigrant or 
intending emi
grant is a member of a joint Hindu family, by the manager of that 
family.  
 
 
On receipt of complaints against unregistered Agents, the concerned 
Police Authority will investigate the matter and after investigation request to 
the Central Government to grant
 
prosecution sanction under Section 27 of 

25
 
 
Emigration Act, 1983 to enable them to prosecute such unregistered Agent or a 
person.
 
 
The Protector General of Emigrants under Section 27 of the Emigration 
Act, 1983 grants prosecution sanction to the concerned St
ate Law enforcement 
agency.  Prosecution Sanctions issued to States during the last two years and 
the current year are as under:
 
Name of State/UT
 
Number of sanction for prosecutions issued 
 
 
2016
 
2017
 
2018 (Up to 
October 2018)
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
0
 
0
 
04
 
Delhi
 
0
 
01
 
01
 
Goa
 
01
 
01
 
01
 
Kerala
 
03
 
05
 
03
 
Maharashtra
 
01
 
0
 
0
 
Punjab
 
08
 
03
 
0
 
Rajasthan
 
04
 
05
 
0
 
Tamil Nadu
 
15
 
05
 
0
 
Telangana
 
10
 
10
 
01
 
Uttar Pradesh
 
0
 
0
 
03
 
 
In May 2016, Government had also issued Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) to be followed by
 
States on receipt of complaints against unregistered/ 
unscrupulous agents.
 
 
Two high levels meetings were conducted under the Chairpersonship of 
External Affairs Minister with the NRI Affairs Ministers of State Governments 
on 8th May, 2017 and 10th 
January, 2018 respectively on safe and legal 
migration. It was stated that the State Governments will appoint ‘Nodal Officer’ 
in their respective State who will pursue the matter with concerned police 
authorities for submitting enquiry report in the matter
s, on complaints that 
have been forwarded to them. Most of the State Governments have appointed a 
‘Nodal Officer’ in their State.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
3
.32
)
 
The Committee ex
press satisfaction on being informed that MEA has now 
proposed of easing of norms for Recruiting Agencies in rural areas by lowering 
the amount of Bank Guarantee to Rs. 8 lakh from Rs. 50 lakh, for urban areas. 

26
 
 
The Committee are of the considered opinion t
hat this is a welcome step in the 
right direction, which would firstly encourage people to go for legally approved 
channel for seeking employment in ECR nations and would also go a long way 
in effectively tackling the issue of illegal migration through unr
egistered/ illegal 
recruiting agents.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The observation of the Committee has been noted. MEA is pleased to inform 
the Committee that the new scheme of registration with reduced bank 
guarantee has received an extremely positive 
response in the form of 
applications from across the length and breadth of the country.
 
State
-
wise number of applications received, In
-
Principle approved and 
Registration Certificates granted under the New Scheme up to 11th Nov 2018.
 
 
Name of State
 
Submitt
ed
 
Approved In
-
Principle
 
RC granted
 
ANDHRA PRADESH
 
3
 
0
 
2
 
BIHAR
 
5
 
2
 
0
 
CHANDIGARH
 
2
 
1
 
0
 
DELHI
 
26
 
7
 
11
 
GUJARAT
 
2
 
0
 
0
 
HARYANA
 
4
 
0
 
2
 
HIMACHAL PRADESH
 
2
 
0
 
0
 
JAMMU & KASHMIR
 
1
 
0
 
0
 
JHARKHAND
 
1
 
0
 
0
 
KARNATAKA
 
3
 
1
 
0
 
KERALA
 
15
 
4
 
2
 
MADHYA PRADESH
 
1
 
0
 
0
 
MAHARASHTRA
 
24
 
2
 
7
 
ORISSA
 
3
 
2
 
0
 
PUNJAB
 
19
 
6
 
10
 
RAJASTHAN
 
9
 
2
 
3
 
TAMIL NADU
 
16
 
3
 
4
 
TELANGANA
 
20
 
3
 
9
 
UTTAR PRADESH
 
13
 
4
 
3
 
UTTARAKHAND
 
3
 
1
 
1
 
WEST BENGAL
 
4
 
0
 
1
 
 
Total
 
176
 
38
 
55
 
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
 

27
 
 
CHAPTER
-
III
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL
 
 
 

28
 
 
CHAPTER
-
IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
1.12
)
 
The Committee note that prior to the economic slowdown in Gulf Cooperation 
Council (GCC) countries, there was  a steady increase in the number of Indians 
emigrating for 
employment. The high point was the year 2013 wherein 8.19 
lakh Emigration clearances were granted by Protector of Emigrants Offices. 
However, the subsequent years witnessed a decline i.e in 2015 it fell to 7.84 
lakh, in 2016 it was further reduced to 5.21 
lakh and in 2017, the figure had 
fallen down to 3.91 lakh. While the reasons for economic slowdown in GCC 
countries is beyond the purview of the MEA, yet, the Committee are of the firm 
opinion that even in times of an economic slowdown, there will always b
e a 
demand for cheap and skilled blue collar workers, albeit in a reduced scale. 
Further, Indian Workers are facing stiff competition from those coming from 
other Asian countries like Bangladesh, Nepal, Philippines etc. The Committee 
exhort upon the Minist
ry of Labour & Employment through the MEA and in 
particular the Overseas Indian Affairs Division to undertake an in depth study 
of this issue and come out with factors responsible for a substantial decrease 
in the number of Indian overseas workers in last 
five years. The need of the 
hour is to ensure that Indian blue collar workers do not lose out good 
employment opportunities overseas to those coming from other countries. This 
would ensure that Indian workers continue to be in high demand in the GCC 
countr
ies, thereby assuring a steady flow of foreign exchange remittance to 
India, but would also reduce  the number of workers being sent, illegally by 
unregistered and unscrupulous recruiting agents.
 
Reply of the Government
 
Besides the economic slowdown, crack
down on the illegal agents in cooperation 
with the State Governments and successful operation of e
-
Migrate system, 
which made it difficult to get emigration clearance with forged documents and 
coordinated efforts to prevent human trafficking are also respo
nsible for 
reduced number of legal emigration clearance during the recent years. The 
Ministry prefers to send the Indian workers abroad safely and securely, than 
competing with other neighboring countries in sending them.  The Ministry 
closely monitors the
 
evolving situations in the GCC countries. The number of 
resident Indian Community in GCC countries is by and large stable and in fact 

29
 
 
there has been a marginal increase. Ministry also works in close coordination 
on labour and manpower related issues with 
GCC countries.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
2.29
)
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of External Affairs has complete details 
of Emigration Check Required (ECR) category workers 
for the 18 ECR 
countries. However, it came out during oral evidence that the Ministry of 
External Affairs are not in possession of any data of Indians going to these 
nations on Tourist Visas and then overstaying illegally and seeking 
employment in these co
untries. Also, Ministry of External Affairs have no 
details of those Indian citizens visiting these 18 ECR countries or any other 
country, who are holders of Emigration Check Not Required (ECNR) as details 
of ECNR Passport Holders going abroad falls under 
the domain of the Ministry 
of Home Affairs. Also, lack of adequate co
-
ordination between the Ministry of 
External Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs further aggravates the issue. In 
the unfortunate event of any Indian citizen staying on illegally in a fo
reign 
nation and meeting some misfortune, the Ministry of External Affairs is not in 
the position to promptly extend help to that particular Indian citizen due to 
lack of details. The Committee feel that the time has finally dawned for 
establishing close c
ooperation between the Ministry of External Affairs and 
Ministry of Home Affairs in terms of sharing details of ECR and ECNR passport 
holders going abroad, either for employment or tourism. The Committee desire 
that this issue be dealt with the requisite a
lacrity so that online and offline 
data sharing between Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs 
on ECR and ECNR passport holders visiting abroad is available in real time. 
This would not only address the issue of persons overstaying on to
urist visas to 
obtain employment but would also enable the Ministry of External Affairs to 
come to the rescue of stranded Indian workers abroad at the earliest.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The concern of the Committee has been noted.  As a first step, the Mini
stry is 
soon making it mandatory on a pilot basis, for the ECNR passport holders 
going abroad on employment purposes, to any of the notified ECR countries, to 
register themselves on e
-
Migrate portal.   The MEA is coordinating closely with 
the MHA for makin
g available the data on the persons going overseas on visit 
visas.  However, MEA takes this opportunity to assure the Committee that MEA 

30
 
 
extends all possible help through its Missions, whenever any Indian worker, 
ECR or ECNR, needs help of any kind.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
3
.30
)
 
Keeping in view the vulnerability of Indian women employed as domestic help 
in the 18 ECR countries, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Ext
ernal 
Affairs in consultation with the Ministry of Labour & Employment fix an upper 
age limit for women who wish to seek employment as Domestic Service worker 
in the ECR countries. This so, as the Committee have noted that at present 
only a lower age limit
 
of 30 years has been prescribed and in the absence of a 
prescribed upper age limit, the same is liable for exploitation by unscrupulous 
agents.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted.  It may be mentioned that in 
some 
countries like Bahrain, Muscat and Qatar, the upper age limit of DSWs 
has been fixed by the respective local Governments to 60 years and beyond 
that age, no work visa can be issued.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2
018)
 
 
 
 

31
 
 
CHAPTER
-
V 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
 
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
2.34
)
 
The Committee also recommend that the duration of training imparted under 
PDOT be increased to atleast 3 days 
so that the less educated blue collar 
workers are able to fully comprehend and grasp the contents of this training in 
a phased manner, as well as they do not suffer from information overload as is 
the present case scenario in one day PDOT.
 
Reply of the Gov
ernment
 
Interaction with Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is a 
regular process towards modification of the curriculum and content of the 
PDOT program to include any relevant inputs from Ministry of Labour & 
Employment, or any other s
ource, regarding labour laws of the 18 ECR 
countries especially with regard to Minimum wages, social security and hours 
of work etc.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
3
.12
)
 
The Committee
 
note that of late there have been many instances of complaints 
regarding human trafficking, particularly women. In the last one year 58 such 
cases have been referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), as it is 
the mandated agency to check human
 
trafficking. Deeply concerned at this 
inhumane practice, the Committee desire that stringent measures be put into 
place for putting an early end to this malaise. They, further desire that Ministry 
of External Affairs obtain the details of the progress ach
ieved by the CBI in the 
58 reported cases of human trafficking and furnish the same to the Committee.
 
Reply of the Government
 
As reported by CBI vide their I.D. No. 25/M
-
28/2017
-
PD/2006 dated 
28.07.2017 they have registered only 6 cases during 2015 to 2017
 
(upto 15th 
July) and all cases are under investigation. MEA will pursue the cases with CBI 
for updates from time to time.
 

32
 
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
3
.13
)
 
Another issue which is
 
a cause of concern to the Committee is the flouting of 
norms by unscrupulous agents who in order to make a quick buck are 
circumventing the rules governing employment of housemaids in the 18 ECR 
countries. Having realised that strict norms have been put i
n place in form of 
ECR column in the passport of such potential candidates, these agents are 
using the route of tourist Visa/ECNR thereby jeopardizing the safety and 
security of these vulnerable women workers. In their endeavour, they have also 
been succes
sful in gaining tacit help from the consular section of these 18 ECR 
nations. This has lead to the strange use of dual visas. While departing India, 
the emigrant workers get their tourist visa stamped by emigration officials and 
on arrival at their destina
tion, they paste their employment visa of a 
neighbouring country before reaching there for employment purpose. However, 
when they encounter any exploitation or ill
-
treatment/harassment at the 
hands of their employers, they have nowhere to go and no
-
one to 
seek help 
from. However, the Committee, laud the Ministry of External Affairs for their 
pro
-
active measure, wherein they have started mandatory registration of non
-
ECR passport holding Indian emigrants going to 18 ECR countries for 
employment purposes, on 
a pilot basis. The Committee desired to be apprised 
of the progress achieved herein and desire that it be made fully operational at 
the earliest. The Committee are sanguine, that if correctly executed, this would 
help to contain the menace of dual visa sys
tem and thereby ensure the safety 
and security of Indian women working as housemaids in these countries.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The Ministry is happy to note that the mandatory registration of ECNR 
passport holders leaving the country on employment visa 
on pilot basis has 
been lauded by the Committee.  The MEA is in the process of launching the 
process fully after issuing required advisories in this regard for awareness of 
the prospective emigrants.  Up to 7th October, 2018,  33584 registration of 
ECNR pa
ssport holders have been recorded in the e
-
Migrate system.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 

33
 
 
(Recommendation Para No.
 
3
.37
)
 
The Committee have been informed by the MEA that owing to rampant 
corruption and large 
scale malpractices in recruitment of nurses for overseas 
employment in ECR countries, the Government has undertaken a slew of 
measures to effectively handle this issue. These are as follows:
 
 
(i)
 
w.e.f
 
31
st
 
May, 2015 Emigration Clearance of nurses has been 
 
 
 
made mandatory;
 
(ii)
 
Emigration Clearance for Nurses shall be procured only through 
six State Government Agencies;
 
(iii)
 
Private Recruitment Agencies have also been permitted to recruit 
nurses for Publi
c and Private Hospitals in Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, 
Oman, Jordan, Qatar etc. through issue of 'Country Specific Order
' 
subject to acceptance of some additional 
terms and conditions 
stipulated by MEA.
 
 
The Committee express their satisfaction on noting that c
onsequent to 
the above measures taken by MEA the number of nurses seeking employment 
in ECR nations had risen to 8459 as on 31.10.2017. They however, would 
advise the MEA to be every vigilant on this vital and sensitive issue to ensure 
that our nurses trav
el legally to these ECR countries and does not encounter 
any harassment/ exploitation at the hands of their foreign employers. However, 
in rare cases of such instances, the MEA should be able to locate and 
repatriate them at the earliest.
 
 
While appreciati
ng the decision of MEA permitting Registered Agents to 
recruit nurses for Public and Private hospitals in the ECR countries against 
'Country Specific Order', the Committee desire the Government to increase the 
number of State Government RAs since potential
 
women candidates, desirous 
of overseas employment need to undertake long journey to these six 
Government Recruitment Agencies for completion of all necessary formalities.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The observation of the Committee has been noted.  The 
Ministry is 
continuously pursuing the State Governments to apply to the Ministry for 
setting up of State Govt. RAs.  Though the response was lukewarm initially, 
some more State Governments have recently expressed their desire/willingness 
to set up their ow
n RAs. Currently, there are seven State Government RAs with 
the inclusion of Rajasthan Skill & Livelihoods Development Corporation, 
Rajasthan (RSLDC). Govt. of Karnataka and Government of Bihar are also 
actively considering nominating a State Undertaking a
s State Govt. RA.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
 

34
 
 
(
Recommendation Para No.
 
3
.43
)
 
The Committee note that the MEA has put in place an elaborate mechanism for 
redressal of grievances faced by emigrant workers 
in the ECR nations, with 
special emphasis being made for the women workers these include signing of 
Memorandum of Understanding with six Gulf Countries, Jordan and Malaysia, 
creations of Indian Community Welfare Fund, MADA Portal, e
-
Migrate System, 
shelter
 
homes, 24x7 Helplines and toll free, Helpline etc. Being of the firm 
opinion that MEA still needs to do a lot more for grievances redressal of the 
vulnerable workers especially in the ECR nations, the Committee therefore 
recommend the following:
 
(i)
 
Augme
nting and strengthening of infrastructure as well as 
manpower of Indian Missions across the globe, especially in 
the 
E
CR nations, so as to speedily respond to any crisis faced by 
Indian citizens outside India;
 
(ii)
 
Make it mandatory for all Indians visitin
g abroad either on ECR or 
ECNR passport to register themselves with the Indian Mission on 
arrival in any foreign country; and 
 
(iii)
 
In case the period of stay exceeds a month, to report to the Indian 
Mission atleast once in three months.
 
 
The Committee fu
rther desire that the MEA take positive action on their 
above
-
mentioned recommendations and inform them of the progress achieved 
in this urgent matter at the earliest.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The recommendations of the committee are noted for compliance.
 
(Ministry of External Affairs O.M. No. H
-
11020/2/2017
-
OE
-
III dated 
14/11/2018)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
    
DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA 
 
6
th
 
February
, 2019
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
    
  
CHAIRPERSON, 
 
17
th
 
Magha, 1940
 
(Saka)
   
      
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOU
R
 
 
 

35
 
 
 
      
APPENDIX
-
I
 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON LABOUR
 
(
2018
-
1
9
)
 
Minutes of the Eleventh
 
Sitting of the Committee
 
The Committee sat on 
31
st
 
January, 2019 from 1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. B
,
 
Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. 
Kirit 
Somaiya
 
–
 
Chairperson
 
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.
 
Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar, MP
 
 
 
3.
 
Shri Ashok Dohare, MP
 
 
 
4.
 
Shri Satish Chandra Dubey, MP
 
 
 
5
.
 
Shri Kaushalendra Kumar, MP
 
 
 
6
.
 
Shri Hari Manjhi, MP
 
 
 
7
.
 
Shri Hariom Singh Rathore, MP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
8
.
 
Shri P.L. Punia, MP
 
 
 
9
.
 
Shri Madan Lal Saini, MP
 
 
 
1
0
.
 
Dr. Banda Prakash, MP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
 
1
.
 
Ms. Rimjhim Prasad
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
 
2.
 
Shri P.C. Choulda
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
3.
 
Shri C. Vanlalruata
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
 
4.
 
Shri Kulvinder Singh
 
-
 
Under Secretary
 
 
 
 

36
 
 
WITNESSES
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
 
 
Sl. No.
 
Name
 
Designation
 
1.
 
Shri Amrit Lugun
 
JS(OE) & PGE
 
2.
 
Shri Manish Gupta
 
JS(OIA
-
I)
 
3.
 
Shri Shashank Vikram
 
Director  (OIA
-
I)
 
4.
 
Col. Rahul Dutt
 
Director (OE
-
II)
 
5.
 
Shri Rajesh Sharma
 
DS (OE
-
III)
 
6.
 
Shri Dilbagh Singh
 
Consultant (OIA
-
I)
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
 
 
Sl. No.
 
Name
 
Designation
 
1.
 
Shri Md. Nasim Khan
 
Deputy Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri Shamim Ahmed
 
Under Secretary
 
 
2
.
 
At the outset, the Hon'ble 
Chairperson welcomed the members and 
informed them about Safeguarding interest of female workers, status of 
complaints received from women workers against foreign employers, 
appointment of Nodal Officers in State Governments/UTs, action taken against 
unscr
upulous agents, sharing of data from the Ministry of Home Affairs those 
who went on Tourist visa etc, to develop a system to know the details of Indian 
workers applying for overseas employments.
 
3
.
 
Thereafter
, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry 
of 
External Affairs and the Ministry of Home Affairs on the subject ‘Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Fortieth Report on ‘Overseas Employment 
of Women Workers including 
Nurses and Maids issues and Regulatory Framework’. The
 
Chairperson then 
drew 
the 
attention of the representatives to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by 
the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee
 
during deposition before the Parliamentary Committees.
 
 
 
 
 
4.
 
The Committee then desired to know about the necessary action taken 
by the Ministry of 
External Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs
 
on the Subject
.
 
The representativ
e of the Ministry of Extern
al Affairs informed that to ensure a 
safe, orderly, legal and humane migration process, the Protector General of 

37
 
 
Emigrants and its ten officers in various locations in India are actively working 
towards curbing activities of illegal agents, ensure transpar
ent recruitment. 
The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that e
-
migrant 
system, the Protector General of Emigrants has on
-
line facility to monitor the 
activities of the foreign employers and recruiting agents who are registered an
d 
take immediate remedial measures. They further stated that the Ministry 
launched a media campaign on safe and legal migration of workers for overseas 
employment to Gulf countries on Television and Radio in Hindi and regional 
language throughout the count
ry.
 
5.
 
As regard to the issue of those people who are going out for jobs on 
Tourist Visa in an unauthorised and illegal manner, the representative of the 
Ministry of External Affairs submitted that the Ministry requires information 
and inputs from the Mini
stry of Home Affairs from time to time and the 
Ministry of Home Affairs has been getting the information from Bureau of 
Immigration.
 
6.
 
The Committee then asked the representative of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to clarify the issue. The representative of 
the Ministry of Home Affairs 
submitted that they have the data of those who have gone on Tourist Visa year 
wise and details of fake passport holders.  The representative further submitted 
that the Ministry have data of those who have gone abroad on Tourist
 
Visas 
but they don’t have the data as how many have returned.
 
 
7.
 
The Chairperson then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and briefing them on the subject as well as r
esponding to the 
queries raised and directed them to furnish any s
uggestion germane to the 
Subject within forty
-
eight hours.
 
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record]
 
 
 

38
 
 
Appendix
-
I
I
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR
 
(2018
-
19)
 
Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee
 
The 
Committee sat on Wednesday, the 6
th
 
February, 2019 from 1030 hrs. 
to 1100 hrs. in Room No. 95
-
A, Chairperson's Chamber, Parliament House, 
New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya    
–
    
CHAIRPERSON
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
2.
 
Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey, MP
 
 
 
3.
 
Shri Satish Chandra Dubey, MP
 
 
 
4.
 
Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah, MP
 
 
 
5.
 
Shri C. N. Jayadevan, MP
 
 
 
6.
 
Shri Kaushalendra Kumar, MP
 
 
 
7.
 
Shri R. Parthipan, MP
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.
 
Shri Hariom Singh Rathore, MP
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
         
 
9
.
 
Shri Ram Narain Dudi, MP
 
 
1
0
.
 
Shri P.L. Punia, MP
 
 
11.
 
Shri Amar Shankar Sable, MP
 
 
12.
 
Shri N. Gokulakrishnan, MP
 
 
13.
 
Shri Madanlal Saini, MP  
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
 
1
.
 
Ms. Rimjhim Prasad
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
 
2.
 
Shri P.C. Choulda
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
3.
 
Shri C. Vanlalruata
 
 
-
 
Additional 
Director
 
 
 
4.
 
Shri Kulvinder Singh
 
-
 
Under Secretary
 
 
 

39
 
 
2
.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of the following draft 
Reports:
 
(i) 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
(ii) 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX 
 
(iii)
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
(iv)
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
(v)
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
(vi) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 40
th
 
Report 
on Oversea Employment of Women Workers including Nurses and 
Maids, Issues and Regulatory Framework' pertaining to the 
Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment.
 
 
(vii)
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
3.
 
The Committee took up the Draft Rep
orts one by one for consideration/ 
adoption and adopted the same without any addition/ modification.
 
4.
 
The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Report 
and present the same to both the Houses.
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
____________________________________________________________________________________
 
XX
 
Does not pertain to this Report.
 
 
 

40
 
 
APPENDIX
-
I
I
I
 
(Vide Para No. 
3
 
of the Introduction)
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FORTI
ETH
 
REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total
 
 
Percentage
 
I.
 
Total number of 
Recommendations
 
 
   
 
    
20
 
 
 
II.
 
Observations/Recommendati
ons which have
 
    
12     
 
        
 
60
%
 
 
 
 
been accepted by Government
 
 
(Recommendation Para. Nos.
 
1.11, 2.3, 2.28, 
 
 
2.30, 2.31, 2.32, 2.33, 2.35, 3.11, 3.29, 3.31 
 
 
and 3.32
 
 
III.
 
Observations/Recommendations which the
 
    
0
0
 
               
   
00%
 
 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 
 
Government’s replies
 
-
 
Nil
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV.
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
 
    
0
3
 
               
   
15
%
 
 
which Government’s replies have not been
 
 
accepted by the Committee and which requires
 
 
reiteration 
–
  
 
 
Recommendation
  
Para Nos.
 
1.12, 2.29 and 3.30
 
 
V.
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
 
     
05
 
 
         
25%
 
 
which replies of Government are of interim
 
 
 
in nature
-
 
Recommendation
  
Para Nos. 
2.34, 3.12, 
 
 
3.13, 3.37 and 3.43
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
         
 
     
-----------
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
     
100%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
                  
      
----------
 
 