1 
 
11 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-2016) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action Taken by the Government  on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in the ir Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Textiles] 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
December,  2015 /Pausha , 1937 (Saka) 
 
 


2 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-2016) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in the ir Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Textiles] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2015   
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2015 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December,  2015 /Pausha , 1937 (Saka) 
 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                        PAGE No. 
         
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 
03.12.2015. 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eight 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha). 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2015-16) 
 DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR - CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
17. Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
18. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
19. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
23. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
24. Shri P.L. Punia 
25. Shri Rajaram 
26. Haji Abdul Salam 
27. Ms. Dola Sen 
28. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
29. Shri R.K. Sinha 
30. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
31. Vacant* 
 
* Shri P.Kannan retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 06.10.2015 
 

5 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  -  Additional Secretary 
 2.    Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Director  
 4.    Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Additional Director 
 5.    Shri Ashikho Alemo   - Executive Assistant 
  
 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the  Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (201 5-16), having 
been authorized by the Committee , do present on their behalf this Eleventh 
Report on Action T aken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighth 
Report on the Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Textiles.  
2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 23rd April, 2015. The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies  indicating 
action taken on the R ecommendations contained in that Report on 22nd July, 
2015. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting 
held on 03rd December, 2015. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by  the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contain ed in the Eighth Report of the 
Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II.  
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                  DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
15 December, 2015                                     CHAIRPERSON 
24 Pausa,1937 (Saka)      STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Com mittee contained in their Eighth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants (2015 -16) of the 
Ministry of Textiles. 
  
2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on        
23rd April, 2015. It contained 13 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of 
the Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and 
are categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government –                                                                                            
Recommendations Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8,  9, 
10, 11, 12 and 13 
 
Total: 11 
  
Percentage: 84.6 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – 
NIL 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00 
 
   
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration – 
Recommendation Para No. 6 
 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature- 
Recommendation Para No. 7 
 
 
 
 
Total: 01 
Percentage: 07.7 
 
 
 
 
Total: 01 
Percentage: 07.7 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Note in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action 
taken replies in respect of the R ecommendation contained in Chapter V 
for which an interim reply has been given by the Government may be 
furnished to them at the earliest.  
 
I. Optimal utilisation of the 12th Plan Outlay 
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
4. Appreciating a n umber of measures taken by the M inistry to ensure 
regular flow of proposals from the States and expeditious release of funds to 
the Implementing Agencies, the Committee, in their Eighth Report, had reposed 
trust that the momentum gathered in 2014 -15 would be continued in 2015 -16 
and 2016 -17 too , so as to optimally utilise the 12 th Plan approve d outlay 
earmarked for various Schemes. 
 
5. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows: 
“Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for  
compliance. Ministry is committed to maintaining the momentum 
in release and is targeting an expenditure of 25 per cent of the 
budget by June, 2015.” 
 
6. The Committee note with appreciation the Ministry's commitment 
for maintaining the momentum in release of funds to the Implementing 
Agencies and targeting an expenditure of 25 percent of the budget by 
June, 2015. At the same time t he Committee , however expect the 
Ministry to be consistent in their approach in the coming years too so  
that the Ministry are in a position to optimally utilise the a pproved 
annual as well as Five Year Plan outlays. 
 
II. Maximum Utilisation of the 2015-16 Budgetary Allocations 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
7. Observing a comparatively better performance of the Ministry in the 
utilisation of funds allocated during 2014 -15 vis-a-vis 2013-14, the Committee 
in their Eighth Report , had  desired the Ministry to ascertain the reasons for 

9 
 
lesser utilisation of funds in some particular schemes and take measures 
accordingly to completely avoid surrender of funds during 2015-16. 
8. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have 
stated as follows: 
“The recommendations of the Committee have been brou ght to the 
notice of all concerned for vigorously carrying forward the need for 
maximum utilization of the Budgetary Allocation during the year    
2015-16” 
 
9. While taking note of  the efforts made by the Ministry to avoid 
surrender of funds and to maximize the utilization of the budgetary 
allocation during the year 2015 -16, the Committee  desire that the 
reasons for surrender of funds in some Schemes during the year 2014 -15, 
be looked into and remedial measures taken as warranted so as to avoid 
such a situation completely during the year 2015-16. 
III. Reduction in Budget Estimates of the Ministry 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
10. Expressing deep concern over the reduction in the Ministry of Tex tiles' 
2015-16 Budget Estimate p roposal by a whopping amount  of Rs. 4, 274.79 
crore by the Ministry of Finance based on the past trend of expenditure, the 
Committee, in their Eighth Report, had impressed upon the Textile Ministry to 
streamline their plan of expenditure on major Schemes and maximise the 
annual earmar ked funds so as to have a strong ground to get the requisite 
allocation from the Finance Ministry. 
11. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Notes, have submitted as under: 
"Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. To ensure improved utilization of funds under major 
schemes, the Ministry of Textiles is in the process of reviewing and 
modifying the guidelines to address the gaps in implementation of 
these schemes. Secretary (Textiles) has also fixed the expenditure 
targets for this quar ter to ensure funds are released on an even 
pace during the financial year 2015-16." 
12. The Committee note that the Ministry are in the process of 
reviewing and modifying the guidelines to address the gaps in the 
implementation of vital schemes like TUFS, ISDS, SITP, etc. In view of the 
imperatives involved, the Committee urge the Ministry to expedite 

10 
 
finalisation of the review and modification of the g uidelines so that the 
plan of expenditure on major S chemes is evenly paced and utilisation of 
the earmarked funds too is maximised. 
IV. Ceiling of Expenditure in the last quarter of a financial year 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
13. The Committee , in their Eight h Report, had  observed that the 
Ministry of Textiles had not been able to keep the budgetary expenditure within 
the prescribed ceiling of 33 percent expenditure in the last quarter and 15 
percent expenditure in the month of March of a financial year for which they 
had obtained relaxation from the Ministry of Finance for booking the 
expenditure beyond the ceiling prescribed during the last quarter of 2014 -15. 
The Committee fe lt that this might be another reason for the Ministry of 
Finance to curtail the budgetary proposal of the Textile Ministry during 2015 -
16 as the expenditure during 2014 -15 was not in sync with their instructions. 
The Committee, therefore, had desired that the utilization of funds during 
2015-16 should be evenly spread and in no case should exceed the prescribed 
ceiling so that the Textile Ministry could gain the confidence of th e Ministry of 
Finance and avoid any curtailment of allocations during RE 2015 -16 and 
beyond. 
14. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows: 
“All Administrative Divisions are requeste d to note the above 
Observation/Recommendations of Standing Committee for strict 
compliance.” 
15. The Committee are not satisfied with such reply of the Ministry and 
feel that by simply requesting the Administrative Divisions to take note of 
the Recommendations of the Committee for compliance, the Ministry 
cannot expect to do justice to their assigned mandate. The Committee, 
therefore, exhort the Ministry to constantly monitor the expenditure 
pattern of various Divisions under their administrative control to ensure 
that there is no departure from the ceiling of 33 percent expenditure in 
the last quarter and 15 percent expenditure in the month of March of a 
financial year, as instruc ted by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee 
are confident that a vigorous follow up in this regard will not only refrain 
the Ministry from seeking relaxation from the Ministry of Finance to book 
expenditure beyond the prescribed ceiling but also facilita te obtaining the 
annual proposed funds to a greater extent. 

11 
 
V. Evolving a specific Jute Export Promotion Scheme 
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
16. Expressing dismay over the absence of a specific Jute export promotion 
scheme, despite the Government's claim of initiating various measures to 
increase the export of jute products, the Committee , in their Eighth Report, 
had impressed upon the Ministry to evolve a specific export promotion scheme 
for jute so as to encourage reputed manufacturers/exporters to contr ibute to 
the volume of exports. The Committee further had recommended that requisite 
steps be taken to make jute, being eco -friendly, accepted internationally as the 
preferred packaging material besides achieving the export target. 
 
17. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Note, have submitted as under: 
 
"The jute goods export has shown a declining trend in 2014 -15. In 
the context of a proposal to introduce a “New Export Incentive 
Scheme for Jute Products”, Ministry of Commerce has advised that 
in the context of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) Agreement 
on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (ASCM), based on the 
current status of India as an Annexure VII country, it would not be 
feasible to provide any additional export subsidy to such jute 
products which would fall within purview of textile and textile  
products. To improve the export, National Jute Board (NJB) has 
been instructed to prepare a scheme to facilitate Indian jute 
exporters to produce export quali ty jute goods based on the advic e 
of Ministry of Commerce. The scheme should provide incentive to  
certain product groups instead of an additional export subsidy. In 
compliance with the above suggestions, NJB is in the process of 
organising a discussion with the jute mills and MSMEs engaged in 
producing jute diversified products (JDPs), to formulate a 
promotional scheme for Indian jute goods, which would incentivize 
export and diversification and help achieve the export target set for 
2015-16". 
 
18. The Committee note that with a view to improving the export of 
jute, the National Jute Board (NJB) has be en instructed to prepare a 
scheme to facilitate Indian jute exporters to produce export quality  jute 
goods based on the advice of the Ministry of  Commerce. Accordingly, the 
NJB is in the process of organising discussion s with the jute mills and 
MSMEs engag ed in jute diversified products. While appreciating the 
measures initiated, the Committee , however, desire the Ministry to 
impress upon the NJB to finalise the promotional scheme, as per the 

12 
 
advice of the Commerce Ministry, in a definite time frame , so that Indian 
jute products are incentivized for export and diversification and the 
annual export targets for jute could also be are optimally achieved. 
 
VI. Contravention of the Jute Packaging Act, 1987 
(Recommendation Para No. 12) 
19. Taking serious note of the contravention of the stipulated provisions of 
the Jute Packaging Act, 1987 by some S tates towards compulsory package of 
minimum 90 percent of food grains and 20 percent of sugar in jute materials, 
the Committee, in their Eighth Report, has desired the Textile Ministry to take 
up the matter with the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution and the State Governments concerned so as to initiate penal 
action against the delinquent personally owned mills. 
 
20. In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry have stated as under: 
 
 “It has been observed that most of the rice mills located in 
West Bengal are not using jute bags while packing the foodgrains 
and are using HDPE/PP bags instead. Through various 
communications, Government of West Bengal has already been 
requested to issue necessary instructions to the rice mills for 
packing paddy/rice in jute bags with the print/mark that the bags 
are manufactured in India.  In this context, Hon’ble Union Minister 
for Textiles has written to Hon’ble Chief  Minister, West Bengal in 
March, 2015 on the use of Jute Bags by rice mills in the state.  
Similar letters have been written to other states by Secretary 
(Textiles).” 
 
21. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that most of the rice 
mills located in We st Bengal are not us ing jute bags while packing 
foodgrains. In this context, the Committee find that apart from various 
communications from the Ministry's side, the Union Minister of Textiles 
has also taken up the matter with the Chief Minister of West Ben gal. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to vigorously pursue the matter with  
the Government of West Bengal as also with other S tates, where 
contravention of the Jute Packaging Act, 1987 has been 
noticed/reported, so that the provision of compulsory pack aging of food 
grains/sugar in jute materials is honoured and de faulting mills are 
penalised. 
 
 

13 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No.1) 
 The Committee note that the proposed outlay by the Ministry for the 12th 
Five year Plan was Rs.40,203.19 crore whereas the approved outlay was 
Rs.25,931 crore. The cumulative expenditure during the first three years of the 
Plan period i.e 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 (upto 15 th February, 2015) has 
been Rs. 9,561.65 crore constituting less than 40 percent of the approved 
outlay. The Ministry have reasoned that there is a stepwise procedure and 
consequent time lag involved in the implementation of Schemes and they have 
been able to firm up all the major Scheme s at the end of the 3rd year of the 
12th Plan. The Ministry have further submitted that they have accelerated 
sanctions and expenditure for the 2014 -15 fiscal and resultantly succeeded in 
incurring expenditure of up to 95 percent of the revised Estimate fo r 2014-15. 
The Committee are aware that there is a considerable time lag involved in the 
implementation of Schemes right from the concept stage to identifying the 
various components/ beneficiaries and obtaining approval. The Committee, 
however, do not appr ove of the 60 percent of the time of the Plan period being 
consumed for formatting the major Schemes, leaving just two years for 
implementation. The Committee are, therefore, of the considered view that the 
vast time lag between the identification and the approval of the Schemes 
conceptualized be curtailed substantially so that adequate time is left for their 
implementation within the stipulated timelines so as to achieve the intended 
goals. 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
Efforts are being made to rationalize existing schemes. The schemes of the 
Ministry have been broadly classified under 11 major heads. 
 
(Ministry of Textile's O.M. No. 2/13/2015-parl., dated 22/07/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.2) 
 As regards the concrete plan of action to optimally utilise the 12 th Plan 
approved outlay in the remaining two years, the Ministry are reportedly taking 
a number of measures viz. weekly monitoring at the level of Secretary and Joint 
Secretaries concerned, regular  interaction with Chief Secretaries to ensure 
regular flow of proposals from the States and expeditious release of funds to 

14 
 
the Implementing Agencies. The Ministry have also assured the Committee that 
all efforts would be made to sustain the momentum gathe red in 2014 -15. The 
Committee trust that the accelerated momentum of 2014 -15 in terms of 
financial sanctions and expenditure would be intact in 2015 -16 and 2016 -17 
too so as to maximize the utilization of 12 th Plan approved outlay meant for 
various textiles sector Schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
Ministry is committed to maintaining the momentum in release and is targeting 
an expenditure of 25 per cent of the budget by June, 2015. 
(Ministry of Textile's O.M. No. 2/13/2015-Parl., dated 22/07/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.3) 
 The Committee note that the BE for Annual Plan 2014 -15 was Rs.4,831 
crore which was reduced to Rs.3,500 crore at the RE stage against which the 
Actual (provisional) expenditure based on the expenditure booked as on 31 st 
March, 2015 was Rs.3,311.75 crore constituting about 94.62 percent of the RE 
provision. Similarly, for Non -Plan expenditure, the Ministry projected an 
amount of R s.866.43 crore which was clipped to Rs.683.54 crore at the RE 
stage and the Actual (provisional) Non -Plan expenditure was RE 664.37 crore 
constituting about 97.20 percent of the RE provision. Though the overall 
utlisation of funds during 2014 -15 appears to  be encouraging, the Committee 
deprecate to find that there have been noticeable shortfalls in expenditure in 
some individual Schemes/Programmes/Activities like National Handloom 
Development (shortfall of Rs.61.61 crore), Powerloom Health Insurance Scheme 
(no expenditure), Powerloom Mega Cluster (no expenditure), Research & 
Development (shortfall of Rs.10.58 crore against the allocation of Rs.12 crore), 
Integrated Processing Development (no expenditure) Scheme for usage of 
Geotextiles (no expenditure) and s etting up of Hastkala Academy (shortfall of 
Rs.9.95 crore against the allocation of Rs.10 crore). The Committee, therefore, 
impress upon the Ministry to accord due import to these Schemes by utilizing 
the earmarked allocation for them during 2015 -16 beside s maintaining the 
pace of expenditure made during 2014-15. 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. The 
reason for shortfall in expenditure in each of the schemes  mentioned  above 
are being suitably addressed in 2015-16. 
(Ministry of Textile's O.M. No. 2/13/2015-Parl., dated 22/07/2015) 

15 
 
(Recommendation No.4) 
 The Committee are surprised to find that during 2013 -14 in as many as 
50 Schemes/ Programmes, there was surrender of funds to the tune of 
approximately Rs.1,334 crore under Plan expenditure and around Rs.61 crore 
under Non-Plan expenditure against the allocation for that year. Though during 
2014-15, the likely surrender of funds is to the tune of Rs.1,412 crore. under 
Plan expenditure and Rs.187.64 crore under Non -Plan expenditure (actual 
surrender including technical surrender of difference between RE&BE),  the 
actual surrender during the year is Rs.188.25 crore (Plan) and Rs.19.17 crore 
(Non-Plan) which is certainly a commendable improvement vis-a-vis the 
expenditure incurred during the previous year. While noting the performance of 
the Ministry during 2014-15, the Committee would like to know the reasons for 
savings in some Schemes during 2014 -15 and the measures taken to avoid 
surrender of funds during 2015-16 completely. 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Committee have been brought to th e notice 
of all concerned for vigorously carrying forward the need for maximum 
utilization of the Budgetary Allocation during the year 2015-16. 
(Ministry of Textile's O.M. No. 2/13/2015-Parl., dated 22/07/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.5) 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that against the total Outlay 
proposal of Rs.7,818.11 crore by the Ministry during 2015 -16 fiscal, the 
Ministry of Finance have restricted the amount to Rs.3,523.32 crore which has 
adversely affected vital schemes  like TUFS, ISDS, SITP, Geotextiles, 
Agrotextiles, etc. As admitted by the Ministry of Textiles, such reductions in the 
Budgetary proposals would dampen the promotion of textiles industry and 
overall developmental and skill development activities in both o rganized and 
unorganised sectors. Conversely, the Ministry themselves have candidly 
admitted that the Ministry of Finance have perhaps curtailed the BE proposals 
for 2015-16 based on the past trend of expenditure which has been hovering 
around 60 per cent on an average during the last few years. Needless to say, 
the Ministry of Textiles have to hold themselves responsible for reduction in 
their 2015-16 BE proposal by a whopping amount of Rs.4,294.79 crore. The 
Committee, therefore, feel that it is high time  the Ministry streamlined their 
plan of expenditure on major Schemes and made endeavour to maximize the 
utilization of the earmarked funds every year so that they have a strong ground 

16 
 
to get the desired allocation from the Ministry of Finance to give the m uch 
needed thrust to the textile sector. 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. To 
ensure improved utilization of funds under major schemes, the Ministry of 
Textiles is in the process of reviewing and modifying the guidelines to address 
the gaps in implementation of these schemes. Secretary (Textiles) has also fixed 
the expenditure targets for this quarter to ensure funds are released on an 
even pace during the financial year 2015-16. 
(Ministry of Textile's O.M. No. 2/13/2015-Parl., dated 22/07/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.8) 
 Pursuant to the Committee's recommendations in their DFG Report of 
2014-15 regarding measures for getting viable proposals from the 
implementing  Agencies, the Ministry are reportedly making efforts which inter-
alia include constant dialogue with the State  Governments, regular visit of 
Technical Experts to the States for guiding them and monitoring different 
projects, sensitizing the State Governments to submit different proposals, etc. 
As non - receipt of viable proposals from the Implementing Agencies has 
remained a persistent cause for shortfalls in the achievement of targets, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry, besides continuing with the above efforts, 
should explore more innovative steps so as to ensure receipt of viable proposals 
from the States wh ich would consequently result in optimal achievement of 
targets. 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation of the Committee have been noted for compliance. It 
will be the endeavor of the Ministry of Textiles to explore innovative measures 
for achieving targe ts. For this purpose the Ministry has already putting into 
place a web -based e –Samiksha portal for monitoring pending issues between 
Centre and State Governments, video conferencing between Secretary (Textiles) 
and Chief Secretary/ concern Secretaries of various states. Secretary (Textiles) 
and Joint Secretaries are undertaking field visits to understand the specific 
needs of each State and to invite viable proposals in future. 
(Ministry of Textile's O.M. No. 2/13/2015-Parl., dated 22/07/2015) 
 
 
 

17 
 
(Recommendation No.9) 
 The Committee note that during the 12 th Five Year Plan the total 
allocation for the North -Eastern Region is Rs.2,593.10 crore. The BE 2012 -13, 
21013-14 and 2014 -15 provided for an amount of Rs.700 crore, Rs.463.10 
crore and Rs.483.10  crore respectively which was correspondingly reduced to 
Rs.450 crore, Rs.340 crore and Rs.350 crore respectively. The Actual 
Expenditure during these years has been  Rs.184.65 crore (2012 -13), 
Rs.232.71 crore (2013 -14) and Rs.241.03 crore (2014 -15). The C ommittee 
believe that just earmarking 10 percent of the total annual Budget of the 
Ministry for the NER serves little purpose without optimally utlising the funds 
allocated. Considering the rich tradition of the textiles in the eight North -
Eastern States, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to make concerted 
efforts  towards maximization of utilisation of the earmarked funds in the NER 
so that the intended objectives like North East Region Textile Promotion 
Scheme (NERTPS), Implementation of Catalytic D evelopment Programme 
Scheme for promoting usage of Agrotextiles and Geotextiles, Handlooms, 
Handicrafts etc. are achieved for the overall promotion and development of 
textiles in the North Eastern Region. 
Reply of the Government 
 In order to maximize the funds earmarked for NER, it has been decided 
to design and implement need based textile projects with necessary flexibility 
as per the specific requirements of NER states. Strategy and details of various 
major interventions of Mini stry of Textiles in the North Eastern States for 
optimum utilization of allocated funds is as follows:  
 
1.  North Eastern Region Textile Promotion Scheme (NERTPS) 
1.1 Ministry of Textiles is implementing the North Eastern Region Textile 
Promotion Scheme ( NERTPS) approved in December 2013 for the development 
and modernization of textile industry in the North East.  It is an umbrella 
scheme which provides for the development of projects for promotion of Apparel 
& Garment Manufacturing, Silk, Technology Up -gradation of powerlooms, 
Handloom and Handicrafts. The Scheme has a total outlay of Rs 1038.10 crore 
for implementation in the 12th Plan. 
 
1.2 The specific objectives of the scheme include increase in the value of 
textile production, technology up -gradation, improvement in design capability, 
diversification of product lines and value addition, better access to domestic 
and export markets, clusterisation and improvement in labour productivity, 
market access & market promotion. Out of the total outlay of Rs 1038.10 crore, 

18 
 
so far projects of about Rs. 900 crore have been sanctioned under NERTPS. A 
few major initiatives under NERTPS are given as below: 
 
(a)  Apparel & Garment Making Centers under NERTPS 
A landmark initiative under NERTPS for construction of Appare l and Garment 
manufacturing Centres in the NE States was launched recently with the 
announcement of Hon’ble Prime Minister on 1st December 2014 in Nagaland. 
The objective of the scheme is to promote employment in the NE States and 
encourage entrepreneurshi p especially amongst women in the area of 
garmenting which has a huge potential both within the country and abroad. 
Under the proposed intervention, the Centre would provide assistance @ Rs 
18.18 crore per State for the construction of physical infrastruct ure and 
purchase of machinery and capacity building for setting up of Apparel and 
Garment Centres. National Building Construction Company Ltd (NBCC) has 
been identified as the executing agency for the infrastructure component 
(construction of workspaces an d for Supply/installation and commissioning of 
machinery). Foundation Stone for Apparel & Garment Making Centre have 
been laid in all the eight North East States. Construction work has started in 
most of the states. 
 
(b)   Development of Silk Sector under NERTPS 
 
Integrated Sericulture Development Project in the North East State  are taken 
up with the aim to increase the value of textile production, technology up -
gradation,  improvement in design capability, diversification  of product lines 
and value addition, better access to domestic and export markets, improvement 
in labour productivity, market access & market promotion. Following projects 
are undertaken for development of sericulture in NER. 
 
(i) Integrated Sericulture D evelopment Project has been sanctioned to 
Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC), Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and 
Tripura with the total project cost of about Rs. 177 crores under NERTPS for 
focussed interventions in the areas of seed grainages, chowkie reari ng, rearing 
house, post cocoon and capacity building activities. 
 
(ii) Proposal of creation of seed infrastructure for mulberry, muga and eri in 
North East has been sanctioned to Central Silk Board with a view to address 
the basic seed requirement of Eri and Muga  in NER states. 
 

19 
 
(iii) Intensive Bivoltine Sericulture Development Project with a total project 
cost of about Rs 130 crores has been sanctioned to all NE States which aims at 
production of international standard Bivoltine Silk by increasing the 
productivity and lowering the production cost by upgrading the skills of women 
and providing them with appropriate technology. 
 
(iv) A project for constructing Silk Printing Unit with a GoI support of Rs 
3.41 crores has been sanctioned to Government of Tripura. 
 
(c)   Handloom Sector:  
 
The North Eastern States accounts for more than 50 per cent of the handlooms 
in the country. The NERTPS aims to modernize the handloom sector in North 
Eastern Region by technology upgradation, improvement in design capability, 
diversification of product lines and value addition, improving access to 
domestic and export markets, clusterization and improvement in labour 
productivity.  Following projects have been sanctioned in this direction: 
(i) Cluster Development Project for Handloom   
(ii) Technology Upgradation for Handlooms  
(iii) Market promotion for Handloom products  
(d) Handicrafts Sector:  
(i) A project for development of Hand crafted Bamboo, Natural Fibre and 
Textile based clusters has been sanctioned in the state of Assam.  
(ii) A project with GoI support of Rs 6.59 crores has been sanctioned to 
Nagaland for Development of Bamboo, Cane and Wood based Handicraft 
(iii) Project for Comprehensive Development of North -Eastern Handicrafts 
with total project cost of Rs 12.48 cr   has been sanctioned under NERTPS for  
marketing promotion of  handicraft projects of NER and national and 
international market.  
 
(e) Powerloom Sector 
 
Comprehensive Powerloom Development Projects under NERTPS have 
been sanctioned in the States of Manipur and Sikkim to promote power loom in 
the NER States. 
  
 
 
 

20 
 
2. Scheme of Geotechnical Textiles 
2.1 Ministry of Textiles has approved the Scheme for Promotion of Usage of 
Geotechnical Textiles in the North Eastern Region of India scheme for 5 years 
from 2014-15 to 2018-19 with a financial outlay of Rs. 427 Crores. 
 
2.2 The scheme has the following basic objectives: 
(a) To demonstrate use of geotechnical textiles as a  modern cost -effective 
technology in the development of infrastructure in fragile ge ological conditions 
of NER; 
(b) To improve the durability, function and life of infrastructure in NER, 
while bringing down the life cycle cost of the projects; 
(c) To promote the use of geotechnical textiles material and create a market 
for these products in the NER by inducing demand in infrastructure 
development; 
(d) To stimulate investment and development of technical textile industry in 
the NER and rest of the country.  
 (Ministry of Textile's O.M. No. 2/13/2015-Parl., dated 22/07/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.10) 
 The Committee were apprised that special attention is being given to the 
development of the NER in general and the generation of productive 
employment for the youth and women in particular by 'setting up Centres for 
production of garments and appa rels' in each North Eastern State. In view of 
the fact that the Scheme has been taken up with the objective of promoting 
employment in the NE States, the Committee exhort the Ministry to accord top 
priority to the fruition of the Scheme as a component of N ERTPS, so as to 
encourage and promote entrepreneurship especially amongst women of North 
Eastern Region in the field of garmenting which has a huge potential both 
within the country and abroad. The Committee further desire that requisite 
and innovative  me asures be undertaken to develop/ expand the marketing of 
the textile produce since production of textile items takes place on a small 
scale in North Eastern Region due to the geographical isolation and difficult 
terrain of the region. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry has launched the construction of Apparel and Garment making 
centres in all North Eastern States through a landmark initiative under North 
East Region Textile Promotion Scheme (NERTPS) of the Ministry. This 

21 
 
intervention marks the beginn ing of organized textile industry in North -East 
Region and promotes entrepreneurship in local youth. As regards marketing 
facility of NER products, it may be noted that Rs. 82.50 crores has been 
sanctioned for activities pertaining to market promotion of N E Textiles and 
Handlooms In addition, a project for Rs. 12.48 crore has been sanctioned to 
EPCH for organising exhibitions, trade events, summit and conferences and 
printing and circulation of catalogues in the international market, with an 
objective to cr eate awareness and promote marketing of North East Textile 
products. Details of various projects sanctioned under NERTPS is given in 
Annexure.  
(Ministry of Textile's O.M. No. 2/13/2015-Parl., dated 22/07/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.11) 
The Committee observe  that in 2012 -13, 1,69,000 MT of Jute  worth 
Rs.1,281.98 crore was exported whereas in 2013 -14 it was 1,65,000 MT worth 
Rs.2,121.94 crore. Export target of jute during 2014 -15 was US $520 million 
(Rs.3,120 crore) and the estimated achievement is US $293 mi llion (Rs.1,760 
crore) constituting  about 56 percent of the export target. The reasons for 
decline in exports have been attributed to inadequate overseas demand, 
competition from synthetics, lack of eco friendly brands and internationally 
accepted standards, absence of specific export promotion scheme for Jute and 
cheaper labour, capital and power cost in Bangladesh resulting in stiff price 
competition. The Committee are aware of the constraints of cheaper cost in 
Bangladesh and inadequate overseas demand resulting in the decline of Jute 
export in 2014-15. The Committee, however,  outright reject other reasons like 
absence of specific export promotion scheme for jute, lack of eco -friendly and 
internationally accepted brands. It is incomprehensible that a sp ecific export 
promotion scheme has not been put in place so far, that too when the 
Government claims of taking various steps to increase the export of jute goods 
including incentives to the exporters to increase the production and improve 
export marker for diversified jute products. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to initiate immediate measures and take up the matter at the 
appropriate fora to evolve a specific export promotion scheme for jute so that 
large manufacturers/ exporters are encourage d to contribute to the volume of 
exports. The Committee also desire that requisite steps be taken to develop 
jute, being eco-friendly, as internationally accepted brand so that it is accepted 
overseas as the preferred packaging material and the export targ et of Rs.2000 
crore set for the year 2015-16 is also achieved. 
 

22 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The jute goods export has shown a declining trend in 2014 -15. In the 
context of a proposal to introduce a “New Export Incentive Scheme for Jute 
Products”, Ministry of Commerce has advised that in the context of the World 
Trade Organisation (WTO) Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing 
Measures (ASCM), based on the current status of India as an Annexure VII 
country, it would not be feasible to provide any additional to  such jute 
products which would fall within purview of textile and textile products. To 
improve the export, National Jute Board (NJB) has been instructed to prepare a 
scheme to facilitate Indian jute exporters to produce export quality jute goods 
based on the advi ce of Ministry of Commerce. The scheme should provide 
incentive to certain product groups instead of an additional export subsidy. In 
compliance with the above suggestions, NJB is in the process of organising a 
discussion with the jute mills and MSMEs engaged in producing jute diversified 
products (JDPs), to formulate a promotional scheme for Indian jute goods, 
which would incentivize export and diversification and help achieve the export 
target set for 2015-16. 
 
 (Ministry of Textile's O.M. No. 2/13/2015-Parl., dated 22/07/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.12) 
 The Committee note that the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) has considered and approved on 20th January, 2015 the Textiles 
Ministry's proposal stipulating that minimum of 90 percent o f foodgrains and 
minimum 20 percent of sugar to be compulsorily packed in  jute packaging 
materials. In this context, the Ministry have submitted that the entire 
mechanism is being monitored by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & 
Public Distribution. The Ministry have further stated that rice millers in some 
States are reportedly not using required quantity of jute bags for packing rice. 
The Committee take serious note of the contravention of the stipulated 
provisions and desire that the matter be take n up with the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution and the State Governments 
concerned so that penal action is initiated as per the Statutory provisions of 
the JP on Act, 1987, against those owners of the company or persons who 
contravene the provisions of the Act. 
Reply of the Government 
 It has been observed that most of the rice mills located in West Bengal 
are not using jute bags while packing the foodgrains and are using HDPE/PP 
bags instead. Through various communications, Governme nt of West Bengal 

23 
 
has already been requested to issue necessary instructions to the rice mills for 
packing paddy/rice in jute bags with the print/mark that the bags are 
manufactured in India.  In this context, Hon’ble Union Minister for Textiles has 
written to Hon’ble Chief Minister, West Bengal in March, 2015 on the use of 
Jute Bags by rice mills in the state.  Similar letters have been written to other 
states by Secretary (Textiles). 
 (Ministry of Textile's O.M. No. 2/13/2015-Parl., dated 22/07/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.13) 
 The Government are reportedly taking a number of steps for the benefit 
of the jute industry including workers, artisans and jute farmers. Such 
measures inter-alia include launching of the Jute Technology Mission, fixing 
Minimum Supp ort Price for raw jute, developing better jute  seeds and 
improving agronomical practices for jute cultivation, demonstrating alternate 
retting technology to farmers to improve the fibre quality of jute, encouraging 
extensive research in jute in order to i ncrease production of Jute Diversified 
Products (JDP), promoting R&D to diversify the usage of jute in composites, 
paper industry, automobiles etc. In view of the significance of jute in India's 
economy in providing sustenance to more than four million peo ple including 
jute farmers, workers, labourers and self - employed artisans and weavers 
especially in the Eastern and North Eastern part of the Country, the Committee 
exhort the Ministry to intensity the measures already initiated besides 
exploring new market avenues for leveraging and promoting use and export of 
jute and jute products both inside and outside the Country so as to attain and 
sustain a pre -eminent global standing as well as to ameliorate the otherwise 
deplorable economic conditions of millions  of jute farmers, workers and 
artisans. 
Reply of the Government 
In addition, the following initiatives is being taken up for the benefit of the jute 
industry including workers, artisans and jute farmers:-  
 
(i) The Govt. of India encourages extensive resea rch in jute in order to 
increase production of Jute Diversified Products (JDPs) and promotion of Jute 
Geotextiles (JGT), which is one of the most important diversified jute products 
with huge potential to have large scale application.  National Jute Board (NJB), 
a statutory body under this Ministry explores new market avenues for boosting 
use of jute goods to promote/increase the use of jute/jute products in the 
country and abroad.  NJB regularly organises trade fairs in India and abroad to 
explore new markets for boosting use of jute goods.   

24 
 
(ii) Linkage has also been established with National Institute of Design (NID) 
for (i) Setting up of Jute Design Cell for Shopping Bags and Lifestyle 
Accessories  at NID PG Campus, Gandhinagar and an MoU has been signe d in 
May, 2015.   
(iii) Currently an international project on JGT with the major funding by the 
Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), a financial institution under the UN 
and with support from the Governments of India & Bangladesh is in progress. 
The project with a total of 26 field trials spread over the two countries (16 in 
India & 10 in Bangladesh) will end in June 2016. Field trials with JGT have 
been conducted in both the countries country in areas of low volume road 
construction, riverbank erosion contro l and hill slope stabilization under 
varying geotechnical and climatic parameters. Performance in each such 
application is being evaluated. The standardization of these products for 
international acceptability is in process. 
(iv) On constant persuasion by Ministry of Textiles, recently the Govt. of 
West Bengal has issued an order on 23.02.2015 directing use of jute in 
connection with construction works of engineering departments and 
organizations of the State Govt., wherever applicable and appropriate. It i s 
expected that other State Govts. would also come forward with similar initiative 
for use of JGT in the appropriate areas of application.  
(v) The project Jute -ICARE (Jute: Improved Cultivation and Advanced 
Retting Exercise) has been launched in select blocks, where jute cultivation is 
popular with a view to improving the income of farmers through improvement 
in yield and the quality of the fibres.   The Jute Corporation of India (JCI), 
Central Research Institute for jute and Allied Fibres (CRIJAF), an R& D 
organization under the Ministry of Agriculture and National Jute Board (NJB) 
are jointly implementing the project on a pilot basis.The main components of 
the Jute-ICARE are as follows:- 
 
(1)    Provision of certified hybrid seeds  (JRO -524) to all jute farmers 
through the Departmental Purchase Centres (DPC) of Jute Corporation of India 
(JCI) and Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies (PACS). 
(2)    Providing sowing and weeding machines developed by Central Research 
Institute for Jute & Allied Fibres (CRIJAF) to the farmers through the PACS. 
(3)   Training of jute farmers in better agronomic practices  through PACS, 
JCI and CRIJAF. 
(4)    Free / subsidized ‘Sona’ microbial consortium developed by CRIJAF for 
use in jute retting through PACS. 
 
 National Jute Board earmarked two Blocks namely, Karimpur – I 
&Karimpur – II under Nadia District of West Bengal and (ii) Berhampore Block 

25 
 
under Murshidabad District of West Bengal.  Total area of 10000 hectares 
covering over 15000 farmers ha s been identified in the project.  Training and 
seed distribution works have been started in the above mentioned blocks in 
West Bengal. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No.. 2/13/2015-Parl., dated 22/07/ 2015) 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No.6) 
 As per the instructions of the Ministry of Finance, the ceiling of 33 
percent expenditure in the last quarter and 15 percent expenditure in the 
month of March of a financial year have to be observed by all the Ministerial 
Departments. Though the Ministry of Textiles have claimed that all the Units of 
the Ministry have been instructed round the year to strictly adhere to these 
Guidelines/ Instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance, the Committee find 
that the Ministry of  Textiles have not been able to keep the expenditure within 
the prescribed ceiling for which relaxation was obtained from the Ministry of 
Finance for booking the expenditure beyond the ceiling prescribed during the 
last quarter of 2014 -15. The Committee fe el that this might be another reason 
for the Ministry of Finance to curtail the budgetary proposal of the Textile 
Ministry during 2015 -16 as the expenditure during 2014 -15 was not in sync 
with their instructions. The Committee, therefore, desire that the u tilization of 
funds during 2015 -16 should be evenly spread and in no case should exceed 
the prescribed ceiling so that the Textile Ministry could gain the confidence of 
the Ministry of Finance and avoid any curtailment of allocations during RE 
2015-16 and beyond. 
Reply of the Government 
 All Administrative Divisions are requested to note the above observation 
recommendations of Standing Committee for strict Compliance. 
 (Ministry of Textile's O.M. No. 2/13/2015-Parl., dated 22/07/2015) 
 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation No.7) 
 
 The Committee note that in a number of Schemes the Ministry's 
performance has been dismal in achieving the physical targets set during t he 
year 2014 -15. Schemes/ Programmes where shortfalls have been observed 
inter-alia include Ambedkar Hastshilp Vikas Yojna (AHVY), Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi 
Swasthya Bima Yojna (RGSSBY), Janashree Bima Yojna (JBY), Group 
Insurance Scheme (GIS) and Health Insuran ce Scheme (HIS) in the Powerloom 
Sector, TUFS, Integrated Textile Park and Human Resource Development. For 
shortfalls in the achievement of targets in the above Schemes, the Ministry 
have cited reasons like budget allocation falling short of meeting fresh 
liabilities, merger of Health Insurance schemes, late approval of EFC, failure of 
State Governments in according environmental clearance and providing power 
and water infrastructure, etc. The Committee are distressed to note that almost 
the same reasons ar e being advanced by the Ministry every year for shortfalls 
in meeting the annual physical targets. The Ministry have assured that they 
are taking a number of measures like periodical meeting of the Union Minister 
of Textiles with the Textile Ministers of all the States and also that of the Textile 
Secretary with the Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of the States, field 
level visits, etc. to ensure optimal achievement of targets during 2015 -16. The 
Committee trust that the measures initiated would be taken to their logical 
conclusion and the gap between the target set and achievement made would be 
substantially bridged during 2015-16. 
 
 

29 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Recommendation of the Committee have been noted for compliance and 
measures are being initiated to take schemes to their logical conclusion and 
the gap between the target set and achievement made would be substantially 
bridged during 2015-16.  
(Ministry of Textile's O.M. No. 2/13/2015-Parl., dated 22/07/2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                           DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
December, 2015                                          CHAIRPERSON 
Pausa,1937 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
 
  

30 
 
                                                APPENDIX-I    Confidential 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on 03 rd December, 2015 from 103 0 hrs. to 1 100 hrs. 
in Room No. `131’ (Chairperson's Chamber),   Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  - Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
     
  1. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  2. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
  3. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  4. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  6. Shri R. Parthipan 
  7. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  8. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
   
     
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  9. Shri P.L. Punia 
  10. Ms. Dola Sen 
  11. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
   
  SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan   - Addl. Secretary 
           2. Shri Shiv Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
  3. Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
  4. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Addl. Director 
  5. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 

31 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee,  convened for consideration and adoption of two Draft Action 
Taken Reports. Giving an overview of the Recommendations made/reiterated in 
both the Draft Action Taken Reports,  the Chairperson requested the Members 
to give their suggestions on them, if any. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the following Draft Action 
Taken Reports and adopted them after some discussions: 
 
(i)  Draft Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands For Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Textiles; and 
 
(ii)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Reports to both 
the Houses. 
 
   
The Committee then adjourned. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX  Do not pertain to this report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations       13  
  
II. Observations/Recommendations which have 11       84.6%   
 been accepted by Government 
 (Rec. Para. Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10 11, 12  
 & 13)  
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the NIL  NIL  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s replies-  
 (Nil) 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
 which Government’s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration –          01   07.7% 
  (Rec. Para. No. 6) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of   01  07.7% 
 which final replies of Government are of interim  
 in nature   
 (Rec. Para.No.7)      
                         ----------- 
           100%  
                                            ------------ 
 