r 
\ 
-.~.' -~7=-:'-: -: -." 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON !.IABOUR 
(2018-1~) 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
TH~ CODE ON WAG-ES BILL, 2017 
Fo.RTY THIRD REPORT 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2018/ Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) 
". '.'. '0. 
----.- ..... --.~...,...-.--, 
. - - -.- .-­ _',- .--- .. ,.~~-.- 


- '~ 
/._ 
FORTY THIRD REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2018-19) 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT . 
THE CODE ON WAGES BILL, 2017 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2018 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2018 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) 
\H) 
___ -;._;;-;..-o"' , ~ ••• __ ~~ __ ~ ." __ ....,....-_. r , •• _ •••• _ 


r 
" 
-_...---------- ..•.•.... --~--~ .. ----~-~ 
CONTENTS 
PAGE No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION . 
GIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
(vi) 
(viii) 
REPORT 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
II. CONSULTATIONS PROCESS BEFORE INTRODUCTION OF THE BILL 
III. CLAUSE BY CLAUSE ANALYSIS 
Definition of 'Employee', 'Worker', Clause 2(j) & Clause 2(y) 
Definition of 'Employer', Clause 2(k) 
Same' Work or Work of Similar Nature, Clause 2(u) 
Definition of Wages, Clause 2(x) 
Prohibition of Discrimination on Ground of Gender, Clause 3(1) 
Procedure for Fixing and Revising Minimum Wages, Clause 8(1) 
Review or Revising Minimum Rates of Wages, Clause 8(4) 
Power of Central Government to fix National Minimum Wage, Clause 9 
Fixing hours of Work for normal Working days, Clause 13(2) 
Deductions which may be made from wages, Clause 18 
Deductions for Absence from Duty 
Disqualification for Bonus, Clause 29 
Calculation of Direct Tax payable by employer, Clause 35 
Non-applicability of Chapter 4 on Payment of Bonus, Clause 41 
Central and State Advisory Boards, Clause 42 
Appointment of Facilitators and their Powers, Clause 51 
Offences and Penalties, Clause 53 
Annexure-I 
Annexure-II 
Annexure-III 
Annexure-Tv 
I Appendix -I 
Appendix-If 
Appendix-III 
Appendix-IV 
Appendix-V 
Appendix-VI 
I 
1 
8 
12 
12 
18 
22 
26 
32 
34 
37 
38 
45 
47 
54 
56 
58 
59 
62 
67 
72 
ANNEXURES 
Code on Wages Bill, 20 i 7 76 
Summary of suggestions received from various organisations/ individuals 127 
and action taken thereon Labour 'Code on Wages Bill, 2017'. 
Record of discussions in the Tripartite Consultation Meeting on the Code 133 
on Wages Bill, 2017 held on lOth March, 2015 under the Chairmanship of 
Hon'ble MOS(IC) for Labour & Employment. 
Comments of the concerned Ministry/ Departments and response of the 150 
Ministry of Labour & Employment thereon 
APPENDICES 
Minutes of the First Sitting of the Committee held on 06th October, 2017. 170 
Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee held on 24th October, 2017. 173 
Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 11th January, 178 
2018. 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee held on 18th January, 2918. 181 
Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee held on 28th February, 184 
2018. 
Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee held on 19th Noven:-ber, 187 
2018. 


..... _- _._._,-'_._------ ,.. .•.. ---~ 
i , - 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2018-19) 
CHAIRPERSON DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA 
MEMBERS 
LQk Sabha 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
Shri Raj esh Diwakar . 
Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
Shri Devajibhai Fatepara 
Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
Dr. Arun Kumar 
Shri Kaushalendra Kumar " 
. ~ ... 
. '~". 
Shri Hari Manjhi 
Shri R. Parthipan 
Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
Shri N aba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
Shri Mulayarn Singh Yadav 
Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. . Dr. Banda Prakash 
23. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
24. Shri N. Gokulkrishnan 
25. ' Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
26. Shri P.L. Punia 
27. Shri Rajaram 
28. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
29. Ms. Dola Sen 
30. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
31. Shri Madanlal Saini 
SECRETARIAT 
L Ms. Rimjhim Prasad 
2,. Shri P.C. Choulda 
2,. Shri C. Vanlalruata 
3. Shri Mohinder Paul Rana 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
Additional Director 
Executive Assistant 
--w- 
------- 


COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. 
3. 
4 .. 
5. 
6: 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
CHAIRPERSON 
Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
Shri Rajesh Diwakar 
Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
Shri Devajibhai Fatepara 
Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
Dr. Arun Kumar ' 
Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
, Shri Hari Manjhi .•...... ' .... ". 
Shri R. Parthipan 
Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
YS Avinash Reddy 
".' . ~.:t; :. \ 
Rajya Sabha 
.22. Dr. Chiranjeevi 
23. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
24. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan 
25. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
26. Shri P.L. Punia - 
27. Shri Rajaram . 
28. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
29. Ms. Dola Sen 
30. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT . 
Joint Secretary 
.. Director .... _ .... 
Additional Director 
Executive Assistant 
1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad 
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda 
2. . Shri C, Vanla1ruata 
3. Shri Mohinder Pual Rana 
l 1 


---_. --_. -. - -_ .... _._ - --- -' --------- .•. - .•. -"" .•. ~ •.... ---- .. --...._'"- •...•.. -::... 
-- ----.---------------- 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2018-19) 
having been authorized by the Committee to present on their behalf this 
Forty-Third Report on 'The Code on Wages Bill, 2017' relating to the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
2. The 'Code on Wages Bill, 2017' was introduced in Lok Sabha on 
10.08.2017 and referred to the Committee by the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok 
Sabha for examination and report within three months i. e. by 21.11.2017 
from the date of publication of the reference of the Bill in Bulletin Part- II 
of Lok Sabha dated 21. 08 .20 17. The Committee obtained extension of 
time from Hon 'ble Speaker to present the Report to the House up to the 
end of Winter Session, 2018. 
3. The Second National Commission on Labour, which submitted its 
report in June, 2002 had. recommended that the existing set of labour 
laws should' be broadly amalgamated into the groups, namely industrial 
relations; wages; social' security; safety; and welfare and working 
conditions. It was decided to bring the proposed legislation, i.e. 'The Code 
on Wages, 2017'. The proposed legislation intends to amalgamate, 
simplify and rationalise the relevant provisions of the four central labour 
enactments relating to . wages viz. The Payment of Wages Act, 1936; The 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948; The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965; and The 
Equal Remuneration Act, 1976. The salient features of the Code on 
Wages are, to provide for all essential elements relating to wages, equal 
remuneration, its payment and bonus, provisions relating to wages shall 
be applicable to all employments covering both organised as well as 
unorganised sector and the power to fix minimum wages continues to be 
'vested in the central govemment as well as the State Government in 
their respective spheres etc. 
4. In the process of examination of the Bill, Committee invited the 
viewsysuggestions on the Bill from Trade Unions/Organizations/ 
Individuals through a Press Communique and received around 100 
views/suggestions. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment on 6th October, 2017, '11th 
January, 2018 and 18th January, 2018 besides 'obtaining written 
clarifications from them: on some major amendments proposed. The 
Committee also heard the views of some Central Trade Unions viz. 
Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU)" All India Trade Union Congress 
(AITUC), Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) and Hind Mazdoor Sabha 
(HMS) at their sitting held on 24th October, 2017. 
; ._. 
••.. _.' ~ ..... ':. •.• ~. __ .• '-r-1Io_,....._ ..•. ,.' ".-.~.---" .• 


.. --------~'-'"-- .. ~=~.s: .. ~ ..... -~ .... ;:=;-. ~-.:§--.=y:.;~r"-.;7~---. - ~·,-_·=·"_::?L·-'_'·5-·-··2:-·-··=·--::::;::·-· ~:c:;- -~~ ----- ... ----.-- ,""'_' '-c....:: -....--. _::-,;:::__ • ~ -._-.'-. -_ "~-",,;;';::";-'--:..' ._. ~- -, 
~ @ 
r .. 
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting 
held on 19th November, 2018. 
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives 
of the Ministry of Labour & Employment for tendering oral evidence and 
placing before the Committee the detailed written notes and post 
evidence information as desired by the Committee in connection with the 
examination of the Bill. The Committee also express their thanks to the 
Trade Unions' for appearing before them and all those who furnished 
useful written suggestions on the proposed ameridrnerrts. 
7. The Committee would like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the commitment, dedication and valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee. 
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have' been printed in thick type In 
the body of the Report. . 
New Delhi; 
11~December, 2018 
~~~Agrahayan~ 194Q(Sak~ 
DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA 
CHAIRPERSON, 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 


I I - I 
SA •••••• ••• .,"-.".- •• 
:.~. _' 
GIST OF RECOMMENOATIONS 
1. The Committee felt that a clarification may be required to 
be given in the Code so that the concept of minimum wage is 
actually 'the minimum wage at the time of entry/initial wage' 
and that experience/loyalty/years of service are to be taken into 
account' over and above the minimum wage and they have 
gathered the impression that Ministry of Labour and. 
Employment is willing to explore the possibility of including the 
. same. Hence, the Committee recommended the Clause 2 [u] and 
Clause 6 Sub-section (6) may be modified accordingly. 
2. The Committee were of the opinion that 'the definition of 
'Wages' given in' the Code is very lengthy and needs further 
clarfffcat.Ion and simplification. The Ministry have justified the 
same by stating that the said definition consists .of two parts, one 
for the p\lrpose of calculation of bonus, as taken from the 
Payment of Bonus Act and second, for the purposes such as 
minimum wages, payment of wages etc. The Committee have. 
found it confusing that in Clause 2 Section (x-'iii) bonus is part of 
wages whereas in, Clause 2 Section (x-A) bonus is not part of 
wages, though the Ministry have clarified that statutory bonus 
has been exefude d from the wages, however, any other payment 
. in the name of bonus is included. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the Ministry should try to address this issue 
through simplification of relevant Clause and explanations given 
therein and also discreet the Ministry to consider a suggestion 
received from them by the employers that inclusion of. bonus 
should be allowed to be taken over in case the Establishment' 
concerned does not earn profit. The Co.mmittee, therefore, 
further recommended that Clause 2 Sub-section (x) of the Code 
may be substituted accordingly. 
3. The Committee observed that under clause 8 Sub-section (1- 
A), it has been prescribed that 'in f"lxing minimum rates of wages 
in respect of arryernploymerrt for the first time under this Code 
or in revising minimum rates of wages so fixed, the appropriate 
Gover1:1ment shall either appoint as many Commit'tees and Sub-. 
Committees as it. considers necessary to hold enquiries and 
recommend in respect of such ilxation or. revision, as' the case 
may be' and they recommended that the following phrase may be 
inserted after the words 'so fixed' in Clause 8(1) (a) "based' on the 
--.---_.---- ........ _------- .-----~ -- ~ -. _- _.- ... -~--' -_ -------_.- 
1 
.. -- -- \ 


I 
-. - :. _'';''': ': -~-.: ,- -- 
:.;;"~~-;'~':- _' _ .. ::::~::.:. ." '. -.'_ 
'norms/parameters prescribed' by the appropriate Government 
from time to time". Further, the Committee observed that under 
Sub-section (4) of the same Clause, it has been provided that 'the 
appropriate Government shall review or revise minimum r~tes of 
wages at an interval of five years' and it has noted that the 
Minimum Wages Act 1948 gives the State Governments flexi1;>ility 
in deciding when to revise minimum wages as long as it Is not' 
more than five years and In order to maintain that flexibility, it 
recommended that in Clause ,8 Sub-section ~4), the words 'at an 
interval of five years' may be substituted with 'ordinarily at an 
interval not exceeding five years'. 
4.' The Committee recommended that the State Governments 
must be consulted before finalization of the National Minimum 
Wage by the Central Government. The Committee observed that 
Clause 9 Sub-section (3), which though provides that the Central 
Government may obtain the advice of the Central Advisory 
Board, does not reflect a positive obligation to consult the State 
Governments and it desired that the Code must underline the 
fact that the power to fix minimum wage shall continue to be 
vested in the Central Government as' well as the State 
Governments in their respective spheres. Hence, they have 
recommended that Clause 9 Sub-Section (3) of the Code may be 
amended in the following manner:' "The Central Government, 
before lJ.xing the national minimum wage under Sub-section (1), 
shall obtain the advice of the Central Advisory Board constituted 
under Sub-sectfon (1) of section 42 and State Advisory Boards 
constituted under Sub-section (4) of section 42." The Committee 
felt that this amendment would also be in tandem with the 
recommendation of the 46th Indian Labour Conference, 2015 to 
remove arbitrariness and unwarranted discretion in the flxatton , . ' 
,of minimum wage. The Committee, also were of the opinion that 
the Code must convey the message that the workers, who are 
getting mtntmum wages as per the present Act shall not get less 
than what they are getting_ now, once the Code on Wages Bill, 
20 i 7 is enacted and the same shall continue to be revised as per 
past practice. 


5. The Committee observed that the existing provision under 
Clause 13 Sub-section (1)(a) of the Code, it is stated as: 'Where 
the minimum rates of wages have been fixed under this Code, the 
appropriate Government may (a) fix the number of hours of work 
which shall constitute a normal working day inclusive of one or 
more specified intervals", The Committee felt that the working 
hours should not be beyond ~ight hours a day, hence, they have 
rec0n:'-mend~d that the following phrase may be added at the ~nd 
of the above said Bub-sectfon. 'not exceeding eight hours per 
day'. and further, they recommended that under Clause 13 Sub­ 
section (2) (a), the words 'on urgent work or'. may be deleted. 
6. The Committee noted that as regards, the issue of using the 
term 'Facilitator' instead of 'Inspector' in the Code, the Ministry 
have sought to convince the Committee that the enforcement . I 
mechanism would be strengthened as the· facilitator will also 
have the responsibility of preventing any violatfons of the 
provisions of the Code by way of providing guidance to both 
employers and workers. They have also stated that the 
inspection scheme is proposed to provide for : risk based 
inspections and make it more effective and reduce arbitrariness. 
Notwithstanding the same, the Committee have felt that the use 
of the term 'Facilitator' instead of 'Inspector' in the Code gives 
the impression. of diluting .t.he enforcement mechanism and 
restricting the "in.spection which is the lifeline of enforcement. 
Hence, the Committee expressed agreement with the various 
suggestions received by them on inclusion of the word 
'Facilitator' instead of 'Inspecto( in the Code on Wages Bill, 
2017 and they, therefore, recommended that under Clause 2 Sub­ 
section (m) and Clause 51 the word 'Facilitator' be substituted by 
'Inspector' in accordance with. ILO norms. 
T; The Committee observed that under Chapter VIII dealing 
with Offences and Penalties in the Code, pe~alty for offences by 
the employer vary from. rupees ten thousand to rupees one lakh 
only. In Clause 53 (1)(a) particularly, it has been stated that any 
employer who pays to any employee less than the amount due. 
shall be punishable with fine which may be extended to rupees 
-"}.- 
--_ .. -----------_ .•..... _----_.-----_ ... _---- _,- .. ------ ---.-.~ ..•..•. --~- ----." ,- __ ._ .. 


fifty thousand. While the Ministry has claimed that the penalties 
have been increased manifold in the Code' as compared to the 
same in the existing Minimum Wages Act,. the Committee still 
felt that. in the present context the penalty amount proposed is 
not substantial enough to act as a deterrent. Hence, they have 
recommended that the Chapter VIII of the Code may be suitably 
modified to ,nx the penalty for offences by the employer from 
rupees fifty thousand to rupees ten lakh. 
(fi r _ 
-j 


REPORT 
INTRODUCTION 
The Code on Wages Bill, 2017 (Annexure I) was introduced in 
the Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2017 and was referred to the 
Standing Committee on Labour on 21 st August, 2017 for 
examination and Report to Parliament in terms of Rille 331 (e) (1) 
(b) of the Rilles of Procedure and' Conduct of Business of Lok 
Sabha. 
1.2 In their Background Note furnished "to the Committee, the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment (MoL&E) stated as under: ! 
"As part of the Labour Reforms initiatives, 38 Labour Acts are 
being amalgamated, simplified and rationalized into 4 codes. Code 
on Wages is the first out of the proposed 4 codes. The Second 
National Commission on Labour, which submitted its Report in 
June 2002, had recommended that the existing set of labour laws 
should be broadly grouped into four or five groups of laws on 
functional basis. In line with the recommendation of the 
Commission, Ministry of Labour & Employment started the 
exercise of drafting four Labour Codes related to (i) Wages, (ii) 
Industrial Relations, (iii) Social Security and . Welfare; and [iv] 
Safety and Working Conditions. The draft Code on Wages, has 
been prepared after amalgamating, simplifying and rationalizing 
the relevant provisions of following four Central Labour Acts: 
(i). The Minimum Wages Act 1948 
(ii). The Payment of Wages Act 1936 
(iii). The Payment of Bonus Act 1965 
(iv). The Equal Remuneration Act 1976" 
1.3 . Justifying the Code on Wages· Bill, the Ministry further 
submitted as under: 
"(i) Extend legislative coverage to every employee to get wages 
not less than minimum wages and thus providing Right· to 
Sustenance to about 48 crore workforce- _. 6f the county. - It 
tiniverealizes the right to get not less than minimum wages from 
employees of scheduled employments to all employees including 
1 . 
. •..•... -.~. --- ..... -.-~ .. 
-~ - •.. ~-.---_,.- .... ,.. -.- . -- .. -_ 


unorganized sector of the country. By abolishing the concept of 
scheduled employment for entitlement of minimum wages, large 
portion of workforce, which was out of the purview of the benefits 
available under the existing Minimum Wages Act, will now benefit 
to all the workers who have been left' from these benefits up till 
now. As per the survey carried out by the. National Sample survey 
Organisation in the year 2011-12, the total employment in both 
organized and unorganised sector in the country was of the order 
of 47 crore. Out of this, about 8 crore were in the organized sector 
and the balance of 39 crore in the unorganized sector, The workers 
in the unorganized sector constitute :II?-0re than 90 percent of the 
total employment in the country. The unorganized workers 
constitute fi big chunk of the population that is below the poverty 
line. By extending the benefit of minimum wage with timely 
payment to such categories of unorganised worker, the sustainable 
goal related to reduction of poverty may be achieved. 
[ii) To' provide ~ effective tool for reducing poverty and 
achieving Sustainable Development Goal 1 and 2 related with 
poverty and hunger: The Rangarajan Committee estimated, that the . 
population below the poverty line in 2009-2010 was 454 million 
(38.2% of the population) and that in 2011-2012 was 363 ·million 
. (2~.5% of the population). In absence of any meaningful Minimum 
Wage, a section of such below poverty line population face hunger 
in their life As per the Code on Wages. Bill 2017, . provision of 
minimum wage will apply to all employments covering both 
organized as well as unorganised sector. Some of these norms 
recommended by the Indian Labour Conference, in 1957 for fixing 
the minimum wage are 3 consumption units for one wage earner 
and Minimum food requirements of 2700 calories per average 
Indian adult. Hence, the proposed Code on Wages will not only 
ensure minimum wages resulting in meaningful earning but also 
make sure adequate consumption patterns with no hunger. 
(iii) To reduce disparity in minimum wages across the country: 
At present there are differences in minimum wages across States 
in various sectors. Such differences are 'due to the fact that 
minimum wage is fixed, revised and enforced by the appropriate 
governments for employments notified in the Schedule by them 
and there is no common provision linking their minimum wages. 
2 
~~':-';:- -- ~ .. " - .. ~ .'~, --- 


. -., --'-':c:":-..;.U~""'--·- -.- . _.. - .•.. :..~- .• -.------ .. _- ---- ::.:..:--..:..:----------- 
I I I 
I 1 . 
~ \~W 
By universalization of the applicability of the statutory right of 
getting wages not less than minimum wages has increased the 
probability of disparity amongst States. The concept of National 
Minimum Wage would ensure that there is less disparity amongst 
States in fixing their minimum wage' and may contribute in 
providing a basic standard of living to all employees across the 
country. 
(iv) , The proposed Code on Wages would ensure the minimum 
rate of wages with timely payment and authorized deductions for 
all employees which in itself would safeguard the good health and 
well being of workers and their dependents. ' 
(v) The 'minimum rate of wages with timely payment and 
, authorized deductions for all employees will motivate them to up­ 
skill them and would help in ensuring quality education for their 
dependen ts. 
(vi) To promote Gender: Equality: The proposed Code 'on Wages 
_provides no discrimination among employees on the ground' of 
gender in matters relating to wages by the same employer, in 
respect of the same work or work of similar nature done by any 
employee. This would promote pay-parity and ultimately gender 
equality. 
(vii) The Code on Wages would significantly improve the welfare 
of worker and secure their interests. The proposed Code on Wages 
for the first time haswidened the scope and coverage of payment of 
minimum wages, timely payment of wages to all the workers 
, irrespective of scheduled employment or wage ceiling which were 
hitherto provided for in the various Acts. This would promote 
decent work and economic growth in the Country. 
(viii) Redistribution of resources and reduction in economic 
disparity: Minimum Wages to all the workforce would result in 
sharing of the benefit of economic growth with all the workforce, 
thus, promoting productivity as we~l as reduction in inequalities.. 
(ix) Rationalization, and simplification of existing Labour Laws: 
The proposed Code on wages intends to make the existing labour 
law~ in sync with the emerging economic scenario; reduces the 
complexity by providing uniform definitions and reduction m 
3 
___ -"u-~-.--.--· 


multiple authorities under various Acts and brings transparency 
and accountability in enforcement of labour laws. This in turn 
would lead to ease of compliance, catalyzing the setting up of 
manufacturing units, enhancing employment opportunities along 
with ensuring safety, social security and welfare of workers. 
1.4 Salient features of the Code on Wages Bill, 2017; as per the 
MoL&E, are as under: 
" (i) The Code on Wages Bill has been drafted after amalgamation, 
simplification and rationalisation of the relevant provisions of the 
"Minimum Wages Act, 1948; the Payment of Wages Act, 1936; the 
" "Payment of Bonus Act; "1965; and the Equal Remuneration Act, 
1976. After the enactment of the Code on Wages, all these four 
Acts will get repealed (Refer clause 68 in the Code). 
(ii) Effort has been made to bring uniformity in the definition of 
different ==» used in four Acts being amalgamated. However, for 
the purpose of bonus, the defmition of 'wage' has been modified 
enabling addition of allowances, concessio_ns and incentives to be 
added to the" wage for the purpose of calculating bonus if the total 
of such allowances, concessions and incentives exceed 50% of the 
wage (excluding these allowances) (Refer clause 2 (l)(x) in the Code). 
(iii) At present the provisions of Minimum Wages Act, apply only to 
employees engaged in scheduled employment. As per the Code on 
Wages Bill 2017, provision of minimum wage will apply to all 
employments covering both" organized as well as unorganised 
sector. This would extend the benefit of rriinimum wage to all 
workers (Refer clause 5 in the Code). 
(iv) The power of fixation and revision of minimum wages :will remain 
with the appropriate Government. However, Central Government 
may, by' Notification, fix 'National Minimum Wage', which may be 
different for different States or geographical areas. Thereafter". the 
minimum rates of wages fixed by the appropriate Government shall 
not be less than the 'National Minimum W_age', notified" for that 
area by the Central Go~emment. If tJ::te minimum rates of wages 
fixed by the appropriate Government earlier" are m?re than that 
'National Minimum Wage', then, the appropriate Government shall 
4 


I I . ' I 
~ ,~ ", 
not reduce such minimum rate of wage fixed by it earlier (Refer 
clause 6 and 9 in the Code). 
(v) The appropriate Governments will fix the minimum rate of wages 
payable to employees. Further, the appropriate Government may 
fix factors by which the' minimum wages will be multiplied for 
different categories of employees. These factors will be fixed taking 
into account the skills required,' the arduousness' of the work 
assigned, geographical' location of the workplace and other factors 
which are considered appropriate by such Government (Refer 
clause 6 (6) in the Code). 
(vi) The revision or review of minimum wages will be held at ari interval 
of 5 years. (Refer clause 8 (4) in the Code). 
(vii) At present the Payment of Wages Act, which' ensure timely 
payment of wages and authorised deductions from wages, is 
applicable in respect of employees drawing wages less than Rs. 
18000/- per month and in specified and notified establishments 
only. Now, the Code on Wages will apply to all employees' 
irrespective of the sector of employment and wage ceiling of an 
individual worker. Further, provision has been incorporated in the 
Code to facilitate the appropriate Government to extend the 
coverage of provisions related to payment of wages to the 
Govemment establishments also, if the appropriate Government 
deems it fit. (Refer clause 25 in the Code). 
(viii) The wages to employees can also be paid by cheque or through 
digital or electronic mode or by crediting it in the bank account of 
the employee .. Further, the appropriate Govemment may, if desires 
so, can specify by notification, the industrial or other 
establishment, where the wages has to be paid only by-cheque or 
through digital or electronic mode or by crediting the wages in the 
bank account of the employee. This would not only promote 
digitization but also extend wage and' social security to the 
worker(Refer clause 15 ·in the Code). 
. - .:._. :: ~- _ .... : .. 
(ix) With regards to the ceiling of wage for the purpose of eligibility for 
Bonus and for the purpose of calculation of Bonus, it has been 
5 
....... - .. _-." .' .. , .•..... , ... ~.~~ 


===~ __ =~-,=_""",,,,,,,,,,,== __ .. ~:,.,,:'~'_:"':_' __ ' __ =-::,~_. _~~-: _ . .:._ ·.---~~'2'c::.-c.:"::.."""~..: .-:_--' .-.-.- •.•. .- ...••.•. -"Jor:-~_ .•.. "'>::~';.';-:_-:.:::~- . .::.:0:;.-;- ----- .• --: •.. 
1>---- i 
I 
I 
prescribed that such amount would be determined by notification, 
by the appropriate Govemment (Refer clause 26 in the Code). 
(x) Advisory Boards will be constituted at State and Central level to 
advise the State / Central Governments respectively, in the matter­ 
related to wages as well as increasing employment opportunities to 
women. At present separate Advisory Boards are constituted under 
the Minimum Wages Act 1948 and Equal Remuneration Act 1976, 
to consider these matters respectively (Refer clause 42 in the Code). 
(xi) Limitation period for filing of claims has been enhanced to 3 years 
as against existing time period varying from 6 months to 2 years 
under the Acts being amalgamated in the Code (Refer clause 45 in 
the Code). 
(xii) Provision of "an Appellate Authority has been made between the 
Claim Authority and the Judicial Forum which will lead to speedy, 
cheaper and efficient redressal of grievances and settlement of 
claims (Refer clause 49 in the Code). 
(xiii) Records can be maintained as prescribed by the appropriate 
Govemment. Exception from this provision has been provided to 
the employers employing not more than five persons for agriculture 
or domestic purpose. However, if demanded by the Facilitator, 
such employers will have to produce reasonable proof of the 
payment of wages to the persons so employed by them (Refer 
clause 50 in the Code). 
(xiv) To ensure effective compliance, the Code envisages the change in 
the designation and role of the "inspector" from mere inspection to 
that of "facilitator" who would also guide and advise the employers 
and workers about the effective implementation of laws. Also to 
address the arbitrariness and malpractices, the 'inspections will be 
carried out through a transparent" web based inspection scheme 
(Refer clause 51 in the Code). 
(xv) Penalties for different types of violations under this Code have been 
rationalG:ed ~fu the amountoffinesvarying from Rs. 10000/- to 
Rs. 1,00,000/- as per -the gravity of violations and repetition of the 
6 


.---------~-~-~.- ... -- .... ---~~~--~~-'-'--'~-~ 
offence. The penalty of imprisonment is for repeat offences only. 
(Refer clause 53 in the Code). 
(xvi) Further, in case of offences excluding the less payment of due 
amount to the employee, the Facilitator, before initiation of 
prosecution proceedings, shan give an opportunity, to the employer 
to comply with the provisions of this Code with in a time period, by 
way of a written direction. If the employer complies with the 
direction within such period, the Facilitator shall not initiate such 
prosecution proceedings (Refer clause 53 (3) in the Code). 
(xvii) Provision of compounding of offences has been made for those 
which are riot punishable by a penalty of imprisonment. However, 
no offence of .same nature shall be compounded, if it has been 
repeated within a period of five years. Further, an additional 
penalty of 20% of the maximum fine for such compounded offence 
will be imposed on the accused in case he does not comply with , . . 
the ord~rs of the compounding authority (Refer clause 55 in the 
Code). 
(xviii) The burden of proof for payment of remuneration or bonus or any 
other claims due to an employee shall lie with the employer (Refer 
clause 58 in the Code). 
1.5 When asked by the Committee to indicate the specific areas 
where the Code on Wages Bill, 2017 will be helpful in protecting the 
minimum wages of contract workers employed by contractors 
providing services / outsourced services in various Government and . ' 
private establishments, the MoL&E in their written replies, 
submitted as under: 
\ 
I I I 
"Minimum Wages Act, 1948 is applicable only to . Schedule 
employments which are notified by the appropriate government. 
The contract workers employed in the scheduled employments,' are 
covered by the provisions of the Minimum Wages Act 1948 
presently. However, the code of wages. Bill, 2017 provide for 
fixation of rninim:wn wages for all em.ployments and is thus' 
applicable to all employees including contract workers employed in 
all sectors. Therefore, a large number of workers including contract 
7 
. . _ .. ----. --- - ._ ----_.--. _.,. - ~----- .... ---- .... . . ---;:---- .. -."' •.. -- •. ~ .. 
------ -..~---.--::;- ... ----.-.- .. - -.--- .... ~-~,- .. -,." --,--.--'.~ . 


B.:.l 
~ r; 
workers, who are not presently covered under Minimum Wages 
Act, 1948 would be ensured minimum wages as per the code on 
wages Bill, 2017." 
l.6 When the Committee expressed the apprehension that the Bill, 
while combining the above four laws, has sought to dilute many 
pro-labour components stipulated in those four laws, the Ministry 
stated as under: 
"The Code on' Wages Bill has been prepared after simplification, 
amalgamation and rationalization of the, relevant provisions of the 
all 4 Central Labour laws. The Code on Wages significantly 
'improves me welfare of worker and secures their interests. The 
Code on Wages for the first time has widened the scope and 
coverage of payment of minimum wages, timely payment of wages 
to all the workers irrespective of scheduled employment or wage 
ceiling which were hitherto provided for in the various Acts." ' 
l. 7 During the course of the sitting held on 24th Oct, 2017, the 
Committee observed as under: 
"For our country, MSMEs are the heart for generating employment 
and for economic growth, Therefore, what I feel, safeguarding such 
interest is the need of the hour to reach the GDP goal of 8 per cent 
or something. The Code on Wages Bill, 2017 should have a, 
balanced view, on one side, conforming sustained economic growth 
of the country and, on the other side, it should create a social 
harmony coupled with labour welfare. These are the things we 
need. Labour' unrest will lead to social dislodging and similarly 
approaching an employer or owner in harsh manner with legal 
tools will lead to failure in economic growth of our country. Both 
should be avoided. Therefore, a balanced view should be taken in 
the Code on Wages Bill, 2017." 
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS 'BEFORE INTRODUCTION OF 
THE BILL 
On being enquired bythe Committee.about. consultations held·­ 
and the stakeholders whom the Ministry consulted before drafting 
the Code on Wages Bill, 2017, as well as a gist of the suggestions 
8 


received from the stakeholders during such consultations and 
reforms pressed 'by them in the existing Wage Laws, the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
"As per the prescribed-pre-legislative consultation policy, the draft 
. of the Code on Wage Bill 2017 was extensively consulted with the 
stakeholders, as under: 
(i). Draft Bill was placed on the Website of the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment on 26.03.2015 for 30 days inviting 
comments from publici stakeholders. Suggestions' received 
from the public were appropriately considered by the 
drafting Group .. Suggestion~ received are tabulated at 
Annexure'll. 
[ii). Two Tripartite Consultation Meetings were held under the 
chairmanship of the Hon'ble Labour Minister with 
representatives from Central Trade Unions, Employers' 
Associations and Central Ministries/State Governments 
participating in it. Summary record of discussions held 
during these Meetings are enclosed at Annexure III. 
(iii). Draft Cabinet Note on the Code on wages Bill was circulated 
to Central Ministries/Departments for Inter-Ministerial 
Consultations. Comments of the . Ministries/Departments 
alongwith response of this Ministry is enclosed at Annexure 
IV." 
2.2 Inspite of the promise by the Constitution of a 
living wage and a socialist framework to enable the 
working persons a decent standard of life, as well as a 
law on payment of minimum wages, which is restricted' 
to 45 scheduled employments only, a universal'rtght of 
sustenance was not available to every working. person 
in the country till date. As the time has now corne to ~ .... <~,-,_.' - '"::..- - ... .,- ,_ .. 
give every such person a legitimate right of sustenance, 
the Code on Wages Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha 
'9 


=_=_ ~_ =_"",,", _;;_- ==_=="""''''''--=---,:-;-- .--;.-:-.0-:-:. __ ~ •• --:=. 
- - ---- -"==-=->-.-",",'" """""""""""""'''''''-'''''.- ees -=.~=--=.--=-=-- -- ~--.-.:;_,-=-====. ~----.- -~:::::::-:---~ 
(~ ~, \ 
with the aim to universalise the coverage of statutory, 
mandatory proyision of payment of wages to nearly 48 ' 
crore working persons throughout the country, out of 
_ which around '82.70/0 work force is in the unorganized 
sector. The fixatfon of minimum wages is justffled jas 
with sustained economic development, more 
employment avenues are' being added, hence,· it is 
essential that minimum rates of wages are fixed for 
working persons in industries where no arrangement 
exists for effective 'regulation of wages and where wages 
are exceptionally low. The Committee feel extremely 
concerned over various malpractices that have 
'particularly crept' in the unorganiaed sector where 
desprte putting years of experience, a workin,g person is 
denied any benefit and is treated at par with a newly 
employed person in so far as wages are concerned. As 
the Code on Wages Bill, 2017 has been referred to the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee . on Labour for 
examination, first and' foremost they feel that the 
Statement of Reasons pertaining to the Code need to 
be suitably. modified to clearly bring out the noble 
intention to ensure the protection of the interests of 
working persons, particularly fhoae working in 
employments hitherto not covered under the scheduled 
list as well as those in the unorganized sector, whfle 
not in any way infringing upon the power of the State 
Governments on the matter concerning labour security, 
welfare and fizdng .of minimum wages in their·ar·ea. -;-In:····-·,:­ 
fact, the Committee are of the view that a concept of 
'Right to Sustenance' should be Introduced for the 
10 
___ ~.= .-o=_ .. _~ =_ ~- .",.....,,_.. ~~-~- •• -----. --~-------------~---------------- 


'. 
crores of workers in the unorganised sector throughout 
the country. 
2.3 The Committee further recall that reducing 
. inequality and promoting decent work for all women 
and men have been Iderrtffied as key objectives in the 
2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Agenda, 
adopted at the United Nations in 2015. The 17 SDGs 
seek to balance. the three dimensions of sustainable 
development: economic, social and environmental. 
Goal 1 and 2 aim at reduction in poverty and hunger" 
Goal 8 calls for "sustained., i,nclusive and sustainable 
economic growth, full and productive employment and 
decent work for all", and highlights the importance of 
achieving equal pay for work of equal value, and 
protecting labour rights. Goal. 5 . calls for Gender 
equality and Goal 10 seeks to "reduce inequality 'within 
and among countries", emphasizing income growth of 
the bottom 40 per cent of the population, the 
elimination of discrimination, as well as the adoption 
of policies, especdally fiscal, wage .and social protection 
policies, and progressively achieve greater equality. A 
Well-designed . and, effective· minimum wages 
mechanism applicable to all may contribute' effectively 
in achieving. these Sustainable Development Goals. In 
this connection, the Committee hope that the Code, on 
Wages Bill which aims to provide righ~ to sustenance to 
all employees by ex1;ending the. coverage of the 
Mi;nimum Wages provision to all employees, instead of 
to those working in scheduled employments only, can 
11 
i 
--=---==--==:.:...____..=:..:.__..::::::~=====:~~----;:;;;;.,.~I 


1'=' = --'_'''~=.':.::.:.:-.".=-:,:,.=.,-",~<.."=~=_,.:::,,,- --,-.,.,-._.:~_.=.:':::-.L";:.~~~.,-~:.~.-~.;:-r.~- ~~~-::z:;"-~::-=;::_~_~_"_~ - ,,-..:::;,;;-=::.--~::. .--'---.~.-.-.:;:=-::;-:--.~ 
I 
be a powerful tool for supporting decent work goals, 
reducing poverty, hunger and inequality. The' . 
Committee trust that the Code on Wages Bill, 2017 
would also ensure "a just and equitable share of the 
fruits of progress to all" and can. be a crucial 
component in strengthening of social protecticn floors 
and poverty alleviation efforts. 
III. CLAUSE BY CLAUSE ANALYSIS 
Definition of ':Employee" and "Worker" 
Clause 20) of the Bill defines "employee" as under: 
" "employee" means, any person (other than an apprentice engaged 
under the Apprentices Act, 1961), employed on wages' by an 
establishment to do any skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled, manual, 
operational, supervisory, managerial, administrative, technical or 
clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment 
be express or implied, and also includes a person declared to be an 
. employee by the appropriate Govemment, but does. not include any 
member of the Armed Forces of the Union;" 
3.2 Clause 2(y) of the Bill defmes "worker'" as under: 
"worker" means any person (except an apprentice as defined un'de~ 
clause (aa) of section 2 of the 'Apprentices Act, 1961) employed in 
any industry to do any manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, 
operational or clerical work for hire. or reward, whether the terms 
of employment be express or implied, and includes working 
journalists as defined. in clause (f) of section 2 of the Working 
Journalists and other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of 
Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 and sales 
promotion, employees as defined in clause (d) of section 2 of the 
Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976,:but 
does not include any such person- 
(1) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950, or the Army Act. 1950, 
or the Navy Act, 1957; or- 4'" . ••..• -. --·0 ~'-.I •• lo..:""".- 
,(il) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other 
employee of a priso:n; or 
12 


(iiI) who is employed mainly in a supervisory or managerial or 
administrative capacity. 
3.3 Suggestions Received by the Committee:. 
• Shri Tapan Sen, the then MP (RS). and Member of the Committee, 
with regard to the definition of employee suggested: 
"Section 2 of the Bill deals with definitions and there are 
definitions of 'workers' as well as 'employees' both almost being the 
same with the exception that supervisory, managerial, 
administrative personnel are treated as 'employee' only while the 
skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled, manual, operational, technical or 
clerical personnel are treated as 'worker' as well as 'employee'. The 
hidden motive behind this is to open avenue for the employers to 
misinterpret and also to discriminate between the workers and 
employees. 
This apprehension becomes more evident, when it is noted 
that in the definition of employees as per section 2 (j) "working 
journalists and other newspaper employees" and "sales promotion 
employee~" are excluded: whereas-in the definition of workers as 
per section 2(y), these two categories have been mentioned 
specifically, meaning thereby that the 'working journalist and other 
newspaper employees' and 'sale promotion employees' will not be 
treated as employees as per the Bill. In this definitional context, 
subsequent chapters of the Code on Wages Bill 2017 dealing with 
"Minimum Wages" and. other wage related matters, mentioned 
only about their applicability for the employees and nowhere, 
"worker" has been mentioned. This may lead to exclusion of the 
sales promotion employees and working journalists and other 
newspaper employees from the coverage of the proposed Bill." 
• All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) , 
Railway Workers I Union (MPRWU) 
communication submitted as under: 
"The differences in definition of "employee" and "worker", 
"employee" includes the . supervisory; managerial and 
administrative staff over and above a "worker", would lead to 
discrimination between workers and employees." 
Mormugao Port and 
In their· written 
13 
._-------.- -.-_., .... -. ...•. ~ .• ----- .. --- ..... ~ ... - -.---- 


• AITUC further submitted that definition of "workers" should be 
same as contained in the Industrial Dispute Act 1947 . 
.• PHD Chamber' of Commerce and Industry (PHD CCI) vide their. 
written submission stated that the definition of employee should 
specifically exclude people engaged in managerial, administrative 
and supervisory nature of jobs. There should also be a defined 
wage limit as to who would be covered under the provisions of -. 
the proposed Act. 
• Federation of Indian Micro and Small & Medium Entreprises 
(FISME), submitted .that merging of definitions of 'worker and 
employee' brings! even managerial staff under the purview of the 
Code. 
• Shri Saurabh Bhattacharjee, Assistant Professor, National 
University of Juridical . Sciences, Kolkata in his written 
memoranda stated that the Code on Wages Bill lacked 
consistency in the use of the terms employee and worker. Section 
5 of the code which deals with minimum wages uses the term 
'employee', section 6(6) and section 7(1) in the same chapter use 
the term 'worker'. Use of different terms for the same chapters 
may lead to confusion, especially since the .definition of terms 
vary. 
He accordingly suggested that the definition provided in 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 be adopted in its substance. 
Therefore, section 2 (y) should be modified as 'worker' means any 
. person (other than an apprentice) who is employed for wages, whether the 
terms of such employment are express or implied, in any kind of work, 
manual or otherwise, in or in connection with the work of an establishment. 
Similarly, the term II employee " under section 2 m be modified 
as 'Employee' means, any person (other than an apprentice engaged under 
the Apprentices Act, 1961), employed on wages by an establishment to do 
any kind of work, skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled, manual, operational, 
supervisory, managerial, administrative, technical, clerical or otherwise, for 
hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and 
also includes a person declared to be an employee by the appropriate 
14 


I ! 
--- --- --- - .-----~-------- - ------------_. __ ._---- 
I 
I 
I,· i 
government, but does not include any member of the Armed forces of the 
Union. 
• The State Government of Karnataka, in their written note to the 
Committee suggested that the clause's defmition of Employee 
enlarges the scope of definition by including Operational, 
Supervisory, Managerial and Technical work. However clause 2(y) 
which defines 'Worker" speaks only of' Manual, Unskilled, 
Skilled, Technical, Operational, or clerical work and includes 
working journalists and other newspaper employees and sales 
promotion employees. The two definitions with varying scope may. 
lead to confusion with regard to the applicability of the provision. 
A common and; comprehensive def-mition of Employee/worker 
may be given for clarity at implementation level. 
• They also suggested that the defiriition of the term "Employee" 
.. enlarges the s<?ope of definition by including Operational, 
Supervisory, Managerial and Technical work. However clause 2(y) 
which defines "Worker" speaks only of Manual, Unskilled, 
Skilled, Technical, Operational or .clerical work and includes 
working journalists and other news paper employees and sales 
'promotion employees. The two defmitions with varying scope may 
lead to confusion with regard to the applicability of the provision. 
A common and comprehensive definition of Employee/worker 
may be given for clarity at implementation level. 
3.4 Response of MoL&E on the above mentioned issues: 
• Responding to the concern raised by Shri Tapan Sen, the then 
MP(RS) and Member of the Committee, it was stated that the 
term "employee" includes "worker" and 'worker' is a sub-set of 
.an employee under the Code on Wages Bill. The scope of 
definition of employee has been expanded to include' the 
persons employed in supervisory, managerial, administrative, 
technical or' operational capacity. The reason for having two 
definitions is that the workers under, Section :?_(q)- of .. the Bill . 
. - -. h'~;~ been co~e~~d ill{der the Industrial Dispute whereas all the 
employees are not covered under the Industrial Disputes Act as 
is the scheme today. It is confirmed that the 'working journalist 
15 
~- . - -------_ .... -_""..,..-... __ .. ._-----_.- ,.-.~. --- ~~ I 


and other newspaper employees' and 'sale promotion 
employees' are covered under the definition of the employees as 
"they are the persons employed on wages by an 
establishment " Section 2(j) of the Code. 
• On the apprehensions of AITUC and MPRWU, the MoL&E 
stated that the use of term worker and . employee has been used 
for different purposes in the Code. The word employee has 
been used where the right for minimum wages, payment of 
wages and payment of bonus is concerned. Thus, implying that 
all persons employed in whatever 'capacity are eligible for these 
statutory benefits, The word worker is used in definition of 
industrial dispute implying, dispute on these matters cannot 
be . raised by persons in supervisory, . managerial and 
administrative capacity. Presently also all employee is not 
covered under Industrial Dispute Act. 
• On the suggestion of AITUC, MoL&E responded that The only 
difference in the definition of "worker" as provided in ID Act 
and that provided in Wage Code is the exclusion of persons 
employed mainly in supervisory capacity. A wage ceiling for 
supervisory capacity of Rs 10,000 per month is provided 
presently in the ID Act. Providing a wage ceilingfor the :persons 
employed in supervisory' capacity in the definition of worker 
may be considered. 
• Responding to the' query raised by PHD CCI, the MoL&E stated. 
that the provision of Minimum Wage and timely 'payment of 
wage is proposed to 'be universalized irrespective of nature of 
job and wage ceiling.. . 
• With regard to the concern raised by FISME, the MoL&E 
submitted that the use of term worker and employee has been 
used for different purposes in the Code. The word employee 
has been used where the right for minimum wages, payment of 
wages and payment of bonus is concemed. Thus,implying that 
all persons employed in whatever capacity are eligible for 0-ese 
statutory benefits', The word worker is used in definition of 
industrial dispute' implying, dispute on these matters cannot 
be raised by persons in supervisory, managerial and 
, . administrative, .. capacity, Presently also all employees are not 
covered under Industrial Dispute Act, The present legislation 
16 


- -- ,-:--".-- - . 
also uses the word employee instead of worker for the purpose 
of minimum wages, payment of wages and grant of bonus.' 
• The suggestions from Shri Saurabh Bhattacharjee did not elicit 
any response from MoL&E. 
• Responding to the suggestion of the Government of Karnataka, 
MoL&E stated that from the definition of "employee" in clause 
2(j) of the Code and the defmition of the "worker" in clause 2(y) 
of the Code, it is evident that "employee" is a broader term 
while "worker' is a limited term. The term "worker" is a sub-set 
of the set' "employee", Employee covers worker but riot vice­ 
versa. The use of term worker and employee has been used for 
different purposes in the Code. The word employee has been 
used where the right for minimum wages, payment of wages 
and payment of bonus is concemed. Thus, implying that all 
persons employed in whatever capacity are eligible for these 
statutory benefits. The word worker is used in definition of 
industrial dispute implying, dispute on these matters cannot' . 
be raised by persons in supervisory, managerial and 
administrative capacity. Presently also all employee.' is not 
covered under Industrial Dispute Act. 
3.5 The Committee note that the definitions of the 
term 'Worker' and 'Employee', both have been provided 
under Clause 2 Sub-sections' U) and (y) in the Code. 
While the definitfon of 'Worker' is similar to the 
definition of 'Workmen' under the Induatrtal Disputes 
. Act 1947, the defirritfon of 'Employee' under Clause 2 
U) has been made broader since it Irrcfudes managerial 
and administrative functions under its scope. The 
Ministry of Labour and Welfare has justified it by 
stating that the use of the .term 'Worker' a.nd 
'Employee' has been used for different purposes in the 
Code. While the word 'Worker' implies that indu$,trial,c, ... 
disputes cannot be" raised "by persons in supervisory, 
managerial and administrative capacity presently 
17 
:::::..=~::..=:...=-::~~~~~ .. __ ._~IJ . .. --" -- - - -"- _._------ ._-- ._---- _- --- .. - _ ... _---- 


I~ J 
: ! ~ -. 
under the Industrial Disputes Act, the work 'Employee' 
has been used where the right for minimum wages~ 
payment of wages and payment of bonus is concerned. 
The. Committee feel that the Code lacks consiste~cy in 
use of both terms at various clauses which may lead to 
confusion. They appre herrd that the confusion may 
lead to employers misinterpreting these terms and 
perhaps also discriminate between the workers and 
employees. The Committee also: find merit in' the 
suggestion received by them during the course of 
examination that since the Equal Remuneration Act, 
1976, as it stands now, applies ·to every employee of an 
establishment, the .~ransition to the Code would result 
in exclusion of workers based on their' nature of work. 
The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that since 
minimum wage is a matter of right. for every working 
person, a common and comprehensive definition of 
employee/worker needs to be given in the Code for 
better clarity at the implementation level and relevant 
clauses amended suitably. 
3.6 Clause 2(k) of the Bill defines "employer" as under: 
"employer" means a person who employs one or more employees in 
his establishment and where the establishment is carried on by 
any department of the Central Govemment or the State 
Govemment, the authority specified,. by the head of such 
department, in this behalf or where no authority, is so specified the 
head of the department and in relation to an establishment carried 
on by a local authority, the chief executive of 0at authority, -and 
includes,- 
( 1) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the 
occupier o{·~tlie--- factory "as' defined in clause (n) of 
section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 and, where a 
person has been named as a manager of the factory 
18 . 
___ .••• r- r -- 


under clause (jj of sub-section (1) of section 7 of the 
said Act, the person so named; 
(it) in relation to any other establishment, the person who, 
or the authoritywhich, has ultimate control over the 
affairs of the establishment and where thesaid affairs 
is entrusted to a manager or managing director, such 
manager or managing director; and 
(iit) con tractor. " 
3.7 Suggestions received by the Committee: 
• Shri Tapan Sen, the then MP (RS) and Member of the Committee, 
with regard to thy definition of employer suggested: 
"The definition of 'employer' [Sec 2(k] has also been so formulated that 
it makes difficult to identify the Principal Employer. As per the earlier 
provision in' Sec 2(e) of the Minimum Wages Act 1948 'Employer 
mea.J:?s any person who employs, whether directly or through another 
person, or whether on behalf of himself or any other person, one or 
more employees ..... ' This has now been changed to 'Employer' means 
a person who employs one or more employees in his establishment ... .' 
In the new Bill. This changed provision totally ignores the reality of 
contract-working in any establishment, which has today become the 
general phenomenon everywhere. Through this it seeks to relieve or 
bail-out the principal employer of the establishment from its 
responsibility and obligation ,on contract workers. At the same time, 
definition of 'Contractor' as prevalent in the Contract Labour 
(Regulation & Abolition) Act 1970 has been' inserted in such manner 
in Sec 2 (f) of the Bill as to suit the employers' interests in respect of 
outsourcing requirement and legalise and legitimise employment of 
contract workers in perennial jobs. There may be some other hidden 
agenda behind this." 
• MPRWU, HMS and CrTU ill their written communication 
submitted as under: 
"Definition of "employer" makes it difficult to identify "Principal 
Employer". New definition not sensitive to' reality of contract working. 
Seeks to relieve principal employer, from .reeporieibility towards 
contract workers." 
19 


_===_ ... -,, __ .. ~~ ,~'" .- __ . ..,_·,-,.,:-··_··-,=c···· ",. ~ . ----.- ._ ;;'=~-"::-'.:,-=o_ =======. _;:;;;. =- y-·ri-·----==~, c----- -- --------~ . 
i 
J 
! 
-. 
• en in their written submission submitted as under: 
" "Employer": Unorganized small establishments employing more than 
one employee should be kept out of purview of this Code and be dealt 
'with separately. It is difficult to monitor application of this Code to 
, every establishment." 
• HMS in their written communication submitted as under: 
"The legal representative of a deceased employer was treated as 
employer under Payment of Wages Act, 1936 but the proposed Code 
does not figure in this provision. ", 
3.8 Response of MoL&E on ,the above mentioned issues: 
• In response to the suggestions of Shri Tapan Sen, the then MP{RS) 
. and Member of the Committee, MoL&E submitted that "Contract 
worker" is also included in the definition of "employee" under the 
Code on Wages Bill. The definition of 'employer" clearly mentions 
that the 'employers' includes 'contractor" and thus the 
responsibility of payment of dues for the 'contract workers' lies 
with the 'contractor'. Further, the Section 43 of the Code on wages 
. Bill 'stipulates that in case the employer fails to make the payment 
due to the employee, the proprietor of the establishment where the 
employee is employed is responsible for payment of dues. 
• Responding to the queries raised by MPRWU, HMS and CITU the 
Ministry stated that "Contract worker" is also included in the 
definition of "employee" under the Code on Wages Bill. The 
defmition of 'employer' clearly mentions that the 'employers' 
includes 'contractor' and thus the responsibility of, payment of 
dues for the 'contract workers' lies with the 'contractor'. Further, 
the Section 43 of the Code on wages Bill stipulates that in case the 
employer fails to make the payment due to the. employee, the 
proprietor of the establishment where the employee is employed is 
responsible for payment of dues. It is also mentioned that the. 
concept of Principal Employerand his responsibility for payment of 
wages would be, again covered in the Code subsuming Contract 
Labour Act . 
• , Responding to the suggestions of Cll MoL&E stated that it is 
envisaged to pay all employedriot less tha,ri the minimum VJage,s:' 
20 
... ----- ___ 00:-_. ._ - 


• Responding to the queries of HMS the MoL&E stated that The 
inclusion of the legal representative of a deceased employer as 
employer in the definition of employer may be considered. . 
• . Further responding to the Committee's doubt that definition of 
employer in Wages Code makes it difficult to identify "principal 
employer', MoLE stated that: 
"As per the present definition of employer :in the Minimum Wages 
Act "employer means any person who employs, whether directly or 
through another'person, or whether on behalf of himself or any 
other person, one or more employees :in any scheduled 
employment :in respect of which minimum rates of wages have 
been fixed under this Act". As per this definition the term pr:incipal 
employer has not been explicitly used however is inbuilt in the . 
definition by us:ing the phrase "whether directly or through 
another person". 
. As per the definition of employer :in the Wage Code, this 
phrase has n<?t been used as' clearly the contractor has been given 
the status of employer as provided clearly :in section 2(k)(ili). The 
definition has used the word contractor specifically to :fix the 
responsibility of payment of wages not less than minimum wages 
and timely payment on the contractor. If the definition is changed 
according to the existing definition, the accountability of the 
contractor will alter. It is reasonable if the contractor is the 
employer of the contract employees and is held specifically' 
responsible for the timely payment of wages. Further, to protect 
the :interest of contract workers if the contractor fails to pay the 
wages on time section 43 of the Code provides obligation to the 
principal employer. By this mechanism initially the contractor is 
held accountable and 1£ he fails, pr:incipal employer would be 
accountable. In view of this it may not be appropriate to change 
the definition of employer." 
3.9 As regards definition of 'Employer' under Clause 2' 
Bub-sectfon (k) the Committee are in agreement with 
the apprehension that the same makes it rather 
difficult to identify' 'principal' employer hence they 
recommend that in the said sub-sectlon (k) in the 
:--phrase '--(employer' means a. person who employs"~:" 
following line may. be added after the word 'employs'- 
21 


-, 
'whether directly or through any person or whether on 
its' behalf or on behalf of any other person'. The 
Committee further recommend that Clause 2 Sub­ 
section (k) (i) fii) (iii) may be added with one more point 
as ,point (iv) -'legal representative of a deceased 
employer'. 
Same Work or Work of Similar Nature 
3. 10 Clause 2 (u) of the Bill states as under: 
"same work or work of a similar nature" means work in 
respect of which the skill, effort and responsibility required 
are the same, when performed under similar working 
conditions by employees and the difference if any, between 
the skill, effort and responsibility required for employees of 
any gender, ~e not of practical importance in relation to the 
terms and conditions of employment." 
3 .. 11 Suggestions received by the Committee: 
• HMS in their written communication. stated that in Clause 2(u) 
. the word "responsibility". be deleted as it may give scope for 
subj ectivity. 
• AITUC in their written communication stated that in Clause 2(u) 
the word "responsibility" be deleted as. the same is open in. 
different interpretations based on subjective considerations. 
• Confederation of Indian Industry (ClI) stated that the terminology 
used in Clause 2(u) with regard to 'same. work' is extremely 
confusing. It would undermine skills and competencies on the 
part of the employee. For example, the -requirement . of 
competencies and skill set for a worker in an auto industry will 
be different than a worker. in. the construction brick kiln 
industry. . .. _" "_., :.;~ 
22 


J 
, . ! 
• PHD Chambers of Commerce and Industry (PHD CCI) suggested 
that in Clause 2(u) after the word 'effort', the word 'experience' 
needs to be added to give importance to experience. 
• Employers' Federation of India (EFI) submitted that the term 
same work is retrograde as it disregards skills and competencies. 
• Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) submitted that in Clause 2(u) 
contract labour should also be included. 
3.12 Response of MoL&E on the above mentioned issue: 
• In response to the suggestions of HMS & AITUC, MoL&E stated 
that the definition of "same work or work-of a similar nature" is I ' 
same as defined in Section 2(h) of the Equal Remuneration Act, 
1976. In comparison of two works, the component of 
"responsibility" is crucial besides skill and effort. 
• Responding to the concern raised by ClI, MoL&E statedthat the 
defmition of "same work or work of a similar nature" is same as 
defined in Section 2(h) of the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976. 
Section 2(u) takes into account skill, effort and responsibility 
required. 
• The MoL&E, while addressing the concern raised by PHDCCI 
submitted that It is as per existing definition in Section 2(h) of 
Equal Remuneration Act. Adding any other criteria would make 
it difficult for implementation. 
• Responding to the query raised by EFI, the MoL&E stated ,that 
"Section 2(u) takes into account skill, effort and responsibility 
required. Thus, the issue of competency has been taken into 
account". 
• Addressing the issue raised by BMS, the MoL&E stated that 
contract labour was also included. 
-' .~ -.',. 
23 


3.13 In response to the Committee's query whether experience 
. should also be 'considered while considering minimum wage, the 
Ministry clarified as under: 
"It has been desired by the committee that the provision should be 
included in the Code to ensure incremental increase of wages of 
the workers from time to time besides providing for wages not less 
than the minimum wages. It is to be mentioned here that there 
have been demands from employers : associations that periodic 
increase should be linked with the productivity of the worker. This 
demand has not been accepted as minimum wage is the wage 
which is essential for sustenance of the worker and can not be 
linked with productivity." 
3.14 Further clarifying the Ministry's position, the representative of 
the Ministry during the course of oral evidence stated as under: 
" ... "The definition of same work or work of similar nature 
needs a relook." Basically;' we had put this for 'The Equal 
Remuneration Act', wherever it is same work or work of 
similar nature, equal remuneration has to be paid.' Now, the 
comments that we have received says that we should have a 
relook at it because when we wanted to explain what is 
similar nature of work, we said, we should take into account 
the responsibility, skill. and' effort. Now, the view of the 
employer side is that we should take experience also into 
account. Sir, if you can see the right side, it is written: 'work' 
has been compared in terms of skill, effort and responsibility' 
which is reasonable, The employer side says that experience 
should also be included. So, we will try and include this also." 
3.15 The Committee are of the firm opinion that 
experferice of a 'worker in any establishment in t,he 
unorganized sector has largely not been recognized ·by 
the employers for payment of wages and therefore it 
needs to be corisfdered . .as . one component while 
comparing work of same 'and similar nature. They feel 
that a clarification may be required to be given in the 
24 ' 
I 
I ' , 


--.-~' -~------~",,,,,-,_,_~,,,,,,,,,,,,-~----":"- •... -_ .• ---"::"=-~:-'~----'-' ." .• :- - .' ~'=-'.:-::=.:~'=-":..==-----':-:: 
Code that the concept of minimum wage is actually 
'the minimum wage at the time of entry/initial wage' 
and that experience/loyalty/years of service are to be 
taken, into account over and above the minimum wage. 
During their interaction with, the Minist'ry of Labour 
and Employment, the Committee gathered the 
impression .that it is willing to explore the possibility of 
incl~ding the same. Hence, the Committee recommend 
that Clause 2 [u] may be modified as under: 
"'same work or work of a similar nature"· 
means work in respect of which the skill, 
effort, experience and responsibility required 
are the, same, when performed under similar 
working conditions by employees whether 
regular or on contract and the difference if 
. any, between the skill, effort, experience and 
responsibility required for employees of any 
gender, are not of practical importance in 
relation to 'the terms and conditions of 
errrployrnerrt." 
3.16 Further, they recommend that Clause 6 Sub- 
section (6) inay be modified as under:' 
"For the purpose of llXation of factors referred 
to in Sub-section (5), the appropriate 
Government shall take into account the skill 
required, the arduQusness of the· work a$signed 
to the worker, experience, length of service in . , 
an . orgarrizatfon, geographical location of the 
25 
I 
==-_ "'''.--. _ - -,.,_~-.-." '---:- -.-'" ---""""'." •...•..•••.• __ -r- » ••• ~_~, .•.• - .• , ,_ c-, ~._._·c;-· .,., -'; ,'.~-,:- .•.. ~ .. -==-,,,,,,,"". ~~"" •. =~--.- . .,..".-.--- .. "- . . - '.----- "'''.--'' . - 


place of the work and other factors which the 
appropriate Government considers necessary". 
Definition of Wages 
3.1 7 Clause 2 (x) of the Bill defines. wages as under: 
""wages" means all remuneration, whether by way of salary, allowances 
or otherwise, expressed in terms of money or capable of being so 
expressed which would, if the terms of employment, express or implied, 
were fulfilled, be payable to a person employed in respect of his 
employment or of work done in such employment, and includes,- 
(!) any remuneration' payable under any award or settlement 
between the parties or order of a court; 
(il) I any remuneration to which the person employed is entitled 
in respect of overtime work or holidays or any period of 
leave; 
(iiz) any additional remuneration payable under the terms of 
employment, whether called a bonus or by any other name; 
(iv) . any sum which by reason of the termination of employment 
of the person employed is payable under any law, contract 
or instrument which provides for the payment of such sum, 
whether with or without deductions, but does not provide 
for the time within which the payment is to be made; 
(v) . any sum to which the person employed is entitled under 
any scheme framed under any law for the time being in 
force; 
(v~ any house rent allowance, but does not include- 
(A) any bonus payable under this Code, which does not 
form part of the remuneration payable under the 
terms of employment or which is not payable under 
any award or settlement between the parties or order 
of a court or Tribunal; 
(B) the value of any house-accommodation, or of the 
supply of light, water, medical attendance or other 
amenity or of any service excluded from the 
computation of wages by a general or special order of 
the appropriate Government; - 
(q any contribution . paid by the employer to _ any 
pension or provident fund, and the interest which 
may have accrued thereon; .. _ . __ '. 
(D) . any travelling allowance or the value of any travelling 
concession; 
~~ _"_"""_ -, .,- __ =""'~_ .=" ~-c . r-. ~".._....-:~,.~.-:--::-.;-. ~"'" _'_",V_-" ••••....•.••.. _~ .~ •• 'O-;-:- _...-._ •.. __ ._~._-..-..-r- ... -.---.-- ""''' -., 


.. -, ••.... ., .,- -~. _. i'" ",-,-,,_, ... - ...• 
,... ••••• ' .-.=::7 ••• .,; '_.' ". '. '.'- .• -_-;,: •• 7_'!_·:'': .•.••. '.'. -:.: .• : • ..:' ..:_ •.• :7-"'::'" ":_':'. ",:,., ~:":-"-:>r:.a; ••. , ••• ~ 
(E) any sum paid to the employed person to defray 
special expenses entailed on him by the nature of his 
employment; or 
(F) any gratuity payable on the termination of 
employment in cases other than those specified in 
sub-clause (iV)" 
3.18 Suggestions received by the Committee: 
• Shri Tapan Sen, the then MP (RS) and Member of the Committee, 
in his written submission stated that the definition of 'wages' is 
quite confusing. It is lengthy enough consisting of some 61 lines. I • 
It is difficult to determine what wage is as per the definition. 
Somewhere it has' been told that wage includes overtime wage, 
house rent allowance etc. But for bonus calculation it is not SO.II 
• HMS in the written submission stated that the definition of 
"wages" is confusing as in some places overtime wage, house rent 
allowance, etc. have been treated as wage but for Bonus 
calculation these are not part of wage. They suggested that the 
eligibility criteria should be treated for payment of Bonus also. 
• MPRWU in their written submission stated that the definition of 
wages is quiet confusing and lengthy as it consist of some 61 
lines. It is difficult to determine what wage is as per the 
definition. Somewhere it has been told that ·wage includes 
overtime' wage, house rent allowance, 'etc., but for .bonus 
calculation it is not so. 
• CITU stated that definition of wages is confusing. Its length itself 
makes it difficult to determine what 'wage' is as per the 
definition. It says that 'wage' includes overtime wage, house rent 
allowance, etc. But this does not holds good for calculatiori of 
bonus . 
• BMS.in the written memoranda stated that proviso 'commission' 
should also be included in the of definition of wages. 
27 
I 


• ClI suggested that proviso 2 under the definition of wages for the 
purpose of Chapter IV may be omitted as the employer provides 
various allowances and contributes towards various social 
security / statutory funds such as PF, ESI, Gratuity, Bonus etc. 
• PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PHDCCI) suggested 
that in the d~finition of wages in Section 2(x) (iii) bonus is part of 
wages whereas in 2(x) (A) bonus is part of wages. It m~y create an 
unnecessary confusion. 
• PHDCCI in .their written submissiori sought a clarification 
regarding bonus being partof wages or no .. 
• The Government of Karnataka suggested that the prOVISO after 
clause 2 (x) (vii) and Explanation thereafter needs further 
clarification and simplification. 
3.19· Response of MoL&E on the above mentioned issue: 
.• In ·response to the concerns raised by Shri Tapan Sen the then 
MP(RS) and Member of the Committee, MoL&E submitted that the 
definition of "wages" in the Code consists of 2 parts, One for the 
purpose of calculation of bonus. (It has been taken from the 
Payment of Bonus Act) and; 'second for the purposes such as 
minimum wages, payment of wages, etc. 
• Responding to the queries of MPRWU, HMS and eITU, MoL&E 
informed that the definition of wages in the existing statutes varies 
with the objective of Statute. The inclusions and exclusions·in the 
definition also vary with the objective. Accordingly, the definition of 
wages for minimum wages and payment of wages is different than 
the definition of wages for the purpose of payment of bonus. 
• Responding to the query of BMS, the MoL&E submitted that the 
commission has been excluded by clause 2 (x) proviso (vii) which 
reads as under "(vii) any commission payable to the. employee:" 
. such provision is a time-tested provision already existing in section 
2(21) (vii) of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 and any alteration .. _ < 
from su"Cii~time'tested may cause unexpected difficulty. . - 
28 
----------_._ 


• Responding to the query raised by crr and PHDCC, the MoL&E in 
their written submission stated that this provisio has been 
provided to deter the employer from adding most part of the wages 
in allowances .and thus reduce the quantum of bonus. This would 
protect employees from exploitation. 
.• ,Clarifying the concerned raised by PHDCCI regarding bonus being 
part of the wages, the MoL&E stated that the bonus given as per 
Payment of Bonus Act i.e. statutory bonus has been excluded from 
the Wages. However, any other .payment in the name of bonus is 
included. It IS as per existing definition of wages in existing 
legislation. 
• The MoL&E responded in the affirmative to the suggestion of the 
Government of Karnataka. 
3.20 During the course of the evidence when this matter was raised 
by the Committee, the representative of the Ministry responded as 
under: 
" ... Defmition of wages is confusing. The comment that we have 
received is lengthy. We will try and address this ... " 
3.21 . The Committee are of the opinton that the 
definftfon of 'Wages' given in the Code is very lengthy' 
and needs further clarification and stmplificatton. The 
Ministry have justified the same by stating that the . . 
said definition consists of two parts, one for the 
purpose of calculation of bonus, as taken from the 
Payment of Bonus Act and second, for the purposes 
such as minimum wages, payment of wages etc. The 
Committee find it confusing. that in Clause 2 Sectfon . 
(x-iii) bonus is part of wages whereas in Clause 2 
Section (x-A) bonus. is not. part of wages, th.c!'1;1gh. t4~ 
Ministry have' cla:dfied that statutory bonus has been 
excluded from the wages, however, any other payment 
29 
, 
===================::::::'~:::::::::==-"'-'~~"""-~-'..-" . _. __......---.~ ~ .... '--- ~I 


,~ ~ 
in the name of bonus is included. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the' Ministry should try to 
address this issue through simplification of relevant 
Clause and explanations given therein. 'The Committee 
would also like the Ministry to consider a suggestion 
received from the'm by t.he employers that inclusion of 
bonus should be . allowed to be taken over in case the 
Establishment concerned does not earn profit. 
The Committee, t.herefore, recotnmend that Clause 
2 Sub-section (~) of the Code may be substituted with 
the following Sub-section as under: 
'(x) "wages" means all remuneration, whether by 
way of salary; allowances . or otherwise, expressed in 
terms of money or capable of being so expressed which 
would, if the terms of employment, express' or implied, 
were fulfiflcd, be payable to a person employed in 
respect of his employment or of work done in such 
employment, and Includes any, - 
(i) dearness allowances; 
(ii). house rent allowance; 
(iii) remuneration payable under any award or 
settlement between the parties or order of a 
court; and 
(iv) additional remuneration payable under the 
terms of employment, with whatsoever name 
it is called, 
but does not include - . 
(a) any bonus payab!€? 'under this Code, which 
'does not form part of the remuneration 
payable under the terms of employment or 
30 


, - ] 
which is not payable under any award or 
settlement between the· parties or order of 
a court or Tribuna~; 
(b) the value of any ~o;us'e-accommodation, or 
of the supply of i light, water, medical 
attendance or other amenity ·or of any 
service excluded from the computatdon of 
wages by a general or special order of. the 
appropriate Government; 
(c) any I contributio:p. paid by the . employer. to 
any pension or provident fund, and the 
interest which m.ay have accrued thereon; 
(d) .any travelling allowance or the value of 
any travelling concession; 
(e) . any sum paid to the employed person to 
defray special expenses' entailed ~n him by 
the nature of his employment; or 
(f) any retrenchment compensation or any 
graturty or other retirement benefit 
payable .to the' employee or. any ex-gratia 
payment made to him on the termination 
of employment; 
(g) any overtime allowance; and 
. (h) any commission payable to the employee: 
Provided that for calculating the wage . . . 
under this clause, if any payments made 
by the employer to the employee under 
clauses (a) to (h) exceeds. one half·of··the all 
remuneration calculated under this clause, 
the amount which exceeds such one-half 
31 
l 
II 
===========~====~~==~~~===-=~-=.~=.= .. ~=.--= ... ~=.- .. ="~~-'~~--~"-~'~-~"-~~=--'-'~'-''''~''~'-~' ~--. -~.~.~=.- --~~~ .. ==,.~-~. ----_. __ - .. 


l 
I " 
" 
shall be deemed as remuneration and shall 
be accordingly added in all remuneration 
'under this clause. 
Explanation - Where an employee is given in lieu of 
the whole or part of the wages payable to him, any 
remuneration in kind by his employer, the value of 
such remuneration in kind which does not' exceed 
fifteen percent of the total wages payable to him, shall 
be deemed to form part of the wages of such employee., 
Prohibition of Dfscrtmtnatfon on Ground of Gender: 
3.22 Clause 3(1) of the Bill states as "Under: 
"There shall be no discrimination among employees on the ground 
of gender in matters relating to wages by the same employer, in 
, respect of the same work or work of similar nature done by any 
employee." 
3.23 Suggestions received by the Committee 
• The Government of Karnataka suggested that "in anyone unit of 
Establishment" may be included at the end of clause 3(1). 
3.24 Response of MoL&E on the above mentioned issue: 
• The MoL&E responded in the affirmative to the suggestion of the 
Government of Karnataka: ._ 
3.25 When queried by the Committee as to whether the Equal 
Remuneration Act has been" diluted by restricting ,it to gender 
discrimination only in respect of payment of wages, the Ministry 
submitted that sub-clause 2 of clause 3 needed to be modified, as 
under: 
"In clause 3, for sub-clause (2(, substitute the following sub­ 
clause, namely: - 
No employer shall, - 
32 
,~~--.--------- .. - _ •• •• _ • __ J_ 


l I 
I - I 
L 
(il' for the purpose of complying with the. provisions of sub­ 
section (1), reduce the rate of wages of any employee; and 
(ii) Make any discrimination between men and women while 
recruiting them for the same work or work of similar nature 
and thereafter in the conditions of employment except where 
the employment of women in· such work is prohibited or 
restricted by or under any law for the time being in force." 
3~26 Clause 3 Sub-section (1) and (2) of the Code 
deal with. prohibition of dtscrfmfnatfon on account of 
Gender. For better clarity in the same, the Committee 
recommend that at the end of Clause 3 Sub-section (1) 
the following phrase may be included: 'In anyone unit 
of Establishment'. In so far as the matter related to 
prohibition of discrimination in recruitment and 
employment conditions, the Ministry have argued that 
the same will be addressed In the Occupational Safety; 
Health & Working Conditions Code, which is· due to 
come in future. However, the 'Cornmdt tee desire this 
Code to be a progressive measure guaranteeing non­ 
discrimination. Hence, the Committee desire that 
Clause 3, Sub-section 2 may be substttuted with the 
following: 
"No employer shall, - 
(i) for the purpose of complying with. the 
provisions of sub-section (1), reduce the rate of 
wages of any employee; and 
(ii) Make any. discri:rnination between men : and 
women while recruiting them for the same 
33 
I 


work or work of similar nature and thereafter 
in the 'conditions of employment except where' 
the employment. of women in such work is 
prohibited or restricted by or under any law for 
the time being in force." 
Procedure for Fbdng and Revising Minimum Wages. 
3.27 Clause 8 (1) of the bill stated as under: 
"In fixing minimum rates of wages in 'respect of any employment 
for the first time under this Code or in revising minimum rates of 
wages so fixed, the appropriate Government shall either- 
(a) appoint as many committees and sub-committees as it 
considers necessary to hold enquiries and recommend in respect 
of such fixation or revision, as the case may be;" 
3.28 The State Government. of Karnataka has. suggested that in 
.Clause 8 (i)(a) the following may be added - 'based on the norms/ 
parameter prescribed by the appropriate Government from time to 
tinier . 
3.29 Response of MoL&E on the above mentioned issue: 
• Responding to the query raised by the Committee, the 
MoL&E has stated as follows "provides flexibility to the . 
appropriate Govemment to' include any factors for 
fixation of minimum wages as it considers' necessary has 
been provided in section 6(6). 
3.30 During the course of oral evidence held on 18th January, 20.18, 
when queried by the Committee as to how the Central Government 
fix the floor levels for the entire country or hundreds of cities, the 
representative of the Ministry responded "as under: 
"Sir, it need not be only one. It can be more than one. The floor level need 
not be one for the entire country". 
34 
_-----_._.- ..•. __ . _._ .. _- 


".:\..o,_ - .• -- - ..••..•..••.••• - .•. :-,,_.;.~::.'":..-----. __ .:. .------ •• -------- _--:"":".--- •. ---=---:-·--··;-.;,·.··--::7-· ... :·;--:·;~ .. ;.::.-::~;:::::..::.:~. 
I 
1 I, 
3.31 When the Committee enquired further about the procedure for 
fixing minimum wages and as to whether the Ministry intends to 
take power, authority and responsibility to fix minimum wages for 
hundreds of cities in the country, the representative of MoL&E 
stated that it was not necessarily to fix wages city-wise. 
3.32 When the Committee sought to know whether the minimum 
wage is same in all industries or not, it was submitted that there is 
a single minimum wage for all the industries under Central 
Government. The Secretary, MoL&E further clarified that the wages 
are fixed according. to unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled categories. 
3.33 On being enquired further as to whether, the Ministry were 
dealing with only three categories of minimum wages and same 
wage for the workers of particular industries in villages and cities. 
The representative of the Ministry stated as under: 
t~, lfR ~ fcp ~ ~ t ~ cnW ~ ftItT +r t, cffiT ~ ~ -Nrrr, 
\WR cnW ~ 1lTcr .r t cIT crID 'Bt ~ ~ m-rrr I' .. 
. . 
3.34 During the course of the oral evidence held on 11th January, 
2018 when pointed out by the Committee that the concept of 
minImum wages was not being implemented in letter and spirit 
even after the lapse of so many years which was resulting in the 
important factor of experience being ignored while ·determining the 
salary . of' a worker;' the· representative' of Council of Indian 
Employers, SCOPE stated as under: 
·"What you are telling is the fundamental. In the industry, what is 
happening is, man, material and machine. In the three. elements, it 
. is only the man which is exploited .. Even the producer, 
manufacturer and the employer don't have the capacity to exploit. , . 
As soon as it comes to exploitation it is the man who gets exploited 
in whatever term' it may be. As. far as minimum wages is 
concerned, I even expressed in the tripartite agreement also, while 
framing this Wage Code 'Bill, we are still going with the philosophy 
35 


of protectionism. When the Minimum Wages Act was enacted in 
1947-48, the country required protective environment from the 
Government. Later, the whole sector has changed. It has to be a 
progressive kind of enactment: The whole basic fundamentals has 
·to change. The whole draft has to change; if you permit me to say 
that with our . Government background, that is the reason I. started 
saying that we don't have any problem with any wage. In -. the 
earlier Act also, and with the present Act also. But if you want to 
become progressive, the whole fundamentals of drafting has to 
change". 
I' 
3.35 When asked' by the Committee to furnis a on 
methodology of fixation of National Minimum Wage and Minimurr 
Wage, the Ministry stated that presently, section 6,7 and 8 of the 
Code on Wages:' Bill provides for the method, mponents and 
procedure for fixation of minimum wages. Section 6(6) provides that 
'for the purpose of fixation of factors for determining minimum 
wages, the appropriate Government shall take into account the skill 
required, the arduousness of the work assigned to the worker, , , 
geographical location of the place of work and other factors which 
the' appropriate Government considers necessary". 
3.36 It was further stated that lias per the present practice, any 
specific formula is not provided in the Minimum Wages Act to 
determine the minimum wages. However, the calculation for 
minimum wages is based on the recommendation of i5.th ILC and 
Judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in .the Reptakos & Co. Vs. its 
Workers.' The factors presently considered while fixing the minimum 
wage are as follows: 
(i) 3 consumptions units for one wage earner. 
(ii) Minimum food requirement' of 2700 calories per aver~ge 
Indian adult. 
(iii) Clothing requirement of 72 yards per.annum per family. 
(iv) Rent corresponding to the minimum area provided for-under 
Government's Industrial Housing Scheme. 
36 


e:.. , I@J 
(v) Fuel, lighting and other miscellaneous items of expenditure 
to constitute 20% of the total minimum wage. 
3.37 In 1992 the Hon'ble Supreme Court delivered a historic 
judgment and directed that children's education, medical 
requirement, minimum recreation including festivals/ ceremonies, 
provision for old age, marriage etc. should further constitute 250/0 of 
the minimum wage and be used as a guide in, fixation of minimum 
wage. In view of the present practice and to provide more specificity 
section 6(6) of the Code may be modified to include other factors 
like calorific requirement, clothing, House Rent, Children's 
Education, Medical requirement or any other' factor as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate Government. 
"Review or Revising Minimum Rates of Wages" 
3.38 Clause 8 (4) of the Bill states as under: 
"The appropriate Government shall review or revise minimum rates 
of wages at an interval of five years". 
3.39 Suggestions received by the Committee: 
• In their written suggestion, PRS Legislative studies suggested 
as under: 
The Code fixes the time period for States to revise minimum wages 
will be fixed at 5 years. This .should be made flexible.' There is' no 
time period specified for the Central Government to revise the 
National Minimum Wage. If revision does not take place at fixed 
periods, businesses may be affected as employers will not 'know 
when they might suddenly face an increase in labour costs. 
3.40 Response of MoL&E on the above mentioned issue: 
• Responding to the suggestion given by PRS Legislative Studies 
the MoL&E state that "providing flexibility in reviewing 
minimum, wages may be considered". 
37 


3.41 Under clause 8' Sub-section (1~A), it has been 
prescribed that 'in fixing minimum rates -of wages in 
respect of any employment for the first time under this 
Code or in revising minimum rates of wages so fixed, 
the appropriate Government shall either appoint as 
many Committees and Sub-Committees' as it considers 
necessary to hold enquiries and recommend in respect 
of such fixatfon or revision, as the case may be'. The 
Committee recommend that the following phrase may 
be inserted after the words 'so fixed' in, Clause 8( 1) (a) 
"based, on the norms/parameters prescribed by the 
appropriate Government from ,time to time". Further, 
under Sub-section (4) of the same Clause, it has been 
provided that -'the appropriate Government shall review 
or revise minimum rates of wages at an interval of five 
years'. The Committee note that the Minimum Wages 
Act 1948 gives the State Governments flexibility in 
decrdtng when to revise minimum wages as long as it is 
not more than five years. .Tn order to maintain that 
flexibility, the Committee recommend that in Clause 8 
Sub-section (4), the words 'at an interval of five years' 
may be substituted with 'ordinarily at an interval not 
exceeding five years'. 
Power of Central Government to ilx National Minimum Wage: 
3.42 Clause 9 of the Bill states as under: 
"(1) The Central Government may, by notification, fix the National 
Minimum Wage:- _" ~""_,, 
Provided that different National Minimum Wage may be fixed for 
different States or different geographical areas. 
38 


(2) The minimum rates of wages fixed by the appropriate 
Government under section 6 shall not be less than the National 
.Minimum Wage and if the minimum rates of wages fixed by the 
appropriate Government earlier- is more than the National 
Minimum Wage, then, the appropriate Government shall not 
reduce such minimum rates of wages fixed by it earlier. 
(3) The Central Government, before fixing the National Minimum 
Wage under sub-section (1), may obtain the advice of the Central 
Advisory Board constituted under sub-section (1) of section 42." 
3.43 Suggestions received by the Committee . 
.• Shri Tapan Sen, the then.MP(RS} and Member of the Committee, 
in his written submission highlighted as under: 
"While reformulating the wage related Bill in the form of present Code 
on Wages Bill, 2017, the Labour Ministry talks loudly in the media 
about the intention of 0e government to improve that Minimum Wage 
level by making provision for 'National Minimum Wage' below which 
no state government can decide the minimum wage. But, in reality, 
the Bill does not provide for a uniform National Minimum Wage for 
the entire country, Section 9(1) of the Bill clearly stipulates that 
different National Minimum Wage may be fixed for different states or 
different geographical areas'. Hence such 'National Minimum Wage' 
as stipulated in the Bill ceases to be a 'National Minimum' but is 
. made a 'state level minimum wage', making the whole concept of 
'National Minimum Wage' a deceptive ploy to mislead the people. Even 
if the difference in price level in different states/ geographical areas is 
taken into account. It can well be reflected in the rates of variable 
dearness allowances, as it exists now. There is no justification of 
making 'national minimum' of the basic minimum wage different fOT 
different states. Hence the provision of 'National Minimum Wage' 
being projected by the government as an improvement in the present 
Bill is rendered meaningless for the workers by the provision of the 
Bill itse1f." 
-; ::,-.' 
• AITUC in their written submission suggested: 
"A National Minimum Wage should be fixed based on criteria. set by 
the 15th 'Indian Labour Conference. No State shall then set minimum 
wag~ below the national level. Criteria for fixation of minimum wages 
should be included as a Schedule to the Act (Code); Appropriate 
-39 


=. _-·-.&..1.aCJ •.•.• ~- '.';:'.:.o("'.,,~-_. - .-.~~:-- • .:-~~_--.---. • .•. • •. ~.:..A-_-_-_· ..•. '1<.~.._-:..;~ ..•..•••....•.. • .•...••. ·.i ••• """~-··;·-- -,=>_ •• - •.• - .•. _- ==----- .. : .. ;:..! •• ~~:... ·---"--_~..::~,:;:,o:;-.--·!"\--<-~ .•• -;:",::::.:.· •. ·,::.v""::':Z:~i==~ ..•. -· 
·'T'·'_:-~-;""""""~-'~·:::~:~:Z:::-;·:~:'-"-'-"7:--.-:~ .... _= .... ..:~. __ -:::'".:" -! :: __ .:::.:~-:.-.:::!_:_::::=_r._ -',,, -_'-":' - -~. '::'-_:'::'::_:-~'-,' :,.,-. -·'·:~=r.= .. _.::::'-" ':_: ~-r. ._:~~ . .,. .. -.-.-:--;-;-:-=--: •.. --=r~-.:- .. '"::-'-.:'":!'''';'~~:-_.:_~ .•. ''''' ,-- 
government should be made statutorily bound to revise Minimum 
Wages every 2 years." 
• MPRWU and HMS in their written communication suggested: 
Fixation of minimum wages and power of central government to fix 
National Minimum Wage is under discretion of government. 
Employers are empowered to suppress wages in establishments in 
erstwhile schedules where wage level was higher than others. 
• BMS in their written submission suggested that as in the new 
laws, the Code which is trying to shift the burden of all social 
sector issues to State Goverrup.ent, is highly objectionable. 
Otherwise there will, be different rates of minimum wages in 
different states. I 
• Self Employed Women'~ Association (S~WA) in their written 
communication suggested that the minimum wages should be 
fixed for Unorganised sector trades. They further suggested that 
, for the homebased workers the minimum wages should be fixed 
on the piece rate basis. A detailed time motion study should be 
conducted for inclusion of the home based trades' in the 
minimum wages and fixation of piece rate for them. They further 
suggested that Government should fix the Rates of Commodities 
for self-employed/ own account workers and it should be covered 
in the Labour Code on Wages. Finally, they suggested that same 
rates of minimum wages should be fixed in all the States i.e. , , 
Minimum wages should not be different in different States. 
• PRS Legislative Studies in their written submission suggested 
that the Code allows the Central Government to set a national 
minimum standard of living. This could be a single, National 
Minimum Wage or different National Minimum Wages for 
different states and regions. There arises a question :whether 
Central Government should set a single National Minimum Wage 
or multiple National Minimum Wages. Single National Minimum 
Wage would bring uniformity and ease of implementation and 
compliance with minimum wage .Iaw, But large' regional 
variations in socio-economic factors across states might mean 
that a single National Minimum Wageis not feasible. 
40 


• Further it was suggested that: 
"Ability of States to reduce minimum wages: Minimum wages set by 
the State Govemments will not be lower than the National Minimum 
Wage set by the Central Govemment. If existing minimum wage set by 
the State Government is higher than the National Minimum Wage, the 
State Government cannot reduce its minimum wage. This mayaffect 
the ability of States to reduce their minimum wages if the Central 
Government decides to reduce the National Minimum Wage. A 
downward revision of minimum wage might lead the Central 
Govemment to lower the minimum wage." 
3.44 Response of MoL&E on the above mentioned issues: . I 
• Responding to the suggestion of Shri Tapan Sen, the then MP(RS), 
Member of the Committee, MoL&E stated that National Minimum 
Wage has to be fixed by the Central Government for the country as 
a whole. However, keeping in the regional disparities and cost of 
living, the provision for different National Minimum Wage for 
different geographical areas has been provided. Further, the 
National Minimum Wage would be fixed on the basis of 
recommendation of the Central Advisory Board, which is tripartite 
in nature and this amount will be fixed after due consultation with 
all stakeholders. 
Responding to suggestion of AITUC, MoL&E stated that as per 
Section 9(2) the State Govemment cannot fix the minimum wages 
less. than the National Minimum Wage. Further, if the minimum 
wage fixed by a State Government is already more than the 
National Minimum Wage, then the State Govts: cannot reduce 
such minimum wages fixed by it earlier. As regards method of 
fixation of National Min'imum Wage, the Section 9(3) provides for 
obtaining the advice of the Central Advisory Board constituted 
under Sectio42(1) which is a tripartite body. The criteria of fixing 
National Minimum Wage or Minimum Wage has not been provided 
in' the Code as the ·criteria· are liable .to change with time and 
various factors like changing socio-economic conditions, various 
Court pronouncements etc, and hence adding a Schedule for this 
purpose would restrict the flexibility. However, the irrtere at of the 
·workers ·w-oUid be taken care of as the nature of Central Advisory 
Board is tripartite. The revision of minimum wage after every 2 
years would not be feasible. Further prOVISIon for revision of 
• 
41 
I 


f""C==':'""":'~;;"'-'-'--""' z 
I I 
!, , 
special allowance (cost of living allowance which varies with 
inflation) at such intervals and in such manner as the appropriate 
government may direct has been provided in Section 7(i),(ii) and 
(iii) ; 
• Responding to suggestions of MPRWU and HMS, the MoL&E stated 
that Central Government will take the advice of Central Advisory 
Board b.efore fixing the National Minimum Wage. Further 
appropriate Government shall appoint as 'many committees and 
sub-committees as it considers necessary in respect of fixation of 
minimum wage. As per prevalent practice and Section 42 of the 
Code, these committees and boards are of tripartite nature to take 
,care of the interests of both workers and employers. 
• Responding to suggestion of BMS, MoL&E' submitted' that at 
present also, the responsibility of fixing minimum wage is 
distributed for Central and State sphere. the proposed distribution 
would allow to continue same mechanism which honours the 
geographical conditions and circumstances of each State. 
• Responding to suggestion of SEW A , MoL&E stated that it is not 
feasible or practical in view of differing conditions and situations. 
• Responding to the suggestions of PRS Legislative Studies and Shri 
Saurabh Bhattacharjee, Assistant Professor, NUJS, Kokata, 
MoL&E stated that the role of State Govemment in consultations 
would be considered/ addressed. 
• Responding to the suggestions of PRS Legislative Studies, MoL&E 
stated that the proposed Code provides flexibility of either fixing 
.one National Minimum Wage or different for different States and 
geographical situations under clause 9(1). The final decision would 
be taken after detail analysis and recommendation of the Central 
. Advisory Board. 
• Responding to the suggestions of PRS Legislative Studies, MoL&E 
submitted that the concerns raised will be considered/ addressed. 
42 


___ .~_~_. _._~ .. _ .. _ .. ~_.~_:-_._,... ". -_' .·-.·.··~.A·· .... ::: v • " ': •• s: •• 0" .":,:--::..,-=,:::.-::.: .. ~, ... : ... :",::-:,,:,:,~ ..•.. .;.,. ••.... -, ..... ,. 
~: 
II 
3.45 During the course of evidence, clarifying on the issue further, 
the Secretary of the Ministry stated as under: 
" ... Now, what is the existing is that the appropriate Government 
has to fix the minimum wage. The appropriate Government, as far 
as certain areas are concerned, say for example, mines, oil sector, 
airport, railways, Central PSUs, for this the Central Government 
fixes the minimum rate. At the present moment, the Central 
Government also has an advisory minimum wage, which is not 
statutorily backed by any Act. The State Government fix for their 
particular area. That is why, this difference comes whereas in the 
new wage code where we have a national minimum 'wage, the 
Ceritral Government will fix one or several minimum wages 
depending on the local conditions which will act as the floor level. 
The increase in minimum wages should be linked. 
What we have said, the State Government, ev~n though they 
are empowered to fix the minimum wage, that cannot be less than 
what the Central Government fixes as floor level. Whatever they fix 
. can only be above that. So, the intention of Code is to ensure that 
the payment of wages is not less than that floor level, at least. So, 
the states, under this Act, are bound to fix minimum wage which 
is above what the Central Government suggests .. That is why, we 
are bringing in that provision. II 
. 3.46 During the course of sitting, the Committee observed as 
under: 
1t ••• "QCR: "* ~ \JlT +tw ~ ~ t fcn ~ 'tf ~ <iPl q-R<:'l ~. 6f;:rr 
~ ~ ~ ~ cB" x=rra ~'{i~~ fcnm t fcrJ ~ ~ cBI \3RYjTf~31fflT 
~ ~ i, ~ Cf)"'~~11 3Wf1T 6Rfi il 3PN WI" 1f1W8cY1 ~ ~ ~ 
'tf ~ ~~, CfwPII'< cB" CfJTl1 ~ en! % ~R~~11 "16f CiTI ~I" 
3.47 The Committee further observed that: 
(I~ ~ .q 'W£9 ~ ~ 1ft ~ t, 'W£9 ;gq<:'l"S ~ ~ t \JlT ~ 
~ -g,' ~ ~ cBt \!.IT ~Cf»);;tl[RCfj Cb •.. J)~H ~ % ~ .. tft ~OR tl ;;mer. 
~ ~ W ~ fcp ~~~ ~ ~ qlfc;ttn ~ ~'~I \JlT ~ WI" ~ 
.-: "'.1; 
43 
I 


~ -g 'tfffi Ji15I'<I~ <IT ~ Cf)~41,< ~ ~ wr ~ x=rr~ qM ~ ~ 
67" 
3.48 Under Clause 9 Sub-section (1) it has been 
provided that the 'Central Government may, by 
notification, IlX the National Minimum Wage:' Provided 
that different National Minimum Wage may be fixed for 
different States or different geographical areas'. The 
Committee recommend that the said Sub-section may 
be substituted with 'the following: I 
'The Central Government shall by 
notification, fix the National Minimt:tm Wage in 
the manner as may be prescribed from time to 
time.' 
3.49 The Committee further recommend that the 
State. Governments must be consulted before 
finalization of the National Minimum Wage by the 
Central Government. They observe that Clause 9 Sub­ 
section (3)., which though provides that the Central 
Government may obtain the advice of the Central 
. Advisory Board, does not reflect a positive obligation to' 
consult the State Governments. The Committee desire 
that the Code must underline the fact that the power 
to fix minimum wage shall continue to be vested in the 
Central Government as ·well as the State Goverrrmezrts 
in . their respective spheres. Hence, the Committee 
. recommend that Clause 9 Sub-Section .(3) of the Code 
may be ameridedfn the "following' malin~r: "The Central 
Government, before fixirrg the National Minimum Wage 
44 


r:~''''''''''''':=''''C''''";;;-';;;'='''''=1<'''=m~ ~="=~""=,:"."""",~.,.>·,,.,,, .•• ·~·c"-"· •.•........ ~ . • 
I et1 , . 
under Sub-section (1), shall obtain the advice of the 
Central Advisory. Board constituted under Sub-section 
(1) of section 42 and State Advisory Boards constituted 
under SUb-section (4) of section 42." This wage 
. fixation would also be in accordance with the 
recommendation of the 44th Indian Labour Conference, 
2012 and- reiterated at the 46th Indian Labour 
Conference, 2015 to remove ; arbitrariness and 
unwarranted discretion in the fixat'ion of minimum 
wage. The Com'mftrte e also are of·the opinion that the 
Code must convey the message that the workers, who 
are getting minimum wages as per the present Act shall 
n.ot get less than what they are getning n0'Y". 'once the 
Code on Wages Bill, 2017 is enacted and the same shall 
continue to be revised as per past practice. 
Fixing hours of work for normal working day 
3.50 Clause 13(2) of the bill states as under: 
"The provisions' of sub-section (1) shall, in relation to the 
following classes of employees apply, only to such extent and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, namely:- 
(a) employees -engaged on urgent· work or in any emergency 
which could not have been foreseen or prevented; 
(b) employees engaged in work of the nature of preparatory or. 
complementary work which must necessarily be carried on 
outside the limits laid down for the general working in the 
employment concemed; . 
(c) employees whose employment is essentially intermittent; , 
(d) employees. engaged in any work which for technical reasons 
has to be completed before the ,duty is over; and 
(e) employees engaged in a work which couldnot be .carried on 
except at times dependent on the irregular action of nattn:'al 
forces. 
45 


3.51 Suggestions received by the Committee: 
• . Shri Tapan Sen, the then MP (RS) and Member of the 
Committee, with regard to the Fixing hours of work for normal 
working day suggested as under: 
"Section 13 of Minimum Wages Act and also section 13 of the code 
on Wages Bill' 2017 stipulate working day and working hour. Under 
this provision, pursued by the organization of Sales Promotion 
Employees for years, 8 State Gover-nrnerrts notified 8' hours working 
day with timing for the Sales Promotion Employees which the 
employers' 'organisations challenged in different High Courts. 
Adoption of this Bill is brought with making these notifications 
irrelevant unless the Sales Promotion Employees as also the 
Working Joumalists and other Newspaper Employees are brought 
under the definition of "employees". 
• HMS vide their written submission stated that the words "on 
urgent work" should be deleted from Clause 13(2) (a) . 
• 
3.52 Response of MoL&E on the above mentioned issue: 
• Responding to the concern raised by Shri Tapan Sen, the then 
MP(RS) and Member of the Committee, the MoL&E stated that it is 
confirmed that the 'working journalist and other newspaper 
employees' and 'sales promotion employees' are covered under the 
definition of the employees as "they are the persons employed on 
wages by an establishment " Section 2m of the Code. 
• Responding to the concem raised by HMS, the MoL&E has stated 
as follows: 
"The issue raised will be considered/ addressed. 
3.53 The existing provision under Clause 13 Sub­ 
section (l)(a) of the Code, it is stated as: 'Where the 
mtnlmum rates of wages have been .fixed under this 
Code, the appropriate Government may (a) ilx the 
number of hours of work which shall constitute' a 
46 


r: Y"""'-.D"",''''''''~'Z'''::'",,, ,-~"~.';'n:" ,'" ;, C~"-:-:;-""''''''''''''~'' ,._"'.""-",,,,-, ._"',,,,,""",,',O, __ , ,', "" ,'," "'",,,", " " 
I t-;ii;, . 
I ~ ,., . 
normal working day inclusive of one or more specified 
intervals' . The Committee feel that the. working hours 
should not be beyond' eight hours a day, hence, they 
recommend that the following phrase may be added at 
the end of the above said Slib-section:. 'not exceeding 
eight hours per day'. 
3.54 The Committee further recommend that under 
Clause 13 Sub~section (2) (a), the words 'on urgent work 
or' may be deleted. 
Deducttons. which may be made from wages: 
3.55 Clause 18 of the Bill states as under: 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in· force, there shall be no deductions from the wages of the 
employee, except those as are authorised under this Code. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,- 
(a) any payment made by an employee to the employer or his agent 
shall be deemed to be a deduction from his wages; 
(b) any loss of wages to an employee, for a good and sufficient cause, 
resulting from- 
(I) the withholding of increment or promotion, including the 
stoppage of an increment; or 
. (iz) the reduction to a lower post or time-scale; or 
(iiI) the suspension, 
shall not be deemed to be a deduction from wages in a case where the 
provisions made by the employer for such purposes are satisfying the 
requirerrients specified in the notification issued by the appropriate 
Governmen t in this behalf. 
(2) Deductions from the wages of an employee shall be made in 
accordance with the provisions of this Code, and may be only for the 
following purposes, namely.-c- 
(a) fines imposed on him; 
(b) deductions for his absence from duty; 
\ , 
47 


~ ~ 
(c) deductions for damage to or loss of goods expressly entrusted to 
the employee for custody; or for- loss of money for which he is 
required to account, where such damage or loss is directly 
attributable to his neglect or default; 
(d) deductions for house-accommodation supplied by the employer or 
by the appropriate Government or any housing board set-up under 
any law for the time being in force, whether the Government or 
such board is the employer or not, or any other authority engaged 
in the business of subsidising house-accommodation which may 
be specified in this behalf by the' appropriate Government· by 
notification; 
(e) deductions for such amenities and services supplied by the 
employer as the appropriate Government or any officer specified by 
it in this behalf may, by general or special order, authorise and 
such deduction shall not exceed an amount equivalent to the value 
of such amenities and 'services. . . 
Explanation.-.For the purposes of this clause, the expression "services" 
does not include the supply of tools and raw materials required for the 
purposes of employment; - 
(fJ deductions for recovery of- 
(z) advances of whatever nature (including advances fo! 
travelling allowance or conveyance _ allowance), and the 
interest due in respect thereof, or for adjustment of 
overpayment of wages; 
(iz) loans made from any fund constituted for the . welfare of 
labour, as may be prescribed. by. the' appropriate 
Government, and the interest due in respect thereof; 
(g) deductions for recovery of loans granted for house-building or 
other purposes approved 'by the appropriate Government and the 
interest due in respect thereof; 
(h) deductions of income-tax or any other tax levied by the Central 
Government or the State Government 811.d payable by the employee 
or deductions required to .be made by order. of a court or other 
authority competent to make such order; 
(z) deductions for SUbscription to, and for repayment of advances from 
any social s~curity fund or scheme constituted by law including 
provident .fund- or pension fund.ior health irrs'uremcevscherne -or -. 
fund known by any other name; 
(J) deductions for payment of co-operative society subject to such 
conditions as the appropriate Government may impose; 
48 


(k) deductions made, with the written authorisation of the employee, 
for payment of the fees and contribution payable by him for the 
membership of any Trade Union registered under the Trade Unions 
Act, 1926; 
deductions for recovery of losses sustained by an .employer on 
account of acceptance by the employee of counterfeit or base coins 
or mutilated or forged curren~y notes; 
deductions for recovery of losses sustained by an employer on 
account of the failure of the employee to invoice, to bill, to collect 
or to account for the appropriate charges due to the employer 
whether in respect of fares, freight, demurrage, wharfage and 
cranage or in respect of sale of food in catering establishments or 
in respect of commodities in grain shops or otherwise; 
deductions for recovery of losses sustained by an employer on 
account of any. rebates or refunds incorrectly granted by the 
employee where such loss is directly attributable to his neglect or . 
default; 
(0) deductions, made with the written authorisation of the employee, 
for contribution to the Prime Minister's National Relief Fund or to 
such other fund as the Central Government .may, by notification, 
specify. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code and subject to 
. the provisions of any' other law for the time being in force, the total 
amount of deductions which may be made under sub-section (2) in any 
wage period from the wages of an employee shall not exceed fifty per 
cent. of such wages. 
(4). . Where the total deductions authorised under sub-section (2) 
exceed fifty per cent of the. wages, the excess may be recovered in such 
(Q 
(m) 
(n)' 
mariner, as may be prescribed. 
3.56 Suggestions Received by the Committee: 
• Shri Tapan Sen, the then MP (RS.) and Member of the Committee, 
in his written submission suggested: 
"In Sec 18 dealing with deductions which .may be made from wages, 
there is B: mention that deduction of income-tax or 'any other' tax' 
levied by the central or the state government can be made. Mention of 
'any ·other tax-"is' a new one and it can be apprehended that such 
attack i.e imposition of some other taxes on the workers is 
forthcoming. Provision of salary deduction for payments to co- 
49 
__ ------------~~~l 


~ ~ .. _ 
operative societies approved by the state government or of premium of 
'any insurance as authorized by the employee as provided in Sec 7(2) 
m & (k) of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 has been done away with. II 
• In his written submission he further suggested: 
"Recovery of losses sustained by employer from the wage's 'was so far 
restricted to railways only which have now been generalized. While in 
the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, provision for recovery of losses 
sustained by a railway administration on account of acceptance of the 
employed person of counterfeit or base coins or mutilated or forged 
currency notes [Sec 7(4) (m)] or losses sustained on account of the 
failure of the 9mployed person to invoice, to bill, to collect [Sec 7(4)(n)) 
or to account for the appropriate charges or the losses on account of 
any rebates or refunds incorrectly granted by the employed person [ 
Sec 7(4)(0)] were there, the same has now been generalized by 
replacing the word, 'railway administration' by 'an employer' in 
Section 18 (I), (in) & (n) respectively of the proposed Bill, thereby 
authorizing all' classes of employers to effect such deductions from the 
salary of an employee/worker. The tyranny of the employer's class is 
well known and this is yet an attempt to further empower the already 
powerful employers to do anything they like to suppress and harass 
the workers." 
• MPRWU in their written submission suggested that in clause 18 
"Any other tax" is apprehended in a way to see that some other 
taxes will be imposed on workers in future. 
• MPRWU, HMS and Cl'I'U in their written communication 
suggested that replacing "a railway adminietration" by "an 
employer" is authorizing all classes of employers to make such 
deductions from the salary, of an employer/worker, this is not 
acceptable. 
• MPRWU and HMS in their submission stated that provision of 
salary deduction for payments to co-operative societies approved 
by the state goverrrment or of premium of any insurance as 
authorized by the employee as prov~qed in' Section 7(2) (j) (k) of 
the Payment .of Wages Act has been removed. 
• BMS in their written communication stated that where the total 
deductions authorised under sub-section (2) exceed 500/0 of the 
! , 
I I I, i 
; 
50 


_, 
wages, the excess may be recovered in such 'manner, as may be 
prescribed. 
3.57 Response of MoL&E on the above mentioned Issues; 
• Responding to the suggestions of Shri Tapan Sen, the then 
MP(RS), Member of the Committee, MoL&E submitted that 
the Government is open to any suggestion for making 
changes in the relevant Section, if required. 
• Responding to the suggestions of MPRWU, MoL&E submitted 
that The Phrase of 'any other tax' may be substituted by "any 
other statutory levy". Mention of such term does not indicate 
future levy of taxes. 
• Responding to the suggestions of MPRWU, HMS and CITU, 
MoL&E submitted that the Government is open to any 
suggestion for making changes in the relevant Section, if 
required. 
• Responding to the suggestions of MPRWU and HMS, MoL&E 
submitted that So far as is concerned .with the salary 
deduction for payments to co-operative societies clause 
17(2)(j) of the Bill provides as under:- "0) deduction for 
payment of co-operative society subject to such conditions as 
the appropriate Government may impose;" and so far as is 
concemed with the premium of insurance, the same has not 
expressly mentioned, however the words "any social security 
fund or scheme constituted by law" used in clause 17(2)(i) 
are of wide scope and' may take care of the insurance policy 
to the Life Insurance Corporation as the life insurance is a 
scheme constituted under the law. 
• Responding to the suggestions of MPRWU and HMS, MoL&E 
submitted that the issue raised is not clear. 
3.58 In Clause ,'18 dealing with deductions which 
may be made from wages, Sub-section (h) mentions 
51 
. I 
_____ --------~--=-~~l _- 


_:"""w."s'·-·:-i::_;~~~~:...~·:··~:~~:.~,:-·:~~~~:: .. ··~:;·t.:-·~,;,-~~~:.:;~~-:.:;;;:.:.:. £.::: -:,:.::".:.:_~; ~._;:;~';_:.-::::i .• ::"~( '7::-::~<:~;';" ',:. ~~.-:·:i.::-:.~·~~·::~·.~~~,:~~~:~rT'~~~~:~:_:::~~~~~\~~:f:-i~:~.~:::~:~~~:·~~~~~';~::~:;':~ r- -' - - "--- _m -'-.--" .' .•.• ------ on. -- -; -- - n c. . .. 
i '- ~ , 
! 
! 
I 
I I ! 
I i 
'deduction of, income tax or any other tax levied by the 
Central Government or the State Government and 
payable by the employee or deductions required to be 
made by order of a court or other authority competent 
to make such order. ' In order to counter the 
apprehension among workers which may arise due to· . ' 
the phrase 'any _ other tax' that - imposition of some 
other taxes may be forthcoming, the Committee 
recommond that the said phrase 'any other tax' under 
Clause 18 Sub-s'ection (h) may be substituted by the 
phrase 'any other statutory levy'. 
3.59 Further, the Committee observe that under 
Clause 18 Sub-section (2) (i) (m) (n), recovery of losses 
'sustain by employer from the wages,' which was so far' 
restricted to railways only, has now been generalised . 
. Hence, to correct this anomaly the Committee 
recommend the following in Clause' 18 in Sub-section 
(2): 
'(i) in item (1), for the "an employer", 
substitute the words "a railway administration" 7 , 
(ii) in item (m), for the word "an employer", 
substitute the words "a railway administration" 
and for the word occurring in third line 
substitute the word "the employer" with "that 
admintstratton" , 
(iii) in item (n), for the word "an employer", 
substitute the words "a railway administration". 
52 


r -- .. ' -'-"""'~-~"", _,,7"" :,:""",",0'" _0'" ,~ <"''''''''-~''''," ""7,' "".<"."" '" ",.- , ",', ~"--"",,"_".,,""-,, ",..' -, , ' .. 
j , 
, I~) 
~ '" 
3.60 The Committee express sertous concern over 
the fact that some employers make deductions like 
EPF/ESI contribution, TDS etc. from .t.he wages/salaries 
of a worker/employee but wilfu~y default in depositing 
the same or resort to undue delay in depositing it 'with 
the trust/ authority, for which t.he employee is 
penalised. While the workers/employees trust that the 
em ployer is doing the same and they can' get it on 
resigning/retirement or avail of the schemes funded by 
their contributio'n, it comes at a rude shock when they 
are penalised for default by the employer on this 
account. 'Most of the time, 'the employees remain 
clueless as to how to deal with a defaulting employer. 
Such cases cause undue sufferings to the workers, 
therefore, the Committee are of the strong opinion that 
an employer, who acts as an 'agent' of the Government, 
authorised to make deductions from the wages and 
deposit it so as to make the worker eligible for social , I 
security schemes, is legally bound to deposit t.hejsarne 
and in this capacity, has to be made accountable for 
, any default on his part. 
Hence, ,the Committee recommend that another 
sub-section namely Clause 18(5) be added in the Code 
as under: 
"Where the deductions are, made by an employer 
but not deposited in the trust/Government fund" as 
required under the provisions of law for the ti,me being 
in force, ,the - worker~/ -employees"-shaU"'--'ncit' "be "heJd 
responsible and' under rio circumstances, shall be 
, asked/forced, to again deposit the same' amount and 
53 
~ - 
i' I f 
\' i 
I I 
r i 
I 


the employer shall be made accountable for default and 
penalised in such manner, as may be prescribed." 
Deductions for Absence from Duty 
3.61 Clause 20 of the Bill states as follows: 
"(1) Deductions may be made under clause (b) of-sub-section (2) of 
section 18 only on account of the absence of an employee from the 
place or places where by the terms of his employment, he is 
required to work, such absence being for the whole or any part of 
the period during which he is so required to work. 
J 
(2) The amount of such deduction shall in no case bear to the 
wages payable to the employed person in respect of the wage 
period -for which the deduction is made in a larger proportion' than 
the period for which he was absent bears to the total period within 
such wage period during which by the terms of his employment he 
was required to work: 
Provided that, subject to any rules made in this behalf by the 
appropriate Government, if ten or more employed persons acting in 
c<?ncert absent themselves without due notice (that is to say 
without giving the notice w?-ich is required under the terms of their 
contracts of employment) and without reasonable cause, such 
deduction from any such person may include such amount not 
exceeding his wages for eight days as may by any such terms be 
due to the employer in lieu of due notice: 
Explanation.-For the purposes .of this section, an employee shall 
be deemed to be absent from the place where he is required to 
work if, although present in such place, he refuses, in pursuance 
of a stay-in strike or for any other cause which is not reasonable in 
the circumstances, to carry out his work." 
3.62 Suggestions received by the Committee: 
• Shri Tapan Sen, the then MP(RS) and Member of the Committee, 
in his written suggestion stated that: 
"The draconian provision for deducting eight days wages for one-day 
strike has been retained in the proposed bill [Sec 20(2)], if the strike is 
declared illegal by the government. And, no strike can ever be legal, if 
54 


.... : , 
the proposals made in the Labour Code on Industrial Relations are 
enacted." 
• MPRWU, HMS and CITU in their written memoranda stated that 
. deduction of 8 days wages for 1 - day strike is dangerous. Eight 
days' wages for one strike. if the strike is declared illegal is a' 
draconian provision. 
• BMS in their written memoranda stated that Section 20(2) IS 
against the freedom of trade unions. 
3.63 Response of the MoL&E on the above mentioned issues: 
• Responding to the issue raised by Shri Tapan Sen, the then· MP(RS) 
and Member of the Committee, MoL&E stated that this provision is 
similar to the existing provision in the section 9 of the Payment of 
Wages Act 1936. Further in the Industrial Relations Code, strike is 
being regulated only with provision of previous notice of 14 days. 
• Responding to the queries raised by MPRWU, HMS and CITU, MoL&E 
stated that it is as per existing Section 9 of Payment of Wages Act. 
Further the Section provides for deduction of up to 8 days and not 
mandatorily 8 days. 
• Responding to the issue raised by MPRWU, HMS and CITU, MoL&E 
stated that it is as per existing Section 9 of Payment of Wages Act and 
is not against the freedom of trade unions. 
3.64 During the course of oral evidence, Secretary, MoL&E 
submitted as under: 
" ... Code sees workers participating in a strike to be absent. Deduction 
of eight days' wages for one-day strike is dangerous. Sir, it is not like 
. that. It is already existing in Section 9 of the Payment of Wages Act. 
What we .have proposed is that a maximum of 8 days deduction can 
. be made for the strike indulged in by the worker. It is thernaxirrrum, 
It is not that fo;r every one-day strike 8 days' wages deduction will be 
done." 
. -: .. ',_ ~ .. 
3 e . 65 The Committee are aggrieved to be informed 
by the stakeholders particularly Labour Unions that. 
I· 
55 
J 
I 


~ ~ 
there have 'been instances when the employer 
sometimes misuses the provisions under Section 20(2) 
and 'withholds/deducts the salary' of employee f~r 
couple of days as a punishment in an illegal manner. 
They, therefore, would like to suggest that the' 
Goyernment may include an explanation or issue a 
separate circular or instructions to stop such misuse. 
Disqualification for Bonus 
3.66 Clause 29 of the Bill states as follows: 
"Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, an employee shall be 
disqualified from receiving bonus under this Code, if he is dismissed 
from service for-' 
(a) fraud; or (b) riotous or violent behaviour while on the premises of the 
establishment; or, ' 
(c) theft, misappropriation or. sabotage of any property of the 
establishment; or 
(d) conviction for sexual harassment". 
'3.67 Suggestions received by the Committee: 
• All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) suggested to "delete the 
clause as these acts don't deal with Payment of Bonus" . 
• State Government of Karnataka vide their O.M dated 5th 
February, 2018 expressed their views as under: 
"This clause may be made more clear by rephrasing in the following 
way: 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, an employee shall 
be disqualified from receiving bonus under this Code, if he is 
dismissed from service on conviction for- 
(a) Fraud related to the establishment or its employees. 
(b) Riotous 'or violent behaviour while' on the premises of the 
establishment or directed at the establishment. 
'. 
56 


. _ .. -' .. _ ~. . .~: -: . - .. . --~.-' .-.--_._._. ~: "':"':-":':"'" -:- .. : ...• :...~ .. : .~--:::-~- 
(c) Sexual Harassment at the work place as per The Sexual 
Harassment of women at workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Act, 2013 . 
. 3.68 Response of the MoL&E on the above mentioned 
suggestion: 
• Responding to the suggestion made by the State Government of 
Karnataka and AITUC, the MoL&E stated that it is as per Section 9 
of the payment of Bonus Act, 1965. Deleting this would not be 
justifiable as it would promote indiscipline and would not be good 
for industrial harmcny. 
I 
3.69. Concurring' with the suggestion received from the 
State Government of Karnataka, ·the Committee 
recommend that Clause 29 of the . Bill providing 
disqualification of' an employee from receiving bonus 
may be made more clear by substituting the same with . . 
the following: . 
'Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, 
an employee shall be disqualified from receiving 
. bonus under this Code, if he is dismissed from 
service on' conviction for- 
(a). Fraud related to the establishment or its 
employees. 
(b) Riotous or' violent behaviour while on the 
premises of the establishment or directed at 
the establishment .. 
(c) Theft, misappropriation or sabotage of any 
property of the establishment. 
(d) Sexual Harassment at the work place as. per 
The Sexual Harassment _. of Women at 
. 57 


Workplace (Prevention, 
Redressal) Act, 2013.' 
Prohibition and 
Calculation of Direct Tax payable by· employer 
3.70 Clause 35 of the Bill states as under: 
"Any direct tax payable by the employer for any accounting year 
shall, subject to the following provisions, be calculated at the rates 
applicable to the income of the employer for that year, riamely-c- 
(a) in calculating such tax no account shall be taken of,- 
(i) any loss incurred by the employer in respect of any 
previous accounting year 'and carried forward under 
any law for the time being in force relating to direct 
taxes; 
(ii) any arrears of depreciation which the employer is 
entitled to add to the amount of the allowance for 
depreciation for any succeeding accounting year or 
years under sub-section (2) of section 32 of the 
Income- tax Act; 
(iii) any exemption conferred on the employer under 
section 84' of the Income-tax Act or of any deduction to 
which he is entitled under sub-section (1) of section 
101 of that Act, as in force immediately before the 
commencement of the Finance Act, 1965; 
(b) where the employer is a religious . or a charitable 
'institution to which the, provisions of section 41 do not apply 
and the whole or any part of its income is 'exempt from the 
tax' under the Income-tax Act, then, with respect to the 
income so exempted, such institution shall be treated as if it . 
were a company in which the public are substantially 
interested within the' meaning of that Act; 
(c) where the employer is an individual or a Hindu undivided 
family, the tax payable by such employer under the Income- 
. tax Act shall be calculated on the basis that, the' income 
derived by him from the establishment is' his only income'; (d) 
where the income of any employer includes any profits and 
gains derived from the export of any goods or merchandise . 
out of India and any rebate on such income is allowed under 
any law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes, 
,58 


I
· . 
® ! 
then, no account shall be taken of such rebate; (e) no 
account shall be taken of any rebate other than development 
rebate or investment allowance or development allowance or 
credit or relief or deduction (not hereinbefore mentioned in 
this section) in the payment of any direct tax allowed under 
any law for the time being in force .relating to direct taxes or 
under the relevant annual Finance Act, for the development 
of any industry". 
3.71 Suggestions received by the Commrttee: 
• When the Committee enquired as to whether the calculation of 
Direct Tax applicable to employer is unfair and deprives him of 
his lawful entitlements, MoL&E, while agreeing to the same, 
further submitted that at page 15, in clause 35 in opening 
portion, for the words "Any direct tax" substitute the words' "For 
the purposesof this Code, any direct tax", 
3.72 In order to allay the apprehensions expressed 
before the Committee that calculation of direct tax 
applicable to employer under Clause 35 is unfair and . . 
deprives him of his lawful entitlements, the Committee 
'recommend that in Clause 35, tn opening portion', the 
words "Any direct tax" may 'be substituted with the 
words "For the purpose of this Code, any direct tax". 
Non-applicability of Chapter 4 on payment of Bonus 
3.73 Clause 41 of the Bill states as under: 
~ . ~ .•. '." ....•. . 
(1) Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to- 
(a) employees employed by the Life Insurance Corporation of 
India; (b) seamen as defined in clause (42) of section 3 of.the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958; 
(c) employees registered or listed under any scheme made 
.under the Dock Workers (Regulation of EmploymentfAct; 
1948, .and employed' by registered or listed employers; 
59 


" _~, __ ,?,a:::::;x:::::: 
(d) employees employed by an establishment under the 
authority of any department of the Central Government or a 
State Govemment or a local authority; 
(e) employees employed by- 
(z) the Indian Red Cross Society or any other 
institution of a like nature including its branches; 
(il) universities and other educational institutions; 
(iiz) institutions including hospitals, chamber of' 
commerce and social welfare inatitutions established 
not for purposes of profit; 
(fi employees employed by the Reserve Bank of India; 
, (g} employees employed by public sector financial institution 
other than a banking company, which the Central 
Govemment may, by notification, 'specify, having regard to­ 
(1) its capital.structure; 
(il) its objectives and the nature of its activities; 
(iiI) the nature and extent of financial assistance or any 
concession given to it by the Government; and , - 
(iv) any other relevant factor; 
(h) employees employed by inland wate,r transport 
establishments operating on routes passing through any 
other country; and 
(z) employees of any, other establishment which the ( 
appropriate Government may, by notification, exempt having 
regard to the overall benefits under any other scheme of 
profit sharing available in such establishments to the 
employees. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) andnotwithstanding 
anything contained in any other provisions of this Chapter, the 
provisions of this Chapter shall apply to such establishment in 
which twenty or more persons are employed or were employed on 
any day during an accounting year. 
3.74 Suggestions receivedby the' Committee: 
• Govemment of Karnataka in their written communication 
suggested that in State of Karnataka, establishments employing 
10 or moreworkers are already covered Under'the ambit ~r"A'ct:-~' 
Due to proposed amendment, establishment already covered 
60 


under Act, will be out of the ambit of Act and employees will be 
deprived of monetary benefits. In the larger interest of Workers, 
the criteria for applicability may be fixed at 10 or more employees 
• AITUC in. their written submission suggested deletion of non­ 
applicability of this chapter. 
• BMS in their written communication suggested that exemptions 
are objectionable. 
• PRS Legislative Studi~s and Shri Saurabh Bhattacharj ee, 
Assistant Professor,· National University of Juridical Sciences, 
Kolkata in their written submission suggested that rationale for a 
National Minimur;n Wage set by the Central Government. ·Labour 
being in the concurrent list, both Centre and State decide, revise 
and enforce minimum wages in different regions and sectors. 
State Governments are responsible for policy decisions to 
improve their economic growth and ensure welfare of citizens. 
The ability of the State Government to determine its. economy 
may be affected if the Central Government sets a National 
Minimum Wage that is not corresponding with the state's 
economic conditions. The code does not allow for consultations 
between Central and State Governments while determining 
National Minimum Wage . 
• BMS in their written communication further suggested that 
benefit of bonus should not be denied to workers m 
establishments employing less than 20 ~orkers. 
3.75 Response of MoL&E on the above mentioned issues: 
• Responding to the suggestions of Government of Kamataka, 
MoL&E stated that as per the existing Payment of Bonus Act, 
1965, the .provisions of Bonus are applicable in the 
establishment in which 20 or mote persons are employed 
(section 1(3)(b)). The same has been retained in the Code. 
• Responding "t6-·ili-e sugg~~tions of AITUC, MoL&E stated that 
presently also the Payment of Bonus Act does not apply to 
certain establishments as provided in Section 32 of Payment of 
61 


· ·,--tr- -c=-_······_ ~ T=C •• 
Bous Act. The same exemption has been continued as it is 
under Section 41 of the Wage Code. 
• Responding to the suggestions of BM8, MoL&E stated that 
presently also the Payment of Bonus Act does not apply- to ' 
certain establishments as provided in Section 32 of Payment of , 
Bonus Act. The same exemption has 'been continued as it is 
under Section 41 of the Wage Code. 
• Responding to the suggestions of BMS, MoL&E stated that this 
exemption is as per existing provision and small establishments, 
having less than 20 employees should not be burdened with 
bonus. I 
3.76 Under Ofause 41 regarding N,on-applicability of 
,thi~ Chapter, the Committee agree with the suggestion 
made by the Government of Karnataka that in the 
larger interest of, the workers,' the criteria for 
applicability may be fixed at ten or more J.1ersons. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommend that in Clause 
41' (2) the phrase 'twenty or more persons" may be 
substituted by 'ten or more persons' .. 
Central and State Advisory Boards 
3.77 Clause 42 of the Bill states as under: 
(1) The Central Govemment ahall-conatrtute the Central Advisory Board 
which shall consist of persons to be nominated by the Central 
Governmen t- 
(a) representing employers; 
(b) representing employees which shall be equal in number of·the 
members specified in clause (a); and 
(e) independent persons, not exceeding one-third of the total - 
members of the Board. 
62 


! . 
i (2) One-third of the members referred to in sub-section (1) shall be 
women and a member specified in clause (c) of the said sub-section shall 
be appointed by the Central Govemment as the Chairperson of the 
Board. 
(3) The Central Advisory Board constituted under sub-section (1) shall 
from time to time advise the Central Government on reference of issues , , 
relating to- , 
(a) ,fixation, or revision of minimum wages and other connected 
matters; 
(b) providing increasing employment opportunities for women; 
(c) the extent to which women may be employed in such 
establishments or employments as the Central Government may, 
by notification, specify in this behalf; and 
'(d) any other matter relating to this Code, and on such advice the 
Central Government may issue directions to the State Govemment 
as it. deems fit in respect of matters relating to issues referred to ' 
the Board. 
(4) Every State Government shall constitute a State Advisory Board for 
advising the State Goverhment- 
(a) in fixation or revision of minimum wages and other connected 
matters; 
(b) for the purpose of providing increasing employment 
opportunities for women; 
(c) with regard to the extent to which women may be employed in 
such establishments or employments as the State Govemment 
may, by notification, specify in this behalf; and 
(d) in any other matter'relating to this Code, which the State 
Goverrimerrt may refer from time to time to the Board. 
(5) The State Advisory Board may constitute one or more committees or 
sub-committees to look into issues pertaining to matters specified in .- - _' - -, ~.o '" • - -, ~! - 
clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section (4-).' 
63 


1-""" " z: ••• - •• __ ••••• ".. ""'" •••• - .: '-'. •••• •••••• •. ,,'.'" --' -- "'---. -- ; •• -. • ~--.. c_ 
! 
(6) The State Advisory Board and each of the committees and sub­ 
committees thereof shall consist of persons- 
(a) representing employers; 
(b) representing employees which shall be equal in number of the 
members specified in clause (a); and 
(c) independent persons, not exceeding one-third of the total 
members of the Board or committ,ee or sub-committee, as the case 
maybe. 
(7) One-third of the members referred to in sub-section (6) shall be 
Women and one among the members specified in clause (c) of the said 
sub-section shall-: . 
(a) be appointed by the State. Govemment as the Chairperson of 
the Board; 
(b) be appointed by the State Advisory Board as the Chairperson of 
the committee or sub-committee, as the case may be . 
. (8) In tendering its advice in the matters specifie_d in clause (b) or clause 
(c) of subsection (4), the State Advisory Board shall have regard to the 
number of women employed in the concerned establishment, or 
employment, the nature of work, hours of work, suitability of women for 
employment, as the case may be, the need for providing increasing 
employment opportunities for women,' including part time employment, 
and such other relevant factors as the Board may think fit. 
(9) The State Government may, after considering the advice tendered to it 
by the State Advisory Board and after inviting and considering the 
representations from establishment or employees or any other person 
which that Government thinks fit, issue such direction as may be 
deemed necessary. 
3.78. Suggestions received by the Committee: 
• Shri Tapan Sen, the then MP(RS) and Member of the Committee, 
in his written suggestion highlighted as under: ._ 
"The Equal Remuneration Act has beeri" totally diluted by 
restricting it to gender discrimination only in respect of payment of 
wages, doing away with other types of discrimination related to 
64 
=.'.-.-.'. 


recruitment, conditions of service such as promotion, vocational 
training, transfer etc. While there was legal binding on the duty of 
the employer to stop gender discrimination on the question of 
recruitment, promotions, training or transfer vide Sec 5 of the 
existing Equal Remuneration Act; 1976. Providing increasing 
employment opportunity for women has however been made a 
point for consideration for the Central Advisory Board [Sec 42 (3) 
(b) & .(c)]· and State Advisory Board [Sec 42 (4)(b) & (c)], but 
purposefully restricting their powers only to advise the central and 
state governments only." 
• MPRWU, HMS, SEWA and PRS Legislative Studies in their 
written communication .suggested that equal Remuneration Act 
has been diluted by restricting it to gender . discrimination only in 
respect of payment of wages. Though the Central and State 
Advisory ·Boards. can consider increasing employment 
opportunities for women, the powers of these Boards are 
restricted to be advisory only. . 
• All India' Manufacturers Organisation (AlMO)' in their written 
submission suggested that the Code weakens Equal 
Remuneration Act by restricting it to gender discrimination only 
and doing away with discrimination rel!3-te9- to recruitment, 
conditions of service etc. 
• SEW A in their written communication suggested that the Central 
and State Advisory Committees have majority representation 
from the organized sector and the committees will tend to fix 
wages keeping in'. mind- the organized sector. They hence 
suggested a separate Advisory Committee/ Sub-Advisory 
Committee could be constituted specifically. for the unorganized 
Sector. 
3.79 Respon.se·ofMoL&E on the above mentioned issues: 
• Responding to suggestions of Shri Tapan. Sen, the then MP(RS) 
and Member of the Committee, MoL~E stated that Th~ .. ~.Qde on,; .... ,. 
Wages is related to wages' only and matter related to .. working 
and employment conditions Will be addressed in. the 
Occupational safety Health & Working Conditions Code. 
65 
1 
I 


Further, under Section 42(3)(b) and (c) of the Code, the Central 
an~ State' Advisory Boards have been mandated to give 
recommendations on "increasing employment opportunities 
for women". 
• While responding to the suggestions of MPRWU, HMS, SEWA 
and PRS Legislative, Studies, MoL&E submitted that Clause 
42(3)(b) and (c) of the Bill provides that the Central Advisory 
Board shall from time to time advise the Central Government on 
reference of issues relating to providing increasing employment 
opportunities of women and the ext~nt to which women may be 
employed in such establishments' or employments as the 
Central povernment may, by notification, specify in this behalf 
.and on' such advice the Central, Government may issue 
directions to the State Government as it deems fit in respect of 
matters relating to issues referred to, the Board: This provision 
effectively takes .care of the gender discrimination relating to ' 
recruitment conditions of service, etc. 
• While responding to the suggestions of AlMO, MoL&E stated 
that Clause 42(3)(b) and (c) of the Bill provides that the .Ceritral 
Advisory Board shall from time to time advise the Central 
Government on reference of issues relating to providing 
increasing employment opportunities of women 'and the extent 
to which women may be employed in such establishments or 
employments as .the Central Government may, by notification, 
specify in this behalf and on such, advice the Central 
Government may issue directions to the State Government as it 
deems fit in respect of matters relating to issues referred to the 
Board. This provision effectively takes care of the gender 
discrimination relating to recruitment conditions of service, etc. 
• While responding to the suggestions of SEWA, MoL&E stated 
that there is no such distinction in clause 42 of the proposed 
Code. 
3.80 During the course of the oral evidence when the Committee 
pointed. "out that "fhe code does not provide for consultations 
66 


I i to 
j 
between Central and State Governments while determining National 
Minimum Wage, the Secretary, MoLE responded as under: 
"In the Advisory Committee, we had put employers' 
representative, employees' representative and independent 
members. The State Govemments should also have 
representatives is what the comment is. We will accept that. 
That is not an issue." 
3.81 The Committee are of the view that the Code 
need to envisage consultations between Central and 
State Governments while determining National ! 
Minimum Wage and t.herefore, recommend the 
following: 
'in Clause 42, in Sub-section (1),- 
(i) in item (b), omit the word ";and", 
[H]: after item (c), insert the word ";~nd", 
(iii)~fter (c) insert the following item, namely:- 
"(d) five representatives of the State 
Governments to be nominated by the 
Central Governmerrt'". 
Appointment of Facflrtators and their powers 
3.82 Clause 51 of the Bill states as under: 
"( 1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint 
Facilitators who shall exercise the powers conferred on them under 
sub-section (4) throughout the State or such geographical limits' 
assigned to them, in relation to stablishments situated in such 
State or geographical limits, as the case may be. 
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification, lay down 'an 
inspection scheme which. shall also provide for generation of a web­ 
based inspection schedule. 
(3) Every Facilitator appointed' under sub-section (1)' shall be 
. deemed to be public servant within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code. 
.' 
67 


- " " •• :. - 'X'" 
(4) The Facilitator may, within the local limits of his jurisdiction­ 
(a) supply information and advice to employers and workers 
concerning the most effective means of complying with the 
provisions of this Code; 
(b) inspect the establishment based on inspection scheme 
referred to in sub-section (2). 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), the Facilitator 
may,- 
(a) examine any person 'who is found in any premises of the 
establishment, whom the Facilitator has reasonable cause to 
believe, is a worker of the establishment; 
(b) require any person to give any information, which is in 
his power to give with respect to the names and addresses of 
the persons; , 
(c) search, seize or take copies of such register, record of 
wages or notices or portions thereof as the Facilitator may 
consider relevant in respect. of an offence under this Cede 
and which the Facilitator has reason to believe has been 
committed by the employer; . . 
(d) bring to the notice of the appropriate Government defects 
or abuses not covered by any law for the time being in force; 
and 
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed, 
(6) Any person required to produce any document or to give any 
information required by a Facilitator under sub-section (5) shall be 
deemed to be legally bound to do so within the meaning of section 
175 and section 176 of the Indian Penal Code. 
(7) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19'73 shall, 
so far as may be, apply to the search or seizure under sub-section 
(5) as they apply to the search or seizure made under the authority 
of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code." ' , 
3.83 Suggestions received by the Committee: . 
• Shri 'Tapan Sen, the then MP(RS) and Member <?f the Committee, 
in his written communication suggested: 
"The concept of inspection for the purpose of enforcement has been 
given' -:a_ go-bye 'as" inspectors will be replaced by facilitators 
(Chapter VII). The facilitators shall conduct inspection only in 
accordance with the scheme' notified by the appropriate 
68 
.... r~:---_._"':._. __ ._ ... _ .. ' .o_"._ .--' .. -.-- 


I l ' 
1 .; 
government from time to time in accordance with the web-based 
inspection schedule generated by such schemes." 
•. It was further suggested: . 
"The binding character of the provisions 'of inspection/ enforcement 
mechanism is totally diluted making other provisions of the law 
practically meaningless to workers. The funniest part of this is, 
the . facilitator who shall be a government appointee and shall be a 
public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the IPC and is 
authorized to search or seize documents from the employer as per 
various provisions of IPC & code of criminal procedure shall not 
have any power to take action against the defaulting employer. 
Rather he/she, like the aggrieved employee or tradeunion has to 
file application before the authority for fructifying the claim. Thus 
realization of any legitimate claim will not be encumbrance free at 
all." 
• AITUC m their written communication suggested that 
appointment of Facilitator in liu of Labour Inspector / 
Enforceme;nt Officer is against the principle of law, enforcement 
mechanism. It was further suggested that word 'facilitator' 
should be deleted and powers of enforcement officer/inspector 
should riot be subject to inspection scheme prescribed by state. 
• AITUC, MPRWU and BMS in their written communication . . 
suggested to replace "Facilitator" with "Enforcement Officer / 
Inspector" . 
• Government of Karnataka in their written communication 
suggested the definition to be retained as "Inspector" and the 
roles, responsibilities and jurisdiction of inspectors as defined in 
the four Acts also to be retained, 
3.84 Response of MoL&E on the above mentioned issues: 
• Responding to suggestions of Shri Tapan Sen, the then MP(RS) 
and Member of the Committee, MoL&E states! that In order to 
remove arbitrariness and enhance transparency and 
accountability, the inspections are being regulated .through an 
.--y------ 'inspection scheme' at present~'-th~ aim is to undertake risk 
based inspection scheme rather than discretionary inspections 
by inspectors. to remove possible malpractices' and avoid 
69 


allegations of arbitrariness by inspecting persons. The 
Facilitator's power of enforcement has not been taken away at 
all. It is only that a system is sought to be put in place where 
risk based inspections are carried out. Also it is for the judicial 
authority to adjudicate the violation of provisions of the .Code 
and impose penalties on the offenders. This authority is vested 
only in judiciary and Facilitators will only launch prosecution 
(This is the existing practice also). 
• Responding to the suggestions of AITUC, MPRWU and BMS, 
MoL&E stated that the word inspector has been-replaced by the 
word "Facilitator" as. the officer discharging the duties of 
facilitator is also responsible for supply of information and 
advice .to both employers and workers to enable effective 
. compliance of the provisions of this Code, besides conducting 
inspections and monitoring the implementation violations: 
Hence the duties of inspector have been widened and now he 
has additional role to facilitate compliance in the 'interest of 
workers. The word facilitator has a positive connotation and 
would be more acceptable to both the employer and employees. 
• . Further responding to suggestions of AITUC, 'MoL&E stated that 
in order to remove arbitrariness and enhance transparency and 
accountability, the inspections are being regulated through an 
"inspection scheme" at present. The aim is to undertake risk 
based inspection scheme rather than discretionary inspections 
by inspectors to remove possible malpractices and avoid 
allegations of arbitrariness by inspecting' persons. The 
Facilitator's power of enforcement has not been taken away at 
all. It is only that a system is sought to be put in place where 
risk based inspections are carried out. 
• Responding to the suggestions of Government of Karnataka, 
. MoL&E stated that the duties of Facilitator have been enhanced 
as compared to the duties of inspector. Now the officer 
discharging the duties of facilitator is also responsible. for 
supply of information and advice to both employers and 
workers to enable effective compliance of the provisions of this 
Code" besides conducting inspections and monitoring the 
implementation violations. Hence. the duties of inspector have 
been widened and now he has additional role to facilitate 
compliance in the interest of workers. 
70 


\ ' 
" ~{ 
:! 
r .~ 
._ •••• ~..£ ••••• _.oed 
3.85 During the course of the sitting the Committee observed as 
under: 
"Now, you are legitimising the internal wrong doings saying that 
facilitators can find out everything but they cannot take, action 
on their own and cannot directly recommend any action. What' 
they have to do? They have to dowhat an employee, who is not 
getting minimum wage, is authorised to do. Just like an 
aggrieved employee, they have to file an application before the 
authority. They cannot give a concrete recommendation. You 
have kept this provision in the Code on Wages Bill. The 
enforcement scenario will go bad to worst. Even the manner in 
which tl1e existing enforcement provisions are being diluted in 
the present Bill will not leave anything." 
3.86 The Committee have been informed that the 
Code on Wages 'Bill will benefit both the employers and 
employees due to simplification and ease of compliance 
as well as ensuring minimum' wages and timely 
. payment· of wages for all employees irrespective of 
wage ceiling and sector. In this connection, as regards, . . 
the issue of using the term 'Facilitator' instead of 
'Inspector' in the Code, th~ .Ministry have sought to 
convince the Committee that the enforcement 
mechanism would be . strengthened as the facilitator 
will also have the responsibility of preventing any 
violations of the provisions of the Code by way of 
providing guidance to both employers and workers. 
They have also stated that the inspection scheme is 
proposed to provide for risk based inspections arid 
make it. more effective and reduce arbitrariness . 
. Notwithstanding the same, the Committee feel fhat the 
use of the term 'Facilitator' instead of 'Inspector' in 
71 
- -- •...•.. -- ----._ .... _--- -_ _- --_ .. 


the Code gives. the impression of diluting the 
enforeemerit mechanism and restricting the inspection 
which is the lifeline of enforcement. 
Hence, the Committee express agreement with the 
various suggestions received by them on inclusion of 
the word 'Facilitator' instead of 'Inspector' in the Code 
on Wages Bill, 2017. They, therefore, recommend that 
under Clause 2 Sub-section (m) and Clause 51 the word 
'Faoifitator' be .substftuted by 'Inspector' in accordance 
with ILO norms. I 
3.87 In order to further strengthen the enforcement 
mechanism, the Committee desfre that in Clause 51(2), 
the following may be inserted: 
"It should also publish periodic reports on . 
establishment-wise status of implementation 
of the provistons of the Bill in a marrner as 
may be prescri~ed".· 
Offences and Penalties 
3.88 Clause 53 of the Bill states as under: 
(1) Any employer who- 
(a) pays to any employee less than the amount due to such 
employee under the provisions of this Code shall be punishable 
. with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees; 
(b). having been convicted of an offence under clause (a) is again 
found guilty of similar offence under this clause, within five years 
from the date of the commission of the first or subsequent offence, 
he shall, on the second and the subsequent commission of the 
offence, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months or with fine' which mayextend toone lakh 
rupees, or with both; 
72 
._-------- 


I I 
I I 
i 
I I 
(c) contravenes any other provision of this Code or any rule made 
or order made or issued thereunder shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to twenty thousand rupees; 
(d) having been convicted of an offence under clause (c) is again 
found guilty of similar offence under this clause, within five years 
from the date of the commission of the first or subsequent offence, 
he shall, on the second and the subsequent commission of the 
offence under this clause, be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one month or with fine which may 
extend to forty thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), for the 
offences of non-maintenance or improper maintenance of records in the 
establishment, the employer shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c) of sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2), the Facilitator shall,' before initiation of prosecution 
proceeding-for the offences under the said clause or sub-section, give an 
opportunity to the employer to comply with the provisions of this Code by 
way of a written direction, which shall lay down a time period for such 
compliance, and, if the .employer complies with the direction' within such 
period, the Facilitator shall not initiate such prosecution proceeding and, 
no such' opportunity shall be accorded to an employer, if the violation of 
the same nature of the-provisions under this Code is repeated within a 
period of five years from the date on which such first violation was 
committed and in such case the prosecution shall be initiated in 
accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
3.89 Suggestions received by the Committee: 
• Shri Tapan Sen, the then MP(RS) and Member of the Committee, 
in his written submission suggested as under: 
"Chapter VIII deals with 'Offenses and Penalties'. Penalty for offenses 
by the employer vary from Rupees' Ten Thousand to Rupees One lakh 
only. One can easily iinagine how benevolent the government is 
towards offending employers." . . . 
• ClI & ASSOCHAM in suggested that the penal amount of 
Rs. 50,000 was on higher side . 
. 73 
~.~._'=.'~ .. ~=.=._=.=~"_--.-'''-.''....,...,....= ... ''7'. -.~ ~. ~ ••••• - •••• '" ••••••••••• ,,'-"--_ - 


• en further suggested that the defInition' of 'improper 
maintenance' needs to be clarified to avoid dispute and 
ambiguity. 
3.90 Response of lVIoL&E on the above mentioned suggestion: 
• Responding to the suggestions of Shri Tapan Sen, the then MP(RS) 
and Member of the Committee, Penalties have been increased 
manifold (existing penalties were up to Rs.500 only or imprisonment 
of six months or both in case of Minimum Wages Act). Penalties have 
been made commensurate with the gravity of offences In case of non-: 
maintenance of records will attract penalty of Rs. 10000 only, the 
non-payment of minimum wages, which is a serious offence, will 
attract the penalty of Rs. 50000/-. Further, provisions for 
imprisonment also been included in case of continuous 
default/violation. 
• Responding to the query raised by ClI & ASSOCHAMj MoL&E 
stated that the imprisonment has been removed from first offence, so 
the amount of fine has been increased to deter com~ission of offence. 
• Responding to the suggestion made by Cll, MoL&E stated that the 
expression "improper. maintenance" is a well understood term which 
means not in accordance with the accepted standards of 
maintenance. The accepted standards may differ in accordance with 
the kind of maintenance or the requirement of maintenance. As such 
there is no ambiguity in the expression. 
3.91 Under Chapter VIII dealing with Offences and 
Penalties in the Code, penalty for offences' by' the 
employer vary from rupees ten thousand to rupees one 
lakh only. In Clause 53 (l)(a) particularly, it has been 
stated that any employer who pays to any employee 
less than the amount due shall be punishable with fine 
which may be extended up to rupees fifty thousand. 
While the Ministry has 'claimed that the penalties have ": 
been increased manifold in the Code as compared to ' 
. . ---:.~:: -. 
74 


\ I 
\ 
the same in the existing Minimum Wages Act, the 
Committee still feel that in the present context fhe 
penalty amount proposed is not substantial enough to 
act as a .deterrerrt. Hence, the Committee recommend 
that the Chapter VIII of the Code may be suitably 
modified to fix ·the penalty for offences by the employer 
from rupees fifty thousand to rupees ten lakh only. 
New Delhi; 
1~O)JeY!)be& 2018 
:Ji~ K~ '-) 1940 (Saka) 
DR. KIRIT SOMAlYA 
CHAIRPERSON, 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
75. 


.i. 


• '-Y-_-"'-""_ •.•••• " •• - .• -:!IF:: •• -.----. "." -.-:..-- •...• ,jt-.~r: .•.• ' .. - 'f i' 
.\. -Jo •• 
.•. - .... : 
As II'TROlJUCED IN LUI-: S"\lill,\ 
Bill No. 163 of2017 
THE CODE ON WAGES. ',2017 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
I 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
I, Short title. extent and commencement, 
2, Definitions. 
3. Prohibition of discrimination on ground of gender: 
4. Determination of disputes with regard to same or similar nature of work. 
CI-lAPTERIl 
M,NIMUM WAlil;S 
5. Payment of minimum rate of wages. 
6. Fixation of minimum wages.' 
7. ' Components of minimum wages. 
8. Procedure for fixing and revising minimum wages. 
9. Power ofCentral Government to fix national minimum wage. 
10. Wages ofemp)oyee who works for less than normal working day, 
11. Wages for two or more classes of work, 
12. Minimum time rate wages for piece work. 
13. Fixing hours of work for normal working day. 
14. Wages for overtime work, 
CHAPTER III 
P A'r'MENT l1F Wl\(il~) 
15: Mode of payment of wages. 
16, fixation ofwag~ period. 
17. Tinie limit tor payment of wages , 
18.' Deductions which 1110), be made from wages. , 
IlJ. Fines. 
20. Deductions for absence from duty. 
21 .. Deductions ror damage or loss . ...: '."'_ 
21. Deductlons lor services rendered. 
23: Oeductions for recovery of advances. 
24 .. Deductions fa'r recovery of loans. 
25. Chapter notto apply to Government establishments. 
-:H- 


-- -.--.-_ " ;---- _,..._ .. 2 ....•. -???~ -.7' :~:-..,:.-_::"---, ':. " ;.-::- •• ::-:- ----_-- :::.-, .: 
(ii) 
CLAUSES 
.CHAPTERIV 
PAYMENT OF BONUS 
26. Eligibility forbonus, etc. 
27. Proportionate reduction in bonus in certain cases. 
28. Computation of number of working days. 
29. Disqualification for bonus. 
30. Establishment to include departments, undertakings and branches. 
31. Payment of bonus out of allocable surplus. 
32: Computation of gross profits.' 
33. Computation of available surplus. 
34. Sums deductible from gross profits. 
35. Calculation of direct tax payable by employer. 
I 
36. Set on and set off of allocable surplus. 
37. Adjustment of customary or interim bonus against bonus payable under this Code. 
38. Deduction of certain amounts from bonus payable. 
39. Time limit for payment of boo LIS. 
40. ,Application of this Chapter to establishments in public sector in certain cases. 
41. Non-applicability ofthis Chapter. 
CHAPTERV 
ADVISORY BOARD 
42. Central Advisory Board and State Advisory Boards. 
CHAPTER VI 
PAYMENT OF DUES, Cl.AIMS AND AUDIT 
43. Responsibility for payment of various dues. 
44: Payment of various undisbursed dues in case of death of employee. 
45. Claims under Code and procedure thereof. 
46. Reference of disputes under this Code. 
47. Presumption about accuracy of balance-sheet and profit and loss account of 
corporations and companies. . 
48. Audit of accounts ~f employers, not being corporations or companies. 
49. Appeal. 
50. Records, returns and' notices. 
CHAPTER VII 
FACILITATOR 
51. Appointment of Facilitators and their powers. 
CHAPTER VIII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
52. Cognizance of offences. 
53. Penalties for offences. 
54. Offences by companies. 
55. Composition of offences, 


(iii) 
C'-,\USES 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
. 56. Bar of suits. 
57. Protection of action taken in good faith'. 
58. Burden of proof. 
59. Contracting out. 
60. Effect of laws, agreements, etc., inconsistent with this Code. 
61. Delegation ofpo~ers. 
62. Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases. 
63. Protection. against attachement of assets of employer with Government. 
64. Power of Central Government to give directions. 
65. Savings. : 
66. Power of appropriate Government to make rules. 
67. Power to remove difficulties. 
68. 'Repeal and savings . 
. THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
. THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE . 
.. 
. "'" '~. '.:_ 
;. ';-: __ '.-:"":r--~.--.':-." :. -.-;-:-.-.-.,,-,~""'-.-.-.- -:- ....•..•. T,.zz:T".·.- -.- .-. -'.-~-'--- 


J :~ ~~ 
1~11 . 
. . 
t g ,,- ~ 
~ ~-: ;~:~ 
As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA 
Bill No. 163 of 2017 
THE CODE ON WAGES, 2017 
A 
BILL 
10 consolidate and amend the laws relating [0 wages and bonus and matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year ofthe Republic oflndia as follows:- 
CHAPTER! 
1. (!) This Act may be called the Code on Wages, 40 17. 
(2) It extends 'to the whole or-Inola, <.,,. ••. ~'.:. . ",. . 
Shari title, 
extent and 
cl.lmmcncemcn·t: . -:,;--.- 
PRELIMINARY 
. . ;1 :... . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may. by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions' 
of this Code and any.reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Code 
shall be construed as a reference. to the coming into force ofthat provision. 
~ . . 
~~",¥,&H*G5&¥&&W H *#=i¥fflB '"' 
--- ..... --~- __ .=. =~ ~_':"."_·,_""=.'=-"<"""'''''''''''-;--·'M_·'· .--- .• - ..• -.,~~- .- 


'. ·ri .;. :.r_·:1·-:-_,~-~ ~fi":i·$O""'·i·- "'~'-'!;"1' 
'. ! 
Definitions 2. In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires.- 
. (a) "accounting year" means the year commencing Of) the I st day of April: 
(h) "Advisory Board" means the Central Advisory Board or. as the case may be. 
the State Advisory Board, constituted under section 42: 
(e) "agricultural income-tax law" means any law for the time being in force relating 
to the levy of tax on agricultural income; 
(tI) "appropriate Government" means,- 
(I) in relation to. an establishment carried on by or under the authority of 
the Central Government or the establishment of railways. mines. oil field. major 
ports, air transport service, telecommunication, banking and insurance company 10 
or a corporation or other authority established by a Central Act or a central 
. public sector undertaking or subsidiary companies set-up by central public 
sector undertakings or autonomous bodies owned or controlled by the Central 
. Governme~t. including establishment of contractors for the purposes of such 
establishment, corporation or other authority, central public sector undertakings, 1 S 
subsidiary companies or autonomous bodies. as the cast: may be. the Central 
Government; 
(ii) in relation to any other establishment. the State Government; 
(e) "company" means a company defined in clause (10) of section 2 of the 
CompaniesAct.20l3; . 20·18of2013. 
, , . .(j) "contractor", in relation to an establishment, means a person who undertakes 
to produce a given result for the establishment •. other than. a mere supply of goods or 
articles of manufacture to such establishment. through contract labour or who supplies 
contract labour for any work of the establishment and. includes a sub-contractor; 
(g) "co-operative society" means a society registered or deemed to be registered 2 5 
under the, Co-cperative Societies Act. 1912. or any other law for the time being in force 2 or 1912. 
in any State relating to co-operative societies: 
(h) "corporation" means anybody corporate established by or under any Central 
Act .. 01' State Act but does not include ~ company or a co-operative society; . 
(i) "direct tax" means-> 
(f) any tax chargeable under the­ 
(A) Income-tax Act. 1961; 
(8) Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964: 
(C) agricultural income-tax law; and 
(1/) any other tax which. having regard to its nature or incidence, 111UY be J 5 
declared by the Central Government, by notification. to be a direct tax for the 
purposes of this Code; 
30 
43 or 1961, 
7 of 1964. 
U) ':employee" means. any person (other than an apprentice engaged under the 
Apprentices Act. 1%1). employed on wages by an establishment to do any skilled, 52 or 1961. 
semi-skilled or unskilled. manual. operational. supervisory, managerial, administrative. 40 
technical or clerical work lor hire or reward. whether the terms of employment be 
express or implied. and also includes. a persondeclared to he an· employee by the 
appropriate Government: but does not include any member of the Armed Forces of the 
Union; 
(Ie) "employer' means a person who employs one or more employees.in his 45 
establishment and where the establishment is carried on by any department of the 
Central Government or the State Government. the authority specified. by the head of 


63 of 1948: 5 
63 or 1948. 
~3 of 1961 
14 of 1947. 
------- .. --- -=.~---~~ 
10 
suchdepartment, in this behalf or where no authority. is so specified the head of the 
department and in relation to an establishment carried 011 by a local authority. the chief 
executive of that authority. and includes,- 
(i).in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the occupier of the 
factory as defined in clause (n) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 and, where 
a person has been named as a manager of the factory under clause (j) of 
sub-section (/) of section 7 of the said Act, the person .so named; 
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the person.who, or the authority 
which, has ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment and when; the 
said affairs is entrusted to a manager or managing director, such manager or 
managing director; and 
(iii) contractor; , 
(I) "establishment" means any place where any industry. ·trade, business, . 
manufacture or-occupation is carried on and includes ~Govemment establishment; . . . 
(m) "Facilitator" means a person appointed by the appropriate Government under 
sub-sectio~ (I) of section 5 I; 
(n) "factory" means the factory as defined in clause (m) of section 2 of the. 
Factories Act, 1948; . 
'(0) "Government establishment" means any office or department of the 
. Governme'nt .or a local authority; 
(p) "Income-tax Act" means the.Income-tax Act, 196 I; 
(q) "industrial dispute" means,- 
(i) any dispute or difference between employers and employers, or between 
employers and workers or between workers and workers which is connected 
with the employment or non-employment or the teims of employment or with the 
conditions of labour, of any person; and 
(ii) any dispute or difference between an individual worker and an employer 
connected with, or arising out of, discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
termination of such worker; 
30 (r) "minimum wage" means the wage fixed under section 6; 
(s) "noti fication" means a notification published in the Gazette of India or the 
Official Gazette of a State, as the case may be. and the expression "notify" with its 
grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly; 
(/) ~'prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government; . 
15 
20 
25 
35 (u) "same work or work ora similar nature" means work in respect of which the 
. skill, effort and responsibility required are the same, when performed under similar 
working conditions by employees and the difference if any, between the skill, effort 
and responsibility required for employees of any gender, are not of practical importance 
in relation to the terms and" conditions of employment; 
('\I) "State" includes a Union territory; . 
(w) "Tribunal" shall have the same meaning assigned to it in clause (r) of section 2 
of the Industrial ~isputes Act, 1947; . 
(x) "wages" means all remuneration, whether by way of salary, allowances or 
. otherwise, expressed in terms of money' or capable of being so expressed which would, 
4S if the terms of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled; be payable to. a person 
employed in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment, and 
inc1udes,- 
40 
(t) any remuneration payable under any award or settlement between' the 
parties .or order of a court; 
-8)- 


t-:.'8. . ~? 
(ii) any remuneration to which the person employed is entitled in respect 
of overtime work or holidays or any period of leave: 
(iii) any additional remuneration payable under the terms of employment. 
whether c.afled a bonus or by any other name; 
(il') any sum which by reason of the termination of employment of the 5 
person employed is payable under any law. contract or instrument which provides 
for the payment of such sum, whether with or without deductions, but does not 
provide for the time within which the payment is to be made; 
(1') any sum to which the person employed is entitled under any scheme 
framed under any law for the time being in force; 10 
(vi) any house rent allowance, 
but does not include- .., 
(A) any bonus payable under this. Code, which does not form part of the 
remuneration payable under the terms of employment or which is not payable under 
any award or settlement between the parties or order. of a: court' or Tribunal; 15 
(8) the value of any house-accommodation, or of the supply of light, water, 
medical attendance or other amenity or of any service excluded from the computation 
of wages by a general or special order of the appropriate Government; . . 
(C) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or provider.t fund, 
and the interest which may have' accrued thereon; 20 
(D) any travellingallowance or the value of any travelling concession; . . . 
(E) any sum paid to the employed person to defray special expenses entailed on . 
hiin by the nature of his employment; or 
(F) any gratuity payable on the termination of employment in cases other than 
those specified in sub-clause (iv): 25 
. Provided that, for the purposes of Chapter IV, "wages" means all remuneration 
(other than remuneration in respect of overtime work) capable of being expressed in 
terms of money, which would, if the terms of employment, express or 'implied, were 
fulfilled, be payable to an employee in respect ofhis employment or of work done in 
such employment and includes dearness allowance. that is to say, all cash payments, 30 
by whatever name called, paid to an employee on accountof a rise in the cost ofiiving, 
but does not include,- 
(i) any other allowance which the employee is for the time being entitled to; 
(ii) the value of any house accommodation or of supply of light. water. 
medj~al attendance or other amenity or of any. service or of any concessional J 5 
supply of foodgrains or other articles; 
(iii) any travelling concession; 
(iv) any bonus including incentive, production and attendance bonus; 
(v) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund 
or provident fund or for-the benefit of the employee under any law for the time 40 
being in force; . . 
(VI) any retrenchment compensation or any gratuity or other retirement 
benefit payable to the employee or any ex gratia payment made to him; - •• • .•••.. -r:;_. -,' - -. .- .-. 
(viz) any commission payable to the employee: . 
Provided further that for calculating the wages under the first proviso for 45 
the purposes of payment of bonus, if the payments made by the employer to the 
. employee under ~Iauses (i) to (vii) exceeds one-half of the all remuneration 
----.-.----.".~--. -. -.----' .•. c: .. -e- -e- ~-...., ----_ .. __ ---- 


..... -,.--.--~ .. -.......-=-r:::=-.---= ---- .. --- •...•. --.-.'-- .. ..,.,. 
-\., 
specified under the said proviso. the amount which exceeds such one-half shall 
be deemed as remuneration and shall be accordingly added in all remuneration 
under that proviso, 
Explanatiol1.-Where an employee is given in lieu of the whole 01' part of the 
wages payable to him, free food allowance or free food by his employer. such food 
allowance or the value of such food shall, for the purposes of the first proviso. be 
deemed to form part of the wages of such employee; 
(y) "worker" means any person (except an apprentice as defined under clause (uu) 
of'section 2 of the Apprentices Ac-t. 1961) employed in any industry to do any manual, 
unskilled, skilled. technical, operational or clerical work tor hire or reward, whether the 
terms of employment be express or implied, and includes workingjournalists as defined 
in clause (f) of section 2 of the Working Joumalists and other Newspaper Employees 
(Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 and sales promotion 
employees as defined in clause Cd) of section 2 ofthe Sales Promotion Employees 
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1976, but does not include any such person- 
I (i) who is subject to the A'ir Force Act, 1950, or the Army Act, 1950. or the 
Navy Act, 1957; or - 
(ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other employee 
ora prison; or 
(iii) who is employed mainly in a supervisory or managerial or administrative 
ca~acity, - 
3. (I) There shall be no discrimination among employees on the ground of gender in 
matters relating to wages by the same employer, in respect of the same work or work of'similar 
nature done by any employee. 
52 or 1961 
I(J 
,. 4501: 1955, 
II or 1976, 15 
45 or 1950, 
46 or 1'l50, 
62 or 1957, 
20 
I ' 
25 (2) No employer shall. for the purpose of complying with the provisions of 
sub-section (I), reduce the rate of wages of any employee, 
4. Where there is any dispute as to whether a work is of same or similar nature for the 
purpose ulsection J, the dispute shall be decided by such authority as may be notified by 
the appropriate Government, 
30 CHAPTERll 
MINIMUM WAGES 
S. No employer shall pay to any employee wages less than the minimum rate ofwages 
notified by the appropriate Governrnentfor the area. establishment or work as may be specified" 
in the notification. 
35 6. (I) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the appropriate Government shall fix the 
minimum rate of wages payable to employees. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (I), the appropriate Government shall fix­ 
(a) a minimum rate of wages for time work; or 
(b) a minimum rate of wages for piece work; or 
40 (c) a minimum rate of wages to apply in the case of employees employed on piece 
work for the purpose of securing to such employees a minimum rate ofwages on a time 
work basis, 
(3) The minimum rate of wages on time work basis may be fixed in accordance with any 
one or more ortne following wage perlods, namcly:-- 
45 (i) by the hour. or 
(if) by the day, or 
(iii) by the month. 
Prohibition of 
discriminution 
on ground of 
gender, 
Dcterrmuatlun 
or disputes 
with regard 10 
surnc or 
similar 11U(Ure 
of work, 
Payment or 
minimum rate 
of wages. 
Flxurlon or 
minimum 
wuges, 
. ... "_,,, 
r-- --.-_-_- __ ~._.-_-~ •• ----~. 
_~ --==~v __ -_--,- , -_ - _ ------ ----------- _--- --,----------- 


Components 
ut' nunimum 
wuges. 
Procedure for 
fixing and 
revising 
mitrimurn 
wagc:s .. 
(-I) Where the rates of wages are fixed b~ the hour or by the day or by the month, the 
manner of calculating the wages shall be such, as may be prescribed, 
(5) The appropriate Government may, by notification, fix factors by which the minimum 
wages so fixed be multiplied for different types of work, 
(6) For the purpose of fixation of facrors referred to in sub-section (5), the appropriate 5 
Government shall take into account the skill required, the arduousness ofthe work assigned. 
to the' worker. geographical location of the place or work and other factors which the 
appropriate Government considers necessary. 
7. (I) Any minimum rate of wages fixed or revised by the appropriate Government, in 
respect of employment. under section '8 may consist of- 10 
(i) a basic rate of wages and a special allowance at a rate to be adjusted, at such 
intervals and in such manner as the appropriate Government may direct, to accord as 
nearly as practicable with the variation in the cost of living index number applicable to 
such wOl:kers (hereinafter referred to as "cost of living allowance"); or 
(ii) a basic rare of wages with or without the cost of living allowance. and the 15 
cash value of the concessions in respect of supplies of essential.commodities at 
concession rates, where so authorised; or ' . 
(iii) an all-inclusive rate allowing for the basic rate, the cost ofliving allowance 
and the cash value of the concessions, ifany. 
(2) The cost of living allowance and the cash value of the concessions in respect of 20 
. supplies of essential commodities at concession rate shall be computed by such authority, 
as the appropriate Government may by notification, appoint, at such intervals and in 
accordance with such directions as may be specified or given by the appropriate Government 
from time to time. 
8. (I) In fixing minimum rates of wages in respect of any employment for the first time 25 
under this Code or in revising minimum rates of wages so fixed, the appropriate Government' 
shall either- 
(a) appoint as many coml;'ittees and sub-committees as it considers necessary 
to hold enquiries and recommend i~ respect of such fixation or revision, as the case 
may be; or 30 
(b) by' notification publish its proposals for the information of persons likely to 
be. affected thereby and specify a date not less than two months from the date of the 
notification on which the proposals shall be taken into consideration, . 
(1) Every committee and sub-committee appointed by the appropriate Government 
under clause (a~ of sub-section (I) shalhconsist of persons- . 35 
(a) representing employers; 
(b) representing employees which shall be equal in number of the meinbers 
specified in clause (a); and' 
(c) independent persons, not exceeding one-third of the total members of the 
committee or sub-committee, as the case may be. 40 
(3) After considering the recommendation of the committee or sub- committee appointed 
under clause (a) of sub-section (/) or, as zhe case may be, all representations received by it 
before the date specified in the notlficationiunder clause (b). of that sub-section, the appropriate 
Government shall by notification fix, orras the case may be, revise the minimum rates of 
wages and unless such notification otherwise provides. it shall come into force on the expiry 45 
of three months. from the date of its issue; . . 
Provided that where the appropriate Government proposes to revise the minimum 
rates of wages by the mode specified in clause (b) of sub-section (l), the appropriate 
Government shall also consult concerned Advisory Board constituted under section 42. 
_' 
T 
---_ .. _-------- -------------------------- -_.--- - 
---- 


(.?) The rniuirnum rates of wages fixed by the appropriate Government under section 6 minimum 
. shall not be less than the national minimum wage and if the minimum rates of wages fixed by wage. 
the appropriate Government earlier is more than the national minimum wage, then, the 
appropriate Government shall not reduce such minimum rates of wages fixed by it earlier. 
10 (3) .The Cen.tral Government, before fixing the national minimum wage under 
sub-section (I), may obtain the advice of the Central Advisory Board constituted under 
sub-section (l) of section 42. 
10. Ifan employee whose minimum rate of wages has been fixed under this Code by the 
day works on any day on which he was employed for a period of less than the' requisite 
15 -number of hours constituting a normal working day, he shall, save as otherwise hereinafter 
provided, be entitled to receive wages in respect of work done on that day. as if he had 
worked for a full normal working day: 
Provided that he shall not be entitled to receive wages for a full normal working day,- 
(-I) The appropriate Government shall review or revise minimum rates of wages at an 
interval of five years. 
9. (I) The Central Government may. by notification. fix the national minimum wage=-, 
Provided that different national minimum wage may be fixed for different Stales or 
different geographical areas. 
(I) in any case where his failure to work is caused by his unwillingness to work 
20 and not by the omission of the employer to provide him with work; and 
(ii) in such other cases and circumstances, as may.be prescribed. 
11. Where an employee does two or more classes of work to eachof which a different 
minimum rate of wages is applicable, the employer shall pay to such employee in respect of 
the time respectively occupied in each such class of work, wages at not less than the 
25 minimum rate in force in respect of each such class. . 
12. Where a person is employed on piece work for which minimum time rate and not a 
minimum piece rate. has been fixed under this Code, the employer shall pay to such person 
wages at not less than the minimum time rate. 
13. (/) Where the minimum rates of wages have been fixed. under this Code, the 
3() appropriate Government may-- 
(a) fix the number.of'hours of work which shall constitute a normal working day 
inclusive of one or more specified intervals; 
(h) provide fora day of rest in every period of seven days which shall be allowed 
to' all employees or to any specified class of employees and for the payment of 
J 5 remuneration in r~spect of such days of rest; 
(c) provide for payment for work on a day of rest at a rate not less than the 
overtime rate. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (I) shall, in relation to the following classes of 
employees apply, only to such extent and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, 
-10 namely:-- . 
(£I) employees engaged on urgent work or' in any emergency which could no! 
have been foreseen or prevented; • 
. . 
(b) employees engaged in work of the nature of preparatory or complementary 
work which must necessarily be carried on outside the limits laid down for the general 
45 working in the employment concerned; . 
(c) employees whose employment is essentially intermittent; 
Power or Ccntrul 
Government 
to fix 
nut iorial . 
Wages or 
employee 
who works 
I'm less than 
norruul 
working day. 
Wuges for 
111"0 or more 
classes of 
work. 
Minimum 
lime rate 
wages lor 
piece work. 
Fixing hours 
01" work tor 
norm III 
working. day, 
j 
-===-----=.. __ --~__:.::.::___~I 


PAYMENT OF WAGES 
15. All wages-shall be paid in·current coin or currency notes or by cheque or through 
digital or electronic mode or by crediting the wages in the bank account of the employee: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may, by notification. specify the industrial 20 
or other establishment, the employer of which shall pay to every person employed in such 
industrial or other establishment, the wages only. by. cheque or through digital or electronic 
mode or by crediting the wages in his bank accourit. 
Fixution or 16. The employer shall fix the wage period for employees either as daily or weekly or 
wage peritlu.. fortnightly or monthly subject to the condition that no wage period in respect of any employee 25 
shall be more than a month: • 
V'Hge~ lur 
evert nne 
wur], 
Moue or 
\\ ug.c~. 
Time lirrut for 
payment or 
wages. 
;; e 
(d) employees engaged in any work which for technical reasons has to be 
completed before the duty is over; and . 
(e) employees engaged in a work which could notbe carried on except at times 
dependent on the irregular action of natural forces. 
(3) For the purposes of clause (c) of'sub-section (2). employment of an employee is 5 
essentially intermittent when it is declared to be so by the appropriate Government on the 
ground that the daily hours of duty of the employee. or if there be no daily hours of duty as 
such lor the employee -. the hours of duty normally include periods of in action duringwhich 
rill: employee may be on duty but is not called upon to display either physical activity or 
sustained attention. 10 
14. Where an employee whose minimum rate of wages has been tixed under this Code 
by the hour, by the day or by such a longer wage period as may be prescribed, works on any 
day in excess ofthe number of hours constituting a normal working day. the employer shall 
pay him for every hour or for part of an hour so worked in excess, at the overtime rate which 
shall not be less than twice the normal rate of wages. 15 
CI-IAPTERIII 
Provided that different wage periods may be fixed for different establishments. 
17. (/) The employer shall pay. or cause to be paid wages to the employees, engaged 
on- 
(i) daily basis, at the end of the shift; 
(ii) weekly basis, on the last working day of the week, that is to say, before the 
weekly holiday; 
(iii) fortnightly basis. before the end of the second day after the end of the 
fortnight; 
. (iv) monthly basis, before the expiry. of the seventh day of the succeeding J 5 
month. . 
3U . 
(2) Where an employee has been- 
(i) removed or dismissed from service; or 
(ii) retrenched or has resigned from service, or became unemployed due to 
closure of the establishment. -10 
the wages payable to him shall be paid within two working days of his removal. dismissal, 
retrenchment or. as the case may be, his resignation. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the 
appropriate Government may, provide any other time limit tor payment of wages where it 
considers reasonable having regard to the circumstances under which the wages are to be ~ 5 
pai_d. 
.. -. - ..... ~~.~-.- .. --.--.- --- - - _. - - -- --~.~-.,~. _~_~-_,- .. 1=-==----_.~-,. . ._._~_~,_._~_~_ .. 


(-/) Nothing contained in sub-section (I) or sub-section (2) shall affect any time limit 
for payment ofwages provided in an)' other law for the time being in force. 
18. (I) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, there shall be no deductions from the wages of the employee, except those as are 
5 authorised under this Code. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,- 
. (c) any payment made by an employee to the employer or his agent shall be 
deemed to be a deduction from his wages: 
'(b) any loss of wages to an employee. tor a good and sufficient cause, resulting 
. 10 . fTom- 
35 
Deductions 
which may he 
made frum 
wages. 
(i) the withholding of increment or promotion. including the stoppage of 
an increment; or 
15 
(ii), the reduction to a lower post or time-scale; or 
(iii) the suspension, 
shall not be deemed to be ~ deduction from wages in a case where the provisions made 
by the employer for such purposes are satisfying the requirements specified in the 
notiticat.ion issued by the appropriate Government in this behalf: 
(2) Deductions from the wages of an employee shall be made in accordance with- the 
prov.isions ofthis Code, and may be only for the following purposes, namely:- 
20 (a) fines imposed on him; 
(b) deductions for his absence from duty; 
(c) deductions for damage to or loss of goods expressly entrusted to the employee 
for custody; or for loss of money for which he is required to account. where such 
damage or loss is directly attributable t? his neglect or default; 
(d) deductions for house-accommodation supplied by the employer or by the 
appropriate Government or any housing board set-up under any law for the time being 
in force. whether the Government or such board is the employer or not, or any other 
authority engaged in the business of subsidising house-accommodation which may 
be specified in this behalfby the appropriate Government by notiflcation; 
(e) deductions tor such amenities and services supplied by the employer as the 
appropriate Government or any officer specified by it in this behalf may, by-general or 
special order, authorise and such deduction shall not exceed an amount equivalent to 
the value of such amenities and services. . 
25 
30 
E.xplanation.-For the purposes of this clause, the expression "services" does 
not include the supply of tools and raw materials .required for the purposes of 
employment; 
(j) deductions for r~covl:ry of- . 
40 
\ 
(i) advances ofwhatever nature (including advances for travelling 
allowance or conveyance allowance), and the interest due in respect thereof, or 
for adjustment of overpayment of wages; 
(iiJ loans madefrom any lund consututedfor the-wellure of labour. 'as may 
be prescribed by the appropriate Government. and the interest due in respect 
thereof; 
(g) deductions for recovery of'loans granted tor house-building or other purposes 
45 approved by the appropriate Government and the imerest due in respect thereof; 


(h) deductions of income-tax or any other tax levied by the Central Government 
or the State Government and payable by the employee or deductions required to be 
made by order ofa court or other authority competent to make such order; 
(i) deductions for subscription to, and for repayment of advances from any 
social security fund or scheme constituted by law including provident fund or pension 5 
fund or health insurance scheme or fund known by any other name; 
(J) deductions for payment of co-operative society subject to such conditions as 
the appropriate Government may impose: - 
(ki deductions made, with' the written authorisation of the employee: for payment 
of the fees and contribution payable by him for the membership of any Trade Union I () 
registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926: 16 of I Y:?6. ••• 
(I) deductions for recovery of losses sustained b)' an employer on account of 
acceptance by the employee of counterfeit or base coins or mutilated or forged currency . 
notes: . 
I 
(m) deductions for recovery of losses sustained by an employer on account of IS 
the failure of'the employee (0 invoice, to bill. to collect or to account fur the appropriate 
charges due to the employer whether ill respect of fares, freight, demurrage, wharfage 
anti cranage or in respect or sail! of foocl in catering establishments or in respect of 
commodities. in grain shops or otherwise: . 
(/1) deductions for recovery of losses sustained by an employer on account" of 20 
any rebates or refunds incorrectly granted by the employee where such loss is directly 
attributable to his neglect or default; . 
(0) deductions, made with the written authorisation of the employee, for 
contribution to the Prime Minister'S National Relief Fund or to such other fund as the 
Central Government may. by notification, specify. 25 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code and subject to the provisions of 
anyother law for the-rime being in terce, the total amount of deductions which may be made 
under sub-section (2) in any wage period from the wages of an employee shall not exceed 
f ll) per cent. of such wages. 
(-I) Where the total deductions authorised under sub-section (2) exceed fifty per cent. J () 
of the wages, the excess may be recovered in s ich manner, as may be prescribed. 
Fil1~~ 19. (I) No tim: shall be imposed on any employee save in respect of such acts and 
omissions on his part as the employer, with the previous approval of the appropriate 
Government or of such authority as may be prescribed. may have specified by notice under 
sub-section (2). 35 
(1) A notice specifying such acts and omissions shall be exhibited in such manner as 
may be prescribed, 011 the premises in which the employment is carried on. 
(3) No fine shall be imposed on any employee until such employee has been given tin 
opportunity of showing cause against the fine or otherwise than in accordance with SL1ch 
procedure as may be prescribed tor the imposition of tines. -10 
. (.,I) The total amount of fine which rnuybe imposed in any 0111:: wage period on any 
employee shall not exceed an amount equal to three per cent. of the wages payable to him in 
respect ofthat wage period. .' 
(5) No tine shall be imposed on any employee who is under the age offifteen years. 
(6) No fine imposed on any employee shall be recovered from him by instalments or 45 
after the expiry of ninety days from the day on which it was imposed, 
(7) Every fine shall be deemed to have been imposed on the day of the act or omission 
. in respect of which it was imposed. 


r'~'~"'''",O:<==-=''''~",''''T'''="C~''''2''''==~>- """.---"''''--.~=-~'"''"'~-~.=~''-- .•• '~ 
1 
(8) All fines and all realisations thereofshall be recorded in a register to be kept in such 
manner and form as may be prescribed; and all such realisations shall be applied only to such 
purposes beneficial to the persons employed in the establishment as are approved by the 
prescribed authority. 
5 20. (I) Deductions may be made under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 18 only 
on account of the absence of an employee from the place or places where by the terms of his 
employment, he is required to work, such absence being for the whole or any partof the 
period during which he is.so required to work. 
(2) The amount of such deduction shall in no case bear to the wages payable to the 
10 employed person in respect ofthe wage period for which the deduction is made in a larger 
proportion than the period for which he was absent bears to the total period within such 
wa/?e period during which by the terms of his employment he was required to work: 
Provided that, subjectto any rules made in this behalfby the appropriate Government, 
if ten or more employed persons acting in concert absent themselves without due notice 
15 (that is to say without giving the notice which is required under the terms of-their contracts 
of employment) and without reasonable cause, such deduction from any such' person may 
include such amount riot exceeding his wages for eight days as may by any such terms be 
due to the employer in lieu of due notice. 
Explanotton=-Po: the purposes of this section, an employee shall be deemed to be 
20 absent from.the place where he is required to, work if, although present in such place, he 
refuses, in pursuance of a stay-in strike or for any other cause which is not reasonable in the 
. circumstances, to carry out his work. 
21. 0) A deduction under clause (c) or clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 18 for 
damage or loss shall not exceed the amount ofthe damage or loss caused to the employer by 
25 negligence or default of the employee. 
- (2) A deduction shall not be made under sub-section (I) until the employee has been 
given an opportunity of showing cause against the deduction or otherwise than in accordance 
with such procedure as may be prescribed for the making of such deductions. 
(3) All such deductions and all realisations thereofshall be recorded in a register to be 
30 kept in such form as may be. prescribed. 
22. A deduction under clause (d) or clause (e) of'sub-sectien (2) of section IS shall nut 
be made from the wages of an employee, unless the house-accommodation amenity or 
service has·been accepted by him as a term of employment or ofuerwise and such deduction 
'shall not exceed, an amount 'equivalent to the value of the house-accommodation amen iry or 
35 sservice supplied and shall be subject to such conditions as the.appropriate Govemnient may 
-impose. 
i3. Deductions under clause if) of sub-section (2) of section .18 for recovery of advances 
.given to an employee shall be subject to the following conditions, namely:- • 
(a) recovery of advance of money given to an employee before the employment 
40 began shall be made from the first payment of wages to him.In respect ora' complete 
wage period but no recovery shall be made of such advances given for travelling 
expenses: 
(b) recovery of advance of money given to an eI11'j:ll~yee after the employment. 
began shall be subject to such conditions as may be preSDri~e?; 
'(c) recovery of advances of wages to an employeezret alreadyearned shall be 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
45 
24. Deductions under clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section I S'for recovery .ofloans 
. .gsanted to an employee, regulating the extent to which such lQalM maybe granted and the 
'rate of interest payable thereon, shall be such as may be prescribed. 
Deductions for 
absence lrum 
duty. 
Deductions for 
damage or 
lass, 
Deductions 
lor services 
rendered. 
Dcductlons 
Iur recovery 
of udvunces. 
.. ~. _. 
Deductions 
fur recovery 
or loans. 


:!::~~:~~:.2::;:::'=:::"::;::·~··"'';~·'-·-;:~··;--~-:;:::'~~'''''_'''-:-:-'=';·:·7''''''''-:':'7';:':7'" ..• · ···-:-::-~~~~1:::'..:7.:~~.;~:-:-:".-:::--~:~.,;_:~::-.~·~:r~'SS:.7~:~:~:.;.:~0~ . ..:::~z::·.::::::.:.=-.i::S:.J~.:..::~::2.:~~::::::~:~:~ .. ::~:~~_;_~~;::~~ ... ~Z' 
;-----~~.=- -:.=-==~-...,.".,..,__~<.-".,-:'''''''--- -"-""_"=="-"·.-_·_-_7_"-==_""·,::-~"""""",,,,,,,,""'_O:='--' -·---·-·-,-.-.r.-·"-_-.",,""_· -,,-:-<_~:-:_~_ =_== __ -_--.-:"-.-.--.-.-.-.~:-,,:=.:..:_:.:,_:........,.,. 
,.;. 
t huptcr not 
III nppl\ 1\1 
(iU\\"rnIllCOl 
C~l~\hll,hnH':T1l~ 
I Ilgil1lill\ lor 
bonus. ~I~. 
r 
25. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the Government establishments 
unless the appropriate Government. by notification, applies such provisions to the Government 
establishments specified in the said notification. 
CHAPTER IV 
P I\YMJ;;NT OF JlONiJS 
26. (I) There shall be paid to every employee, drawing wages not exceeding sllch 
amount per rnensern as determined by notification by the appropriate Government; by his 
employer. who has put in at least thirty days work in an accounting year, an annual minimum 
bonus calculated at the rate of-eight and one third per cent. of the wages earned by the 
employee' or one hundred rupees, whichever is higher whether or not tIle employer has any 10 
allocable surplus during the previous accounting year. 
(2) For the purpose of calculation of the bonus where the wages 'of the employee 
exceeds such amount per rnensern, as determined by notification. by the appropriate 
Government. the bonus payable to such employee under sub-sections (I) and (3) 'shall be 
calculated as ifhi~ wage were such amount, so determined by the appropriate Government or 15 
the minimum wage fixed by the appropriate Government, whichever is higher. 
(3) Where in respect of any accounting year referred to in sub-section (1). the allocable 
surplus exceeds the amount of minimum bonus payable to the employees under that sub­ 
section, the employer shall, in 'lieu of such minimum bonus. be bound to pay to every 
employee in respect of that accounting year, bonus which shall be an amount in proportion 20 
to the wages earned by the emplo/yee during the accounting year, subject to a maximum of 
twenty pel' cent. of such wages.. . ' . . 
(4) In computing the allocable surplus under this section. the amount set on or the 
amount set off under the provisions ofsection 36 shall be taken into account in accordance 
with the provisions of that section. 25 
(J) Any demand for bonus in excess of the bonus referred to in sub-section (I), either 
on the basis of production. or productivity in an accounting year for which the bonus is 
payable shall be determined by an agreement or settlement between the employer and the 
employees, subject to tlie condition that the total bonus including the annual minimum 
bonus referred to in sub-section (I) shall not exceed twenty per cent. of the wages earned by 30 
the employee in the accounting year. 
(6) In the first five accounting years following the accounting year in which the employer 
sells the goods produced or manufactured by him or renders services. as the case may be, 
from such establishment, bonus shall be payable only in respect of the accounting year in 
which the employer derives profit from such establishment and such bonus shall be calculated 3 ~ 
in accordance with the provisions of this Code in relation to that year, but without applying 
the provisions 'of section 36. 
(7) For the sixth and seventh accounting years following the accounting year.in which 
the employer sells the goods produced or manufactured by him or renders services, asthe 
case may be. from such establishment, the provisions of section 36 shall apply subject to the 40 
following modifications, riamely:- 
(i) for the sixth accounting year set on or set off. as the case may be, shall be 
made in the manner illustrated in the First Schedule taking into account the excess or 
deficiency, if any, as the case may be, of the allocable surplus set on or set off in 
respect of the' fifthand sixth accounting years; "5 
(ii) for the seventh accounting year set on or set off, as the case may be. shall be 
made in the manner illustrated in the First. Schedule raking into account the excess or 
deficiency, if any, as the case rna)' be, of the allocable surplus. set on or set off in 
respect of the fifth, sixth and seventh accounting years. 


(8) From the eighth accounting year following the accounting year in which the employer 
sells the goods produced or manufactured by him or renders services, as the case may be, 
from such establishment, the provisions of section 36 shall apply in relation to such 
establishment as they apply in relation to any other establishment. 
.5 Explanation I.-For the purpose of sub-section (6). au employer shall not be deemed 
to have derived profit in any accounting year. unless- 
(Cl) he has made provision for depreciation of that year to which he is entitled 
under the Income-tax Act or, as the case may be, under the agricultural income tax law; 
and 
,.. 
(b) the arrears of such depreciation and losses incurred by him in respect of the 
establishment for the previous accounting years have been fully set off against his 
profits. 
Explanation 2.-Fm the purposes of sub-sections (6), (7) and (8), sale of the goods 
produced or manufactured .during the. course of the trial running of any factory or of the 
15 prospecting stage of any mine or an oil-field shall not be taken into consideration and where 
any question arises! with regard to such production or manufacture, the appropriate 
Government may, after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of representing the case, 
decide upon .the issue. 
I U 
:W of' 1946. 
14 or 1947. 
-, ,(9) The provisions of sub-sections (6). (7) and (8} shall, so far as may be, apply to new 
20 departments or undertakings or branches set-up by existing establishments . 
. 27. Where an employee has not worked tor all the working days in an accounting year, 
the minimum bonus under sub-section (I) of section 26, if such bonus is higher than eight 
and one third per cent. of the salary or wage of the days such employee has worked in that 
accounting year, shall be proportionately reduced. 
25 28. For the purposes of section 27. an employee shall be deemed to have worked in an 
establishment in any accounting year also on the days on which,- 
(a) he has been laid off under an agreement or as permitted by standing orders 
under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946, or under the Industrial 
Disputes Act. 1947. or under any other law applicable to the establishment; 
(b) he has been on leave with- salary or wages; 30 
(c) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by accident arising 
out of and in the course of his employment; and 
(d) the employee has been on maternity leave with salary or'wag~s, during the 
accounting year. 
35 29. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, an employee shall be disqualified 
from receiving bonus under this Code, ifhe is dismissed from service for-' 
(a) fraud; or 
(b) riotous or violent behaviour while on the premises of the establishment; or 
(c) theft, misappropriation or sabotage of any preperty of'the establishment; or 
(cI) conviction for sexual harassment. 4u 
30. Where an establishment consists of different departments or undertakings or has 
branches. whether situated in the same place or in different places, all such departments or 
undertakings or branches shall be treated as parts of the same. establishment for the purpose 
of computation of bonus. under this Code: 
45 Provided that where for any accounting year a separate balance-sheet and profit and 
loss account are prepared and maintained in respect ofariy such department or undertaking 
Proportionate 
reduction in 
bonus in 
certain cases. 
Computation 
of number of 
working days. 
Disqualificarion 
for bonus. 
Establishments 
to include 
.departments. 
undertakings 
and branches. 


Payment Ill' 
bonus out of 
allocable 
surplus. 
Computation 
of gross 
profits. 
Computation 
. of available 
surplus. 
Sums 
deductible 
from gross 
profits. 
or branch, then, such department or undertaking or branch shall be t~eated as' a separate 
establishment for the purpose of computation of-bonus, under this Code for that year, unless 
such department or undertaking or branch was, immediately before the commencement of 
that accounting year treated as part of the establishment for the purpose of computation of 
bonus. - 5_ 
31. (I) The bonus shall be paid out of the allocable surplus which shall be an arnount . 
equal to sixty per cent. in case of a banking company and sixty-seven per cent. in case of 
other establishment, of the available surplus and the available surplus shall be the amount 
calculated in accordance with section 33_ 
(2) Audited accounts of companies shall not normally be questioned. 
(3) Where there is any dispute regarding the quantum of bonus, theauthority notified 
by the appropriate Government having jurisdiction may call upon the employer to produce 
the balance-sheet before it, but the authority shall not disclose any information contained in 
the balance-sheet unless agreed to by the employer. ' 
. 32. The gross profits derived by an employer from an establishment in respect of the 15 
accounting year shall,-'. . . 
(a) in the case ofa banking company, be calculated in the manner specified in 
the Second Schedule; . 
10 
.., 
(b) in any other case, be calculated in the manner specified in the Third Schedule. 
33. The available surplus in respect of any accounting year shall be the gross profits 20 
for that year after deducting therefrom the sums referred to in section 34: 
Provided that the available surplus in respect of the accounting year.commenclng on 
any day in a year after the commencement of this Code and in respect of every subsequent 
. accounting year shall be the aggregate of- . 
. (a) the gross profits for that accounting year after deducting therefrom the sums 25 
referred to in.section 34; and 
(b) an amount equal to the difference between- 
(t) the direct tax, calculated in accordance with the provisions of sect ion 35, 
in respect of an amount equal to the gross profits of the employer for the 
immediately preceding accounting year; and 30 
(ii) the direct tax.calculated in-accordance with provisions of section 35, 
in respect of an amount equal to the gross .profits of the employer for such 
preceding accounting year after deducting there from the amount of bonus 
which the employer has paid or is liable to pay to his employees in accordance 
with the provisions of this Code for that year. 35 . 
34. The. following sums shall be deducted from the gross profits as prior charges, 
namely:- - . 
(a) any amount by way of depreciation admissible in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 32 ofthe Income-tax Act or in accordance with .: 
the provisions ofthe agricultural income tax law, for the time being in force, as the case 40 
maybe: 
Provided that where an employer has been paying bonus to his employees 
under a 'settlement or an award or agreement made before the 29th May, 1965, and 
subsisting on that date after deducting from the gross profits notional normal 
depreciation, then, the amount of depreciation to be deducted under this clause shall, 45 
at the option of such employer, which is to be exercised once and within one year from 
that date. continue to be such notional normal depreciation; - 


(b) any amount by way of development rebate or investment allowance or 
development allowance which the employer is entitled to deduct from his income 
under the Income-tax Act; 
(c) subject to the provisions of section 35, any direct tax which the employer is 
5 I iable to pay for the accounting year in respect ofhis income, profits and gains during 
that year; 
Ccl) such further sums as are specified in respect of the employer in the Fourth 
Schedule, . . 
. 35. Any direct tax payable by the employer for any accounting year shall, subject to 
10 the following provisions, be calculated at the rates applicable to the income of the employer 
for that year, namely:- ' 
(a) in calculating such tax no account shall be taken of,- 
(I) any loss incurred by the employer in respect of any previous accounting 
year and carried forward under any law for the time being in force relating to 
direct taxes; 
Calculation of 
direct tax. 
payable by 
employer, 
15 
10 of 1965, 
(if) any arrears of depreciation which the employer is entitled to add to the 
amount of theallowance for depreciation for any succeeding accounting year or 
years under sub-section (2) of section 32 of the Income-tax Act; 
(iiI) any exemption conferred on the employer under section 84 of the 
Income-tax Act or- of any deduction 'to which he is entitled 'under sub-section (I) 
of section 101 ofthatAct, as in force immediately before the commencement of 
the Finance Act, 1965; 
(b) . where the employer is ~ religious or a charitable institution to which the, 
provisions of section 41 do not apply and the whole or any part of its income is exempt 
25 from the tax under the Income-tax Act, then, with respect to the income so exempted, 
such institution shall be treated as if it were a company in which the public are 
substantially interested within the meaning of that Act; 
20 
(c) where the employer is an individual or a Hindu undivided family, the tax 
payable by such employer under the Income-tax Act shall be calculated on the basis 
30 that the income derived by him from the establishment is his only income; 
(cI) where the income of any employer includes any profits and gains, derived 
from the export of any goods or merchandise out of India and any rebate on such 
income is allowed under any law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes-then, 
no account shall be taken of such rebate; 
35 (e) no account shall be taken of any rebate other than development rebate, or 
investment allowance or development allowance or credit or relief or deduction (not 
hereinbefore mentioned in this section) in the payment of any direct tax allowed under 
any law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes or under the relevant annual 
Finance Act, for the development of any industry, 
40 36, (I) Where for any accounting year, the allocable surplus exceeds the amount Of 
maximum bonus payable to the employees in the establishment under section 26, then, the' 
excess shall, subject to a limit of twenty per cent. of the total salary or wage of the employees 
'employed in the establishment in that accounting year, be carried forward for being set on in . 
the succeeding accounting year and so on up to and inclusive of the fourthaccounting year 
45 to be utilised for the purpose of payment of bonus tntnejnanner illustrated in the First 
Schedule. . . 
(2) Where for any accounting year, there is ·no available surplus qr the allocable 
surplus in respect of that year falls short of the amount of minimum bonus payable to the 
employees in the establishment undersection 26, and there is no amount or sufficient amount 
Set on and set 
off of 
allocable 
surplus. 


-;;===============-- .. ~.,.-,.-==:-:--. ---::;::;;;::;-----.----.- -,,--,",,- .. -- .. ---===-=======-:-:-::::::_--;_':;:.~~::;::::- 
Ad.illSI!n~nl or customary UT 
interim. bonus 
against bonus 
payable under 
this Code. 
ceruun . 
amount, frlJITI. 
bonus 
payable 
Time limit 
for P,I) men: 
of bonus. 
Appllcauon 
or this 
Chapter-to 
establishruents 
in publi<: 
sector in 
certain cases. 
i 
carried forward and set on under sub-section U) which could be utilised for the purpose of 
payment of the minimum bonus. then, such minimum amount or the deficiency, as the case 
may be. shall be carried forward for being set off in the succeeding accounting year and so 
on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year in the manner illustrated in the First 
Schedule. 
(3) The principle of set on and set off as illustrated in the Firsr Schedule shall apply to 
all other cases not covered by sub-section (/) or sub-section (2) for the purpose of payment 
of bonus under this Code, 
(-I) Where ·in any accounting year any amount has been carried forward and set on or 
S~ ofl'under this section. then, in calculating bonus for the succeeding accounting year, the 10 
amount of set 011 or set off carried forward from the earliest accounting year shall first be 
taken into account 
37. Where in' any accounting year,- 
(a) an employer has paid any puja bonus or other customary bonus to employee; or 
(6) an employer has paid a part of the bonus payable under this Code to an 15 
employee before the date on which such bonus becomes payable, 
then, the employer shall be' entitled to deductthe amount of bonus so paid from the amount 
of bonus' payable by him to the employee under this Code in respect of that accounting year 
and the employee shall be entitled to recejve only the balance. . . 
38. Where in any accounting year, an employee is found guilty of misconduct causing 20 
tinancialloss to the employer, then. it shall be lawful for the employer to deduct the amount 
of loss from the amount of bonus payable by him to the employee under this Code in 
respect of that accounting year only and the employee shall be entitled to receive the 
balance. if any, 
" 
39, (I) All amounts payable to an employee by way of bonus under this Code shall be 25 
paid by crediting it in the bank account of the employee by his employer within a period of 
eight months from the close of the accounting year: 
Provided that the appropriate Government or such authority as the appropriate 
Government may specify in this behalf may, upon an application made to it by the employer 
and for sufficient reasons. by order, extend the said period of eight months to such further' 30 
period or periods as it thinks fit; .so, however, that the total period so extended shall not in 
any case exceed two years. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (I), where there is a dispute 
regarding payment of bonus pending before any authority, such bonus shall be paid, within 
a period of one month fro~ the date on which the award becomes enforceable or the settlement 35 
comes into operation, in respect of such dispute: 
Provided that if, there is a dispute for payment at the higher rate, t-he employer shall 
pay eight and one third per cent. of the wages earned by the employee as per the provisions 
of this Code within a period of eight months from the close of the accounting year. 
40. (/) If in any accounting 'year an establishment in public sector sells any goods 40 
produced or manufactured by it or renders any services, in competition with an establishment 
in private sector, and the income from such sale or services or both, is not less than twenty 
per cent. of the gross income of the establishment in public sector for that year, then, the 
provisions ofthis'Chapter shall apply in relation to such establishment in public sectoras 
they apply in relation to a like establishment in.private sector. 45 
"(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (I). nothing in this Chapter shall apply 
to the employees employed by any establishment in public sector. 


44 or 1958. 
5 
9 or 1948. 
10 
15 
41.· (I) Nothing in. this Chapter shall apply to- 
(a) employees employed by the Life Insurance Corporation ofIndia; 
(b) seamen as defined in clause (42) of section 3 of the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958; 
(c) employees registered or listed under any scheme mad~ under the Dock 
Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948, and employed by registered or listed 
employers; 
(d) employees employed by an establishment under the authority of any 
department of the Central Government or a State Government or a local authority; 
(e) employees employed by- 
(i) the Indian Red Cross Society or any other institution of a like nature 
including its branches; 
I (i/) universities and other educational institutions; 
(iii) institutions including hospitals, chamber of commerce and social 
welfare institutions established not for purposes of profit; 
(j) employees employed by the Reserve Bank ofIndia; 
(g) employees employed by public sector financial institution other than a banking 
company, which. the Central Government may, by notification, specify, having regard 
to- 
(I) its capital structure; 
(if) its objectives and the nature of its activities; 
(iiI) the nature and extent of financial assistance or any concession given 
to it by the Government; and 
(iv) any other relevant factor; 
25 (h) employees employed by inland water transport establishmerits operating on 
routes passing through any other country; and 
(i) employees of any other establishment which the appropriate Gover.nment 
may, by notification; exempt having regard to the overall benefits under any other 
scheme of profit sharing available in such establishments to the employees. 
20 
30 (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (I) and notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other provisions of this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply 
to such establishment in which twenty or more. persons are employed or were employed on 
any day during an accounting year. 
35 
CHAPTERV 
ADVISOR Y SOARD 
42. (I) The Central Government shall constitute the Central Advisory Board which 
shall consist of persons to be nominated by the Central Government- 
"(a) representing employers; 
(b) representing employees which shall be equal in number .of the members 
specified in clause (a); and 
(c) independent persons, not exceeding one-third of the total members of the· 
Board.' 
Non­ 
applicability 
of this 
Chapter. 
. Central 
Advisory 
Board and 
Stale 
Advisory 
. Boards.· 
I 
I •.••• ,_ .•.. _~.:t' ••• :-~ -_ ••. __ 
_ ._----.-- -_._--_- _ .. -._ _.---_ .. _ _- .,. .. _----.. .' _--~--.-. -~- .. -. _..., .•..•.. .-.------- 


-.- ..•. L---=...-~ .•........•...•.. ~ .• -=- _ 
(2) One-third of the members referred to in sub-section (1) sha1I be women and a 
member specified in clause (c) of the said sub-section. shall be appointed by the Central 
Government as the Chairperson of the Board . 
. (3) The Central Advisory Board constituted under sub-section (/) shall from time to 
time advise the Central Government on reference of issues relating to- 5 
(a) fixation or revision of minimum wages and other connected matters; 
(b) providing increasing employment opportunities for women; 
(c) the extent to which women may be employed in such establishments or 
employments as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf; 
and 10 
(d) any other matter relating to this Code, 
and on such advice the Central Government may issue directions to the State Government as 
it deems fit in respect of matters relating to issues referred to the 'Board. 
(-;I) Every State'Govemment shall constitute a State Advisory Board for advising the 
State Government- 15 
(£I) in fixation or revision afminimum wages and other connected matters; 
(b) for the purpose of providing increasing employment opportunities for women; 
(c) with regard to the extent to which women may be employed in such 
establishments or employments as the State Government may, by notification, specify 
. in this behalf and 20 . 
(d) in any other matter relating to this Code, which the' State Government may 
refer from time to time to the Board. 
I (5) The State Advisory Board may constitute one or more committees or sub-committees 
to look into issues pertaining to matters specified in clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section (4). 
(6) The State Advisory Board and each of the committees and sub-committees thereof 25 
shall consist of persons- 
(a) representing employers; 
(b) representing employees which shall be equal in number of the members 
specified in clause (a); and 
(c) independent persons, not exceeding on~-third of the total members of the 30 
Board or committee or sub-committee, as the case may be. 
(7) One-third of the members referred to in suo-section (6) shall be women and one 
among the members specified in clause .(c) of the said sub-section shall- 
(CI) be appointed by the State Governmen~ as the Chairperson of the Board; . 
(b) be appointed by the State Advisory Board as the Chairperson of the 35 
committee or sub-committee, as the casemay be. 
(8) [n tendering its advice in the matters specified in clause (b) or clause (c) of ~ub­ 
section (4), the State Advisory Board shall have regard to the number of women employed in 
the concerned establishment, or employment, the nature of work, hours of work, suitability 
of'wornen for employment, as thecase may be, the need for providing increasing employment 40 
opportuni£iesfor women, including' part timeemployment, and such- other-relevant factors as 
'the Board may think fit.' . 
(Q) The State Government may, after considering the advice tendered to it by the State 
Advisory Board and after inviting and considering the representations from establishment 
or employees or any other person which that Government thinks fit, issue such direction as 45 
may be deemed necessary. 
--.-----.-----~--.------------------- ---- --- 


~~c::==~~~~.... ·;;:;"=·'3w.;E~==::O;~>?Y:~_..._m_dOli; •• m;c;:e;::ki';:Gg;S»~~~?:"'1"z::?.;· .... ·.·:;-.:.:·-·~.::..i~·.":':S· ...••..•. ~ f"'····'---=~·"-...,=""'---_u.c.-------_"'.,~2" .. c- -=:- ".:,----- ~. ""~o= 
1- : 
r @ 
~ ~~ 
(10) The Central Advisory Board referred to in sub-section (I) and the State Advisory 
Board referred to in sub-section (4) shall respectively regulate their own procedure including 
that of the committees and sub-committees constitutedby the State Advisory Board, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(II) The terms. of office of the Central Advisory Board referred to in sub-section (I) 
and the State Advisory Board referred to in sub-section (4) including that of the committees 
and sub-committees constituted by the State Advisory Board, shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
J 0 
CHAPTER VI 
PAYMENT OF DUES, CLAIMS AND AUDIT 
9 or 1932. 
:43. Every employer shall pay all amounts required to be paid under this Code to every 
employee employed by him: 
Provided that where such employer fails to make such payment in accordance with this . 
Code, then, the company or firm or association or any other person who is the proprietor of 
15 the establishment, i:n which the employee is employed, shall be responsible for such payment. 
Exptanatton=-Fot the purposes of this section the expression "firm" shall have the 
same meaning as assigned to it in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932. 
44. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Code, all amounts payable to an employee 
under this Code shall, if such amounts could not or cannot be paid on account of his death 
20. before payment or on account of his whereabouts not being known,- 
(a) be paid to the person nominated by him in this behalf in accordance with the­ 
rules made under this Code; or 
(b) where 'no such nomination has been made or where for any reasons such 
amounts cannot be paid to the person so nominated, be deposited with such authority, 
25 as may be prescribed, who shall deal with the amounts so deposited in the manner as 
may be prescribed. 
(2) Where in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (I), all amounts payable to 
~ an employee under ~is Code- 
(a) are paid by the employer to the person nominated by the employee; or 
(b) are deposited by the employer with the authority referred to in clause (b) of 
sub-section (1), 
then, the employer shall be discharged of his liability to pay those amounts. 
45. (I) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint one or more 
authorities, not below the rank ofa Gazetted officer, to hear and determine the claims which 
35 arises under the provisions of this Code. 
30 
(2) The authority appointed under sub-section (J), while deciding the claim under that 
sub-section, may order, having regard to the circumstances under which the claim arises, the 
payment of compensation in addition to the claim determined, 'Which may extend to ten times 
of the claim determined and endeavour shall be made by the authority to 4ecide the claim 
40 within a period ofthree months. 
(3) If an employer fails to pay the claim determined and comperrseeorr ordered to be 
paid under sub-section (2),. the authority shall issue a certificate of recovery to the Co !lector 
or District Magistrate of the district where the establishment is located who shall recover the 
same as arrears' of land revenue and remit the same to the authority for ·payment to the 
45 concerned employee. 
Responsibility 
for payment 
of various 
dues. 
Payment of 
various 
undisbursed 
dues in case. of 
death of 
employee, 
Clai ms under 
Code and 
procedure 
thereof. 


~=::..:_--=====-~=========== ---.------ - -.~- .. ---~-, ~-----...,=-~~--~<~-~~- 
Reference of 
disputes under' 
this Code. 
Presumption 
about 
accuracy of 
balance-sheet 
and pro til and 
loss account 
II r corporauons 
and 
companies. 
(-I) Any application before the authority for claim referred to in sub-section (I) may be 
filed by,- 
CCl) the employee concerned; or 
(b) any Trade Union registered under-the Trade Unions-Act, 1926 of which the 
employee is a member; or 
(c) the Facilitator. 
(5) Subject to such rules as may be made, a single application may be filed under this 
section on behalf or in respect of any number of employees employed in an establishment. 
(6) The application under sub-section (4) may be filed within a period of three years 
from the date on which claims referred to in sub-section (J) arises: 
Provided that the authority referred to in sub-section(J) may, entertain the application 
after three years on sufficient cause being shown by the applicant for such delay. 
(7) The authority appointed under sub-section (1) and the appellate authority appointed 
under sub-section (I) ofs'ection 49, shall have all the powers ofa civil court under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, for the purpose of taking evidence and of enforcing the attendance 
of witnesses and compelling the production of documents, and every such authority or 
appellate authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 195 and 
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. . 
46. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code: where any dispute arises between 
an employer and his employees wlth respect to- . 
(a) fixation of bonus or eligibility for payment of bonus under the provisions 
of this Code; or 
(b) the application of this Code, in respect of bonus, to an establishment in 
public sector. 
then, such dispute shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute within the meaning of the 25 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. 14 of 1947. 
16 of 1926. 
10 
, . 
15 5 of 1908. 
2 of 1974. 
20 
47: (1) Where, during the course of proceedings before­ 
(a) the authority under section 45; or' 
. (b) the appellate authority under section 49; or 
(c) a Tribunal; or 30 
(d) an arbitrator referred to in clause (00) of section 2 ofthe Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, . 14 of 1947. 
'in respect of any dispute of the nature specified in sections 45 and 46 or in respect of an 
appeal under section 49, the balance-sheet and the profit and loss account of an employer, 
being a corporation or a company' €otb.er than a banking company), duly audited by the 35 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of1.ndia or by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of 
companies under section 141 of the Companies Act, 20 I 3, are produced before it, then, the 18 of 20'13. 
said authority, appellate authority, 't'ribumal or arbitrator, as the case may be. may presume 
the statements and particulars conteined in such balance-sheet and profit and loss account 
to be accurate and it shall not be nec.essar-y for the corporation or the company to prove the 40 
accuracy of such statements and particulars by the filing of an affidavit or by. any other 
mode: 
Provided that where the said authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, as 
the case may be, is satisfied that the statements and particulars contained in the 
balance-sheet or the profit and loss account of the corporation or the company are not 45 
accurate, it may take such steps as it thinks necessary to find out the accuracy of such 
. statements and particulars. 
.---.-.--------- -- .. - -- ---- --_ .. --- 


· .•. =,' """""'~--= 
(2) When an application is made to the authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or 
arbitrator, as the case may be, referred to in sub-section (1), by any Trade Union being a 
party to the dispute or as the case may be, an appeal, and where there is no Trade Union, by 
the employees being a party to the dispute, or as the case may be, an appeal, requiring any 
5 clarification relating to any item in the balance-sheet or the profit and loss account, then 
such authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, may, after satisfying itself that 
such clarification is necessary, by order, direct the corporation or, as the case may be, the 
company, to furnish to the Trade Union or the employees such clarification within such time 
as may be specified in the direction and the corporation or, as the case may be, the company, 
10 shall comply with such direction. 
48. (J) Where any claim, dispute or appeal with respect to bonus payable under this 
Cede between an employer, not being a corporation or a company, and his employees is 
pending before any authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, as the case may be, 
as referred to in sub-section (1) of section 47 and the accounts of such employer audited by 
15 any auditor duly qualified to act as auditor of companies under the provisions of section 141 
18 of 2013. ofthe CompaniesAct, 2013, are produced before such authority, appellate authority, Tribunal 
or arbitrator, then the provisions of section 47 shall, so far as may be, apply to the accounts 
so audited. 
(2) When the authority, appellate authority, -Tribunal or arbitrator, referred to in sub- 
20 section (/), as the case may be, finds that the accounts' of such employer have not been 
audited by any, such auditor and h is of opinion that an audit of the accounts of such 
employer is necessary for deciding the question referred to it, then, such authority, appellate 
authority, Tribunal or' arbitrator,' may; by order, direct the employer to get his accourits 
audited within such time as may be, specified in the direction or within such further time 'as it 
25 may allow by such auditor or auditors as itthinks fit and thereupon the employer shall 
comply with such direction. 
(3) Where an employer fails to get the accounts audited under sub-section (2) the 
authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, referred to in sub-section (I), as the case 
'may be, may, without prejudice to the provisions of section 54, get the accounts audited by 
30 such auditor or auditors as it thinks fit. ' 
(4) When the accounts are audited under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), the 
provisions of section 47 shall" so far as may be, apply to the accounts 50 audited. , . (5) The expenses of, and incidental to, any audit under sub-section (3) including the 
remuneration of the auditor or auditors shall be determined by the authority, appellate authority, • 
35 Tribunal or arbitrator, referred to in sub-section (I), as the case may be, and paidby the 
employer and in default of such payment shall be recoverable by the authority referred to in 
sub-section (3) of section 45 from the employer in the manner provided in that sub-section. 
49. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the authority under sub-section (2) Appeal. 
of section 45 may prefer an appeal, to the appellate authority having jurisdiction appointed 
40 by the appropriate Government, by notification, for such purpose, within ninety days from 
the 'date of such order, in such form and manner as may be prescribed: 
" 
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain the appeal after ninety days if it 
satisfied that the delay in filing the appeal has occurred due to sufficient cause, 
(2) The appellate authority shall be appointed from the officers of the appropriate 
45 Government holding the post at least one .rank higher than the authority referred under 
sub-section (I) of section 4.5. ," -_. __ . ,_ 
. (3) The appellate authority shall, after hearing the parties iri the appeal, dispose of the 
appeal and endeavour shall be made to dispose of the appeal within a period of three months, 
(4) The outstanding dues under the orders of'theappellate authority shall be recovered 
5 a by the authority referred to in section 45, by issuing the certificate of recovery in the manner 
specified' in sub-section (3) of that section. 
Audit of 
accounts of 
employers, 
not being 
corporations 
or compan ies. 


Records. 
returns and 
notices. 
Appointment 
of Fac·ilitators 
and their 
powers. 
so. (I) Every employer of an establishment to which this Code applies shall maintain 
a register containing the details with regard to persons employed, muster roll, wages, and 
such other details in such manner as may be prescribed. . 
, (2) Every employer shall display a notice on the riot ice board at a prominent place of 
the establishment containing the abstract of this Code, category-wise wage rates of 5 
employees, wage period; day or date and time of payment of wages, and the name and 
address of the Facilitator havingjurisdiction . 
. (3) Every employer shall issue wage slips to the employees in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed. 
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (I) to (3) shall not apply in respect ofthe employer 10 
to the extent he employs not more than five persons for agriculture or domestic purpose: 
Provided that such employer, when demanded, shall produce before the Facilitator, the 
reasonable proof of the payment of wages to the persons so employed. . 
. Explanation.-F?r the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "domestic purpose" 
means the purpose exclusively relating to the home or family affairs ofthe employer and does 15 
not include any affair relating to any establishment.jndustry, trade, business, manufacture 
or occupation. . 
CHAPTER VII 
F ACILIT~TOR 
.. 
51. (1) The appropriate Government may, by.notification, appoint Facilitators who 
shall exercise' the' powers conferred on them under sub-section (4) throughout the State or 
such geographical limits assigned to them, 'in relation to establishments situated in such 
. State or geographical limits, as the case may be. 
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification, lay down an inspection scheme 
which shall also provide for generation of a web-based inspection schedule. 25 
20 
(3) Every Facilitator appointed under sub-section (I) shall be deemed to' be public 
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1860. 
(4) The Facilitator may, within the local limits of his jurisdiction-e- 
(a) supply information and advice to employers and workers concerning the 
1'I)0st effective means of complying with the provisions of this Code; 30 
(b) inspect the establishment based on inspection scheme referred to in 
sub-section (2). . 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), the Facilitator may,- 
(c) examine any person who is found in any premises of the establishment, 
whom the Facilitator has reasonable cause to believe, is a worker ofthe establishment; 35 
(b) require any person to give any information, which is in his power to give with 
respect to the names and addresses of the persons; 
(c) search, seize or take copies of such register, record of wages or notices or 
portions thereof as the Facilitator may consider relevant in respect of an offence under 
this Code and which the Facilitator has reason to believe has been committed by the , 40 
employer; 
Cd) bring to the notice, of the appropriate Government defects or abuses 'not 
covered by any law for the time being in force; and 
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 


I 
.'; ~~"~=- '~"==',~",",,'-;;':7:~"'~';~:<._<=~_.:':-::'.",' _:;-=:=~:-'.~O=-·· =-. "-",,-''';7='-~"- ='=---"""'7':~'=~' === 
.' f~ .', 
I~~' : , , , 
, 
. 
:~ B :!: :~ 
(6) Any person required to produce any document or to give any information required 
by a Facilitator under sub-section (5) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the 
meaning of section 175 and section 176 of the Indian Penal Code. 
(7) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall, so far as may be, 
apply to the search or seizure under sub-section (5) as they apply to the search or seizure 
made under the authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code. 
CHAPTER VIII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES . 
52. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Code, Cognizance of 
10 save on a ~omplaint made by or under the authority of the appropriate Government or an offences. 
officer authorised in this behalf, or by an employee or a registered Trade Union registered 
16 of 1926. under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 or a Facilitator. 
45 of 1860. 
201' 1974. 
2 of 1974, (2) Notwithstanding anything coIitained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, no 
court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
15 shall try the offences .under this Code. 
53. (1) Any employer who- 
(a) pays to any employee less than the amount due to such employee under the 
provisions of this Code shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees; 
Penalties for 
offences. 
. (b) having been convicted of an offence under-clause (a) is again found guilty of 
'similar offence under this clause, within five years from the date of the commission of 
the first or subsequent offence, he shall, on the second and the subsequent commission 
ofthe offence, be punishablewith imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both; 
25 (c). contravenes any other provision of this Code or any rule made or order made 
or issued thereunder shall be punishable with fine .whicq may extend to twenty thousand 
I 
" 
20 
rupees; 
(d) having been convicted of an offence under clause,(c) is again found guilty of 
similar offence under this clause, within five years from the date ofthe commission of 
30 the first or subsequent offence, he shall, on the second and the subsequent commission 
ofthe offence under this clause, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to forty thousand rupees, or 
with both. . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section '(l), for the offences of non­ 
, 35 maintenance or improper maintenance of records in the establishment, the employer shall be 
punishable with fine which m~y extend to ten thousand rupees. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c) of sub-section (/) or sub-section (2), 
the Facilitator shall, before initiation of prosecution proceeding for the offences under the 
said clause or sub-section, give an opportunity to the employer to comply with the provisions 
40 of this Code by way of a written direction, which shall lay down a time period forsuch 
compliance, and, if the employer complies with the direction within such period, the Facilitator 
shall not initiate such prosecution proceeding and, no such opportunity shall be accorded to 
an employer, if the violation of the same nature of the provisions under this Code is repeated 
- _. ", .... within a period of five years' from the date on which suchfirst violation was committed' and 
45 in such case the prosecution shall be initiated in accordance with the provisions of this 
Code. 
54. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Code is a company, every person Offences by 
who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to the companies. 
company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be 
-/a/~ 


------------.-.~---~~---~~ 
Composition 
of offences. 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment if'he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 5. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under 
this .Code has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, 
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, 
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable 10 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanatton=Yor the purposes of this section,- 
(a) "company" means anybody corporate and includes­ 
(I) a firm; or 
! 
(iz) a limited liability partnership registered under the Limited Liability 15 
Partnership Act, 2008; or 6 of 2009 . 
. (iii) other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm. 
55. (I) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 2 of 1974. 
anycffence punishable under this Code, not being an offence punishable with imprisonment 20 
only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, on an application of the accused person, 
either before or after the institution 'of any prosecution, be compounded by a Gazetted 
officer, as the appropriate Government may, by notification, specify, for a sum of fifty per 
cent. of the maximum fine provided for such offence, in the manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (I) shall apply to an offence committed by a 25 
person for the second time or thereafter within a period of five years from the date- . 
(i) of commission of a ~imilar offence which was eariier compounded; 
(iz) of commission of similar offence for which such person was earlier convicted. 
(3) Every officer referred to in sub-section (I) shall exercise the powers to compound 
an offence, subject to the direction, control !!_nd supervision of the appropriate Government. 30 
. (4) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such manner 
as may be prescribed .. 
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no 
prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in relation to 
whom the offence is so compounded. 35 
(6) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any 
prosecution, such composition shall be brought by the officer referred to in sub-section (l) 
in writing, to the notice of the Court in which the prosecution is pendingand on such notice . 
of the composition of the offence being given, the person against whom the offence is so 
compounded shall be discharged. 40 
(7) Any person who fails to comply with an order made by the officer referred to in 
sub-section (I), shall be punishable with a sum equivalent to twenty per cent. of the maximum 
fine provided for the offence, in addition to such fine. 
(8) No offence punishable under the provisions of thisCode shall be compounded 
except under and in accordance with the provisions of_this section. 45 


MISCELLANEOUS 
) , 
56. No court shall entertain any suit for the recovery of minimum wages, any deduction Bar of suits, 
from wages, ~iscrimination in wages and payment of bonus, in so far as the sum so claimed- 
Ca) forms the subject of claims under sec!ion 45; 
(b) has formed the subject ofa direction under this Code; or 
(c) has been adjudged in any proceeding under this Code; 
(d) could have been recovered under this Code. 
57. No suit, prosecution or any other legal proceeding shall lie against the appropriate 
10' Government or any officer of that Government for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Code. 
CHAPTER IX 
5 
58. Where' a claim has been filed on account of non-payment of remuneration or bonus 
or less payment of wages or bonus or on account of making deductions not authorised by 
this Code from the wages of an employee, the burden to prove that the said dues have been 
15 paid shall be on the employer. 
59. Any, contract or agreement whereby an employee relinquishes the right to any 
amount or the right to bonus due to him under this Code shall be null and void in so far as 
it purports to remove or reduce the liability of any person to pay such amount under this 
Code. 
20 60. The provisions of this Code shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in the terms of any award, 
agreement, settlement or contract of service. 
61. The appropriate Government may, by notification, direct that any power exercisable 
by it under this Code shall, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, 
25 as ma~ be specified in the notification, be II!SO exercisable- 
(a) where the appropriate Government is the Central Government, by such officer 
or authority subordinate to the Central Government or by the State Government or by 
such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government, as may be specified in . 
the notification;' 
30 (b) where the appropriate Government is a State Government, by such officer or 
authority subordinate to the State Government as may be specified in the notification, 
62. Where an employer is charged with an offence under this Code, he shall be entitled 
upon complaint duly made by him, to have any other person whom he charges as the actual 
offender, brought before the court at the time appointed for hearing the charge; and if, after 
35 the·commission of the offence has been proved, the employer proves to the satisfaction of 
the court- 
(a) that hehas used due diligence to enforcethe execution of this Code; and 
(b) that the said other person committed' the offence in question without his 
knowledge, consent. or cOnI;ivance, 
40 that otherperson shall be convicted of the offence and shall be liable to the like punishment 
as if he were the employer and the employer shall be discharged from any liability under this 
. Code in respect of such offence: 
Provided that in seeking to prove, as aforesaid, the employer may be examined on oath, 
and the evidence of the employer or his witness, if any, shall be subject.to cross-examination 
Protection c 
action taken 
in good faith 
Burden of 
proof. 
Con tracting 
out. 
Effect of 
laws, . 
agreements. 
etc. 
inconsistent 
with this 
Code. 
. Delegation of 
powers. 
Exemption of 
employer 
from liability 
in certain 
cases. 
~_=_=._""u,·,·,·:.··' .. - .... _ •.. ,-" ·C·~-.·.· ,.., •... - .. -.- .. -. -. ~' .... ' ...•... _.~ ..• ----~ .. -- 


Protection 
against 
attachment of 
assets of 
employer' 
with 
Government. 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
,to give 
directions. 
Savings. 
Power of 
appropriate 
Guvernment 
to make rules, 
by or on behalf of the person whom the employer charges as the actual offender and by the 
prosecution. . 
, 63. Any amount deposited with the appropriate Government by an employer to secure 
the due performance of a contract with that Government and any other amount due to such 
employer from that Government in respect of such contract shall not be liable to attachment 5 
under any decree or order of any court in respect of any debt or liability incurred by the 
employer other than any debt or liability incurred by the employer towards any' employee. 
employed in connection with the contract aforesaid. ' . 
64. The Central Government may, for carrying into execution of the provisions of this 
Code in the State give directions to the State Government, and the State Goverrunent shall 10 
abide by such directions. 
65. Nothing contained in this Code shall be deemed to affect the provisions of the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 and the Coal Mines. 42 of 2005. 
Provident Fund and Bpnus Schemes Act, 1948, or of any.scheme made thereunder. 46 of 1948. 
66. (If The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of previous 15 
publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions ofthis Code. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality .of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the' following matters, namelyc-c- 
(a) the manner of calculating the wages under sub-section (4) of section 6; 
(b) thecases and circumstances if! which an employee employee for a period of 20 
less than the requisite number of'hours shall not be entitled to receive wages for a full 
normal working day, under section 10; . 
(c) the extent and conditions, which shall apply in relation to certain classes of 
.employees under sub-section (2) of section 13; 
(d) the longer wage period for fixation of minimum rate of wages as referred in 25 
section 14; 
(e) the manner of deducting loans made from any fund constituted for the welfare 
of labour under sub-clause (il) of clause (j) of sub-section (2) of section 18; 
(j) the manner of recovery of excess of amount under sub-section (4) of 
section 18; 30 
(g) the authority to provide approval for imposition of fine under sub-section (I) 
of section 19; . 
(h) the manner of exhibition of the acts and omissions to be specified in the 
notice under sub-section (2) of section 19; 
(I) the procedure for the imposition offines under sub-section (3) of section 19; 35 
U) the form of the register to record all fines and all realisations thereof under 
sub-section (8) of section 19; 
(k) the procedure for making deductions for absence from duty under 
SUb-section (2) of section 20; . 
(l) the procedure for making deductions, for damage or loss under sub-section (2) 40 
.. ". of section 21; . ,,' ._. ., 
(m) the form ofthe register to record alldeductions and all realisations thereof 
under sub-section (3) of section 21; 
(n) conditions for recovery of advance of money given to an employee after the 
, employment began under clause (b) of section 23; . , 45 


(0). conditions for recovery of advances of wages to an employee not already 
earned under clause (c) of section 23; 
(P) deductions for recovery of loans and the rate of interest payable thereon 
under section 24; . 
(q) manner of regulating the procedure by the Central Advisory Board and the 
State Advisory Board, including that of the committees and sub-committees constituted 
by the State Advisory Board, under sub-section (10) of section 42; 
(r) the terms of office of members of the Central Advisory Board, the State 
Advisory Board, including that the committees and sub-committees constitutes by 
the State Advisory Boar.d, under sub-section (J 1) of section 42; 
. (s) the authority and manner of depositing with such authority, various 
undisbursed does under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 44; 
(t) form of single application in respect of a number of employees under sub­ 
section (5) of section 45; 
15 (u) form for making an appeal to the appellate authority under sub-section (1) of 
section 49; 
10 
, 
(v) the manner of maintenance ofa register by the employer under sub-section (/) 
of section 50; 
(w) the form and manner of issuing wage slips under sub-section (3) of 
20 section 50; . 
(x) the other powers to be exercised by the Facilitators under sub-section (5) of 
section 51; . 
(y) the manner ofimposing fine under sub-section (l) of section 55; 
.(z) the manner of composition of offence by a Gazetted Officer specified under 
25 sub-section (4) of section 55; . 
(za) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed under the 
provisions of this Code.' 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
30 period. of thirty days which' may be comprised in one session, or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions as aforesaid, both Houses agree in makingany modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or amendment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
(4) Every rule made by' the State Government under this section shall, as soon as 
possible after it is made, be laid before the State Legislature. 
67. (1) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Code, the Central' 
Government may, by order 'published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, as may appear. to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under .this section after the expiry of 
a period of two years from the commencement of this Code . • J 
45 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made. 
'before each House of Parliament. 
35 
~ ,. I 
, 
", ; 40 
-/os-- 
Power 10 
~el11ove 
difllculties, 
j 


------ -------~.-- .. --------- 
Repeal and 
savings. 
=== __ = __ =_.=. _·<·-.7_·:=-="_-~~"" 
68. (1) The Payment of Wages Act, 1936, the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Payment 
of Bonus Act, 1965 and the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 are hereby repealed. . 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal. anything done or any action taken under the 
enactments so repealed including any notification, nomination, appointment, order or direction 
. made thereunder or any amount of wages provided in any provision of such enactments for 
any purpose shall be deemed to have been done or taken or provided for such purpose under 
the corresponding provisions of this Code and shall be in force to the extent they are not 
contrary to the provisions of this Code till they are repealed under the corresponding 
provisions of this Code or by the notification to that effect by the Central Government. 
I . 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of section 6 
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply to the repeal of sU,ch enactments. 
... :. . 
4 of 1936. 
II of 1948. 
21 or 1965. 
25 of 1976. 
5 
10 
10 of 1897 . 


THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sections 26 (7) and 36] 
In this Schedule, the total amount of bonus equal to eight and one-third per cent. of the 
annual wages payable to all the employees is assumed to be Rs. 1,04,167. Accordingly, the 
. maximum bonus to which all the employees are entitled to be paid (twenty per cent. ofthe 
annual wages of all the employees) would be Rs. 2,50~OOO. 
< . 
Year . Amount equal to Arriount payable as . Set on or set Total set on or 
sixty per cent: or bonus off of the year set off carried 
- sixty-seven per carried forward forward 
cent. as the case 
may be, of 
available surplus , 
allocable as bonus 
Rs. ; Rs. Rs. Rs. Of 
(year) 
1. 1.04,167 1,04,167# Nil Nil 
2. 6,35,000 '2,50,000* Set on Set on m 
- 2,50,000* 2,50,000* 
3. ·2,20,000 2,50,000* (inclusive of Nil Set on 2,20,000 (2) 
30,000 from year-2) 
4. 3,75,000 2,50,000* Set on Set on 2,20,000 (2) 
1,25,000 1,25,000 (4) 
5. 1.,40,000 2,50,000* (inclusive of Nil Set on 1, I 0,000 (2) 
1,10,000 from year-2) 1,25,000 (4) 
6. 3,10,000 2,50,000· Set on 60,000 'Set on Nil ## (2) 
1,25,000 (4) 
60,000 (6) 
7. 1,00,000 2,50,000* (inclusive of Nil Set on 35,000 (6) 
1 ,i5~ 009 from year-4 
and 25,000 from year-6) , 
8. Ni! 1,04,167# (inclusive of Set on 6.9,167 Set off 
(due to loss) 35,000 from year-6) 69,167 (8) 
9. 10,000 1,04,167# Set off·94,167 Set off 
69,167 (8) 
94,167. (9) 
10. 2,15,000 1,04, J 67# (after setting Nil Set off 52,501 (9) 
off 69,167 from year-S 
and 41.666 from year-9) 
*Maximum amount admissible. 
# Minimum amount admissible. 
##Thc Balance of Rs. 1,10,000 set on from year-2 lapses . 
. ~--~- ' .. -.~--~== 


.-; 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 32(a)] 
COMPUTATION OF GROSS PROFITS " 
Accountirig year ending- 
!tern Particulars Amount of Amount of Remarks 
No. sub-items main items 
(in Rupees) (in Rupees) 
I 2 3 4 5 
*1. Net profit as shown in the Profit and Loss account 
after making usual and necessary provisions. 
2. Add back provision for: •• (a) Bonus to employees 
*. (b) Depreciation 
Cc) Development rebate reserve 
(d) Any other reserves 
Total of Item No.2 ...... : .... Rs ............ , .. 
3. Add back also: 
(a) Bonus paid to employees in respect of previous ** accounting years. 
(b) The amount debited in respect of gratuity paid , 
or payable to employees in exc.ess of the 
aggregate ot:""" 
(il the amount. if any. paid to, or provided 
for payment to; an approved gratuity I 
fund; and 
(iil the amount actually paid to employees 
on their retirement or on termination of 
their employment for any reason. 
(c) Donations 'in excess of the amount admissible - 
for income-tax. 
Cd) Cap ital expenditure (other than capital .-. expenditure 'on scientific research which is 
allowed as a deduction under any law for the 
time being in force relating to direct taxes) 
and capital losses (other than losses on sale of 
capital assets on which depreciation has been 
allowed for income-tax). 
(e ) .Any amount certified by the Reserve Bank of 
India in terms of sub-section ~Jl of section 
34A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 , 
or 1949). 
({) Losses of. or expenditure relating to, any Rs ............... 
business situated outside India .. 
Total or Item No.3 ........... 
4. Add also income, profits or gains (if any) credited 
directly to published or disclosed reserves. other 
than- .. ..'-; . .. .. 
(il capital receipts and capital profits (including 
profits on the sale of capital assets on' which 
depreciation has not been allowed for income- 
tax); 
' .. , 


• 
2 4 5 
6. Deduct: 
(a) Capital receipts and capital profits (other Ulan 
profits on the sale of assets on which 
depreciation has been allowed for income-tax). 
(b) Profits of, and receipts relating to, any business 
situated outside India. . 
(c) Income' of foreign banking companies from 
• investments outside India. . . 
(d) Expenditure or losses (if any) debited directly 
to published or disclosed reserves, other than- 
(i) capital expenditure and capital losses 
(other than losses on sale of capital assets 
on. which depreciation has not been 
allowed for income-tax); 
(ii) losses of any business situated outside 
India. . . 
(e) In the case of foreign banking companies 
proportionate administrative (overhead) 
expenses of Head-Office allocable to Indian 
business. 
(/l" Refund of any excess. direct tax paid for 
previous accounting years and excess 
provision, if any, of previous accounting years, 
relating to bonus, cfepreciation or development 
rebate, if written back. 
(g) Cash subsidy, it' any, given by the government 
or by any body corporate established by any 
law for the time being in force or by any other 
agency through budgetary grants, whether 
given directly or through any agency for 
specified purposes and the proceeds of which 
are reserved for such purposes . Rs. . . 
5. 
7. 
(ii) profits of, and receipts relating to, any business 
situated outside India; 
(iii) income of foreign banking companies from Rs . 
investment outside India. 
Net total of item No.4 . 
Total of item Nos.J, 2, 3 and 4 ... Rs . 
*** 
*** 
*** 
*** 
*** 
'" 
**** 
Total of Item No.6 . 
Gross profits for purposes of bonus (item No.5 Rs . 
minus item No.6) . 
Explanation=At: sub-item (b) of item 3, "approved gratuity fund" has the same meaning assigned to it in 
clause (5) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act. . 
*Where the profit subject to taxation is shown in the Profit and Loss account and the provision made for 
taxes on income is shown, the a~tual provision' for taxes on income shall be deducted from the profit. 
**If, 'and to the extent, charged to- profit and loss account. 
***If, and to the extent, credited to profit and loss account. 
**·'In the proportion of Indian Gross Protit (item No: 7) to Total World Gross Profit (as per consolidated 
profit and loss account adjusted as in item No.2 above only). 
- _.:;:- .. .'_-:.- 
j 
-~---- .. ~.-.~~~~~~~--.--~.-.~~~~.I 


• 
.. 
TIlE TIlIRD SCHEDULE 
[See section 32(b)] 
.cOMPUTATION OF GROSS PROFITS 
Accounting year ending- 
item Particulars Amount of Amount of' Remarks 
No. sub-items main items 
(in Rupees) (in' Rupees) 
1 2 3 4 5 
I. Net profit as per profit and loss account, 
2. Add back provision for: 
(0) Bonus to employees. 
(b) Depreciation. 
(c) Direct taxes, including the provision (if any) * for previous accounting years. 
(d) Development rebate I Investment allowance I * Development allowance reserve. 
(e) Any other reserves .......... 
Total of item No.2 ........... Rs ............... 
3. Add back alse: 
(a) Bonus paid to employees in respect of previous * 
accounting years. 
(aa) The amount debited in respect of gratuity paid 
or payable to employees in excess of the 
aggregate of- 
(i) the amount, if any. paid to, or provided 
For payment to, an approved gratuity 
fund; and 
(ii) the amount actually 'paid to employees 
on their retirement or on termination of 
their employment for any reason. 
(b) Donations in excess of the amount admissible 
for income-tax. 
(c) Any annuity due, or commuted value of any * annuity paid, under the provisions of section 
2800 of the Income-tax Act during the 
accounting year. 
'(d) Cap ital expenditure (other than capital * expenditure on scientific research which is 
allowed as a deduction under any law for the 
time being in force relating to direct taxes) 
and capital losses (other than losses on sale of 
capital assets on which depreciation bas been 
allowed for income-tax or agricultural income- 
tax). ... 
(e) Losses of, or expenditure relating to, any Rs ..........•.... 
business situated outside India. 
Total of item No.3 ........... 
.. 
.•... 
.--_._-----_ . r-. (/O.~.-.--.-.-- 


.! 
4. 
2 
Rs ,. 
Rs ; .. 
Rs . 
4 
• j 
5. 
Add also income, profits or gains (if any) credited 
directly to reserves, ather than- 
(i) capital receipts and capital profits '(including 
profits on . the sale of capital assets on which 
depreciation has not been allowed for income­ 
tax or agricultural income-tax): 
(U) protits of, and receipts relating to. any business 
situated outside India; 
(iii) income of foreign concerns from investment 
outside India. 
Net total of item No.4 . 
Total of item Nos.l. 2,3 and 4 ... 
5 
** 
** 
*** 
6. Deduct: 
(0) Capital receipts and capital profits (other than 
profits on the sale of assets on 'which 
depreciation has been allowed for income-tax 
or agricultural income-tax). 
(b) Profits of, and receipts relating to, any business 
situated outside India. 
(c) Income of foreign concerns from investments 
outside India. 
(d) Expenditure or losses (if any) debited directly 
to reserves; other than- 
(I) capita! expenditure and capital losses 
(other than losses on sale of capital assets 
on which depreciation has not been 
allowed for income-tax or agricultural 
income-tax); 
(ii) losses of any business situated outside 
India. 
(e) In the case of fpreign concerns proportionate 
administrative (overhead) expenses of Head­ 
Office allocable to Indian business. 
(j) Refund of any excess direct tax paid for 
previous accounting years and excess 
provision, if any, of previous accounting years, 
relating to bonus, depreciation, taxation or 
development rebate or development 
allowance, if written back. 
(g) Cash subsidy, if any, given by the Government 
or by any body corporate established by any 
law for the time being in force or by any other 
agency through budgetary grants, whether 
given directly· or through any agency for 
specified purposes and the proceeds of which 
are reserved for such purposes. . 
Total of item No.6 . 
7. Gross profits for purposes of bonus (item No.5 Rs . 
minus item No.6) 
*. 
** 
Explanation=-us sub-item (aa) of item 3, "approved gratuity fund" has the same meaning assigned to it in 
. clause (5) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act. 
+[f, and to the extent, charged to profit. and less-account. 
**!f, and to the extent, credited to pro tit and loss account. 
***in the proportion of. Indian Gross Profit (item No. 7) to Total World Gross Profit (as per consolidated 
profit and loss account, adjusted as in item No.2 above only) . 
. r-/II.-:- 
----_._---------_ .... _--_ ... _--- 


·_---- - _._---------------, .•.. __ .. _----._-- 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 34(d)] 
lte m Category of employer further sums to be deducted 
No. 
I 2 3 
I. Company, other than a (/) The dividends payable on its preference share capital for the 
banking company accounting year calculated at the actual rate at which such dividends 
are payable; 
(i/) eight and a half per cent. of its paid-up equity share capital as at 
the commencement of the accounting year; 
(iii) six per cent. of its reserves shown in its balance-sheet as at the 
commencement of the accounting year. including any profits 
carried forward from the' previous accounting year: 
I 
Provided thai where the employer is a foreign company within 
the meaning of clause (42) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 
2013 (18 of 2013), the total amount to be deducted under this 
item shall be eight and a half per cent. on the aggregate of the 
value of the net fixed assets and ·the current assets of the company 
in India after deducting the amountof its current liabilities jother 
than any amount shown as payable by the company to its Head 
Office whether towards.any advance made ~y the Head Office or 
otherwise or any interest paid by the company to its Head Office) 
in India. 
2. Banking Company U) The dividends payable on its preference 'share capital for the 
accounting year calculated at the rate at which such dividends arc 
payable; 
(Ii) seven and a half per cent of its pard-up equity share capital as at 
the commencement of the accounting year; 
(iii) five per cent of .its reserves shown in its bal ance sheet as at the 
commencement of the accounting year, including any profits 
carried forward from the previous accounting year; 
(Iv) any sum which, in respect of the accounting year, is transferred 
by it- 
(a) to a reserve fund under SUb-section (I) of section 17 of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949); or 
(b) to any reserves in India in pursuance of any direction or 
advice given by the Reserve Bank of India, 
whichever is higher: 
Provided that where the banking company is .a foreign company 
within the meaning of clause (42) of section 2 of the 'Companies 
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), the amount to be deducted under this 
item shall be the aggregate of- 
(0 the dividends payable to its preference shareholders for the 
accounting year at the rate at which such dividends are payable 
on such -amount as bears the same proportion to its total 
preference share capital as its total working funds in India bear to 
its total world working funds; 
(il) seven and a half per cent. of such amount as be ars the same 
proportion to its total paid-up equity share 'capital as its total 
working funds i~ India. bear to its total world working funds; 
(iii) five per cent of such amount .as bears the same proportion to its 
. total' disclosed reserves "\l its total working funds in India bear to 
its total world working funds; 
(iv) any sum which, in respect of the accounting year, is deposited by 
it with the Reserve Bank of India under sub-clause (;1) of clause 
(6) of sub-sectiori (2) of section II of the Banking Regulation 
r Il2-"'- 
·1 
.1 
~~~~~.-~= .. ------ .. - - - ... _---- ._----_._--- 


3. 
Co-operative society 
3 2 
Corporation 
4. 
Act, 1949 (10 of i949). not exceeding the amount required 
under the aforesaid provision to be so deposited. 
(i) Eight and a half per cent of its paid-up capital as at the 
commencement of the accounting year; 
(ii) six per cent. of its reserves. if any, shown in its balance-sheet us 
at 'the commencement of the accounting year. including any 
. profits carried forward from the previous accounting year. 
(il Eight and a half per cent. of the 'capital invested by such society 
in its establishment as evidenced from its books of account at the 
commencement of the 'accounting year; 
(Ii) such sums as has been carried forward in. respect of the accounting 
year to a reserve fund under m~y law relating to co-operative 
societies for the time being in force. 
5. Any other employer Eight and a half per cent. of the capital invested by him in his 
not falling under any of establishment as evidenced Irorn his books of account at the 
the aforesaid categories commencement of the accounting year: 
Provided that where such employer is a person to whom Chapter XXlI-A 
of the Income-tax Act applies, the annuity deposit payable by him 
under the provisions of that Chapter during the accounting year shall­ 
also be deducted: 
Provided further that where such employer is a firm, an amount equal 
to twenty-five per cent. of the gross prolits derived by it from the 
establishment in respect of the ac.counting year after deducting 
depreciation in accordance with the provisions of clause (a) of'section 
34 by way of remuneration to all the; partners taking part in the conduct 
of business of the establishment shall also be deducted, but where the 
partnership agreement, whether oral or written. provides for the payment 
or remuneration to any such partner, 8n9- 
(i) the total remuneration payable to all such partners is less.than 
the said twenty-live per cent. the amount payable, subject to a 
maximum of forty-eight thousand rupees to each such partner: 
or 
(ii) the total remuneration payable to all such partners is higher than 
the said twenty-five per cent. such percentage, or a sum calculated 
at the rate of forty-eight thousand rupees to each such partner, 
whichever is less, shall be deducted under this proviso: 
Provided also that where such employer is an i.ndividual or a Hindu 
undivided family- 
(i) an amount equal to twenty-five per cent. of the gross profits 
derived by such employer from the establishment in respect of 
the accounting year after deducting depreciation in accordance 
with the provisions of clause (a) of section 34: or 
(ii) forty-eight thousand rupees, 
whichever is less. by way of remuneration to such employer, shall also 
be deducted. 
6. Any employer falling In addition to the sums deductible under any of the aforesaid [terns such 
under item No. I or item sums as are required to be appropriated by licensee in .respect of the 
No.3 or item No.4 or accounting year to a reserve, if any, shall also be deducted. 
item No. 5 and being a 
licensee defined in clause 
(39) of section 2 of the " 
Electricity Act, 2003 
(36 of 2003). 
Exp/ancrlial1.- The expression "reserves" occurFi.ng· in column. (3) against ltern Nos. I (iii). 2\1/1) 
and 3(iil shall not include any arriount set apart for the purpose of- 
(i) payment of any direct tax which. according to the 'balance-sheet, would be payable; 
(ii) ':'leeting any depreciation admissible in accordance with the provisions of clause (al of 
section' 34: 
i 


(iii) payment of dividends which have been declared, 
but shall include- 
(p) any amount, over and above the amount referred to in clause (i) of this Explanation, set apart 
as specific reserve thr_}he. purpose of payment of any direct .tax; and . 
(b) any amount set apart fOT meeting any depreciation in excess of the amount admissible in 
accordance with the provisions of clause (a) of section 34. 
. -' 
.~ 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS' 
" 
The.Second National Commission on Labour, which submitted its report in June. 2002 
had recommended that the existing set of labour laws should be broadly amalgamated into' 
the following groups, namely:- 
(a) industrial relations; 
(b) wages; 
(c) social security; 
Cd) safety; and 
(e) welfare and working conditions. 
2. In pursuance of the recommendations of the said Commission and the deliberations' 
made in the tripartite meeting comprising of the Government, employers' and industry 
representatives, it has been decided to bring the proposed legislation, namely, the Code on 
Wages, 2017. The proposed legislation intends to amalgamate, simplify and rationalise the 
relevant provisions of the following four central labour enactments relating to wages, 
namely:- 
(a) the Payment of Wages Act, 1936; 
. . (0) the ~inimum Wages Act, 1948; 
(c) the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965; and 
(d) the Equal Remuneration Act, 197~. 
3. The amalgamation of the said laws will facilitate the implementation and also remove 
the multiplicity of definitions and authorities without compromising on the basic'conceprs 
of welfare and benefits .to workers. The proposed legislation would bring the use of 
technology in its enforcement, An these measures would bring transparency and 
accountability which would lead to more effective enforcement. Widening the scope of 
minimum wages to all workers would be a big step for equity. The facilitation for ease of 
compliance oflabour laws will proinote in setting up of more enterprises thus catalysing the 
creation of employment opportunities. 
4. The salient features of the Code on Wages, 2017, inter alia, are as follows:- 
(a) it provides for all essential elements relating to wages, equal remuneration, 
. its payment and bonus; 
(b) the provisions relating to wages shall be applicable to all employments 
covering both organised as well as un-organised sectors; 
(c) the power to' fix minimum wages continues to be vested in the Central 
Government as well the State Government in their respective spheres; 
(d) it enables the appropriate Govemmentto determine the factors by which the 
minimum wages shall be fixed for different category of employees. The factors shall be 
determined taking into account the skills required, the arduousness of the work assigned, 
geographical location of the workplace and other aspects which"'the appropriate 
Government considers necess1iry; . _', 
. (e) the provisions relating to timely payment ofwages and authorised deductions 
from wages,which are presently applicable only in respect of employees drawing wages 
upto eighteen thousand rupees per month, shall be made applicable to all employees 
. irrespective of wage ceiling. The appropriate Government may extend the coverage of 
~.'-.....__ such provisions to the Government establishments also; 
--- 
.' __ ... _------ 


(f) it provides that the wages to employees mayalso be paid by cheque or 
through digital or electronic mode or by crediting it in the bank account of the employee. 
However, the appropriate Government may specify the industrial or other 
establishment, where the wages are to be paid only by cheque or through digital or 
electronic mode or by crediting the wages in the bank account of the employee; 
(g) it provides for national minimum wage for different geographical areas so as 
to ensure that no State Government fixes the minimum wage below the national minimum 
wage, notified for that area by the Central Government; 
(h) in order to remove the arbitrariness and malpractices in inspection, it empowers 
the appropriate Government-to appoint Facilitators in the place of Inspectors, who 
would supply information and advice the employers and workers concerning the 
most effective means of complying with the provisions of the proposed legislation. It 
has also been provided that the inspections are carried out through a transparent! 
web based inspection scheme. 
(i) it empowers the appropriate Government to' determine the ceiling of wage 
limit for the purpose of eligibility of bonus and calculation of bonus, by notification, 
which will make it easier to revise ceilings; 
(j) in the place of number of authorities at multiple levels, it empowers the 
appropriate Government to appoint one or more authorities to hear and decide the 
claims under the provisions of the proposed legislation; 
(k) it enables the appropriate Government to appoint an appellate authority to 
hear appeals so as to ensure speedy, cheaper and efficient redressal of grievances 
and settlement of claims; 
(I) it provides for. graded penalty for different types of contraventions of the 
provisions of the proposed legislation; 
(m) it provides that the Facilitator shall give an opportunity to the employer 
before initiation of prose clition proceedings in cases of contravention, so as to-comply 
with the provisions of the proposed legislation, However, in case of repetition of the 
contravention within a period of five years such opportunity shall not be provided; 
(n) it provides for compounding of those offences which are not punishable 
with imprisonment; 
(0) it provides that where a claim has been filed for non-payment of remuneration 
or bonus or less payment of wages or bonus or on account of making deduction not 
authorised by the proposed legislation, the burden shall be on the employer to prove 
that the said dues have been paid to the employee; 
(P) it enables the appropriate Government to -constitute Advisory Boards at 
Central and State leve Is to advice the Central Government and the State Governments, 
respectively, on matters relating to wages, women employment, etc.: 
(q) the period of limitation for filing of claims by a worker has been enhanced to 
3 years as against existing time period verying from 6 months to 2 years, to provide 8. 
worker more time to settle his claims. . 
5. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill. 
6. Th~ Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. i· , 
! " 
NEW DELHI;. 
The 3rd August, 20 17. 
BANDARU DATTATREYA. 
,. 


IT' '·WL·.·'·- " •.• ~~ ••.•.•. ,.~ rrr-:.: ·"C:·.::"·~_·~~::.C"-::C"=="~. ~·~~"=·'=:=""-="~""X.:.0:=~ 
~-' ® 
Notes on Clauses 
'Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to define certain expressions used in the Code, which, inter 
alia, include "accounting year", "Advisory Board", "appropriate Government", "employee", 
"employer". "Tribunal", "wages" and "worker". 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the prohibition of discrimination on ground of 
gender, It.also provides that no employer shall, for the 'purpose of prohibiting the 
discrimination among employees on ground of sex in matters relating to wages, shall reduce 
the rates of wages of any employee. 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for determination of disputes with regard to same or 
similar nature of work. The dispute shall be decided by such authority as may be notified by 
the appropriate Government. 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to provide for payment of minimum rates of wages. The 
wages less than the minimum rates of wages notified by the appropriate Government for a 
State or any part thereof shall not be paid to any employee. ' • 
I 
Clause 6 ofthe Bill seeks to provide for fixation of minimum wages, Such fixation of 
minimum wages by the appropriate Government shall be subject to the powers of the 
Central Government to fix national minimum wages, The minimum wages shall be for time 
work, piece work, and for the period by hours or day or month. . 
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to provide components of the minimum wages. Any minimum 
rate of wages fixed or revised by the appropriate Government may, infer alia, consist of 
basic rate, cost of living allowance and value of the concessions, if any. 
Clause 8 of the Bill seeksto provide the procedure for fixing and revising minimum 
wages, 
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to provide the power of Centra I Government to fix nalionai 
minimum wages. Different national minimum wages may be fixed for different Stat~s or 
different geographical areas. The Central Government before fixing the national minimum 
wage may obtain the advice ofthe Central Advisory Board. 
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to provide, inter alia, for wages of employee who works 
for less than normalworking day. An employee, where his failure to work is caused by his 
un-willingness to work and not by omission of the employerto provide him with work, shall 
not be entitled to receive wages for a full normal working day. 
Clause II of the Bill seeks to provide wages for two or more classes of work. It 
provides that an employee who does two or more classes of work to each of which different 
rate of minimum wages is applicable, the employer shall pay to such employee in respect of 
the time respectively occupied in such class of work, wages at not less than the minimum 
rate in force in respect of each such class. 
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to provide minimum time rate wages for piece work, 
Clause 13 ofthe Bill seeks to provide for fixing hours of work for normal working day, 
day of rest and payment for work on day of rest by the appropriate Government. 
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to provide for payment of wages for overtime work which 
is in excess of the number of hours constituting a normal working and the overtime rate shall 
not be less than twicethe normal rate of wages. ' 
Clause 15 of the' Bill seeks to' provide for payment of all wages in current coin or 
,c~e~cy notes or by cheque or by crediting the wages through digital or electronic mode in 
the bank account of the employee except as may be notified by the appropriate Government 
in specified industrial or other establishment in which wages to be paid only by cheque or 
by crediting in bank account. 


Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to provide for fixation of wage period for employees which 
shall not be more than a month either as daily or weekly or fortnightly or monthly and the 
said wage periods may be fixed different for different establishments. 
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to provide time limit for payment of wages on monthly 
basis, daily basis, weekly basis and fortnightly basis. In case of removal, dismissal. 
retrenchment, resignation from service or in the case of un-employment due to closure of 
the establishment, the wages payable to an employee shall be paid within two weeks. The 
appropriate Government may provide time limit apart from the time limit provided in this 
clause. 
. \ 
Clouse 18 of the Bill provides for deductions which may be made from the wages of an 
employee. No deduction from thewages shall be made except those as are authorised under 
the proposed legislation. The upper ceiling of deduction is fifty per cent. of the wage in any 
. wage period. . 
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to provide the imposition offines bythe employer on any 
ell1pl~yee. The fine shall be imposed.on any employee only in accordance with the approval 
and procedure as speci~ed in the clause. 
Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to provide for the deductions for absence from duty. The. 
amount of such deductions shall in no case bear to the wages payable to the employee in 
respect of the wage period for which the deductions is made in a larger proportion than the 
. period for which he was absent bears to the total period within such wage-period during 
which by the terms of his employment he was required to work. An employee shall be 
deemed to be absent from the place where he is required to work if, although presence in 
'such place, he refuses in pursuance of a stay-in strike for any other cause which is not 
reasonable in the circumstances, to carry out his work. . 
Clause 2 I of the Bill seeks to provide deductions for damage or loss. The deductions 
for damage or loss shall not exceed the amount ofthe damage or loss caused to the employer 
by negl igence or default of the employee. The deductions shall not be met until the employee 
has been provided an opportunity of showing cause against the deductions or 'otherwise 
than in accordance with the procedure prescribed by rules. . 
Clause 22 of the Bill provides for deductions for services rendered. Such deductions. 
shall not be made from the wages of employee unless the house accommodation, amenity or 
service has been accepted by him as a term of employment or as otherwise. Such. deductions 
shall also not exceed an amount equivalent to the value of such amenity or service supplied. 
The appropriate Government may impose conditions for such purpose. 
Clause 23 of the 8 ill seeks to provide for deductions for recovery of advances. 
Certain conditions have been provided in the said clause subject to which the deductions 
shall be made for the recovery of advance of money given to an employee before and after 
the employment began. 
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to provide deductions for recovery of loans and the 
manner for such recovery shall be provided in the rules. 
Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to provide that the provisions relating to payment of 
wages provided in Chapter III in the proposed Code shall not be applicable to Government. 
establishments uni~~s the appropriate Government applies such provisions to any 
Goverriment establishment as may be specified by it b)i notification. 
Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to make provisions for eligibility for bonus. The threshold 
limit for payment of the bonus is the wages not exceeding such amount per mensern as 
determined by notification, by the-appropriate Government. .Where the wages ofthe employee 
exceeds such amount per mensem, as determined by notification, by the appropriate 
Government, the bonus payable to such employee shall be calculated as if the wages of 
such employee were such amount, so determined by the appropriate Government or the 


.1". 
minimum wages fixed by the appropriate Government, whicheve~ is higher. The other details 
regarding the payment of bonus have also been provided in this clause. 
Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to provide for proportionate reduction in bonus in case 
where an employee has not worked for all the working days in an accounting year, etc. 
Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to provide for computation ofthe number of working days 
for the purposes where an employee has not worked for all the working days in an accounting 
year. Provisions have been made in this clause to cover certain days as working days as 
specified therein .. 
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to specify certain disqualifications, on the basis of dismissal 
from service for fraud, etc., for receiving bonus. 
Clause 30 ofthe Bill seeks to provide for the purposes of computation of bonus that 
the establishment shall include its departments, undertakings and branches, where for any 
accounting year a separate balance sheet and profit and loss account are prepared and 
maintained in respect of any such department or undertaking or branch, then, such department 
or undertaking or branch shall be treated as a separate establishment for the purpose of 
computation of bonus for the accounting year, such department, undertaking or branch 
was, immediately before the commencement ofthat accounting year treated as part of the 
establishment for the purpose of corriputation of bonus. 
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to provide for payment of bonus out of allocable surplus. 
It also empowers the appropriate Government to notify the authority having jurisdiction for 
calling upon the employer to produce the balance sheet before it. . 
Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to provide for the computation of gross profrt in the case 
ofa banking company in accordance with the Second Schedule anti in any other case in the 
manner specified in the Third Schedule. 
Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to provide for the computation of available surplus in 
respect of any accounting year. 
Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to specify the sums which shall be deducted from the gross' 
profits as prior charges which includes the sums specified in the Fourth Schedule, 
Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to provide for the calculation of direct tax payable by the 
employer. Such direct tax for any accounting year shall be calculated at-the rate applicable 
.to the income ofthe employer for that year subject to the provisions specified in that clause. 
Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to provide for set on and set off of allocable surplus. It 
provides as to how the allocable surplus exceeding the amount of maximum bonus payable 
to the employee shall subject to the limit of20 per cent. of the total salary or wages of the 
employee in that accounting year be carried forward for being set on in the succeeding 
accounting years up to and inclusive offourth accounting year for the purpose of payment 
of bonus in the manner illustrated in the First Schedule to the proposed Code. It further 
provides that where for any accounting year, there is no available surplus or the allocable 
surplus in respect of that year, falls short of the amount of the minimum bonus payable to 
the employees and there is no amount or sufficient amount carried forward and set on which 
could be utilised for the purpose of the minimum bonus, then, such minimum amount orthe 
deficiency shall be carried forward for being set off in the succeeding accounting years ~nd 
so on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year in the manner illustrated in the First 
Schedule. It also provides that the applicability of the First Schedule in other cases and for 
the taking in to account at first instance the amount of set on or set off carried forward from 
the earliest accounting year. 
Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to provide for the adjustment of customary or interim" 
bonus payable under the proposed legislation. 
Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction of the amount ofloss caused by 
the employee on account of misconduct from the amount of bonus payable by the employer 


to the employee in respect of the concerned accounting year only and the employee shall 
be entitled to receive the balance, if any. 
Clause 39 .ofthe Bill seeks to provide the time limit for payment of bonus. The bonus 
payable to an employee shall be paid by crediting in the bank account of the employee by 
his employer. It also specifies regarding the extension of period for payment of bon LIS in 
certain cases and the upper limit of the extension which shall not exceed two years and in 
case of a dispute for payment at higher rate, the employer shall pay eight and one third per 
cent. of the wages earned by the employee as per the provisions of the proposed legislation 
within the time limit. . 
Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to provide for the application of the provisions of Chapter 
IV regarding the payment of bonus to establishments in public sector in certain cases as 
specified in the said clause. . 
Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to provide for the non-applicability of the provisions of 
Chapter IV regarding the payment of bonus in certain cases which, inter alia, include 
employees employed in Life Insurance Corporation of India, Indian Red Cross Society or 
any other institution ofa 'like nature including its branches, Reserve Bank ofindia, etc, It 
also provides that the provisions regarding the payment of bonus shall apply to such 
establishments in which twentyor.more persons employed or were employed on any day 
during an accounting year .. 
Clause 42 of the Bill.seeks to provide for Central Advisory Board to be constituted by 
the Central Government which shall be tripartite in nature having representatives from 
employees, employers and independent persons as well as there will be one third 
representatiori of'women in this Board and the said Board 511a[( advice the-Central Government 
01) issues referred to it. It also provides that every State Government shall also constitute a 
State Advisory Board for advising the State Government, inter alia.ot: fixation or revision 
of minimum wages, increasing employment opportunities. etc. The State Advisory Board 
may constitute one or more committees or sub-committees to look into issues pertaining to 
matters specified in the clause. One third members of the State Advisory Board shall be 
women. 
Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to provide the responsibility for payment of various dues 
of the employees. In case of failure to pay the dues, the concerned company or firm or 
association or any other person who is the proprietor of the establishment shall be 
responsible for the paymerit of dues. . 
Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to provide for payment of various undisbursed dues of the 
employee in case of his death. Such dues will be paid to the persons nominated by the 
employee and where there is no such nomination or for any reasons such amount cannot be 
paid to the person nominated, then, the dues shall be deposited with the Authority specitied 
in the rules, who shall deal with the amount in the manner provided in such rules. Where the' 
. dues are paid by the employer in accordance with this clause by the employer, then, he shall 
. be discharged of his liability to pay the dues. . 
Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to provide for appointment of Authority by the appropriate 
Government to decide the claim of employees which arises under the provisions of the 
proposed legislation. The said authority shall have powers to award payment of claim 
amount along with compensation which may extend up to ten times of the claim amount. 
Further, ifan employer fails to pay the amount of claim and compensation awarded by the 
Authority, then, the said Authority shall issue a recovery certificate to the Collector or 
District' Magistrate of the district wh~re the establishment is located who shall recover the 
same as arrears of land revenue and remit the same to the authority for payment to the 
concerned employee. Any application before the authority for claim referred above may be 
filed by the employee concerned or Facilitator or by any Trade Union of which the employee 
is a member. . . 


:;;_ -.=--- 
, :~ 
: ~. 
~ 
~ R 
r ~ :,.] 
a .~ 
1 fj. 
i :::\ ~ '::j 
Hi '1 ':'} 
~ ~~ 
. ·.cta~lse 46 of the Bill provides that if a dis-putt: arises between an employer and his 
employees with respect to the bonus payable under the proposed legislation or the application 
of this Code, in respect of bon LIS, to an establishment in public sector, then, such dispute shall 
be deemed to be an industrial dispute under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. 
Clause 47 ofthe Bill seeks to provide that ifi~ any dispute referred to the authority, 
appellate authority, a Tribunal or an arbitrator, any corporation or it company (other than a 
banking company) submits to the said authority, appellate authority, a Tribunal or an arbitrator, 
the documents like balance sheet and profit and loss account duly audited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India or by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of companies 
under Companies Act, 2013, then, such documents shall be presumed to be accurate and it 
shall not be necessary for the corporation or company to prove the accuracy of such' 
statements. However, when an application is made to the said authority, appellate authority, 
Tribunal or arbitrator by any employee or a Trade Union being a party to the dispute 
requiring any clarification to the said statements, then, on order of the authority, appellate 
authority, Tribunal or arbitrator the concerned corporation or company, as the case may be, 
shall clarify the same. . 
Clause 48 of the Bill seeks to provide for audit of accounts of employers not being 
corporations or companies. Where an employer fails to get the accounts audited then there 
is provision for getting the accounts audited by such auditor or auditors as the authority 
thinks fit and the expenses of and incidentalto such audit including the remuneration of 
auditor or auditors shall be determined by 'the authority and be paid by the employer. In 
case of failure of payment, this clause contains the provision for the recovery of such 
.expenses .. 
Clause 49 of the Bill makes provisions for appeal against the order of the authority. . . 
-~ .. : 
Clause 50 ofthe B ill seeks to provide for records, returns and notices. The said clause 
makes provisions for the maintenance of register by the employer containing the details 
with regard to persons employed, muster roll, wages, and such other details in the manner 
to be specified in the rules by the-appropriate Government. It also provides for the display 
of a notice on the notice board at a prominent place at the establishment containing the 
abstract of the proposed legislation, category-wise wage rates of employees, wage period, 
day or date and time of payment of wages and the name and address of the Facilitator 
having jurisdiction. There is provision for issue of wage slip. The employer who employs 
not more than five persons for agriculture or domestic purpose is exempted from the provision 
. but when demanded, he shall produce before the Facilitator the reasonable proof of the 
payment of wages to the persons employed, . 
. Clause 51 of'the Bill seeks to provide for appointment of Facilitators and their powers. 
The Facilitator may supply information and advise to employer and workers concerning the 
most effective means of complying with the provisions of the proposed legislation. The 
said clause also empowers the Facilitators to inspect the establishment based on inspection 
scheme. 
Clause 52 ofthe Bill seeks to provide for cognizance of offences under the provisions 
of the proposed legislation. The cognizance of the offences shall be taken by the court on 
a complaint. No court inferior to the Metropolitan Magistrate or Magistrate of the First 
Class shall try the offences. 
Clause 53 ofthe Bill seeks to provide penalties for offences. Enhanced penalties shall 
be imposed on the offender who is again found guilty of similar offence already committed 
by him, for which he has been convicted. The Facilitator shall, before initiation of prosecution 
proceedings, give an opportunity to the employer to comply with the provisions of the 
proposed legislation. The prosecution proceedings shall not be initiated against the employer . 
who complies with the said provisions within the period specified. Such opportunity shall 
not be accorded to an employer, if the violation of the same nature of the provisions of 
r-(2-lr 
,\lI't·'I. . . ". _ .~ ~. _~___ ,.~" _ .. _'--=, ••••••• . =------~~--~~~~~.~-~~~~~-~~~~-~~;-i~~~~·~tt1~titt~~i~~·~~~~~~~<~:~-~~:~--~~~~~~;~§-~~~-~-.~ l~~~~~~~@;;;!~ 
-'-"'--" . ------- --------.--_ .. _-_ .... ---.~-. 


------------ .. --~--------------- ~------,...--~-=--="=--==_=~~~ __ ~_~_ ~_ ~._~_'='"=~~, . .,.,_.~-...,.,.==== =a-_""""....,"""',.,,~~="""'_"""" __ ""_~,.,_,..,_=_== __ .-, -. 
," 
'.~ 
I' 
.1< 
proposed legislation is repeated within a period oftive years from the date on which the first 
violation was committed. 
Clause 54 of the Bill seeks to provide for offences by companies, If the offence is 
committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in 
charge of and was responsible to the company for the conduct of business of the company, 
as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. Protection has been provided where offence 
has been committed without the knowledge or where all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of the offence has been exercised. The director, manager, secretary or other 
.offlcer of the company with the consent or connivance of whom the offence has been 
committed shall al~o be deemed to be guilty, 
Clause 55 of the Bill seeks to provide for composition.of offences. Only the offences 
for which there is no punishment with imprisonment shall be compounded. The compounding 
money shall be a sum of fifty per cent. of maximum fine. There is no compounding for a 
'similar offence compounded earlier or for commission of which conviction was made 
committed for the second time or thereafter within a period offive years. 
Clause 56 of the Bill seeks to provide bar of suits: The matters in which the court shall 
not entertain the suit, inter alia, relate to the recovery of minimum wages, any deduction 
from wages, discrimination in yYages and payment of b~nus. 
Clause 57 of the Bill seeks to provide for protection of action taken in good faith by 
the appropriate Government or any officer of that Government under the provisions of the 
proposed legislation. ' 
Clause,58 of the Bill seeks to provide regarding burden of proof. The burden of 
proving that the dues on account ofremuneration or bonus, etc" have been paid shall be on' 
the employer. 
Clause 59 of the Bill seeks to provide that any contract or agreement whereby an 
employee relinquishes the right to any amount or the right to bonus due to him under the, 
provisions of the proposed legislation shall be null and void in so far as it purports to 
remove or reduce theliability of any person to pay such amount. 
Clause 60 of the Bill seeks to provide for overriding effect in respect of laws, 
agreements, etc., which are inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed iegislation. 
Such laws, agreements, etc., shall not affect the provisions of the proposed legislation. 
Clause 61 of the Bill seeks to provide for delegation of powers. The appropriate 
Government may, by notification, delegate the powers exercisable by it in the proposed 
Code with or without any condition to the officer or authority subord inate to that Government, 
etc., as may be specified in the notification, 
Clause 62 of the Bill seeks to provide for exemption of employer from liability in 
certain cases, The employer who is charged with an offence under the provisions of the 
proposed legislation shall be entitled upon complaint duly made by him, to have any other 
person whom he charges as the actual offender, brought before of the court at the time 
appointed for hearing the charge and if used he proves that he has, after the commission of 
the offence has been proved, due diligence to enforce the execution of the provisions of the 
proposed legislation and the other person committed the offence without his knowledge, 
consent or connivance, then, that other person shall be convicted of the offence and the 
employer shall be discharged. 
Clause 63 ofthe Bill seeks to provide for protection against attachment of assets of 
employer with Government.'.. ' 
Clause 64 of the Bill seeks to provide for the powers of the Central Government to 
give directions to the State Government for carrying into execution of the provisions of the 
proposed legi~lation and such.directions sh~1l be binding. 
I. 
"j' 


Clause 65 of the Bill seeks to provide that the provisions of the proposed legislation 
shall not effect the provisions of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act, 2005 and the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948, or of any 
scheme made thereunder, . 
Clause 66 of the Bill seeks to confer power upon the appropriate Government to make 
rules. Such powers are' of general nature for carrying out the provisions of the proposed 
legislation and also the matters on which such rules may be made .have been specified. 
There is provision for laying the rules, as the case may be, before the Parliament or the State 
. Legislature. . 
. Clause 67 of the Bill seeks to confer power upon the Central Government to make 
provisions published in the Official Gazette and not inconsistent with the provisions of the 
proposed legislation for removing the difficulty. Such powers shall not be exercised after 
expiry of a period of two years from the commencement ~f the proposed legislation and 
every or~er published under this clause shall be laid before the each House of Parliament. 
'., Clause 68 of the Bill seeks to provide for repeal of certain enactments, namely, the 
Payment of Wages Act, 1936: the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Payment of Bonus Act, 
1965'and the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976, and saving of things done and action taken 
'there under. 
.~ .- ... --;;---- .. _-_ .. ,_", ... -- _- ..... _-_ ... 
-_- ~ 
_. -~--.'-' - .... ~---- _._-_._----_ .. ' ..... ---." ..... ,-- ." 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that no employer shall pay to any employee wages less 
than the minimum rate of wages notified by the appropriate Government for the area, 
establishment or work as may be specified in the notification. 
2. Sub-clause (5) of clause 6'ofthe Bill provides that the appropriate Government may, 
by notification, fix factors by which the minimum wages so fixed be multiplied for different 
types of work. 
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to fIX the 
national minimum wage, by notification. Proviso to the said clause further provides that 
different national minimum wages may be fixed for different States or different geographical 
areas. 
~'" 
4. Clause 25 ofthe Bill exempts the application of the provisions of this Chapter II1 of 
the Bill to Government establishments unless the appropriate Government, by notification, 
applies such provisions to any Government esta~lishment specified in the said notification, , , 
5, Sub-clause (1) of clause 45 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to 
appoint by notification, one or more authorities, not below the rank of a Gazetted officer, to 
hear and determine the claims which arises under the provisions of this Bill. 
6. Sub-clause (1) of clause 49 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to 
appoint appellate authority having jurisdiction to hear appeals preferred by any person 
aggrieved by an order passed by the authority under sub-clause (2) of clause 45. 
7. Sub-clause (1) of clause 51 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to 
appoint Facilitators who shall exercise the powers conferred on them under sub-clause (4) 
of the said clause throughout the State or such geographical limits assigned to them, in 
relation to establishments situated in such State or geographical limits, as the case may be. 
8. Sub-clause (2) of clause 51 oftbe Bill empowers the appropriate Government to lay 
down an inspection scheme by notification, which shall 'also provide for generation of a 
web-based inspection schedule. 
9. Sub-clause (1) of clause 55 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to 
specify a Gazetted Officer for the purpose of compounding offences in accordance with the 
provisions of the said clause. 
10. Sub-clause (1) of clause 66 empowers the appropriate Government, subject to the 
. condition of previous publication, to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the 
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such rules 
may be made. These matters, inter alia, include: (a) the manner of calculating the wages 
where such rates are fixed by the hour or .by the day or by the month under sub-section (4) 
of section 6; (b) the cases and circumstances in which an employee employed for a period 
of less than the requisite number of hours constituting a normal working day shall not be 
entitled to receive wages for a full normal working day under section 10; (9) the extent to 
which, and subject to such conditions, the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 13 shall 
apply in relation to certain classes of employees, under sub-section (2) of that section; 
(d) the manner of fixation of minimum r~te of wages by the hour, by the, day or by such a 
longer wage period under section 14; (e) manner of deducting loans made from 3!1Y fund 
constituted for the welfare of labour under sub-clause (il) of clause (j) of sub-section (2) of 
, section 1 &; (j) the manner of recovery of excess of amount under sub-section ('4) of section 
18; (g) the authority to provide approval for imposition of fine under sub-section (I) of 
section 19; (h) the manner of exhibition of the acts and omissions to be specified in the 
notice under sub-section (2) of section 19; (l)~the procedure for the imposition of fines 
, 
- :41' 


under sub-section (3) of section 19; U) the form of the register to record all fines and all 
realisations thereof under sub-section (8) of section 19,; (k) the procedure for making 
deductions for absence from duty under sub-section (2) of section 20; (1) the procedure for' 
making deductions for damage or loss under sub-section (2) of section 21; (m) the form of 
the register to record all deductions' and all realisations thereof under sub-section (3) of 
section 21; (n) conditions forrecovery of advance of money given to an employee after the 
employment began under clause (b) of section 23; (0) conditions for recovery of advances' 
of wages to an employeenot already earned under clause(c) of section 23; (P) deductions 
for recovery ofloans and the rate, of interest payable thereon under section 24; (q) manner 
of regulating the procedure by the Central Advisory Board referred to in sub-section (1) of 
section 42 and the State Advisory Board referred to in sub-section (4) of the said section 
including that of the committees and sub-committees constituted by the State Advisory 
Board under sub-section (J 0) of section 42; (r) the term of members of the Central Advisory 
Board, the State Advisory Board including the committees and sub-committees constituted 
by the State Advisory Board under sub-section (l1) of section 42; (s) the authority and 
manner of depositing with such authority various undisbursed dues in case of death of 
employed person under clause (b) of sub-section '(1) of section 44;, (t) form of a single 
application in respect of'a number of employees under 'sub-section (5) of section 45; (II) the 
form for making an appeal to the appellate authority by the aggrieved person under sub­ 
section (1) of section 49; (v) the manner of maintenance of a register by the employer to 
maintain the details of persons employed, muster roll, wages and such other details under 
sub-section (1) of section 5,); (w) the manner of issuing wage slips under sub-section (3) of 
section 50; (x) the other powers to be exercised by the Facilitators under sub-section (5) of 
section 51; (y) the manner of composition of offence by a Gazetted Officer specified under 
sub-section (4) of section 55; and (z) any other matter which is required to be or may be , 
specified under the 'proposed legislation. 
11. Sub-clause (3) of clause 66 provides that every rule made by the Central Government 
is required to.be laid before each Houseof Parliament. 
12. Sub-clause'(4) ofc1ause 66 provides that every rule made under the said clause is 
required to be laid before State Legislature. 
, , 
13. The matter in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure .or 
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The 
delegation oflegislative power is, therefore, of a normal character, 
(_ 


LOKSABHA 
... 
A 
BilL 
to consolidate and amend the laws relating to wages and bonus and 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
;. ':'-_.:. 
(Shrl Bandaru Dattatreya, Minister of State for Labour and Employment) 
GMGIPMRNP-1808LS(S3)-07-08-2017. 


Summary of suggestions received from various organisations I individuals and 
action taken thereon Labour Code on Wages. 
I 
I I 
I· l 
Clause No. Suggestion received from Remark 
Organisation I Individual 
2(k) 'employee' H.U.L 
Definition of employee is wider and less Considering merger 
restrictive, earlier it was covering only of four Acts, it is 
those employees who are covered in necessary to have 
schedule employment and now it is for such definition. 
all employees. Hence earlier definition 
shouldrernaln as it is. 
A.Rai LKO - Out worker should also be Have been included 
included in this definition. I - 
. C.I.I. - Definition should exclude Considered . • supervisory, managerial, administrative 
tech cadres. Wage limit should be 
subject to current ceiling. 
2(1) 'employer' H.U.L 
In the definition the word indirectly Accepted 
should not be there . . 
2(t) 'list of defaulters' H.U.L 
Provision for maintaining list of Not feasible 
defaulters added in new law, the said 
period should be less than 5 years. 
2(za) 'wages' H.U.L 
1. Suggested for consolidated wages Since the definition 
, concept which include basic + DA. is as per existing 
2. Allowance and wages should be' provision, herice 
·enhance.d based on C.P.I not feasible ., •• '1 - 
C.I.1. 
I Separate definition of employee for each Has been done so 
chapter be mentioned. in respect of 
Chapter IV 
Indian Tea Association 
1. wages should include .Bonus. 2. Wage --do-- 
should include in kind benefits 3. 
Separate wage definition for Bonus 
Chapter. .' " . .,..-~ ":; -.;. .. -; _- - " -.. . -"" . ,- . _. 
5. Payment of minimum A.Rai LKO .. 
wages. Existing position should remain intact Not feasible 
because Central Govt. estt. I worker will 
( 


get less wages now since State Govt. 
will' only be fixing w.ages. 
C.I.I. 
Its heading should be 'Payment of Accepted' 
Minimum rats of Wages' 
7. Components of H.U.L 
Minimum Wages Minimum wage shall also include Since not in the 
productivity linked "variable pay" interest of workers 
Small Scale Industry Association:- In 
• minimum wages. Not feasible 
Components, the following should be 
considered:- 
(i) Productivity of employee 
(ii) Paying capacity of small emp, 
(iii) Geographical location & Mkt. 
forces 
COSIA 
(i) Area wise, Cat. Wise minimum Suitable provision 
wage should be fixed . already made. 
: (ii) VDA should be based on 
·C.P.I. 
(iii) 
14. Wages for the Chamber of Small Industry 
overtime work Association Provision is made 
O.T rate should be 1.5 times instead' as per present 
twice the rate of wages. position. 
15. Minimum Wages Women and Child Devp. Ministry 
Advisory Board Women member should also be there in Provision for 
minimum wages Advisory Board women member 
has been made. 
Chamber of Small Industry Not feasible 
Association (COSIA) 
MSME Asson. Rep. should also be a 
member of this Board. 
C.I.I. 
Provision may b.e made for equal no. of Complied 
persons of employer & employees . 
. . - . ... 
16. Mode of payment of COSIA 
wages Provision may be made fer payment of Accepted. 
Wages in cash upto Rs. 5000/- 
18. Time limit for payment H.U.L Earlier (Sec. S of 
of wages Time limit in case of removed, dismissed PW Act) it was 
and retrenched employee is 2 working before the expiry_ of 


I 
days which should be 7 days. 
COSIA 
Provision for monthly payment should be 
10th day instead of ihday. 
C.I.I. 
Provision may be made for payment of 
monthly wages should be 7 working 
days-instead of 7th day. 
2no day, which has 
now been made 2 
working days, 
which 'is correct 
since the payment 
will be made 
through bank 
usuallv. 
Not feasible 
19. Deductions which H.U.L 
may be made from wages, (i) Provision for Deduction on Nc of 'go 
slow' should also be made. 
(ii) Provision for home loan recovery 
should be made. 
fC.I.I. 
(i) Provision for deduction in the event of 
suspension should also be included. 
(ii) Deduction for payment of co­ 
operative society should also been 
included. 
(iii) In place of total deduction amounting 
to 50% of wages,it should be ('5%of total 
wages. 
Not feasible 
Accepted this 
suggestion included 
in CI.19(3)(d) 
20. Fines C.I.I 
(i) In clause 20(1) the words "with the 
previous approval of app. Govt. should 
be removed" 
(ii) In clause 20(4) replace 3% with 10%. 
27. Eligibility for bonus H.U.L 
Instead of minimum 30 days it should be 
increased to 18.0 days 
Small Scale Industry Association: 
Provisions of P. B. Act (Chapter IV 
now)are too complicated, Bonus should 
be paid"@ 8,33% of wages simply. 
Hence, whole chapter should be 
amended. 
Presently also it is 
30 days, hence . 
provision is correct. 
,------~------------ __ ~_- __ ,~~. ~ :-:--_--:-_~~ __ r.~, _-_"' ·J7 •• ~.-- .•• r •. -:..·.""------=""-~ 


I ~ 
~ ~ 
COSIA 
Chapter of Bonus should not apply to Not feasible 
workers of MSMEO i.e. instead of 20 
workers it should apply to 40 workers 
only. 
C.I.I 
The term 'Wages' should include only -db~- . Basic + DA. . 
28. Disqualification for H.U.L 
bonus Moral turpitude should also be a Not feasible since 
disqualification for bonus. presently it is not 
there. 
COSIA 
The Chapter of Bonus should not apply Not feasible since 
to estt.employing 40 workers. presently it is not 
there. 
29. Establishments to C.LI 
include departments, New branches, Oeptt. should not be Not feasible since 
undertakings and treated as part of main estt. 5 years presently it is not 
branches infancy should be allowed for these there. 
Oeptt. 
40. Non- applicability of C.I.I :The chapter of bonus should not 
the Chapter apply to sick companies declared under 
.. Sick Industrial Companies Act. 
42. Responsibility for H.U'.L 
payment of various dues Provision should also be made saying Not feasible 
that if contractor fails to make payment 
of bonus, then PE should make and he 
can recove~r from-the contractor. 
c.u 42(3)(4) relating to contractor should be 
.. deleted as these can be taken care of in 
CL Act. 
44. Claims under the H.U.L ( 
Code and procedure Provision for 'Grievance Redressal Not feasible 
thereof Officer' or 'Ombudsman' should be made 
in respect of claims. 
47. Records, Returns and Category wise wage rates of employees 
Notices are required to be displayed which is - very wide: It should be specified. 
48. Appointment of H.U.L 
Facilitators and their Suggested for generation of web based This has already 


powers inspection schedule 
i~C--O~~S-IA--------------------------~S--el~f-ce-rt-i-fic-a-t-io-n--~ 
Facilitator should 110t visit MSME and web based ' 
inspection has 
been accepted, 
, A.Rai 
48(2) Web based info. Should have 
alternate mechanism for urgent 
exigencies & may not be successful as 
by the time work completes - may not 
come his number for inspection. 
Small Scale Industry Association 
Only self-certification should be there. 
No Facilitator should visit small scale 
estt. for inspection purpose. 
CJ.I 
There should not be provision - 
forFacilitator and only self certification 
should suffice . . , 
been implemented 
& provision for this 
is also made in 48 
(2), 
Self certification 
and' web based 
inspection has 
been accepted, 
Self .certificatlon 
and web based 
inspection has 
been accepted. 
Self certification' 
and web based 
inspection has 
been accepted. 
49. Coqnizance of 
offences 
A.Rai 
Powers of prosecution should not be 
given to the T.U.s, it may be a abuse of 
law. 
C.I.I 
'The Govt. should not give power of 
prosecution to non-governmental 
agencies. 
.. 
50. Penalties for offences H.U.L 
Suggested that in first time offence 
penalty should be lncreasedfrorn Rs. 
50,000 to tlac and for subsequent 
offence imprisonment upto 3 months 
Small Scale Industry Association 
Fine should be Rs.20,OOO instead of 
Rs.50,OOO 
RS.50,OOO fine is 
reasonable 
--do-- 
C.I.I 
There shouloonly be self - regulation 
'" /3J ~ 
.. 
Not feasible 


-------------:--------~----------------~.---~.~-~- 
54. Burden of proof H.U.L 
In the bill burden of proof is put on The provision is 
employer which should be deleted. made for ensuring 
payment of 
minimum waqes to 
\ workers who do not 
have access to 
- information. 
Abbreviations used :- 
H.U.L - Hindustan Unilever Ltd. 
C.1.1 Confederation of:lndian Industries '< 
C.O.S.I.A. - Chamber of Small Industry Association 
Provn. - Provision 
Assocn- Association 
sec. Section 


· ... _~ .. __ ."~_- __ ~""""~" . .-., .- . __ .... ~.~._~=._=.,===_=,_====<=z;= 
Annexure 1 iT 
'Record of discussions in the Tripartite Consultation Meeting on The Labour Code on 
Wages held on 10th March, 2015 at Hall No.3, Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi under the 
, chairmanship of Hon'ble MOS(lC} for Labour & Employment . 
A .tripartite consultation meeting to discuss the draft of the Labour Code on Wages 
Bill 2015 was held on 1 O~.03.2015 at Hall No.3, Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi under the 
chairmanship of Hon'ble Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Labour & Employment. 
The. meeting was attended by the representatives of Central Trade Unions, Employers' 
Associations, State Governments and Senior Officers from the Central Ministries (part of the 
Inter. Ministerial Group) and Ministry of Labour & Employment. List af participants is at 
Annexure. 
I 
2. Initiating the discussions, Shri Dheeraj Kumar, Joint Secretary welcomed all 
Participants to this tripartite meeting and highlighted the issues for discussion. In his 
opening remarks, Shri Shankar Aggarwal, Secretary (Labour & Employment) emphasized 
that amalgamation .of various labour laws pertalninq to wages into one c0:1e.was the ne~d of 
the industry and employers and it aimed at providing a legal framework conducive to growth 
of industry as well as protecting the interest of the employees. He further expressed that the 
ultimate. objective of this exercise as well as similar other exercises to be made in future in 
c~nsolidation and 'amalgamation of large number of labour Jaws into a smaller number, was 
to provide an atmosphere which would create sufficient jobs along with protecting the rights 
of workers. ' 
3, Thereafter, the Hon'ble Minister Shri Bandaru Dattatreya addressed the gathering 
and said that the way for amalgamation and consolidation of labour enactments was paved 
by the report of the 2nd NCL. He further shared that the proposed Code will be amalqamatinq 
the provisions of the 4 Acts namely the Minimum Wages Act 1948, the Payment of Wages 
'Act 1936, the Payment of B~nus Act 1965.; and the Equal Remuneration Act 1976 and while 
amalgamating, important provisions of all the related enactments would be consolidated: 
without in any way diluting'the key features cif the various enactments. He said that the 
Labour Code on Wages Bill has already undergone: a process of sollcltinq the views and 
~uggestio.ns of the lnter-Mlnlsterial Group (IMG) "and all the key suggestions received from" 
IMG have been i~co'rporated' in the BilL Thereafter, the Hon'bl,e Minister Shri Bandaru 
Dattatreya invited the Participants from the stake holders Groups to offer their valuable 
suggestions for improving and strengthening tJ:e draft Labour Code on Wages Bill. 
~, ,~~_ , ___"..-, .. __ ._ -- f J =~ --=' ==-=-=_~' __ "-::: __ - __ '= __ = __ '='_=-:':_"''''''-_' ~ '_-' ._, ... -_-.r',_~~, ._...----...--_' _....- .. _' _' T"_~\ 


,®.'. 
4, Thereafter, representatives of the Central Trade Unions, Employers' Associations 
. and State Governments deliberated on the draft labour Code on Wages Bill 2015, one by . . 
one, The observations put forth by the participants are summarised as under (grouped in 
stakeholders wise); 
A. Observations of Central Trade Unions 
(1), 8MS: The Representative of the Bharatiya Mazdoor ~angh (8MS) mentioned that 
the 'Wage" is a complex subject. The Labour Code on Wages need to address all , " 
key issues, aspects and concerns and 'therefore decisions on such complex and 
important issue cannot be taken in one me-eting. He mentioned about provisions - , , 
regarding bonus, equal remuneration etc. and asked whether all the provisions of 
these 4 legislations have been included ln the, Wage Code. BMS cannot right now 
, give its views as to whether bonus should form part of the labour code on wages. He 
requested that the issue should be deferred for some time so that all Central Trade 
Unions can sit together and submit a consolidated view on the labour code on 
wages. 
(2). INTUC: The Representative of Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC) 
welcomed the ,initiative of the Government of India and said that the Wage should 
include all employees, There should be a natfonallevel minimum wage, which should 
be the guiding principle for the States and the minimum wages fixed by the State 
Governments cannot be below that. There wasa need to give'due consideration to 
the concept of need based minimum wage ?S suggested by }Sth ILC. The issue of 
non-lmplernentatlon of minimum wage required immediate redressal by putting in 
place effective implementation machinery. The procedure for recovery of minimum 
wages requires simplification and the conceptof appropriate govem_ment also require, 
to be defined rnore clearly, There is a' need of having uniform deflnltions fo: various, , , ' 
sections/parts of the Code, The recommendations of Fair Wages Committee are' 
required to be looked into fo~ the purpose offlnallslnq the Code. BI:>nuS need not-be 
, clubbed with this Code. 
(3). AITUC: The Representative of the All India. Trade Union Congress (AITUC) 
also demanded that more time should be given to examine this wage code, He said 
that the consolidation of various labour laws. and piecemeal amendments in various ' 
.-/1,'y " L, -~~ ..,;",.,........_,~~--=.,._, __ ....,.,..;"._ 


~ 
I i1· 
It4 
. 
, 
~ 
labour laws cannot go together. Definitional aspects need to be properly addressed, 
Trade unions need some more time to go through the Code in order to clearly knew 
whether the proposed code contains the essential feature and essence of all the Acts 
to be amalgamated. Implementation .aspects also ~eed to be duly addressed, They 
could not express the opinion whether or not the. Payment ~f Bonus Act, 1965 should 
be arnalqamateo in the proposed Code. He mentioned that a National Minimum 
Wage has to be fixed. Definltion of appropriate government required to be clearly' . . 
looked into and the Code should have criteria for fixation of minimum wage. The 
concept of need based minimum wage required to be given due consideration. 
(4), HMS: The Representative of the Hind Mazdoor Sabha (HMS) said that this 
attempt" ?f 'the Government is against the Directive Principles .of the Constitution. 
With regards to the Report of lhe 2nd National Commission of Labour, .he mentioned 
that the report was neither accepted by the ~overnment nor.by the Trade Unions and 
Employers Associations, except for the portions regarding recommendations for the 
unorganised workers. He said that there are a large number of international I" • 
conventions and recommendations and the proposed Code was against some of . . 
these norms. The minimum wage act is part of the ILO Convention ratified by the 
Government of India and therefore' repeaiing of the Minimum Wages Act will be 
violation of the ILO Convention. He demanded that the ILC meeting should-be called 
to discuss this 'matter and then only the Goverriment should go ahead. He also 
wanted time for detailed study of the wage code. 
(5) CITU: The Representative of Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) also 
agreed with the other Trade Unions regarding more time for comprehensive 
examination of the draft Wag~ Code. He me~tioned that as there was dissenting 
note from the Representative of the Trade Unions in the 2nd NCL Report, the 
Government should not take plea of that Report. He said that the Trade Unions are 
dernandlnqlrnplementatlon of ·th·e labour laws since long time but the G.overnment is 
gradually closing all enforcement departments. The focal point of labou~ code on, 
wages should be who is a worker and what ·his wage is. He wanted to know the 
objective of the Government and the intention behind the Codification of the labour 
laws. There should be a common and comprehensive understandinq before 
proceeding ih the matter. He-also demanded for the time to go into deta}i of the 
Wage Code. 
- . , 


~--~,=~-~~,----~------- ---'=--=~~--- .: r : 
.. _\'. 
~. ~ 
(6). AIUTUC: The Representative, of All India United .Trade Union Centre (AI UTUC) 
also agreed with other Tra?e Unions and 'mentioned ,that it _is not posslble to study 
this draft labour code in such a short time. He wanted more time to go through it. He 
said that the Simplification and codlficatlon should not result in -diluton and no scope 
should be left for loop holes, 
(7). TUCC: The Representative .of Trade Union Coordination Centre (TUCC) said 
that in earlier several meetings, the, Employers' 'Associations have been demanding 
the simplification of labour laws, whereas the !rade Unions' are asking for 
implementation of the labour laws: However, a balance has to be maintained 
between both. 'He mentioned that this is a good lnltiative of 'the Govemment but they 
could not get time to go. through it. Regarding delegation of power to States for, 
deciding the minimum wage, he mentioned that it should not be left to the States and 
the Centre should not abdicate its responsibility under the Code. There must be a 
statutory National Minimum Wage and States can provide over and above that He 
rnentloned that in the 15th ILC the linkage 'of cost of IMng and the Minimum w~ge 
has been ,discussed. 'Regarding bonus provisions, slrnpllticaton must be th,ere and 
there should not be any ambiguity. The c~iling for the purpose' of eligibility for bonus 
and calculation requires to be enhanced. Regarding penalty provisions in the draft 
Wage Code he said that the laws are being violated as ,the fine is very less, He 
demanded that the provision of imprisonment must be there as a penalty as minimum 
deterrent. He also demanded more time to examine the draft labour code. 
.' 
(~), SEWA: The Representative of Self Employed WO\l1en, Association (SEWA) 
mentioned that the key features of all the four labour enactments needto be retained. 
The Code is still complicated and the concept of minimum wage requires moore 
clarity. The issue of piece-rate wage workers has not been properly addressed, She , . 
. demanded for more time so that a detailed response can be given by them: 
(9). AICCTU: The Representative of All, India Central Council- of Trade Union 
(AICCTU) also asked for more time for ex~ressil'\g their view on the, Draft Wage. 
Code. He mentioned that for the first time effort has been made to implement the 
I 
, . 
recornmendatlons of 2nd NCL. Amendments are going on in all labour laws and 
wanted to know the intention of the Govemment. In the name of invitinq foreign . , , 
capital, compromise should Flat be made with the basic rights of the workers. There 
should be a national minimum wage and the same should be effectively 
implemented. 
~ .•. - 
- -.-:. .:; 


(10). LPF: The. Representative of Labour Progressive Federation (LPF) 
appreciated that this is a very good attempt by the Government. He also mentioned' 
that the time given was very short and they will be giving th~ir views in a consolidated 
manner, Regarding fixation and determination of minimum wage, the Central 
Govemment sh~uld not abdicate its responsibility and should not totally depend on . . 
the State Governments. In Section 6 of the Bill, the category of highly skilled has 
been left out. For the purpose. of calculation of cost of living, the ingredients should 
be clearly spelt out. hi the context of section 8(3) it was suggested. to continue with 
the time period of two years and five years; There shoulc not be any ceiling for the. 
purpose of eligibility and calculation of bonus. The Cdde 'should have a special I . 
provision of productivity linked bonus, which has been _lg·nored. 
(11). NFITU (DHN): The Representative of National Front of Indian Trade Unions 
(Dhanbad) [f\)FITU (DHN)] welcomed the initiative of the Government. He also 
demanded more time for' giving their suggestions on the Wage Code. Regarding 
penalty provislons, he suggested that it should be more than Rs. 10.00 Lakhs to act 
. as' deterrent: He suggested for a drafting Committee including representatives of 
trade unions and employers 'orgimisatiGns for the purpose of codification 'of various 
labour laws. He said that the definitions under the Code should -be clear and 
co~erage should be clearly defined. He demanded that suggestions should be invited 
from all including public and other stakeholders to have wider consultation on this 
important matter. 
B. Observations of Employers' Associations 
(1). SCOPE: The Representative' of . Standing Committee of Public 
Enterprises (SCOPE) supported the initiative of the government. However he 
mentioned that detailed comments will be sent after studying the Code. There is still 
scope for simplification of the Code. Formula for payment of more than the minimum . 
bonus needs to be simplified. In this context it was suggested to keep in mirid 'Profit 
before Tax' (PBT) :and also performanc~ related pay. It .was further suggested that for . .. ..? 
this purpose the formula as being used by Department of Enterprises m~y also be 
taken into account. Definitions need to be made uniform and penalty provision needs 
to be revisited. 


'::". -"...- .. ..: .• ,':;:--,-.-,~-j ,' ... :.-:::;Z=:::::::::::. .• _ ,; '.'_'_ •.• 
-.---~;-:,"'::"":;:--::"!' .. :> .. ' -.:::..:- ! ... --:_'.- -.' - .. _'. ;;-_'-:" -:.::~:::-::=";;;;.:-_,":.- -, ~.~.:.~,: -. :-..:,. --.-.:. ": ..•.. _ " .. ~:--:.-.:-=.: 
. , . (2) . EFI: The Representative of Employers Federation of India·(EFI) also supported the 
initiative of the government. He said that there is still scose for 'simplification of the 
language of the Code, especially in the context of bonus. 'Wh'ile taking abo~t living' 
wage we should also have to keep in mind the capacity of the in?ustry to pay. 
(3). AlAI: The Representatiye of All .India Association of Industries (AlAI) mentioned , " . 
that sick units and small and micro-enterprises should also be given due 
consideration while finalising the Wage Code. 
(4). FASII: The Representative of Federation of Association of Small lndustrles of . . 
India (FASII) demanded for more time for sending their views . • I 
(5). ICSI: The Representative of Indian Council of Srnall lndustries (ICSI) welcomed the . . 
step of the government. He suggested that micro and small sector needs to be given 
due protection commensurate with its contribution to the economy and employment. 
He said that the ten. times compensation for difference of wages is too high. ·Also the 
lrnprlsonrnentprovlslon is Vf~ry harsh and it should not be there. 
(6).· . LUB: The Representative of the La~hu Udyog Bharti (LUB) complimented the 
government for very well prepared and balanced draft. He suggested that the 
deficiency of trust between employers and trade unions required to be bridged. There 
should be one national level minimum wage. Bonus issue. has been also addressed 
very. nicely in the draft Code. In the context of section 6 dealing with skilled, semi­ 
skilled and unskilled category it was suggested to avoid micro management. In -the 
context of section 8 it .was suggested to delete the words 'not exceeding'. In section 
15 regarding Advisory Board, the proportion of the representatives from workers and 
employers should be two third of total. In the context of section 22 it was suggested 
that it should be 8 days per day of absence. Section 28(1) & (2) required to be . . 
revisited. He also demanded that at least two weeks' time should be given to study 
the Agenda before calling for' such Meeting. 
(7). ASSOCHAM: The Representative of Associated Chambers of Commerce & 
Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) complemented the goverh_l'Dent for promptness. He 
suggested that Govemment shou!d not go to micro-I eve! in categorising skilled, semi­ 
skilled workers and this should be left to the employers to decide. In the context of 
section 8(3) it was suggested that 'at intervals not exceeding five years' was required 
to be substituted by 'after five years'. Regarding mode of payment of wages to be 
. : 
(. 


decided by appropriate Government, he suggested that mix of the three modes viz. 
cash, cheque and bank transfer should not be there and it should be elther of the ., three.' Regarding deductions from wages (section 20 (2) (II», provision regarding 
'legal inquiry' of decree should also be included. In . section 21 (6) instead of "60 . 
days", maximum time limit should be 'one year'. In the context of section 27, the 
provision of chapter dealing with bonus should be applicable to any establishment in . 
which 20 or more persons were employed at least for 7 days during an. accounting 
year. In the context of section 49(2) i! was suggested that the certification should be 
from within the existing system. The set off and set on table was required to be 
simplified. Expenditure on training and development as well as on corporate social 
responslbslty (CSR) should also. be taken into account for the purpose of balance . . . 
sheet. He demanded for more time to come outwith detailed suggestions. 
! 
(8). . ell: The Representative of Confedera_tion oflndlan Industries .(CII) congratulated 
the Ministry for drafting of the Code. He said that there should. be clear cut 
suggestion 'which part of the Code needs to be simplified and why. The Code. is sllent 
about limitation and malicious and false cases and complaints . .There is confuslon in 
'inspector' and 'facilitator'. He said that detailed comments will be sent by them in 
writing. 
(9). PHDCCI: The Representative from PHD Chambers of Commerce & Industry in 
India (PHDCC;;I) appreciated the Governments' effort. He suggested that the bonus 
provision needs to be simplified especially ..jR.-tAe- eentext of-payment of rnlnirnurn 
bonus. In the context. of section 4 it was suggested that the authority for . . 
determination of disputes with regard to.same and similar nature of work should be 
judi~ial authority. In the context of section ~9 it was suggested that the time limit for 
establishments engaging more than 1000 employees ~hould be up to tenth day of the . 
expiry of wage period. Section 48 'should spell out the limit for maintenance 'of 
records and registers. Complaints should be filed only after permission from higher 
officials. The Code should have penalty provision for f~lse claims . 
. , 
(10) COSIA: The Representative of. Chamber of Small Industry Associations 
(COSIA) congratulated the government for its initiative. He-requested for time to go 
through with th~ draft and con:e out with concrete suggestions. Wages should be 
fixed mainly taking into account level of skill and hardship involved and there should 
not be any other conslderation like employment. There should be an exemption from 
payment of contribution in respect of bonus for employees in the age group of 18 to 
I". _ 
l . -_. --. ... ,., .. ~__.........~ ..... - .... ~~--------- .. ~~--~~ ... ~~ .. '$'~-'---'" .. 
_- .. - ... -=-=---_ .. _ .. __ -_ .... _--=_---_ .. -.==_ ... .--- 


21. The Minimum Wages Advisory Boards both at the central and the state level 
should have the representatives from medium and small enterprises also. Also the 
t 'Minimum Wages' shoul~ be defined for MSMEs and big industries separately. 
f- 
C. Observatiofls of State Governments 
(1). Uttar Pradesh: The Representative of State Government of Uttar Pradesh .said . . 
that the detailed comments on the Wage Code wi!! be sent 'later, However, she 
mentioned that the implementation clauses have been diluted' in the draft Wage 
Code. One of the important reasons for ineffective implementations is that in a large' ~. . ' .' : . 
number of cases records of workers (such as wage slip) are not maintained. 
. I· . 
Facilitation is not enough for effective lrnplernentation. Apprentices should not be 
exempted from the definition of workers. Provisions of the Code ,dealing with equal 
remuneration need to be further strengthened. -Governrnent should not 'be exempted 
for any of the purposes under the Code. Penalties need to be made g'raded, and there 
should be, deterrent penalty for not keeping the workers on' rolls .as it is' the, most 
importantreason 'responsible for 'non-implementation of various other aspects of , .' 
labour law. Penalties I fine needs to be indexed so that the amount is increased in 
'time. 
(2): Odlsha: The Representative of State Government of Odisha suggested that 
the Rule making power under the Code should be given to State Governments, 
Powers of inspectors need to be relooked. He mentioned that the major constituents 
for wage determination are still left out. He said that the detailed section wise 
comments will be sent shortly after obtaining qovernment approval. 
(3) Maharashtia: The Representative of State Government of Maharashtra said 
that detailed comments will be submitted later. He mentioned that the Definition of 
employee has been made too broad. Substitution of the term 'lnspector'by 'facilitator' , . .. . 
may dilute implernentatlon. For the purpose of applicability of bonus, number of 
employees may be reduced from 20 to ~o as Is the case In Maharashtra. EXp~rlence 
of contract workers needs to be taken into account in fixation and determination of 
their wage. 
(4), Haryana: The Representative of State Government of Haryana applauded the 
governmen,t's lnltlative. He suggested that the definitions need to be made more: 
c' -1'1(}- 


J..._. 
comprehensive and inclusive so as to ensure the protection of wages of employees 
under all the categories and skill and hardship' should be given due consideration in 
determination and fixation of minimum wage. He said that detailed comments on 
each section will be .. sent later. 
(5). Gujarat: . The Representative of State 'Government of Gujarat also. said that. 
det~i1ed comments will be sent later on. The provision of bonus need to be defined 
clearly as under 'Factories Act, factories can be defined under Section 85, if 
employfng less than even 5 workers. 
5. Thanking the participants, Secretary (L&E) appreciated for the wonderful , . 
deliberations whlch would ultimately help in. proceeding further in the journey towards 
formulation of Codes. Secretary requested all those present to send their comments in' 
writing as well. 
6. Surnrnlnq: up the deliberations, Hon'ble Minister of State. (IC) for Labour & 
Employment thanked all the Participants and said that the apprehensions expressed about 
intention of the G'overnm~nt are not correct. The government's ultimate objective is 
transparency and accountability. The issue of implementation of the labour law is directly 
related to strength of the trade unions. Hon'ble Minister requested'both the employers and 
trade unions to give specific proposals I suggestions for 'finalising the Code. He also 
expressed that State Governments have to playa key role in helping and strengthening the . . 
Central Government. Hon'ble Minister said that we will have one more meeting .on this issue 
where Trade Unions and Employers' Association should come with specific ideas and we will 
. consider that. 
7. The Meeting ended with vote of thanks by Joint Secretary to Hon'ble Minister and all 
Participants for sparing their valuable time for this tripartite consultation meeting. 
_._._-_- ... _-- 
·i 
I 
I 


. . , .... 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. , 
9. 
'10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15 
~ 7~ •• ,.,.,._._ ,~ __ 
, ~ . 
Ust of partlcipants in the Tripartite Consultation Meeting on The Labour Code on 
Wages helej' on 1 ath March, 2015 at 'Hall No.3, Vigyari Bhavari, New Delhi undsrthe 
chairmanship of Hon'ble MOS(IC) for Labour & Employment 
Ministry of Labour & Employme'nt 
Sh. Bandaru Dattatreya, Hon'ble MOS (IC) Labour & Employment 
Shri Shankar Aqqrawal, Secretary (L&E) 
Sh. Deepak Kumar, Additional Secretary (L&E) 
Sh. P. P. Mitra, Princlpal l.abour & Employment Advisor, 
ShFi B. B. Mallick, Joint'Secretary & DGLW 
Sh. Alok Kumar, 'Joint Secretary & DGET 
Sh. Manish Gupta .. Joint Secretary 
Sh. Dheeraj Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri D. Chaudhury, Deputy Director General 
Ms. AnujaBapat, Director 
Sh. D. p. Singh, Deputy CLC (C) 
Shri S.K. Tripathi, Under Secretary 
Dr Onkar Sharma, Regional Labour Commissioner (C) 
Dr Sanjay Upadhyay, Fe.llow WGNLI 
Dr S.D. Singh, Consultant 
. .. in chair 
Central MinistriesfDepartment 
1. 'Ms. Shubhra Singh, .Joirrt Secretary, Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion 
2. Sh. Amit Singla, Deputy Secretary, Department of Commerce 
3. Sh. R K. Sood, Under Secretary, Department' of Rural Development 
State, Governments 
1. Sh. G. Srinivas, Principal Secretary (Labour), Government of Odisha 
2. Sh . .K. Satpathy, Asst. Labour Commissioner, Government of Odisha 
3. Ms. Shalini Prasad, Labour Commissioner, Government of Uttar Pradesh 
4. Sh. H: K. Jawade, Labour Commissioner, Government of Maharashtra 
5. Sh. A. K. Pandey, Department of Labour, Government of Maharashtra 
.6. . Sh. Anupam.Malik, Additional Labour Commissioner, Government of Haryana 
7. Sh. K. O. Shah-Additlonal Commissioner of Labour, Government of Gujarat , 
8. Sh. Kumar Digvijay, Joint Labour Commissioner, Government of Bihar 
Central Trade Unions 
1. Shri B. N. Rai, Bhartiya Mazdoor Sangh (BM$) 
'2. Sh. M. N. Jha, Bhartiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) 
. ,~.--~--~--------------,--------,---------- 
.~--'------- 


~j 
-: 
r :,: 
3. , Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy, Indian National Trad Union Congress (INTUC) 
Sh. K. K. Tiwari, Indian National TradeUnion r<eSs(INTUC) 
Sh. Ashlsh Pandey, Indian National Trade Union Congress (lNTUC) 
Shri DL Sachdev, Secretary,.Alllndia Trade Union Conqress (AITUC) 
Shri Tharnpan Thomas, vice President, Hind Mazdoor Sabha CHty1S) 
Shri A. K. Padmanabhan, Centre of Indian Trade Union (CITU) 
Shri RK Sharma, Secretary, All India United Trade Union Centre (AIUTUC) 
Sh. S. P. Tiwari, Trade Union Coordination Centre (TUCe) 
Ms. Shikha Joshi, Self-Employed Women's Association (SEWA) 
Shri Rajiv Dimri, All India Central Council of Trade Union (AICCTU) 
Shri V. Subburaman, Labour Progressive Federation «LPF). 
Dr. Deepak Jalswal, National President, National Front .of Indian T-rade Union 
(NFITU-Dhanbad). . 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. , 
10. 
11. 
12, 
1,3. 
14. 
I 
Employers' Associations 
I ' 
1. Sh. Rajeev Bhardwaj; Standing Committee of Public Enterprises (SCOPE) 
2. Sh. Bhaqlrathl Dhal, Employers Federation of India (EFI) 
3. Ms. Renu M. Verma, All India Association of Industrles (AlAI) 
4. Ms. Jaspreet Kaur, Federation of Associations of Small Industries '(FASII) 
5. Sh. P. Kumar, Indian Council of Small Industries (ICSI) 
6. Sh. R K. Bhardwaj, Laghu Udyog Bharti CLUB) 
7. Sh. O. P. Mittal, Laqhu Udyog Bharti CLUB) 
8. Sh. S.P. Srivastava, Associated Chambers of Commerce & Industry of lndia 
(ASSOCHA1y1) 
9, Sh. Rajesh Gopinathan, Confederation of Indian Industry (CIl) 
1 ci. Sh. Rajiv Kapoor, Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) 
11. Sh. R. K. Joshi, PHD Chamber of Commerce & Industry (PHDC~I) 
12. Sh. Ravi Wig, PHD Chamber of Commerce & Industry (PHDCCI) 
13: Sh. Purushaottam Agwan, Hen' General Secretary, Chamber of Small Industry 
Associations (COSIA) 
i 
I " 
( _.:-- 


---------- ---~.---.~- 
. " •• _? 
. (2). 
"";",::.-.-_.-.- -~--.--.-~;-::::.=- _- 
. ~ . 
Reco~d of di;cussigns i~ the Second Tripartite Consultatlon Meeting on The Labour Code on 
Wages held on 13 April, 2015 at Tagore Chamber, SCOPE, Complex, New Delhi under the 
chairmanship of Hon'ble MOS(IC} for Labour & Ei1!ployment ' ' .. ' 
. ,The second tripartite consultation rneetinq to discuss the draft of the' Labour Code on Wages 
was held at 0.3.00 PM on 13.04.2015 at Tagore Chamber, SCOPE Complex, New Delhi under the 
chairmanship of Hon'ble Minister of State (Independent Charge) for labour & Employment. The 
meeting was attended by the representatives of Central Trade Unions, Employers' Associations, State 
Governments and Senior Officers from the Central Ministries (part of the Inter M'inisterial Group) and 
Ministry of Labour & Employment. List of participants is at Annexure. ' . 
2. Initiating the discussions, Shri Dheeraj Kumar, Joint Secretary welcomed all Participants to 
this tripartite meeting and highlighted the issues for discussion. In hls opening remarks, Hon'ble 
Minister Shri Bandaru Dattatreya said that the way for amalgamation and consolidation of labour 
enactments was paved by the report of the 2nd NCL. He further shared that the proposed Code will be 
amalgamating ·the provisions' of the 4 Acts namely the MinImum Wages Act 1 ~48, the Payment of 
Wages Act 1936, the Payment of Bonus Act 1S65; and the Equal Remuneration Act 1976 and while 
amalgamating, important provisions of all the related enactments would be consolidated without 
diluting the key features' of' the various enactments: He menti0ned\ that the draft Labour Code on 
Wages was discussed earlier in the Tripartite Meeflnq held on 10.03.2015 and the dratt has been 
improved on the basis of deliberations held in that Meeting. . 
3. Intervening in between representative from All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) placed 
on record their protest for stoppage of the Minimum Pension of Rs. 1000/-·under the Employees' 
Pension Scheme of EPFO. Hon'ble Minister clarified that he has atready taken up the jnatter with the 
Finance Minister and the matter is under consideration. Thereafter, the Hon'ble Minister Shri Bandaru 
Dattatreya invited the Participants from the stake holders Groups to. offer their specific suggestions, 
so as to lrnprovetha draft Labour Code on Wages. . . 
4. Thereafter, representatives of the Central 1 rade Unions, Employers', Associations and State 
Govemments deliberated on the draft Labour Code' on Wages Bill 2015, one by one; The 
observations put forth by the participants are summarised as under (grou~ed in stakeholders wise): 
A. Observations of Central Trade Unions . ' 
(1 ). BMS; The Representative of the Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) mentioned that the 
second National Commission on Labour had suggested for 71abciur codes. Asall labour laws, 
are interconnected, Labour-Code on Wages can not be considered In isolation. He said that 
·Wage" has 3 aspects viz. whether it is in cash or in kind; it shows the dignity of labour; and 
also in which sector it is covered. He opposed the concept of fixing of Minimum Wages by the 
State Governments as employers will go to the-States where the Minimum wage is low. He 
said that Natlonal Minimum Wage should be fixed and States can improve upon on the-basis 
of local factors. He suggested for change in nomenclature of-the Code as "Bhartiya Vetan 
Sanhita" or "Indian Code on Wages'. He suggested that the Bank Accounts wilL be opened for 
payment of wages and the right of making complaints is being given to the Trade Unions also 
in addition to the workers. He did not support the word "facilitator" being used for 'inspector'. 
Regarding fixation of wages tie suggested that the 44th ILC has made certain, 
recommendations and that may also be looked into. 
INTUC: The Representative of Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC) supported the . 
views expressed by' the BMS representative. However he questioned the requirement of 
Labour Code ane! Acts may remain separate and there is no need for merging, Regarding 
composition of Minimum Wages.Advisory Beard, he suggested that instead of all members 
being Government appointee, representatives from Trade Unions may be appointed. He 
opposed the provision of appeal as rnade in Labour Code. He suggested that at State level 
also Minimum Wage Board should be there; . 
AITUC; The Representative of the AI! India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) said that Trade 
Unions can not decide unless they are given complete plcture. He questioned selective 
approach in implementing the recommendations of the National Commissions of Labour. 


', , v :.,,:: ". 
.' 
Government should bring comprehensive Codes on all. A Tripartite Committee should be 
formed which will examine the drafts and come out with its recornmenoauons. He mentioned 
the plea of employers about cornpetlnq with the world and wondered why not wages in India 
should also be of world level. He opposed all powers to be given to States for fixing minimum 
wages. Regarding implementation oflabour law? he said that sufficient Budget allocations 
, and manpower should be there with enforcement agencies. He suggested that enforcement 
and monitoring mechanism for labour laws should also be tripartite, Regarding this.Code on 
Wages, he said that normal working day has not been defined in the Code and it has been left ' 
to be decided by the Government. For Bonus, he suggested that there should not ,be, any 
ceiling: Also calculation formula for it should be simplified and transparent. He mentioned that 
at one' hand Government Is drafting Labour Code on wages and at the same time gomg for' 
the amendment in the Minimum Wages Act.' , , ' 
(4), AIUTUC: The Representative of All India United Trade Union Centre (AIUTUC) 
supported the views expressed by other Trade Unions. He added that though severe penalty 
may not be there for violation of the provisions of the Code but certainty of punlshrnent must 
bethere to act as deterrent. ' 
(5). TUCC: The'Representatlve ofTrade Union Coordination Centre (TUCC), said that the 
Minimur:n Wages Act is connected with other Labour 'laws and a 'comprehensive approach 
should Be adopted. I , , . 
. (6). SEWA: The Representative of Self Employed Women Association (SEWA) supported the 
views expressed by other Trade Union members. She said that informal sector should also be 
taken into consideration In drafting the Code. . . 
(7). AICCTU:' The Representative of All India Central Council .of Trade Union (AICCTU) 
said that since long time they are demanding for strict implementation of the labour laws and 
. the Minimum Wages. These amendments are anti-worker and the' concept of Code should be 
clarified first. He said that they oppose this Code. 
, i 
LPF: . The ... Representative of Labour Progressive Federation (LPF) mentioned that 
under "approprlatd Government", both State and Central Government should be there. Also 
the name "inspector" should be retained for psychological effect. 
(8). 
(9). NFITU (OHN): The Representative of National Front of Indian Trade Unions (Ohanbad) 
[NFITU (OHN)] supported the views expressed by other Trade Unions. 
B. Observations of Employers' Ass'ociations 
(1 ). AlOE: . The Representative of All India' Organisation of Employers (AlOE) mentioned 
that the Code uses terms 'employee' and 'workers'. This should be either of the two and not. 
both. He said that wages are paid on monthly basis whereas. bonus Is given annually. 
Therefore Bonus Act should be out of the purview of this Code. With regards to inclusion of 
supervisors also in' the definition of "employee" under this Code, he suggested that some 
higher wage ceiling say Rs. 15000/- per month may be fixed. In the List of defaulters, only the 
habitual defaulters should be included and the names should be there only if they do, 
violations 3-4 times. Regarding payment of wages to a removed/dismissed employee (Section , 
18 (2)), payment should be made in 7 days instead of 48 hours. In Section 43, for settlement 
, . of claims under the Code the claim as well as, appellate authority should be quasi-judicial in. 
nature. There should be a' time limit for maintenance of records. He opposed the provisions in 
Section 48 regarding taking coqnlzance of offences under this Code. He welcomed the 
provision for compounding but suggested for some fine for the frivolous complalnts, Under 
Section 58, State ~overnments should also be given power to rnake rules. 
EFI: The Representative of Employers Federation of India (EFI) said' that the factor 
'capacity to pay" Should also be considered while flxlnq the minimum wages and industry's 
view point should also be considered. Bonus should be left for negotiation between employer 
and employee and not included here. In case of workers, skilling and experienceIs important 
and that should be taken care whiling fixing the wages. He suggested that some uniform 
. (2).- 
~.~=.-=---~----~--~-~~~~=~=-~==.-~~.~ .. =-------~.- .. =:I 


system should be there across the country for fixing minimum 'wages, Regarding constitution 
of Minimum Wages Advisory Boards at the State level clear guidelines should be there 
regarding eligibility and cornposltlon. Also the claims authorities should be quasi-judicial and 
fair. . 
(3). CO'SIA:The Representative of Chamber of Small Industry Associations (COS~A) mentioned 
that MSME sector should also be focussed upon while finalising the Labour Code on Wages. 
In definition itself, MSME sector should be mentioned separately. For small scale sector a 
basic floor minimum wage should be fixed and on the basis of skills this can be increased on 
percentage basis. There should be simple wage mechanism for MEMEs. In section 8, review 
of the minimum waf;les should be same time across after 5 years interval. In the Advisory 
Boards, MSME sector should be represente.d. The working hours should be aflowed up to 12 
. hours. Payment of wages through Bank or Post Office is good but payment of advances can 
be allowed in cash. As fo'r as payment of wages on 7th day is concerned, it should be 10th day 
for MSI'y1Es. Bonus provislons should not apply to MSMEs and it should be linked to profit. 
The facilitator should guid'e the employer about non-compliance' of the provisions and give 3 . 
month time for compliance after giving notice. Maintenance 'of records should be for 3 years 
only and not beyond that. ' 
• I • 
. . . 
AlMO:. The Representative of All India Manufacturers' Organisation (AIMO) said that we all 
are working for same goal and workers are our assets. He suggested that Bonus Act should 
be removed out of this Labciur Code. 
(4). 
(5). FASII: The .Representative of Federation of Association of Small. Industries of lrrdla 
(FASII) said that the eligibility of bonus should be revisited. . 
ICSI: "The Representative of Indian Council of Small Industries (ICSI) said that small 
industries can not go in such legal terminologies. Penalties in the Code are too harsh. Small 
industries should be exempted from inspections' and cost of production should De minimised. 
(6). 
(7). LU8: The Representative of the Laqhu .Udyog Sharti (LU8) said that lhe name of the Code 
. should be as per Indian system. .He opposed \h!=!. sectlon 6 (3) regarding revising the minimum 
.wages by the States from time to time. . 
ASSOCHAM: The Representative of Associated Chambers of Commerce & 
Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) mentioned that they have already providedtheir comments in 
earlier Meeting. He said that in definition of employee contract workers should be clarified, 
Regarding procedure for fixing minimum wages, there should be .broed guidelines from the 
Central Government on the basis of which minimum wages can be 'fixed by the State 
Government. Under section 32 regarding sums deductible from gross profits, the CSR funds 
should be included. In Section 49 the penalty amount of Rs. 1.00 Lakhs is very severe and 
some cateporisatlon should-be there. . . 
(9). FICCI:. The Representative of Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry 
(FICel) supported the vIews expressed by AlOE, He mentioned about s.ome discrepancies in 
cross referencing in the Code regarding sectlons. 
(8). 
(10). PHDCCI: The Representative from PHD Chambers of Commerce & Industry in India 
(PHD CCI) supported the Governments' effort. 
(11) . FISMJ;:: The Representative of Federation of Indian Micro, Small & Medium' Enterpri~es' 
(FISME) mentioned under section 43 and 44 r~gardlng claim settlement, excessive delegatIOn 
has been given to, State Govemment without giving any -gUidelines. He said that in the 
definitlon of "employee" managers should not be' included. Under Section 43, the 
compensation amount of 10 times is too draconian. A!stVcro'ss referencing about section 47 in 
_definition of 'facilitator' in section 2 (f) is incorrectly mentioned as section 49 (1). 
---~-'-.-----------'- ------ ------ 


C. Observations of State Governments 
(1 ). Uttar Pradesh: the Representative of State 'Government of 'Utlar Pradesh welcomed the 
move of the Central Government in drafting this Code. 
(2). 
I 
Odisha: The Representative of State Government of Odisha mentioned that State's 
mlnlmum wages are very less in comparisonto central sphere wages. 
(3) Meghalaya: The Representative of State Government of Meghalaya said that the 
name "facilitator" should be replaced by some other word which is regulatory in nature. 
Madhya Pra~esh: The Representative of' State Government. of Madhya Pradesh 
suggested that the definition of "employee" should be adopted from the Payment of Gratuity 
Act. 
(4). 
(5). Punjab: . The Representative of Stafe G~vernment of Punjab also supported that the 
definition of "employee" should' be adopted from the Payment of Gratuity Act. Also th~ 
definition of "employer" is restricted in nature; The manner of fixing wages should be clarified. 
Also the qualiflcatlons for the claim authorities are not given. . . 
Haryana: The Representative of State. Government of Haryana said that in the 
preamble of the Labour Code, the words "for securing the earned wages' should be included. 
Also at several places, .the "appropriate Government" should' be clarifiecf whether it is State 
Government or Central Government. A separate. section on 'deferred wage' should be 
included. In section 43 (4) regarding claims under the Code. only Trade Unions should be 
authorised to approach on behalf. of worker and not NGOs. Regarding hours of work, 
calculation has to be top. downwards.· Minimurh wage should be in 'cash and not "in kind". 
Tamil Nadu: The Representative of State Government of Tamil Nadu endorsed the views 
(If representative of Haryana, 'S'he sLlggested that Minimum wages should be fixed for all 
employees. She asked that under section 39 (v) (c) who will decide about the 'not for profit' 
institutions. Regarding coverage of MSMEs,' she mentioned that they will be covered under 
Small factories Bill. . 
(6). 
(7). 
5. Representative from Ministry of MSME suggested that the Service sector should also be 
brought under the purview of this Labour. Code. He mentioned that it is better to have a uniform 
system from Central level and States should follow that. Concept of small and very small 
establishments should be incorporated in the Code. . 
6. Summing up the deliberations, Additional Secretary (L&E) clarified that hence -forth 
nomenclature of "Facllltators" in place of . "Inspectors' will be used 'iri all Labour' Codes. He also 
brought to the notice of participants about corrlqendurn issued regarding section 6 (3) about fixing the 
minimum wages on the basis of skills and arduousness of work etc. Regarding' fixing of minimum 
wages, State Governments are being empowered so as to bring parity and uniformity. Regarding 
penalty, the amount of fine mentioned is upper limit and actual amount will be decided by the judicial 
authority. He also mentioned that under section 44.a provision of Appellate Board is being introduced 
to simplify and expedite the dispute resolution mechanism. 
7. In his concluding remarks, Hon'ble Minister of State (Ie) for Labour & Employment thanked all 
the Participants and said that the apprehensions expressed about intention of the Government are not . 
correct. There is no dilution of any provisions protecting the Interest of workers. The main purpose of 
the Labour Code is rationalisation, simplification and ease of compliance of labour laws. He said that 
State Governments have to playa major role. He mentioned that the fixation of minimum wage wIll be 
on the basls of sknr-required.: arduousness of work assigned to the worker, cost of Jiving and 
geographical location of the place of work. Regarding penalties also, for the first time offence only fine 
will be imposed and also opportunity will be given to Improve. Central Government will continue to 
give direction 'regarding minimum waqes'to the State Govemment from tlrnetotlrne. . 
. . . 8. Hon'ble Minister mentioned that Govemment is' intending to bring· 4 Labour Codes viz. labour 
Code on Wages, Labour Code on Industrial relations, Labour on Social Security & Welfare and 
(_ 


I r I: '. 
~ a , 
I 
I B 
....• - ... .,..-- c=----- 
1, . 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
<; 8. 
9. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. . 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
: '16. 
Labour Code on safety & Working Conditions by amalgamating the relevant provisions of the Labour 
laws. He mentioned about the initiatives taken by the Government for unorganised workers and also 
requested State Governments to utilise the cess collected for the building. and other construction 
workers. Regarding 'inspections' he said that after introduction of randomised computer based 
inspection schemes .• such apprehensions are. misplaced. 
9. ' The Meeting ended with vote of thanks by Joint Secretary to Hori'ble Minister and all 
Participants for sparing their valuable time for this tripartite consultation meeting; . 
***** 
. . 
List of participants in the Second Tripartite Consultation Meeting on The Labour Code on 
Wages held on 13th April, 2015 at Tagore Chamber, SCOPE Complex, New Delhi u~der the 
chairmanship of Hon'ble MOS(IC) for Labour & Employment . - . 
Min~try of Labour & Employment 
" 
Sh. Bandaru Dattatreya. Hon'ble MOS (IC) Labour & Employment 
Sh. Deepak Kumar, Additional Secretary (L&E) '. 
Sh. Dheeraj Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri D. Chaudhury, Deputy Director General 
Sh. Suresh Singh, Director 
Dr Onkar Sharma, Regional Labour Commissioner (C) 
Dr S.D. Singh, Consultant 
Sh.. Piyush Sharma, Consultant 
Shri S.K. Tripathi, Under Secretary 
...in chair 
Central MinistrieslDepartm~mt 
. .. 
1. Dr. M. Vijaywargia, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel, Legislative Department 
2. Dr. O. P. Mehta, Director, Ministry of MSME . 
3. Sh. Amit Singla, Deputy Secretary, Department of Commerce 
4. Sh. Sanjay Kumar, Under Secretary, Department of Commerce· 
5. Sh. Gopal Prasad, Deputy Secretary, Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion 
6. Sh. Amar Nath Singh, Deputy Secretary, Department of Expendlture 
7. Sh. S. K. Chaudhary, Under Secretary, Ministry of Women & Child Development 
State Governments 
Sh. A. K, Sinha; Principal Secretary (Labour), Government of Uttar Pradesh 
Ms. Shallnl Pandit, Labour Commissioner, Government of Odisha 
Smt. M. NiNarnpul, LabourCornrnissloner, Government o(Meghalaya 
Sh. Jawald Akhtar, Labour Commissioner, Government of West Bengal 
Sh. R. G. Pandey, Additional Labour Commissioner, Government of Madhya Pradesh 
. Sh. HarishNayar, Additional Labour Commissioner, Government of Punjab 
Sh. Anupam Malik, Additional Labour Commissioner, Government of Haryana 
Sh. S. Narsimha Murthy, Additional Labour Commissioner, Government of Karnataka 
Ms. S. Kalaivani, Joint Commissioner of Labour (Cone.): Govemment of Tamil Nadu 
Sh. Kumar Oigvij:o.y, Joint Labour Commissioner. Government of Bihar 
Sh. Arvind K. Pendse, oio Labour Commissioner, Government of Maharashtra . 
Sh. Ajit Singh N Dodla, Assistant Cornrnlssloner of Labour, Government of.Gujarat 
Sh. R. L. Rishi, Assistant Labour Commissloner, A & N Islands Administration 
Sh. K. Ravinder Reddy, Assistant Gommissioner of Labour, Govemment of Telangana 
Sh. Prern Sagar, Labour Inspector, 010 Labour Commissioner, UT_of Chandigarh 
Sh. Prasad Pednekar, Assistant Labour Commissioner, Government of Goa. 
-_-_ .... __ .. _._ .. _-- 


1:""''''''''' - --~.x";=i;;;;;';;";;;'~"'"~i;;;;i.:";;';;;;;;';;~~:: ~:",~'...,~1l::::.;.~~ 
~~ (!~. H ~. 
~ ~ 
~~ ~: <; . ' 
Centra! Trade Unions 
3'1i .. 4. 
5 . 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
Shri B. N. Rai, Bhartiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) 
Ch .. Zile Sin~h, India~ Natio~al Trade Union Con9ress (1NTUC)' 
Shn R. P. Singh, Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC) 
Sh. Mohit Awana, Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC) 
Sh. Sh: G. L. Dhar •. All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) 
Shri DL Sachdev, Secretary, All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) 
Sh. K. Radhakrishna •. AlIlndia United TradeUnion Centre (AIUTUC) 
Sh. K. I. P. Menon, Trade Union Coordination Centre (TUCC) 
Ms. Shikha Joshi, Self-Employed Women's Assodation (SEWA) 
Shri Rajiv Dimri, All India Central Council ofTrade Union (AICCTU) 
Shri V. Subburaman, Labour Progressive Federation «LPF) 
Sh. Ram Jash Singh, Sr. Vice President, National Front" of Indian Trade Union (NFITU- 
Dhanbad) ., ' . .', . 
Sh. Rakesh ~alviya, Secretary, National Front of Indian Trade Union {NFITU-Dhanbad) 13. 
Employers' Associations : 
.1. Sh. Sanjay Bhatia, President, All India Organisation of Employers (AlOE) 
2. Sh. Bhagirathi Dhal, Employers Federation of India (E::FI) 
3. Sh. V. K: Singh, All India Manufacturers' Organisation (AlMa) . 
4. Ms. Jaspreet Kaur, Federation of Associations of Small Industries (FASII) 
5. Sh. P. K. Singhania, Indian Council of Srnall lndustries (lCSI) 
6. Sh. O. P. Mittal, Laghu Udyog Bharti (LUB) . 
7. Sh. G.P. Srivastava, Associated Chambers of Commerce & Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) 
8. . Sh. Rajesh Goplnathan, Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) . 
9. Sh. Harendra Kumar, Confederation of Indian Industry (CIl) 
1n. Sh Sri.ll:::lgp.swt'lr, Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICel) 
11. Sh. R. K. Joshi, PHD Chamber of Commerce & Industry (PHDCCI) 
12.. Sh. Ravi Wig, PHD Chamber of Commerce s Industry (PHDCCI) 
13. ISh. Naveen Jain, Federation of Indian Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (FISME) 
14. Sh. A. Saxena, Federation of Indian Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (FISME) 
15. . Sh. D. Bandyopadhyay, Federation of Indian Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (FISME) 
16: Sh. Purushaottam Agwan, Hon' General Secretary, Chamber of Small Industry Associations 
(COSIA) 
1 
~(_~.........---------~~~~~~I 


Annexure 4 
. ... . 
Comments of the concerned MiniStrylDepartments and response of the Ministry of Labour & 
'Employment thereon 
~ " 
Response of Ministry of Labour 
& Employment thereon 
(_ 
1. 
[Vide OM No. 4- 
2I2010-ALL-ES dsted 
13.07.2015J 
SL Name of the 
No. Mlnlstry/Departrnent 
Department of 
Agriculture & 
Cooperation 
.Cornrnents 
(i) There is a wide variation between 
agricultural wages and· non­ 
agricultural waqes. As per Labour 
Bureau's- Monthly Publication on 
Average Daily Wage Rates for 
Agricultural: and Non-agricultural 
occupations for the month of April 
2015, the average agricultura! wage 
rate is significantly less than ttie 
non-agricultural wages; While fixif.1g 
the Minimum Wages, Government 
should appropriately examine inter­ 
state and intra-state differences in 
agricultural and non-agricultural 
wages. 
(ii). Any periodic increases in minimum 
wages should be based on rise in 
Consumer Price Index for 
Agricultu~al Labour (CPI-ALj and 
not on Consumer Price Index for 
Industrial Workers (CPI-IW) . 
(iii). Even though a farmer is 
technically an employer of 
agricultural labourers he should not 
be burdened with the responsibility 
of maintaining wage books, Wage 
slips and wage cards for the 
labourers employed by him for 
farming operations. 
(ii) Agreed. 
Mention of CPI-IW is replaced 
with 'Consumer Price Index' in 
section 8(4j ui l;'It:,'WC:lge Code. 
However, it is for' the State 
Governments to consider 
appropriate CPI, while deciding 
the factors for revising the 
minimum wages in a particular 
occupation. 
(i). 'Power of fixation and revision 
of minimum wages, which at 
present vests with both Central 
and State Govemment in their 
respective spheres, will 
henceforth lie exclusively with 
State Governments. Therefore, 
State' Governments are 
" presumed to take into 
consideration all factors as 
suggested by the Department 
of AgricultLlre & Cooperation. 
(iii). Agreed. 
A sub-section (4) is being 
added in section 50 regarding 
, 'Records, returns and Notices' 
as under: 
(4). The provisions of sub­ 
section (1) ,to (3) shall not apply in 
respect of the employer to the 
extent he employs not more than 
five persons for agriculture or 
domestic purpose: 
Provided that such 
employer, when demanded, shalf 
produce before the Facilitator, the 
reasonable proof of the paYf!lent 
of wages to the persons so 
employed. 


l 
r 
. ' .. 
(iv). Such an elaborate Code is more 
relevant for industrial workers and 
not for agricultural labourers. 
Hence, it is considered necessary to 
design a simplified code for 
aqrlculturailabcurers. 
(v) While constituting the State/Central 
! Minimum Wage1? Advisory Board, a 
representative from Department of 
AgrlGulture & Cooperation of the 
appropriate Government may be 
included to take care of the balance 
between farm viability and fair wage 
for agri~ultural workers. 
(vi) At pr.esent, agricultural labourers 
rI.,) l"'(1t ,",)rnA 1.I[1np,r the purview of 
Payment of Bonus Act, 1965. The 
. Ministry of Labour & Employment 
may review the . organizational 
structure of farms in the country and 
decide whether . agricultural 
labourers need to be brought under 
the scheme of payment of bonus. 
The position of Panchayats as per 
the' draft' Code is ambiguous.· 
Panchayats are not departmental 
offices, but local governments. 
However, in actual fact the salaries 
and other service conditions of 
Panchayat employees are decided 
by State Governments. It is 
important to ensure that Panchayats 
do not become liable under the 
Labour' Code on Wages for 
decisions of" State Government. 
Therefore: 
Explanation: For the purposes 
of this sub-section, the expression 
"domestic purpose U means the 
purpose exclusively (elaUng to the 
home' or family affairs of the 
employer and. does not include 
any affair relating to any 
establishment, industry, trade, 
business, 
occupetion. 
manufacture or 
[Vide OM No. N- 
11011/301/2015-Po/./l 
dated 21.07.2015) 
(I) Whether or' not Parrchayats . are to 
be covered under "local authority" 
may be clarified in' the Bill. 
'Ambiguity in this regard would lead 
to lack of clarity in policy and to 
litigation. 
(iv). Only the relevant provisions of 
the Code will apply to the 
agricultural workers and there 
may not be any need for 
separate Code for agricultural 
workers. 
/ 
I 
2. Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj 
(v). This s6ggestion will be 
appropriately considered while 
formulating the Rules. 
(vi) The Labour Code on WilgS.S 
does not propose any changes 
in the existing applicability of 
bonus provisions in the 
establishm ents. 
The Wage Code is applicable 
wherever the employer-employee. 
relationship is established and 
therefore wherever, Panchayats 
are the "employer", they -.yill be 
responsible. for the payment of 
wages and allowances to the 
employees. 
._------------_.- 


--' -, -'-----------~--- 
3, 
[Vide OM No. 
15(1)/Ec, Dn.l2010 
(Vol. II) dated 
08.07.2015J 
:. -; .. -_- ":'--~'::.": 
(iii): State departments of Panchayati 
Raj should also be consulted. 
Department of 
Economic Affairs 
(ii) Panchayats should not be held 
liable for decisions' of State 
Governments regarding various 
provisions of the Labour Code', 
Consultations with the State 
Governments have been done 
. during the Tripartite. Consultation 
process and no State Governrn­ 
has raised such issue .. 
(i) The Bill' proposes a delegation in 
several provisions to the .States. 
However, with regard to, the 
minimum wages, the proposed 
Code suggests setting up a Central 
Minimum Wage Advisory Board, 
. and makes directions of the 
Advisory Board binding on the 
Government. This is not advisable, 
India is not a single labour market 
nor it is price/cost of living. similar 
across the country. Therefore, 
mandated minimum wage rates 
from the centre would appear not 
only to do a contradlction 'to the 
, . spirit of the proposed Bll], but would 
also be 'self-defeating as .it would be 
difficult for Central Board to be as 
aware of conditions, and cost of 
living, in each State as the State 
Governments are. In fact, there is 
no . apparent need to create a 
Central Advisory' Board . at all. 
Ministry of Labour may likely to 
reconsider. . 
The Code now provides for 
constitution of an Advisory Board 
to look into matter related to 
wages as well as increasing 
employment opportunities to 
women. The advice. of the Central 
Advisory Board is not binding on 
the Central Government. . 
(ll). With regard to section 7, Ministry of 
Labour may consider if house rent 
allowance should also be counted 
as a component of wage. It is a cost 
to the company and not counting it 
perhaps discourages . formal 
employment (India's current formal 
employment 'is 7% of all 
employment, which is certainly not 
in the 'interest of labour itselt). 
. Naturally, if HRA is counted, then 
the minimum wages would have to 
be fixed higher, depending on the 
State/city etc. 
(fi). Accepted. 
The 'definitlon of ·wage" in section 
2 (z) is being revised by adding 
one more sub-clause (VI) 'as 'any 
house rent allowance', in addition 
to the sub-clauses (i) to (v), which 
.have been given providing the' 
components which includes 
,wages . 
(iii). Section 10 of the Code 
prescribes 'for 'payment of fun 
normal working day wages to an 
.ernployee even if he was 
employed for less than normal 
working hours during the day, if 
his minimum rate of wages has 
been fixed· by . the day basis. 
However, Section 6 of the Labour 
Code prescribes for fixation of rate 
of wages for a period determined 
(iii). With regard to proposed section 
10, insisting on payment of full day's 
wage for even part time work may 
militate against part-time 
employment, taken by some to 
increase family income. The world 
over wage rate is hourly wages. As 
urbanization increases, most 
markets seem to be rushed over the 
weekends, betw_!:len 4-8 J:lM. Many 
families would seek to add to their 
------ _-- 


" 1 
4. Ministry of Rural 
Development 
income by fulfilling the need for 
extra .lT1anpower of shops and 
restaurants at this time. Therefore, 
there is perhaps a need to provide 
for the possibility of employment for 
half a day. Ministry of Labour may 
'like to also consider .this possibility. 
by the hour; or by the day; or by 
the month. In view of this, for such 
work at weekends, as has been 
suggested here, the employee's 
wages may be fixed on hourly 
basis, and paid according to the 
number of hours he is employed. 
(iv). With regard to section 14, (iv). Even in the present provision 
prescribing Overtime at double .the under the Minimum Wages Act 
wages may derive formal overtime 1948, the Overtime' rate is twice 
underground. Since' overtime is the ordinary rate of wages. In view 
optional and presumably labour of this, reducing this rate to one . 
would not accept it if it is not and a half time is not appropriate. 
remunerative enough, perhaps 
Ministry of Labour would like to 
consider even one and 8. half time 
. of wage-rate may be sufficient. 
Agreed with the suggestion of the 
Ministry of Rural Development. [Vide PM No. J- 
110601112015- 
MGNREGA (RE-lIl) 
dated 24.07.20151. 
1. Both Sections 6(1)"- and 28 of the 
I Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 
(42 of 2005), give the Central 
'Government, the authority to 
determine its wage rates 
independent of the Minimum Wages 
Act, whlch is proposed to be 
overridden by the Labour Code. 
Wher.eas, Section 6(1) is a non­ 
obstante S.8ction whiG!"> provides for 
the fixation of wage rates and 
begins with the words 
"Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Minimum Wages 
Act, 1948", Section 28 gives the 
provisions of the MGNREG Act 
overriding authority' over other 
legislatior,ls. These are in 
furtherance of the legislative· intent 
to keep the activities under the 
MGNREG Act separate and distinct 
from those under any other 
legislation especially the Minimum 
Wages Act. The implication is that it 
will not be possible to fix budget for. 
the MGNREGA, as the power to. 
revise minimum wages vests with 
State Governments under the Code 
and the "Central Government has, 
absolutely no role in fixation 'of the 
wage rate in respect . of any 
category of employment under the 
proposed Labour Code. This will 
lead to a state of fiscal 
unpredictability_ The-only instrument. 
upon which the Centre's budget 
liability Is premised is the control 
over the wage rate: "If. this is 
controlled by States through 
minimum wages then the Centre will 


f 
I 
,( 
;' 
',' 
5. Keeping in view the above, Ministry 
of Rural Development request that Wages under MGNREGA will be 
the following revised provisions may exem pted from the coverage of 
, be made in the draft Labour Code:- .Labour Code on Waqes and 
, fund the MGNREG Act, but will be 
unable to control the fund 
requirement. The Parliament would, 
not be, permitted to control and use 
its constitutional authority to 
examine and approve expenditure 
through the process of budget 
approval. 
2. Many provisions of the draft Labour 
Code, especially clause 13; are 
contrary to the related provisions 
under MGNEG Act: 
3. The unified Labour Wage Code 
intends to take place of all labour 
laws, especially those mentioned ln 
clause 60. ·Consequently, all the 
! provisions of these laws findiny 
.place in the Code would be i 'applicable to MGNREGA in view of 
clause 57 of the draft Code. This 
will have major conflicts with the 
: provisions of MGNREG Act having 
" far reaching consequel'lces derailing 
the implementation. ' 
4. 'Ministry of Rural Development has 
been constantly expressing to the 
. Ministry of Labour &. Employment, 
its stand that the. MGNREGA wage 
rates may be kept outside the 
purview of the Minimum Wages Act. 
. As a matter of fact, in a meeting of 
the Committee.of Secretar(es (CoS) 
held on 24,08,2012 to discuss the 
'National Floor Level Minimum 
Wage (NFLMW) and other 
proposed amendments to the 
Minimum Wages Act 1948, 
~ecretary (RD) mentioned that 
MGNREGA may be exempted from 
NGLMW since the MGNREG Act 
itself excludes the applicability of 
Minimum' Wages Act. Accordingly, 
in Para-20 of the draft Cabinet Note 
circulated by Ministry of Labour on 
the subject, of which the minutes of 
CoS meeting are one of the 
annexure, it is mentioned that 
'MGNREGA wage rates have been 
kept outside the purview of the 
Minimum Wages Act, which meets 
the requirement of the Ministry of 
Rural Development, 
Accepted. 


(_ 
5 Department of 
Commerce 
sections 65 regarding ·Savings" 
will be revised as under: (a). Clause 57 - Effect of laws and 
agreements inconsistent" with the 
Code: The provisions of this 
'Cede shall have effect 
notwithstanding . anything 
inconsistent contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, 
except the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005 (42 of 2005), 
or In the terms of any award, 
agreement, settlement or contract of 
65. Saving: Nothing co-ntained in 
this Code shall !:ie deemed to 
affect the provisions of the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural­ 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 
(42 of2005) and.the Coal Mines 
Provident Fund and Bonus 
. Schemes Act, 1948 (46 of 1948), 
or of any scheme made 
thereunder. 
.. ::i'. 
[Vide aI'll No. 
14/2812014-TPD 
(Environment) dated 
?.4.07.2015] 
6. Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs 
service. 
- (b). CI9use 58 - Saving: Nothing 
contained in. this Code shall be 
deemed to affect the provisions of 
the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
I Employment Guarantee AGI, 2005 . 
(42. of 2005), Coal Mines Provident 
Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 
. 1948. (46 of 1948), or of any, 
scheme made thereunder. 
[Vide OM No. 
4/4212015-CL V dated 
24.0"7.2015] 
Ministry of Steel 7. 
[Vide OM·' No. 
4(18)/2015-Coord. 
dated 29.07.201~] 
No objection, subject to that 
. "Ministry of Labour & Employment 
may reconsider the formulation for 
sub-section 2 of section 48 and add 
the elements of third party 
certification which were there at the 
Tripartite consultation stage for 
facilitating ease of doing business'. 
Labour Code on Wages provides 
for laying· down an Inspection 
scheme by the appropriate 
Government. This issue of 'third 
party certification' can be 
incorporated In the inspection 
scheme, if required, at that time .. 
N·o objection, subject to that 
'Explanation' to clause' 56 of the 
said Bill which defines "company", 
for the purposes of the said clause 
may .also specifically include LLP 
incorporated under the 'Limited 
Liability Partnership Act (LLP Act), 
2008, in sub-clause (a). 
Accepted 
In tire section 54 regarding 
'Offences by companies, the sub­ 
clause (a) of the "Explanation' is 
revised as under: 
(a) "company" means anybody 
corporate and includes - 
(i) a firm; or (ii) a limited liability partnership 
registered under . the Limited 
Uability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 
of 2009); or 
(iii) other association of 
individuais; and 
(i) The title of the Bill should be Labour (i) Bonus is closely related to the 
'Code on Wages & Bonus Bill 2015 subject of "'{ages and hence 
as Bonus is not part of th~ wages. included in this Code. 
(ii) There should also be a provision (Ii) Section· 45 (2) of the Wage 
for speedy disposal of matters by Code clearly mentions that" the 
Claim Authorities falling under the endeavour shall be made by the 


f . . ,-,' -~.- . -~-,-- .. , -;; ;-, ,':_:- ':. .i-c-v-: :':-;-:--:'~-:-~-.:-:-,;,,;:,"-. _, -::. '.:. 
A"AA • ey' 
(iv) Five years' time period has 
been kept considering the 
chances of likely changes in 
management in some units. 
However, this opportunity will not 
be given to an. em ployer violating 
the provision of payment of wages 
due to an employee .. 
(v) Inclusion of unorqanlsed sector for (v) The Labour Code on Wages 
the applicability of provisions of will not have any Scheduled 
minimum' wages· 'is' a welcome employment and it will apply to all 
move. However, minimum wages employees including in the 'steel 
for scheduled employment in Steel sector. 
sector is also needs to be notmad 
as at present there is no schedule 
minimum wages for steel sector in 
most of the States. 
(vi) A facilitative provision has 
been kept in the Code to dealwith 
exceptional cases where the 
payment has to be made in small 
amount for a shorter time period of 
work and appropriate Government 
will decide the amount upto which 
payment can be made in cash. 
(vii) The' formula for calculation of (Vii) The existing provisions of the 
bonus in case of allocable sur-plus Payment of Bonus Act 1965 have. 
· exceeds the minimum bonus, needs been retained without any 
simplification. The petty contractors modifications in the calculation 
find it difficuit'to compute the bonus formula. 
resulting in the loss of extra bonus 
to workers employed in lntsrrnlttent 
nature of jobs, daily wages through 
contracts even when the contractor 
actually has allocable surplus. . 
8. Ministry of Mines 
purview of this Code. 
(iii) The amount of fine in penalties is 
· teo Iowan a gen~ral basis. The 
amount of fine should be fixed as 
per the magnitude of operation of 
the concerned establishment. 
Further, the term of imprisonment 
should also be increased with each 
· subsequent violation by the 
concerned employer. 
(iv) The employer should not be 
accorded an opportunity before 
imposing any penalty for violations; if 
the violation of the same' nature 
'occurs even after the period of five 
years. 
authority to decide the claim within 
a perlod of three months. 
, 
(iii) Penalty provisions have' be 
made in correspondence to the 
gravity of the violations. Penalties 
'amounting to Rs. 10000/- to Rs. 
50000/- cannot be termed as too 
low. Focus of the provisions of the 
Code is on enforcement of labour 
laws through guiding and advising 
the employers and. penal 
provisions should be applied only 
for habitual offenders. 
(i) .In section 2(d), 'appropriate (i) At present, the Minimum Wages 
government has been defined. It Act 1948 and the Payment of 
has been stated that 'appropriate. Wages Act 1936, defines 
Governmenf means in relation to 'appropriate Government' in case 
establishment carried on by or of 'Mines" as Central Government. 
(vi) Provision for payment of wages 
through cash . may be removed 
. altogether as payment by cash has 
many inherent drawbacks .. 
(_ 
[Vide OM No. CDN- 
13/5/2015-COORD 
dated 27.07.20151 


I"~"'"""_"""='''':-=''''''''''~~;;;;'''''';;;;';~';l;;@:l'''j"',,~ii:llr~ 
~:' '@ ': -, 
~ I·, 
~ .;; 
M 
~ 
~ '~ 
< 
under the authority of the Central 
Government or the establishment of 
Banks, Mines, Air Transport .... etc. 
the Central Government, It" means 
all mines -are considered under the 
Central Government. It is not 
correct. The mines may be under 
the control of State Government or 
the Central Government. Therefore, 
the Central Government cannot be 
the exclusive 'appropriate 
Government' in case of all mines.' 
In order to ensure continuity and 
also to avoid any disparity in 
wages and other terms and 
conditions of workers working in 
mines, either under the control of 
Central Governments or State 
Govemments, it has been 
proposed to continue with the 
present definition. 
(ii) In the draft Bill, 'Company', (ii) The 'employer' has been 
'Contractor', 'Cooperation', clearly defined iii the' Code for' 
'Corporation', 'Employer' (covered different type of establishments, 
under Section 2 of the Factories Alsosection 54 has explained that 
Act) have been defined. It is in case of 'company', the firm or 
suggested to include "firm", other association of fndividuals will 
"indlvldual" and "other association of be included in the definition of 
I individual" in the list of definitions 'company'. 
and they should also be considered 
in the meaning of 'employer': 
9. Department of Health . 
& Family Welfar.e 
(i) A single broad law that replaces 
multiple laws on the same subject 
will help rationalize contradictions in 
existing laws. Instead of getting 
entangled in four laws, employers 
will have to comply with one set of 
rules which will lead to better 
monitoring and reduce hassles for 
both employees and employers. 
(i) Noted. 
(ii). Proposal to make payment to (ii) Noted. 
employees via cheque' or electronic • 
transmission would ,help attain 
broader objective of financial 
inclusion. 
(iii). The States would be given partial 
autonomy in . the' fixation and 
revision of minimum wages. 'The 
minimum wages in an area can, 
therefore, be decided keeping in 
view the cost of. living in that area 
and other need based factors. 
However, a single floor rate should 
be decided by the Government and 
States should be free to set the 
minimum wage rate higher than his 
basic wage, but not lower than it. 
(iii). Provlslons have been made 
that the Central Government 
may give directions to the State 
Government, for carrying out 
execution of the provisions of 
the Code. This takes care of 
the concern raised by the 
Department of Health & Family 
Welfare. 
, 
[Vide OM No. Z- 
2B015/33/2015-Estt.1 
dated 29.07 .7015J 
10. Department of 
Industrial Policy & 
Promotion 
['Iide OM No. 
51112o.10-MPS (Vol.") 
While the Department of Industrial 
Policy & Promotion supports the 
measures proposed for labour 
welfare, the effect of higher wages 
in an increasingly competitive global 
manUfacturing ecosystem needs to 
,. 1_ 
"1''' • 
The exercise of Codification of 
Labour Laws itself Is an effort 
of the Government to make the 
laws simple and easy for 
compliance to promote Ease of 
Doing Business. WaQes ,nave 


dated 06.08. 2015J 
11. Department of 
Electronics 8. ' 
Information 
T echnolo'gy (DeitY) 
[Vide OM 
2(6)/20 15-CD 
10.08.2015J 
No. 
dated, 
Ministry ofTextiles 
[Vide OM No. 
41112015-Coord. dated 
12.08.2015J 
12. 
be factored. It should also be 
ensured 'that implementation of the 
provisions is in sync with the efforts 
of the Govemment to promote Ease 
of Doing Business. 
DeitY supports the proposal with 
observations that: . 
(i) Since ICT can play an important role 
in the implementation of Wages Bill 
, 2015 and the same has not been 
explicitly mentioned in the draft bill, 
Deity suggests an additional Para 
47 (5) under Chapter V' 
,(miscellaneous) as below: : 
"Strategic use and deployment of 
Infonmation and Communications 
Technologies (ICT) including Cloud 
and Mobile platforms in the overall 
implementation of Wages Bill, 2015" 
(ii). It is seen that the proposal involves 
activities/features related to 
maintaining records electronically, 
filling returns electronicaHy and web 
based inspection schedule in 
addition to features' related to 
wages., As the information security 
activities are vital in these 
electronic/web based activities, it is 
'suggested that implementation' of 
suitable information security 
measures may be made part of the 
proposal. 
Supports the proposal with following 
. suggestions: 
(i) As per the rie~v Labour Code on 
Wages, provision of minimum wage 
wi!! apply' to all employments 
covering both ' organizec:l and 
unorganlsed sector. In case of 
textiles specially garments the job 
work done (embroidery, washing, 
pressing etc.) is incidental and 
peripheral 'nature and may be kept 
out of purview of me~in'g of 
minimum wages. 
(ii). Fine on contravention has 'been 
proposed in Fine slabs of Rs, 5000/­ 
and Rs. 10000/-' and for the 
repetition of the offence within a 
period of five year, if convicted for 
the first offence, penalty for the 
to be fixed keeping in view 
various relevant factors for 
different type of occupations 
and this will certainly addre 
tlie scenario in that industry 
while decldinq the minimum 
wages. 
Observations of Deity are 
noted. 
Concerns raised are mainly 
related to the implementation 
aspects of the Labour Code on 
Wages, . which will be 
appropriately taken care while 
formulating Rules under this 
Wage Code. 
(i) The Wage Code strives to 
ensure payment of at least 
minimum wages to all Workers 
whether In' organized or 
unorganised sector. In view of 
this excluding any specific 
sector or occupation may not 
be appropriate and will be 
'Injustice to the workers of that 
sector. However, the definition 
of 'employee" is modified to 
address the concern on 
outworker. 
(H).Penalty" provisions' have been 
made in correspondence to the 
gravity of the violation? Focus 
of the penal provisions of the 
Code Is on enforcement of 
labour laws through guiding 


1:""~ "'--","-'c:>~~'""""''''''i""'~~'~'''''''"''''':''Pl'''"",iV"'."""""-','i¥'",,'P'l',w;""2Cc,c"""'''':·,''-''';:;;,:0~~ 
:11 " [oj 
~ 
~. 
f.1 
~:! ~. 
r 
i. 
" 
l .~ 
second offence in the form of tine 
extendable to Rs, One lakh or 
lrnprlsonrnent upto .3 months. The 
clause relating· to imprisonment may 
be considered for deletion. 
and advising the employers 
and penal provisions should be 
applied only for habitual 
offenders. However, repeat 
offenders must have some· 
deterrent penalty to avoid 
violations. 
(i) The' section on "Advlsory , 
Board" has' since been revised 
as section. 42 to reflect its 
composition and functions for 
advisory board on Minimum 
Wages Act as well as Equal 
Remuneration . Act. However, 
this is only enabling provision 
and. details about the 
composition of Board, its 
Members, their' salary and 
allowances will be prescribed in 
Rules by the· appropriate 
Government. Department of 
Expenditure wilibe consulted at 
the time of making Rules 
related to the Central Advisory 
Board, as suggested, 
(ii). Again, this is an enabling, 
provision only to facilitate the 
appropriate Government for 
extending the provisions of this 
Code to 0 any government 
establishment (viz, factories, 
PSUs, offices etc.) if it is 
desired so. At present under 
the Payment of Wages .Act 
also, appropriate Government 
has to notify the establishment 
in order to get them covered 
under the Act. 'In absence of 
such enabling provtslons, it 
may not be possible for the 
Governments to extend the 
coverage to such 
.establlshrnents even if needed. 
13. Department of 
. Expenditure 
(i) Chapter II, Clause 15 (4)' of the 
Labour Code on Wages Bill 2015 
states that the Central Government 
shall constitute Central Mlnimurn 
Wages Advisory Board which shall 
consist of persons to be nominated 
by 'the Central' Government 
representing employers and 
employees in the employment. It i,s 
not dear whether any salary, 
I honorarium etc. will rbe paid to the 
members of the Board nor the 
specific, numbers of the members of 
the Advisory Board has been 
indicated. Terms and conditions of 
the members of the Board may be 
finalized in consultation with 
Department of Expenditure, 
(Ii) The DCN states that "The 
Government establishments are, at 
present, not covered under the 
provisions of Payment of Wages 
Act, 1936 until so notified. Now, the 
Labour Code on Wages will apply to 
all employees and irrespective of 
wage celllnqs". Whereas, Clause 26 
of Chapter III, on 'Payment of 
Wages', which' inter-alia, stipulates 
time limit for payment of wages, 
states that ~Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this chapter, 
the provisions of this chapter shall 
not apply to the . Government 
establishments except 0 where the 
appropriate Government applies, by 
notification, such provisions to the. 
gpvemment establishments 
specified in the notification." That Is 
to say, application of provisions 
under payment of wages, which 
include adhering to time lines also, 
are not binding on 'the Government, 
whether State or Central. Such a 
provision which is not binding is 
akin to not laying down the 
provision. 
; - 
[Vide OM No.3 (1)/E­ 
Coordl2010 dated 
18.08.20151 


.. , . 
.. 
Ii'0!. . 
w 
(iv) Clause 22 (1 J states that • f'. . (iv) Deduction for damages or loss 
I deduction .. .for damages or loss is recovery of the loss of 
shall not exceed the amount of .: employer by the neglect of the 
damage or loss caused to the . ,employee and this is different 
employer by the neglect or default from the fine imposed on him, 
of the employed person." But. the which is basically a penal 
amount of damage can exceed the provision ,by the employer on 
wages, In that case condition kept the employee. Therefore, while 
in case of 'Fines' in Clause 20 (4) restriction, of fine' is appropriate 
may be applied to deductions also, ,in. order to avoid exorbitant 
'i.e. 'The total amount of fine which 'amount imposed as : fine, 
may be imposed In anyone wage: , damages has to be recovered 
period on any employed person through deduction for the 
shall not exceed an amount equal to wages, which may Trot be 
three per cent of the wages payable, confined in ceilif.lg of three 
to him in respect of that wage- percent of the wages. 
period'. 
(iii) Clause 20 (5) in Chapter III states 
that "No fine shall be imposed on 
any employed person who is under 
the age of fifteen years", It .appears 
to be a tacit approval ,fQr"chiid 
labour. It may be reworded to 
specifically exclude children till the 
age of 14 years. . 
(iii) Prohibition of employment of 
children below 14 years age is 
covered under the Child Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulatic 
Act 1986 and repeating that 
provision here also is not 
required as this Code is meant 
for wage related' matters, 
However, as the adolescents, 
between age 14 to 18 years 
can 'be employed in non­ 
hazardous units, it is suggested 
that a fine should not be 
im posed on a person below 15 
years of age keeping in view 
his tender age. 
H. Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas • 
[Vide OM No. 
2501 Bl5I2015-Gen. 
dated 20.10.2015] 
J- 
(i) In section 2(d) regarding definition 
of 'Appropriate Government' 
Appropriate, Govt. for oil' PSUs and 
its subsidiaries remains the Central 
Govt. -, Similar treatment for 
Contractor's establishment .ls 
appropriate. 
(ii) In section 2(k) (i) regarding 
. definition of "Employee', 
managerial. administrative, 
technical or clerical work has also 
been included in the definition of 
employee. Scope' of Code goes 
beyond worker category to include 
'Managers. It is not appropriate to 
extend the coverage to Managerial. 
administrative employees/officers 
who are highly skilled and highly 
paid. An 'out-worker" as defined 
under the Contract Labour (R&A) 
Act, 1970 is excluded from the 
definition of the term worker' in. that 
Act. It is surpris_ing that the same 
(i) Noted. 
(i1) .Accepted . 
'out worker' has been removed 
from the definition of 
'employee'. However" as 
payment of wages has to be 
ensured to all employees in 
time and in prescribed manner, 
managerial and supervisory 
cadres have not been excluded 
rroir,- .... 'lhe' 'deflnitlorr. of- 
'employee'. But for the payment 
of bonus, wage limit for the 
workers has been Introduced 
so as to avoid payment of 
bonus to hiQhly paid 


f CO"" "'>'4~ CC=·.,,,.', 'C. , .• 7''''', ·,".~0··",,,,,,,-,,·C:;:.CC"·~""'~.,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,·"··· -,'C;" , r : .: '·'ir::; '0:--,; ;;C'; '7"" .; : i.;:;::' 
~ ~ p: .: .. 
, 
.~ 
.. 
has been included in the definition 
of the term 'employee' .. under .the 
Code. Such inclusion is contrary to. 
the provision of the CLPRA. Since 
the term 'contract labour' has not 
been included iii the Code, it is 
r • illogical to Include an 'out-worker' 
with whom the Principal Employer 
(PE) has no contact and who does 
riot work in the· premises of the PE 
under the definition of employee, 
Since they are already 'employees' 
of the Contractor, who has been 
defined under the Code, there. is no 
need for justification to include the' 
term under the definition of' 
'employee'. In any case, the 
'establishment' of the Contractor is 
already covered under the Code. 
t 
liii) In section 2(za) regarding definition 
of "Wages" Exclusion no. 6 may be" 
reworded to clarify it .as gratuity 
payable under the Payment 'of 
Gra.tuity Act, 1972. As Payment of 
Wages Act was created in 1936, the 
definition did not refer to' statutory 
gratuity Which was created in 1972. 
A recent Madras High Court 
judgment has interpreted wages to 
include statutory gratuity, which 
should not be treated as wages, 
employees, 
(iii) The exclusion from the 
definition of 'wage' mentions 
"any gratuity payable on the 
termination of employment in 
cases other than those 
specified in sub-clause (ivY', 
The sub-clause (iv) says about 
"any sum which by reason of 
the termination of employment 
... -of the person employed is 
payable under any law, contract 
or instrument which provides 
for the payment of such sum, 
whether with or . without 
deductions, but does not 
provide for the time within 
which the payment is to be 
made. The gratuity payable 
under Payment of Gratuity Act 
1972 has prescribed a' time limit 
for such payment and therefore 
not covered under sub-clause 
(lv). 
(iv) Noted 
With regards to the fixing 
factors for different type of 
work; it is clearly mentioned 
that the State Government shall 
take' into account the skill 
required, the arduousness of 
Another complication is that 
payment of wages on dismissal, 
removal, 'retrenchment or 
resignation is to be ensured within 
. the next 2 working days, as per 
Sec, '18(2) of the Code, whereas 
PG Act allows a timeframe of .30 
days from the date of separation. 
Another complication is related ·to 
PF contribution on wages, If 
statutory 'gratuity is not excluded 
from the definition, a claim for PF 
contribution on gratuity paid could' 
also be technically raised, as had 
been done by the EPFO in relation 
to encashment of Leave with 
Wages, in the past, 
(Iv) In section 5 regarding Payment of 
minimum 'rate of wages,' State Govt. 
has been given the exclusive 
respenslbility of fixing and notifying 
minimum wages within its territorial 
jurisdiction. This will end the 
current duality in wages being 
prescribed by both. Central and 


.' .. '. ~. 
\. 
.,~ 
(v) In section 8(3) regarding procedure (v) Noted. 
for fixing and revising minimum 
wages, where a variable D_A 
component is part of the MW, then 
. the wages are to be revised once in 
five years and otherwise in once in 
two years. This is acceptable. 
(ix) 111 section 21 (2) regarding (ix) Not accepted. 
deductions for absence from duty This provision is' similar to .the 
. the minimum number of ten. section 9 of the 'Payment of 
State Govts for the same scheduled 
employment. 
By fixing factors for different types 
of work, which will. be multiplied by 
the minimum wages,' the other 
· wages are to be computed. It is not 
clear whettier this refers to different 
skill levels or to different riatures of 
work such as technical, clerical, etc. 
(vii) Noted. 
(vi) In section 18(2) regarding Time 
! limit for payment of wages, in case 
of removal or dismissal -or 
retrenchment from service the time 
limft of two working days for release 
of wages due may be increased to 
three working days. In the case of 
r.esignation . or closure of the 
establlshrnent, tlie time frame may 
be increased to seven" working 
days. In cases of death of an 
employee, a time limit of 15 working 
days payment of unpaid wages may 
also be incorporated. 
(vii) In section 19(3) m and (n) 
regarding deductions which may be 
made from ·wages,. deductions for 
· adjustment of over-payments of 
wages' . as permitted under the 
Payment of Wages Act, 1936 
should be. included in the Code. 
Instead of seeking written 
authorization for contribution/fees to 
a registered TU or contribution to 
PM Relief Fund etc., electronic 
option exercised by the employee 
through intranetJintemal employee 
self-service portal of the 
establishment may be provided for. 
(viii) In section 20(2) regarding Fines,' 
· electronic display of acts and 
omissions may also be permitted to 
be exhibited on the intranet/internal 
. website of the estab'ilshment, which 
can be view.ed by all employees. 
the work assigned to the 
worker, geographical location of 
the place of. wor~ and other r: r-.': 
factors . which the Stc: 
Government considers 
appropriate. This will ensure 
fixing 'different factors for work 
requiring different skill levels. 
. . t 
(vi) The time limits for payment of 
wages In different conditions 
have been made 
incommensurate with the 
existing provisions under 
Payment of Wages Act', as far 
as possible, 
(viii) This will b.e prescribed in 
Rules, as mentioned in 'this 
Section. 


(_ 
employed persons required to act in 
a concerted rnanner to absent 
themselves without notice is high. 
Even fewer persons can sit on 
strike, such as hunger strike and 
such employed persons acting in a 
concerted manner can strike work 
without giving notice. Therefore, the 
figure ten may be reworded as four 
or more employed persons etc. 
Wages Act 1936, where "ten or 
more employed persons" has 
been specified. 
...... 
'.' 
i 
I 
(x) In . section 28 regar.ding 
dlsqualltlcation for bonus In addition 
to the existing provisions related to 
dismissal "from service for' fraud, 
riotous or violent behavior OD 
premises of the establishment, theft, 
misappropriation for' sabotage of 
property of the establishment, 
conviction for sexual harassment 
! has been i3~ded. This is a welcome 
addition. 
(x) Noted. 
'(xi) In section 38 regarding Time llmlt 
for payment of bonus E~payment of 
bonus. has been provided for, which 
is a welcome change .. 
(xi) Noted .. 
(xii) In section' 40 regarding Non- (xii) Noted. 
applicability of the Chapter, 
Provision for exemption from the 
Chapter relating to Bonus has been 
provided. This is a necessary 
provision to enable establishments, 
which may already have an existing 
system of profit sharing and to 
whom this Chapter is applicable, to - 
apply for exemption. 
(xiii) In section 41(1) regarding Power 
of remove difficulties, Limitation 
period of two years to remove 
difficulties' in the Code does not 
appear to be required .. In a dynamic 
business and economic 
environment the Central Govt. 
should retain the power to retain 
any difficulties in the Code at any 
point of time and not limit it to two 
years. 
(xiii) This provision is made to 
avoid any difficulty in initial two 
years of the commencement of 
this Code. Thereafter, if 'any 
change or clarflcaton is 
required, that may be required 
to be processed as ameridment 
to the Act and not be carried 
out through official notification 
only in the Gazette. 
(xiv) Noted and these details can 
be taken care in the Rules to be 
prescribed. 
(xiv) In section 43 regarding Payment 
of various undisbursed dues in case 
of death. of employed person, the 
provision should also include a time 
period for payment of dues either to 
the nominee or the authority. 
Ftfteen working days is 
recommended as appropriate 
period in this regard. 


:::!~~-"__"..'!'~~~~-:.~..:..:.oc::...:~ •• _~.::-~~.s..'''-~~~::; . ..:.:.''''''~'''''~''-'''~-;;;''--~'~-~'-''''''''''-''''''';-''''~~:;"5---'':;-'''>;-'~'---::-'''---~-';-''~'''' •. ; . ..::..:..,.;...;-:........:.... • ..: ..•.. ~...:..:-:~~ . 
. - _ .. ==- _ .•• _._. 
!' '. " 
: 
: '. 
l 
(xv) In section 44 (4) regarding Claims (xv) This is as per existing 
under the Code and procedure provision. 
thereof, nominee in case of death of 
8:n employee should be permitted to 
make an application for dues under' 
the Code. 
(xvi) In section 45 regarding Appeal, (xvi) Noted. 
Creation of an Appellate Authority is 
a-welcome addition. 
!' 
(xvii) In section 47 regarding Records, 
Returns and Notices, the provision 
permittirm maintenance of electronic 
records and not just registers is 
welcome. Similarly, it should be 
permitted to treat hosting of abstract, 
of the Code on the intranet/internal 
website of the' establishment and 
not 'insist for Notice Boards, where 
all employees have access to the: 
intemal website. Similarly, .in a 
move to reduce the usage of paper, 
e-wage slips or e-mail containing e­ 
wage slip details should be 
permitted and accepted as effective 
compliance of the Code. 
Submission of e-returns is a 
welcome provision. 
(xvlil)' In section 50 regarding Penalties 
for offences, Penalties' have been 
substantially. iricreased in the new 
Code. These will act as deterrents 
and encourage employers to ensure 
,that wages not less than the 
minimum wages are paid in time. 
Provision for 'show cause' and time 
to comply before initiation of 
prosecution is welcome. A time 
frame of 21 working days may be 
prescribed in this regard. . 
(xlx) In section 51 regarding 
Compounding of offences, the 
provlsion of· compounding of 
offences is a welcome provision. 
This will reduce the- number of likely 
future' prosecutions and 'dispense 
quick justice. 
(xx) In section 54 regarding Burden of 
proof, the burden of proof has to be 
011 the claimant, with the employer 
only having to counter with proof of 
compliance. Otherwise this will lead 
.to vexatious and frivolous 
complaints being raised. 
(xvii) Noted. 
(xviii) Noted. 
This is a procedural aspect and 
the days for the compliance will 
be decided by the Facilitator, as 
per the actual circumstances 
and nature of violation. 
(xix) Noted, 
(xx) The employer has to provide 
proof that he has made the 
payment of dues and this 
information will be available 
with the employers only. 
Therefore frivolous claims will 
be avoided rather being raised. 


11-- .. -----'~--~-~~- -~,-, -,~,""""'--~*-,~-~~-~,'-='"''''- eeec 
N ~ ~~ 
), 
~ 
~ 
(_ 
~- •... 
(xxi) Lack of clarity .:.. Labour laws,' 
which are now being rationalized as 
Labour' Codes, . should be macfo 
applicable to unionized category' of 
employees only, i.e -r for workers,.as 
defined under the existing laws. 
Inclusion of supervisors, officers, 
, engineers, managers, 
administrators under the definition 
of 'employee' exceeds the brief of 
the labour legislations and attempts 
to extend the coverage of labour 
Codes to officers also. This step 
needs to be reviewed. The term 
'worker' and employee' have both 
been used in the Code. The term is 
not interchangeable and should be 
retained as 'worker'. 
, " 
(xxii) Time frame for filling of claims: 
I No time frame has been prescribed 
for making claims against the 
employer under the Cede, It is 
recommended that a time frame of 
six-months be prescribed, which 
may be relaxed for cogent reasons 
by the Authority prescribed under' 
the Code. 
(xxiii) Malicious or vexatious claims - 
the provisions of Sec. ~5 (3) and (4) 
of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 
be retained in the Code so that 
bona fide errors or disputes are 
treated as such. Fine' amount for 
malicious or vexatious claims be 
increased in the same proportion as 
penalty for non-payment, 
15. Department of Support the Bill 'Noted 
Telecommunications 
[Vide OM No. 2- 
1112-D15-Policy-J dated 
09.07.2015) 
16. Department of Social Support the Bill Noted 
Justice & 
Empowerment 
[Vide OM No. 23- 
7120 13-Cdn. dated' 
10.07.2015J 
, . 
17. Department of Support the Bill Noted 
.. Chemicals & 
Petrochern icals 
[Vidr; OM No. 
20015/69120 15(Coord). . 
dated 13.07.2015J , 
(xxi) It has been proposed that the 
provisions of Wages (fixing 
minimum wages as well as 
Payment of wages) should 
apply to all employees 
irrespective' of their category 
.. (officers as well as workers). 
However the dispute redressal 
mechanism' for industrial 
disputes and also the payment 
of bonus will be available only 
to workers and appropriate 
distinction has been made 
wherever required for this 
purpose in the Code. 
(xxii) Accepted. 
It has now been proposed In section 44 (5) that the 
application for claims can be 
filed within five years from the 
date on which claims. arises. 
'H-owever, the claim authority, 
on sufficient reason 'shown by 
the applicant to it, may condone 
the delay. 
(xxiii) Not accepted. 
(his may provide unnecessary 
burden on a worker and it may 
deter the worker to raise even a 
legal claim. 


-. - - 
18. Ministry of Road .. Support the Bill Noted 
Transport & Highways 
[Vide OM No. CO- 
140101151201S-Coord 
dated 15.07.2015] 
19. Ministry of Home No objection 'Noted 
Affairs 
[Vide OM No. 
11 03414512015~/S-IV 
dated 16.07.2015] 
20. Departm ent of W~lcomes. the move Noted 
Defence (DRDO) . . [Vide OM No. 
DMSILW19557 dated , 
15.07:2.015] 
; 
21. Ministry of A YUSH I Support the B11I Noted 
[Vide OM No. Z.28015111712015- 
PP&C dated 
16.07.2015] 
22. Department of Heavy Support the Bill Noted 
Industry 
[Vide OM. No. 
21 (2)201 O-Coord 
dated 16.07.2015J 
23. Department of Support the proposal Noted 
Consumer Affairs 
[Vide OM No. N- 
9111/2015-P&C dated 
20.q7.2015J 
24. Ministry of Power Support the Bill Noted 
[Vide OM No. 
1213712015-T&R dated 
2007:2015J 
25. Ministry of Culture Support the Bill Noted 
fVide OM. No. 4- 
.6/2015-CDN dated 
22.07.2015J 
26.. Department of School Support the Bill Noted 
Education & Literacy 
[Vide OM No. F.19- 
71201S-EE.! dated 
22.07.2015J 
27. Department of Posts No specific comments to offer ·Noted 
[Vide· OM No. 92- ' . .,' 
21/20 15-Coor.dIO&M 
dated 21.07.2015J 
28. Ministry of Housing & Support the Bill . Noted 
Urban Poverty 
, , 
I I 


i" .. '.~"""".~~~Z"?:~,.~:;.::'.'.'~ ",,,,·-'·W-=-~"''':·:C':c?'·''_·7''''.~.,,!.~·_~,-.-:'''':''T.::~··--=:''.z,r.~A';·;'-' ,. .. .-: ... ~. =: .. ~:"." r.: , ' .. ':,:;<~:" '": •. '7C 
~ . 
i ~ ~ .. 
~ Alleviation 
[Vide OM No. K- 
1401510112014-USD 
dated 22. 07. 2015J 
29. Ministry of Food Support the proposal Noted 
Processing Industrfes 
[Vide OM No. p- 
1202611 0120 15-PC 
(123) dated 
24.07.2015J 
30. Ministry of Support the proposal Noted 
Development of North . 
East Region 
[Vide. OM No. 
714120 13-DoNER 
(Labour) (Vo'.!') dated ~ 
27.07.2015] 
31. Department of Public No objection Noted 
Enterprises 
[Vide OM No. W- 
1110002l2015-DPE - (WC) . dated 
24.07.2015] 
32. Department of Animal support the proposal Noted 
Husbandry, Dairying & 
Fisheries 
[Vide OM No, 25- '. 
/(1 00)120 15-ADFIAR 
dated 23.07.2015] 
33. Department of Nil comments Noted 
Defence Production 
[Vide OM No. 4 .. 
(21)/20 151D(CoordIDD 
P) dated 29.07.2015] 
34. Department of Food & Support the proposal Noted 
Public Distribution 
[Vide OM No. 
17012121201.O-FC-3 
dated 24.07.2015J 
35. Department of No comments . Noted. 
Science & Technology 
[Vide OM No. 
01 111i20·15-DST dated 
23.07.2015J . 
36. Mi nistry of Tourism ... - SUPPQr! fhe w.9Posal . - . -~ .. Noted .--.-.~:~ ..• - ...... _ ... . -- 
[Vide OM No. 2- 
P&C(9)12015 dated 
22. 07. 2015J 
37. Department of No objection Noted 
Fertilizers . 
[Vide OM No. 
J ' / -;.. ~ 
'~/67" 


2801218/20 15-Coord. 
I dat~d 27.07.2015J 
. "-- .. ,' .. ) . 
38. Ministry aT Skill No objection to the proposal. Noted 
Development & 
Entrepreneurs,hip 
[Vide OM No: MSOE- 
1(1)120 15-AP dated, 
10.07.2015J 
39. Ministry of Women & Support the proposal Noted 
Child Development 
[Vide OM, No. I 
43011/17(4)12015- 
Coord dated 
31.07.2015] 
40. Ministry of Civil ' Support the proposal Noted 
Aviation I .. 
[Vide OM No. AV- 
3101511412015-C&W 
dated ').7.07.2015J 
41. Department of No comments to offer Noted 
Financial Services 
[Vide OM No. 
41118120 15-IR deted 
31.07.2015J 
42. Department of No comments to ,offer Noted 
Personnel & Training 
[Vide OM No. 
490141112015-Estt ©- 
Pt. dated 29.07.2015J 
43. Ministry of Shipping No speclticcornrnents to offer Noted. 
[Vide OM No. CO- 
1105313412015-Coord. 
dated 12.08.2015J 
. 44. Department of Higher Support the proposal Noted 
Education 
[Vide OM No. 16- 
1512014- TS. VII dated 
17.08.2015] 
45. Ministr.y of Urban Support the proposal Noted 
Development : 
[Vide OM No. 
2801212412014-W3 
dated 24.08.2015J 
.. 
46. Ministry of Mic~o, Support the proposal " 
Noted 
Small & Medium 
Enterprises 
[Vide OM No. 
1 0(2)120 15-MSME 
Pol. dated 04.09.2015J 


r~i''':';~~2-:::;~~';@ii~~''''i''''~~~''~~;L::~'_ 
~~ ~~~:.:- ~ .. . ! 
47. Ministry of Information Support the proposal Noted. 
& Broadcasting 
[Vide OM No. 0- 
14011!1012015-PMS 
dated 13.08.2015J 
48. Ministry of Coal Support the proposal Noted. 
[Vide OM No. 
600131112015-PRIW-/ 
dated 31.08.2015J 
49. Departm ent of No comments to offer Noted 
Pharmaceuticals . , 
[Vide OM No. 
50013(112015-CDN 
dated 31.12.2015J : , 
. - - .-._._, 


i'" ':;:;', ... =:";;"'~_'_:l'_~;::.,o:.:.: :"-~?":?-""'</.-"~"""","" ... =~""¥.,,'C-.:'. -, 7'. ·c~:; •. ::".:.-;--. ;-.:'.",: ..'. ==: ~::·;.C::C'?:':~:'.:.", .. ,.:,'·CC··-.,: .. ,.,""""'""'" .". .t., '. '.<0. ,~,::.::.~,:r-:"c:,"::"~~::C:':::;':::- 
I ~-. -. ·------------- .,,_ .. - ... . ' , 
f ~ 
I ~ ~ ~ 
Appendix-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
Minutes of the First Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on 6th October, 2017 from 1430 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in 
Committee Room No.2, Block-A, PHA-Ext. Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT' . 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya - CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
LOK S.A!BHA 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
. 3. Shri Ashok Dohare 
4. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
5. . Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
6. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
7. Dr. Arun Kumar 
8. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar . 
9. Shri Hari Manjhi 
10. Shri R. Parthipan 
11. Shri N aba Kumar Sarania 
12 .. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
13. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Ram N arayan Dudi 
15. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
16. Shri P.L. Punia . 
17. Shri Rajaram 
18. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
19. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan 
20. Ms. Dola Sen 
SECRETARIAT 
l. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Ms. Rimjhim Prasad 
Smt. Anita B. Panda 
Shri Dhiraj Kumar 
Smt. Archana Srivastva - 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
Addl. Director 
Under Secretary 
I 
I 


_ _.,.'_ .. _ ~ =.=.~ =. .=_ .. =_.=_ ==-~ .. =._= __ = ......•... .,,;:_'.: _ .. _ -~-.:..: .. .:.:..:~~=:...: .. :_ .. :"O;,::;.~.::._-_"i::. . .;,:~."i~;;:-.::.~.'=-.:,--- .•. :---.~.-..;.:-~.~~....:.t.::.....:...-:,,::.:,.-'_.:-L:,,: . ..:;:. 
-=======~===~-=- =::=::;:::=="'""-"'-'=" .=:;;-.- .• ~-- :=z .... '~"::- .e , ':;:;_:;. ,.'~-" • ...:..=.,_,:.:_ .. ==::::::::::::::::::::::-=.--~-, =.""'=- --::::..:.: .. ..:..,.; -. :;i;.;i-; •• :-",,-, •• -~ •. -; ,r-- -- .. -.!------ ... - . ...!. --.-- .•... -.-.-- ....• __ :> :.:.:..:.. 
I ~: 
§ 
2 
2. 
PART I 
(1430 hrs to 1500 hrs.) 
XX XX XX XX 
3. XX XX XX XX 
4. XX XX XX :xx 
I . 
5. xx xx xx xx 
6. xx xx xx xx 
, PART II 
(1500 hrs. to 1640 hrs.) 
Witnesses 
Representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment 
Sl. No Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Heera Lal Samariya Additional Secretary 
2. Sh. Anil Kumar Nayak Chief Labour Commissioner (C) 
3. Joint Secretary Sh. R. K. Gupta 
7. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry 
of Labour & Employment to the sitting of the Committee, convened to have a 
briefing on 'Code -on Wages Bill, 2017'. The Chairperson' then 'drew attention of 
the. representatives to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee during deposition before the 
Parliamentary Committees. He then asked the representatives of the Ministry to 
give an overview of the subject matter .. 
-) ?-Jr- 


r~.i'·'~:·~·':C\"~·'·~ ;;\ ·~::';:i¥1Eft:=:'i:C!.-S'':>±.-~- ~;:'~:·.:;;:t; ;.':; Z::-;:.:j;;-::c..: :\<,-"1~-.;;_:o:,_- _. - - 4f~~*'-~'?t;;;~"1t'i$=~:':'~sr-~~;;;;~~~ 
~ rl 
I'l 
I 
I I ~ ~ ~~ 
~ , 
3 
8. The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment, accordingly, 
briefed the Committee on the subject highlighting inter-alia sub-summation of 4 
Acts in 'Code on Wages', consultation with stakeholders, major changes proposed 
in the Code vis-a-vis existing acts, benefits to workers, etc. Thereafter, the 
Members raised queries on various issues which, inter-alia, included low wages to 
contract workers in NIC, GAIL,. Railways, Airports, private organisations, etc; 
implementation of social security schemes and minimum wages; accountability, 
. details of inspection; reasons for not mentioning the word 'worker' in chapter-If: 
national minimum wage and variable dearness allowances; recommendations of . . 
the 45th and 46th Indian-Labour conference in 2015; denial of bonus to contract 
workers of BVG in Parliament Complex, Shram shakti Bhawan, VP House, etc; 
disparity between the salaries of contract workers in Government and private 
organisation; harassment of women employees at Government/private 
organisations; inclusion of Beedi Workers; etc. The Additional Secretary, Ministry 
of Labour & Employment responded to queries raised by' the Members. 
9. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee 
and briefing them on the subject as well as responding to the queries raised. The 
Chairperson directed the Additional Secretary of Ministry of Labour & 
Employment to furnish written replies within 10 days in respect of those queries, 
. for which information was not readily available with them during the meeting as 
well as which required detailed and statistical information. 
The witnesses then withdrew, 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
xx 'Does not pertain - ~_ .. this ReEort. 
-j 
__ __.o.._~ = .. -.~.-_, .. ~ .. ---.~ .. -.' ~.c-~~·--· -~,--- -.- 


r.- .. - .. ~~-:" .. -. ~=. ,=. - '-"'=' - ~'. --_':=':::,"=:::" '::S;'-,'::-='·--'::'::"'---::':::::--~:"::::;--'>::::-?'~~~"~"'-C'~'>o=-?""" _:Sti~"'''''''''''::'~.,-E .. .;~§,~O=S,?7~''"':'' ,.,~~,,,.,."2. c;,,=,'.' r '~".'.'.,? 
~' 
~ .® 
I · ~! ,', ;, 
Appendix-II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
, (2017-18) 
Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 24th October, 2017 from 1100 hrs. to . 
1330 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT· 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya CHAIRPERSON' 
MEMBERS 
LOKSABHA 
1. 8hri Rajesh Kumar. Diwakar, MP 
2. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey, MP 
3. ShriSatish Chandra Dubey, MP 
4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam, MP 
5. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, MP 
6. Shri C.N. Jayadevan, MP 
7. . Shri Bahadur Singh Koli, MP 
8. Dr. Arun Kumar, MP 
9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar, :tyIP 
10. Shri Hari Manjhi, MP 
11. Shri R. Parthipan, MP 
12. Shri Hari Om Singh Rathore, MP 
13'. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania, MP 
14. 8hri Kodikunnil Suresh, MP 
15, Shri Dayak:ar Pasurioori, MP 
RAJYASABHA 
16. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway, MP 
17. Shri P.L. Punia,-MP 
18. Shri Rajaram, MP 
19. Bhri Amar _Shapkar .Sab1e, ME .. , . - ". 
20. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen, MP 
21. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan, MP . 
22. Ms. Dola Sen, MP 
I 
------------~------~--~~ 


I'~""~=""'~~ --,--- -""---~--'-'-_O-.7._. - .•.. -"""""'''''''.-,=---=--=-:.-------.~=---- .. _ .... 
~ ~ .:: 
" 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad 
2. Smt. Anita B Panda 
3. Shri Dhiraj Kumar . 
4. Smt Archana Srivastva - 
. ., Jomt Secretary 
Director 
Additional Director 
Under Secretary 
Part -I 
Witnesses 
REPRESENTATIVE OF BHARTIYA MAZDOOR SANGH (BMS) 
·S1. Name of the Officer Designation 
No 
l. Shri Pawan Kumar Zonal Organising Secretary, BMS 
REPRESENTATIVE OF CENTRE O'F INDIAN TRADE UNIONS (CITU) 
.SI. N arne of the Officer Designation 
No 
1. Smt. K. Hemalata, President, CITU 
REPRESENTATIVE OF ALL INDIA TRADE UNION CONGRESS (AITUC) 
SI. Name of the Officer Designation 
No 
l. 8hri. Vidya Sagar Giri Secretary, AITUC 
REPRESENTATIVE OF ALL INDIA UNITED TRADE UNION CENTRE 
(AIUTUC) 
81. N arne of the Officer Designation 
No 
1. 8hri Ramesh Kumar Member 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and the representatives of various Trade Unions to the sitting, convened to 
hear suggestions/ views of the representatives of the Central Trade Unions viz. 
(i) Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS), (ii) All India Trade Union Congress 
(AITUC) , (iii) Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) and (iv) All India United 
Trade Union Centre (AIUTUC) on 'Code on Wages Bill, 2017'. The Chairperson 
--------.:.__---------:--- ... - _- 


r"~~=::::~:::~:::::===~';£ ;;.' '~b the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of, the Committee 
~ ... 
during deposition before the Parliamentary Committees. He then asked the 
representatives of various Trade Unions to put forth their suggestion/ views on 
'Code on Wages Bill, 2017'. 
3. The representatives of Trade Unions then raised the issues relating to 
universal wage, drawbacks of maintenance of minimum bank balance, same 
wage for same work to contract workers; national minimum wage, loopholes in 
implementation of Labour Laws/ Acts; violation of Right to Strike; Bonus Act, 
Equal remunera~onj wages; loopholes in inspection by Ministry; differentiation 
of workers under skilled, unskilled and semi skilled work etc. 
<, 
4. Thereafter, the Members raised queries on various issues which, inter­ 
alia, included universal wage; making wages region wise; gap between 
subjective and objective realities; measures to be taken for efficient 
implementation of the Act; monitoring process and conviction rate for non 
implementation of minimum wagesj Bonus; common minimum wages in 
Central ~d State Organisations" etc.' 
I· 
5. The Chairperson then thanked them for appearing before the Committee 
and responding to the queries raised. The Chairperson directed the 
representatives of various Trade Unions to furnish written memoranda on 
other clauses of the Bill on which they want to make suggestions within 10 
days. 
PART-II 
REPRESENTATIVE OF PHD CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRIES 
(PHDCCI) 
81. Name of the Officer Designation 
No 
1. 8hri Ravi Wig Former Pre side!.l:t. ~d . Cb.air rnari, , - .-.-:,,~-==-~,-.,..- ... -' ~-- .. - 
.' 
HR and IR Committee 
_t. 


-- .-----------~~-- 
f' ::'."':'::f:~~: :::;~::::;:,~~-:q.g:&~~:~e'"--;::~;> =L.o_\~k:=~;:;·":~::;:·~;;::;:·; :'. " . :_;.' ::.~;rk :;:,~,;:_~ ;' ·;::'·'.!7;~?;:J:r-::,;jE*-;;J.$.2f~ ••• ;;;¥:iill'di.·"ffb:$E;;;:·~)-r·~;i"i"~.§';;;;~~~';-2-;-.'8;_;~:;_~.,: 
e 
I ':, 
~$ 
:~ r 
REPRESENTATIVE OF FEDERATION OF INDIAN CHAMBERS OF 
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (FICCI) 
8L N arne of the Officer Designation 
No 
1. Shri B.P. Pant Advisor, FICCI 
REPRESENTATIVE OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRi7 OF INDIA (ASSOCHAM) , 
81. Name' of the Officer Designation 
No , 
1. Shri K.C. Mehra Senior Managing Committee 
Member, ASSOCHAM 
REPRESENTATIVE OF CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN INDUSTRIES (ell) 
S1. Name of the Officer Designation' 
No 
1. 8hri M. 8. U nnikrishnan Chairman cn National Committee 
on Industrial MD &CEO, Thermax 
Ltd., 
6.' At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of (i) The 
Associated Chambers of Commerce & Industry of India (A8S0CHAM), (ii) 
Confederation of Indian Industries [Cll] , (iii) Federation of Indian Chambers of 
Commerce .& Industries (FICCI) and (iv) PHD Chambers of Commerce & 
Industries (PHDCCl), to the sittingconvened to hear/ suggestion on 'Code on 
. Wages Bill, 2017'. The Chairperson then drew attention of the representatives 
to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of 
the proceedings of the Committee during, deposition before the Parliamentary 
Committees. He then asked the representatives of ASSOCHAM, ClI, FleCI and 
PHDCCI to put forth their suggestions/ views on 'Code on Wages Bill, 2017'. 
7. The representatives of ClI, FlCCl, PHDCCI and ASSOCHAM then raised 
the issues relating to universal wage, differentiation in wages of workers under 
(skilled/ semi skilled/ unskilled) category, comparison of minimum wages with 
other countries, definition and fixation of National minimum wage. 
-------------------------- 


GsKcy Hr" D -- - --' 
. " 
:,'"' 
8, Thereafter, the Members raised queries on various issues which, inter­ 
alia, included the present wages given by the employer to the workers, 
initiatives taken by the garment Industry employers about the wages, 
discussionwith the associations, eligibility of PF to garment workers problems 
faced by the Industries and measures to be taken to make the workers and 
·Industries profitable. 
9. The Chairperson then thanked them for appearing before the Committee 
and responding to the queries raised. The Chairperson directed representatives 
of PHDCCI, FleCl, ASSQCHAM and crr to furnish written memoranda on other 
clauses of the Bill on which they want to make suggestions within 10 days. 
'The witnesses then withdrew. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
, ,':oJ 
1 
I 


r~'1,,"~',,""-'v~""'""~';C-~'!%"'>""'=="'b%;""""''-''';~''''''';' ,,",,,",,,- '" ";~~,'-",""- "CC,-,- 
I t f f;r, 
Appendix~III 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
Minutes of the Eighth Sittirig of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 11th January, 2018 from 1530 hrs. 
to 1700·hrs. in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Kirit Sornaiya, MP - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOKSABHA 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar; MP 
3. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey, l'4P 
4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam, MP 
5. Shri C.N. Jayadevan, MP 
6. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli, MP 
7 .. Dr. Arun Kumar, MP 
8. Shri Hari Manjhi, MP 
9. Shri Hari Om Singh Rathore, MP 
10. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, MP 
RAJYASABHA 
11. Shri Ram N arain Dudi, MP 
12. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway, MP 
13. Shri Rajaram, MP 
14. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan, MP 
15. Ms. Dola Sen, MP 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad 
2. Smt. Anita B Panda 
3. Shri Dhiraj Kumar 
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
. Additional Director 
Additional Director . 


r , ... - -.' - .. -.-~ .. ' .... :. "",-"-,,,,,_,, - .: ·c· .. ·cc·".-;~r"-'~ c. ~- '-A'-~:::~':.: ~n'- .. --- 
I joi 
;-; 
- ::> 
WITNESSES 
REPRESENTATIVES OF COUNCIL OF INDIAN EMPLOYERS (SCOPE) 
S1. Name of the Officer Designation 
No 
1. Dr. U,D. Choubey Director General 
2. Shri Rajeev Bhardwaj Director (HR) - 
REPRESENTATIVE OF LAGHU UDYOG BHARATI 
S1. Name of the Officer . Designation 
No 
1. ~hri RK. Bharadwaj National Vice President 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and the representatives of Council of Indian Employers (CIE) - SCOPE; and 
Laghu Udhyog Bharti (!:tUB) to the sitting, convened to hear suggestions/ views 
of the representatives of the Council of Indian Employers (CIE) - SCOPE; and 
Laghu Udhyog Bharti (LUB) on 'Code on Wage~ Bill, 2017'. The Chairperson 
then drew attention of the representatives to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by 
the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee 
during deposition before the Parliamentary Committees. He then asked the 
representatives of stakeholders to put forth their suggestions/ views on 'Code 
on Wages Bill, 2017'. 
3. The representatives of stakeholders then raised the issues relating to '. 
National Minimum Wage; payment of wages to employees; same wage for 
experienced and newly joined employees for same work; exploitation of 
employees by their employers in payment of minimum wage; offences and 
penalties under 'Section 52'; Section 6(1), sub-clause 2 &; 3; minimum. number 
of days to ,determine minimum wage, leave salary; ambiguity on clauses dealing 


r~""':~='.~:".:'~"'_~::::::::-=="--::'":~:'~~'~~:C"':=~<7''''.~, ~. 7" · , 
I ~ with fine, bonus etc., adding depreciation in calculation of profit under clause 
~i •• 30(a), revision of wages for employees working in unorganised sector; etc. 
4. Thereafter, the Members raised queries on various issues which, inter­ 
alia, included efficient implementation of Act regarding minimum wages, DA 
and Bonus; measures to increase minimum wages; calculation of direct tax 
under universal wage; making wages region wise; measures to be taken for 
efficient implementation of the Act; moni~oring process and conviction rate for 
non implementation of minimum wages/ Bonus; common minimum wages in 
Central and State establishments, etc. 
5. The Chairperson then thanked them for appearing before the Committee 
and responding to the queries. raised. The Chairperson directed the 
representatives of stakeholders to furnish written memoranda containing their 
suggestions on various clauses of the Bill, if any, within 10 days. 
6. xx xx xx xx 
[{\ copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
xx Does not pertain' --m this Report. 


Appendix-IV 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-181 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 18th January, 2018 from 1430 hrs. 
to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room No. '2', Parliament House Annexe - Extension 
Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Kirit Sornaiya, MP - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOKSABHA 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar, MP 
3 .. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam, MP 
4. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli, MP 
5. Dr. Arun Kumar, MP 
6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar, MP 
7. Shri N aba Kumar Sarania, MP 
8. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori, MP 
RAJYASABHA 
9. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway, MP 
10. Shri Rajaram, MP 
11. Ms. Dola .Sen, MP 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Anita B Panda 
2. Shri Dhiraj Kumar 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata 
Director 
Additional Director 
Additional Director 
t 
_----....---____.;____._.....~l 


_._ .. _--'-'- .. -- ._----- . - - .. - . "----- ~, 
., ..• 
. '\ 
WITNESSES • 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
S1. Name of the Officer Designation 
No 
1. Smt. M. Sathiyavathy Secretary (L&E) 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Nayak Chief Labour Commissioner (C) 
3. Shri Manish Kumar Gupta Joint Secretary 
4. Shri R.K. Gupta Join t Secretary 
2. xx xx xx X)C The Committee further 
decided to seek permission of Hon'ble Speaker to present the Report on 'Code 
on Wages Bill, 2017' till the second week of the' Budget Session (Second Part). 
3. Representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment were then 
usheted in. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of Ministry of 
Labour & Employment to the sitting convened to hear views of the Ministry on 
the memoranda received by the Committee containing suggestions on 'Code on 
Wages Bill, 2017'. The Chairperson then drew attention of the representatives 
to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of 
the proceedings of the Committee during deposition before the Parliamentary 
Committees. He then asked the representatives of the Ministry to put forth 
their views. 
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment then explained various 
points that emerged from the memoranda received on the said Bill by .the 
Committee, through PowerPoint Presentation, which inter-alia included 
difference 'in definition of 'employee' and 'worker' Section 2U), 2(y); definition of 
'same work or work of'-aimilar nature' Section 2(u); definition of 'appropriate 
government; methodology of fixation of National Minimum wage; increase in 
minimum wages;. universal national minimum wage; gap for reviewing 
minimum wages from 5 years to 3 years; existing minimum wage = by the 
State and Central Government; wage ceiling of Rs.18,OOO / - removed by the 
wage code -o.nder payment of wages act; dilution of Equal Remuneration Act 


.' ~~; under gender discrimination; disputes regarding payment of wages, minimum 'f".~.' 
wages or gender discrimination; appointment of facilitator in lieu of labour 
-- enforcement mechanism; etc. 
inspector / enforcement officer; dilution of provisions of inspections/ 
5. Thereafter, the Members raised queries on various issues which, inter­ 
alia, included definition of "employer" under Section 2(k); Universal National 
.Minimum Wage; setting the minimum wage at Rs.18,OOO per month in the 
Code; extension of the provisions of Minimum Wage to Unorganized Sector 
workers; consultations between Central and State Governments while 
determining national minimum wages under section 9 (1), (2) & (3); deduction 
of 8 days wages for I-day strike under the code; calculation of direct tax by the 
employer under Section 35(a); etc. 
6. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the Ministry for 
appearing before the Committee and responding to the queries raised. The 
Chairperson directed the Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment to 
furnish written replies within ten days in respect of those queries, for which 
information was not readily available with them during the meeting as well as 
which required detailed and statistical information. Further, the Chairperson 
requested the Members to send their suggestions, if any, on the 'Code on 
Wages Bill, 2017'. 
The witnesses ·then withdrew. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned . 
.xx Does not pertain .:t({_. this Report. 


Appendix-V 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee 
The C.ommittee sat on Wednesday, the 28th February, 2018 from 1130 
hrs. to 1240 hrs. in Committee Room No. '2', Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya, MP - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOKSABHA 
2. Shri Rajesh KUmar Diwakar, MP 
3. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam, MP 
4. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli, MP 
5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar, MP 
6. Shri Hari Manjhi, MP 
7. Shri Hari Om Singh Rathore, MP 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri P.L. Punia, MP 
9. Shri Ram Narain Dudi, MP 
10. Nazir Ahmed Laway, MP 
11. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen, MP 
12; Shri N. Gokulakrishnan, MP 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad 
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
. Additional Director 


-- -------------- 
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee, convened for fmalisation of Report on 'Code on Wages Bill, 
2017'. 
3. -- The Committee then held discussion on .the draft report on 'Code on 
Wages Bill, 2017. The Chairperson gave an overview of the Recommendations 
of the Committee made in the Draft Report and requested the Members to give 
their suggestions on them, if any. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee , 
desired some modifications/ suggestions in the draft Report like deductions 
from salary under section 18 of the Bill and whether the same is not deposited 
by the employers, deductions on account of absence from duty, calculation of 
direct tax payable, etc. 
4. Further, the Chairperson requested the Members to grve their 
suggestions on the Report on 'Code on Wages Bill, 2017, if any, in writing by 1st 
March, 2018 positively, so that the same may be incorporated in the report. 
The Committee then adiourned. 
