i 
26 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[EXEMPTED ORGANISATIONS/ TRUSTS/ ESTABLISHMENTS 
FROM EPFO : PERFORMANCE, ISSUES AND CHALLENGES] 
  
TWENTY-SIXTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2017/Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) 
  
       
 


ii 
   TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2016-17) 
 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[EXEMPTED ORGANISATIONS/ TRUSTS/ ESTABLISHMENTS 
FROM EPFO : PERFORMANCE, ISSUES AND CHALLENGES] 
  
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.04.2017 
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.04.2017 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2017/Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) 
 
  


iii 
CONTENTS 
PAGE No.  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (iv)
      
INTRODUCTION            (v)
   
      REPORT 
 
GIST OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  1 
CHAPTER - I  
I. INTRODUCTORY 6 
CHAPTER - II  
I. COVERAGE OF WORKERS/EMPLOYEES 13 
II. TOTAL CORPUS 20 
III. PATTERN OF INVESTMENT 28 
IV. PHYSICAL INSPECTION OF SECURITIES 34 
V. MONITORING 36 
VI. VIOLATIONS/MALPRACTICES 44 
VII. PROPOSALS PENDING FOR GRANT OF EXEMPTION 47 
VIII. WITHDRAWAL OF EXEMPTION 49 
IX. MAINTENANCE OF DATA BASE 51 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix I- Minutes  of  the Seventh Sitting  of   the Committee held on 
14th December, 2016. 
55 
Appendix II-Minutes  of  the Eleventh Sitting  of   the  Committee held  on 
18th January, 2017. 
58 
Appendix III-Minutes  of  the Fifteenth Sitting  of   the  Committee held  on 
6th April, 2017. 
62 
 
 
  
  

iv 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2016-17) 
 DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS   
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
17. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
18. Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
19. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
20. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
21. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
23. Shri N. Gokulkrishnan 
24. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
25. Shri P.L. Punia 
26. Shri Rajaram 
27. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
28. Ms. Dola Sen 
29. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
30. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
31.* Vacant 
* Vacancy occurred vice Shri Haji Abdul Salam expired on 28.02.2017.  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Ms. Rimjhim Prasad   - Joint Secretary  
 2.    Smt. Anita B. Panda   -  Director 
 3.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Under Secretary 
 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
          I,  the  Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2016 -17) having 
been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this Twenty -Sixth 
Report on 'Exempted Organisations/ T rusts/ Establishments from EPFO : 
Performance, Issues and Challenges'  pertaining to the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment. 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment and EPFO on 14th December, 2016 and 18th 
January, 2017. The Committee cons idered and adopted the Draft Re port at 
their sitting held on 6th April , 201 7. The Committee wish to express their 
thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Labour and Employment for tendering 
oral evidence and placing before them the detailed written notes and post 
evidence information as desired by the Committee. 
3. For ease of reference, the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
  
                     
New Delhi;              DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA  
   6th  April, 2017                          CHAIRPERSON,  
  16th  Chaitra, 1938 (Saka)             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
  

1 
 
GIST OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AS CONTAINED 
IN THIS REPORT 
 
 Concerned with the gross deficiencies in the monitoring of the 
performance of Provident Fund Exempted Establishments, the Standing 
Committee on Labour had decided to examine the subject “Exempted 
Organizations/Trusts/Establishments from EPFO: Performance, Issues 
and Challenges” on priority and held evidences of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment and EPFO as well as few 
exempted Establishments on 14.12.2016 and 18.1.2017 respectively.  
The Committee have been informed that their con cerns are being 
addressed by the Ministry of Labour & Employment and EPFO.   
In the present Report, the Committee have made their 
observations/recommendations on the following points:- 
1. A definite timeline need to be given to all Regional offices to 
conduct compliance audit of the 1549 Exempted 
Establishments employing 84,42,241 workers.  Also all pending 
proposals for cancellation of exemptions to be finalised 
without further delay. 
2. Total corpus of Exempted Establishments is ₹2.57 lakh crore, 
which includes a huge unclaimed amount of Rs.5475 crore too.  

2 
 
This data was collected by EPFO only after the intervention of 
the Committee.  Presently no provision is there in the Act to 
deter a Trust from holding such unclaimed amount with them.  
Suitable provision/amendment needs to be incorporated in the 
Act to specify the time period for holding unclaimed amount 
by the establishments to avert such a situation.  Also the 
concerned establishments are expected to have names and 
addresses of all workers hence urged to tr ace them to reduce 
non-claim cases. 
3. C-DAC, Pune, which is developing a better software to monitor 
details of all Exempted Establishments and their compliance of 
the provisions of the Act, to speed it up as further time would 
be required for migration of da ta from the old system to the 
new one, before the new software starts its proper operations. 
4. In 180 Exempted Establishments having less than 20 workers, 
22 Establishments have zero membership.  Exemption granted 
to these Establishments to be reviewed immediately. 
5. 118 Exempted Establishments have total corpus of less than 1 
crore. They filed their last returns in 2014 or 2015.  
Apprehending that these Establishments may not have settled 
the PF dues of their employees/workers, EPFO has been asked 

3 
 
to explain the basis of granting exemption to them, reasons for 
non-filing of returns since last 2 -3 years and status of 
disbursement of dues to the subscribers. 
6. The Committee have recommended that proper strong 
guidelines may be prepared with regard to past performa nce, 
net worth, group performance, etc. as well as minimum 
strength of workers, collections, contributions, corpus of the 
company/establishment, to grant exemption. 
7. The Committee have asked to be furnished with the special 
audit report of certain exempted establishments, as committed 
by EPFO during the meeting held on 18.1.2017 which was 
promised to be ready by 31.3.2017. 
8. Surcharge levied by EPFO in case of deviations from the 
prescribed pattern of investment by Exempted Establishments, 
is very nominal henc e cannot act as an effective deterrent.  
Therefore, Committee has directed that a raised amount of 
surcharge be notified at the earliest. 
9.  As the present Act does not impose any restrictions on 
Exempted Establishments to invest accumulated PF fund 
amount in their own business, therefore, the Committee have 

4 
 
strongly recommended to initiate requisite process to stop 
such practices.  
10. No physical inspection of investment instruments (where the 
PF amount is invested) is made due to the same being in 
DEMAT format .  Committee has emphasized on inspection of 
DEMAT Accounts as well as physical inspection of filed returns 
during the compliance audit of Exempted Establishments to 
ensure that the Government-prescribed pattern is followed. 
11. Citing various cases of violati ons, the Committee have 
emphasized on bringing requisite transparency and 
accountability not only in the compliance of exemption 
provisions under the EPF & MP Act, 1952 by the concerned 
establishments but also in the monitoring of the same by 
RPFCs and EPFO. 
In the meantime, the Ministry and the EPFO are already active on 
the following initiatives:  
(i) development of a new better software through C-DAC for more 
effective monitoring; 
(ii) initiation of compliance audit of Exempted Establishments;  

5 
 
(iii) identification of small/very small PF Trusts and framing of 
policy guidelines for imposing restrictions of minimum corpus 
and membership etc;  
(iv) In view of non-capturing of data about un-claimed PF amount 
of members with Trusts of PF Exempted Establishments, 
initiation of for mulation of guidelines for Trusts to transfer 
un-claimed amounts of EPFO;  
(v) Framing of new rates of surcharge for levying on account of 
deviation from the prescribed pattern of investment by BOTs 
of PF Exempted Establishments; and  
(vi) In-principle agreement to  frame necessary 
guidelines/amendments/ notification to restrict BOTs of 
Exempted Establishments from investing in the instruments 
issued by the principal establishments and its sister 
concerns. 
As is seen from the recommendations, the Committee have sough t 
status of all these efforts at the action taken stage. 
 
  

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 With the Industrial growth  in India, some of the big employers had 
introduced schemes of provident funds for the welfa re of their workers. 
But all tho se schemes were  private and voluntary. Workers of the small 
employers remained deprived of the benefits which were provided by the 
big employers. On 11th February, 1948 , a private bill was introduced in 
the Constituent Assembly of India to provide for the establishment a nd 
grant of provident fund for certain classes of workers by their employers. 
This Bill provided for compulsory establishment of provident funds by 
every employer in industrial concerns for the betterment of the 
employees and their families.  On 15th Novemb er, 1951 the Government 
of India promulgated the Employees' Provident Funds Ordinance which 
came into force on that date. Subsequently the Employees' Provident 
Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill was introduced in the 
Parliament to replace the Ordinanc e. To avoid any hardship to new  
establishments, a provision had  been made for exempting them for a 
period of three years and similar exemptions were given  to other 
establishments which we re less than three years old till they have been 
in operation for a period of three years in all. The rate of contribution will 
be 6 percent of the total emoluments of the worker, the worker and the 
employer each contributing these amounts. Further, the scheme could 
empower payment of a higher subscription by the workers a t their 
option. Where provident funds offering equal or more advantageous 
terms were operating efficiently, provision ha d been made for them to 
continue subject to certain safeguards in the interest of the workers. 
EPF&MP Act 19 of 1952 
1.2 The Employees' Provident Funds Bill having been passed by both 
the Houses of the Parliament received the assent of the President on 4th 
March, 1952. It came on the Statute Book as the Employees' Provident 
Funds Act, 1952 (19 of 1952). By section 13 of the Labour Providen t 
Fund Laws (Amendment) Act, 1971 (16 of 1971) the nomenclature of the 
Act was amended as "The Employees Provident Funds and Family 

7 
 
Pension Fund Act, 1952" (w.e.f. 23.4.1971)  and by section 17 of the 
Labour Provident Fund Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (99 of 1976), the 
nomenclature of the Act was again changed as "The Employees' Provident 
Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952" (w.e.f. 1.8.1976). Now it 
stands as THE EMPLOYEES' PROVIDENT FUNDS AND 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1952 (19 OF 1952) (Came int o 
force on 4.3.1952). 
 Till 1997 this Act had been amended 15 times. 
1.3 EPF & MP Act, 1952 applies to an establishment – 
i. Employing 20 or more employees and 
ii. Falling under the schedule or under class of establishments 
so notified.  
1.4 An establishment falling under the purview of the EPF & MP 
Act is required to comply with the following Schemes:- 
i. Employees' Provident Fund Scheme (EPF), 1952 
ii. Employees' Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme(EDLI), 1976 
iii. Employees' Pension Scheme (EPS), 1995 
 
 Establishments pre existing enactment of EPF & MP Act, 1952. 
 Allowing employers with good track record to provide flexibility – for 
extending better benefits to employees. 
 To overcome service related issues. 
 If any establishment having a scheme providing comparable or 
more be nefits to members seeks exemption, it can be granted 
exemption from operation of EPF Scheme, 1952 subject to terms 
and conditions and overall supervision. 
1.5 Types of exemption 
 There are three kinds of Exemption Categories as under: 
 Establishment as a whole - Section 17(1)(a) 
 "any [establishment] to which this Act applies if, in the opinion of 
the appropriate Government, the rules of its provident fund with respect 
to the rates of contribution are not less favourable than those specified in 

8 
 
section 6 a nd the employees are also in enjoyment of other provident 
fund benefits which on the whole are not less  favourable to the 
employees than the benefits provided under this Act or any Scheme in 
relation to the employees in any other [establishment] of a simil ar 
character;" 
 Class of Employees - Para 27A read with Section 17(2) 
"27A. Ex emption of a class of employees - (1) [The appropriate 
Government] may by order and subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in the order exempt from the operation of all or any of the 
provisions of this Scheme any class of employees to whom the Scheme 
applies: Provided that such cla ss of employees are entitled to benefits in 
the nature of provident fund, gratuity or old age pension according to the 
rules of the [factory or other establishment] and such benefits separately 
or jointly or on the whole not less favourable than the benefi t provided 
under the Act and this Scheme.  
(2) Where any class of employees is exempted as aforesaid, the employer 
shall in respect of such class of employees maintain such account, 
submit such returns, provide such facilities for inspection, pay such 
inspection charges and invest provident fund collections in such manner 
as the Central Government may direct.  
 [Provided that above mentioned returns shall be submitted by the 
employer in electronic format also, in such form and manner as may be 
specified by the Commissioner.] 
(3) A class of employees exempted under sub -paragraph (1) or the 
majority of employees constituting such class may by an application to 
the Commissioner make a declaration that the class desires to join the 
Fund and thereupon such class of employees shall become members of 
the Fund.  
(4) No class of employees shall be granted exemption or permitted to 
apply out of exemption more than once on each account.  
(5) The provisions of this paragraph shall be deemed to have come into 
force with effect from the 14th of October, 1953." 
"Section 17(2) - Any Scheme may make provision for exemption of any 
person or class of persons employed in any establishment to which the 
Scheme applies from the operation of all or any of the provisions of the 
Scheme, if such person or class of persons is entitled to benefits in the 
nature of provident fund, gratuity or old age pension and such benefits, 
separately or jointly, are on the whole not less favourable than the 

9 
 
benefits provided under this Act or the Scheme : Provided that no such 
exemption shall be granted in respect of a class of persons unless the 
appropriate Government is of opinion that the majority of persons 
constituting such class desire to continue to be entitled to such benefits. 
(2A) The Central Pr ovident Fund Commissioner may, if requested so to 
do by the employer, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to 
such conditions as may be specified in the notification, exempt, whether 
prospectively or retrospectively, any establishment from the operation of 
all or any of the provisions of the Insurance Scheme, if he is satisfied 
that the employees of such establishment are, without making any 
separate contribution or payment of premium, in enjoyment of benefits 
in the nature of life insurance , whether linked to their deposits in 
provident fund or not, and such benefits are more favourable to such 
employees than the benefits admissible under the Insurance Scheme. 
(2B) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section 2A, the Insurance 
Scheme may provide for the exemption of any person or class of persons 
employed in any establishment and covered by that scheme from the 
operation of all or any of the provisions thereof, if the benefits in the 
nature of life insurance admissible to such person or class of persons are 
more favourable than the benefits provided under the Insurance 
Scheme." 
 
 Individual Employees - Para 27 read with Section 17(2) 
"Para 27 Exemption of an employee - (1) A Commissioner may by order 
and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order exempt 
from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Scheme an 
employee to whom the Scheme applies on receipt of application in Form I 
from such an  employee: Provided that such an employee is entitled to 
benefits in the nature of Provident Fund, gratuity or old age pension 
according to the rules of the factory or other establishment and such 
benefits separately or jointly are on the whole not less fa vourable than 
the benefits provided under the Act and the Scheme.  
(2) Where an employee is exempted as aforesaid, the employer shall in 
respect of such employee maintain such account, submit such returns, 
provide such facilities for inspection, pay such i nspection charges and 
invest provident fund collections in such manner as the Central 
Government may direct.  

10 
 
(3) An employee exempted under sub -paragraph (1) may by an 
application to the Commissioner make a declaration that he shall 
become a member of the Fund.  
(4) No employee shall be granted exemption or permitted to apply out of 
exemption more than once on each account." 
"Section 17(2) - Any Scheme may make provision for exemption of any 
person or class of persons employed in any establishment to which  the 
Scheme applies from the operation of all or any of the provisions of the 
Scheme, if such person or class of persons is entitled to benefits in the 
nature of provident fund, gratuity or old age pension and such benefits, 
separately or jointly, are on t he whole not less favourable than the 
benefits provided under this Act or the Scheme: Provided that no such 
exemption shall be granted in respect of a class of persons unless the 
appropriate Government is of opinion that the majority of persons 
constituting such class desire to continue to be entitled to such benefits. 
(2A) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner may, if requested so to 
do by the employer, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to 
such conditions as may be specified in the notification, exempt, whether 
prospectively or retrospectively, any establishment from the operation of 
all or any of the provisions of the Insurance Scheme, if he is satisfied 
that the employees of such establishment are, without making any 
separate contribution or payment of premium, in enjoyment of benefits 
in the nature of life insurance, whether linked to their deposits in 
provident fund or not, and such benefits are more favourable to such 
employees than the benefits admissible under the Insurance Scheme. 
(2B) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section 2A, the Insurance 
Scheme may provide for the exemption of any person or class of persons 
employed in any establishment and covered by that scheme from the 
operation of all or any of the provision s thereof, if the benefits in the 
nature of life insurance admissible to such person or class of persons are 
more favourable than the benefits provided under the Insurance 
Scheme." 
1.6 Function of Exemption Division in EPF Head office - 
 In the EPFO Head Office, a separate division to deal with 
Exemption exists. Its functions are as under: 
 Processing of the proposals for grant of exemption from operation of 
EPF Scheme, 1952 received from the field offices for onward 

11 
 
submission to the Appropriate Government s - Central 
Government/State Governments as the case may be. 
 Processing the proposals for cancellation/surrender of exemption. 
 Formulation of guidelines/directives for the field offices. 
 Handling of grievance pertaining to exempted/relaxed 
establishments. 
 Monitoring of Dashboard of EPF Exempted Establishments. 
 Other miscellaneous work. 
1.7 Procedure for applying for Exemption - 
 The establishments eager to seek Exemption from EPF Scheme, 
1952 applies to the Appropriate Government through the Regional 
PF Commissioner under whose jurisdiction the establishment lies. 
 The proposal submitted to RPFC is examined at the level of the fiel d 
office and the proposal complete in all respects is forwarded to the 
Exemption Branch of the EPFO Head Office. 
 Exemption Branch scrutinises the proposal and the proposal 
complete in all respects is placed before the CBT, EPF or Sub 
Committee of CBT, EPF on Exempted Establishments, for 
recommendation to the Appropriate Government. 
 On getting recommendation of the Sub -Committee on Exempted 
Establishment, CBT, EPF, the proposal is then forwarded to the 
Appropriate Government for consideration. 
1.8 Provision for Relaxation - 
 Para 79 of EPF Scheme, 1952 provides for special provisions in 
respect of the establishment whose application for exemption has 
been received and are under consideration. 
 Under the provisions Commissioner may relax an establishment 
during the pendency of application for grant of exemption. 
 At present this power has been withdrawn w.e.f 2012 from the 
RPFCs through an administrative order. 
 
 

12 
 
1.9 Cancellation/Surrender of Exemption - 
 As per section 17(4) exemption may be cancelled:- 
 By the authority which granted it 
 Duly following the laid down procedure 
 Through an order in writing 
 For failure to comply with the conditions 
 Surrender of exemption by the Establishment 
 Where Exemption stands revoked consequent upon change of legal 
status of the exempted establishment, formal order is issued at the 
end of CPFC. 
 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER - II 
I. COVERAGE OF WORKERS/EMPLOYEES 
 As per the information furnished by the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment/EPFO, there are 1,549 exempted Establishments all over 
India. The number of employee s covered in each of the exempted 
establishment are 84,42,241 (as on 31.03.2016). 
2.2 While analysing , the information provided by the EPFO it was 
found that some of the exempted establishment s were following dual 
setup i.e. some of their employees were subscribing to their own trust 
formed for this purpose and some were subscribing to EPF.  When asked 
by the Committee as to  how the EPFO tackle s this situation as the 
particular organi sation could be  shown under exempted  as well as un -
exempted establishment, the EPFO informed as under: 
 "Section 17 of the  EPF & MP Act,1952 provides for following types 
of exemption :- 
S.N
o 
Provision Applicability 
1 U/s 17(1)(a) of 
EPF & MP 
Act,1952 
To 
Establishment 
to which Act 
apply 
2 U/s 17(2) of 
EPF & MP 
Act,1952 read 
with Para 27  
of EPF 
Scheme, 1952 
Exemption of an 
Employee 
3 U/s 17(2) of 
EPF & MP 
Act,1952 read 
with Para 
27(A)  of EPF 
Scheme, 1952 
Class of 
Employees  
 
 With reference to the case 1 mentioned at Sl. No. (1) above, all the 
eligible employees of the establishment are made member of the Trust.  
 With reference to case 2 mentioned at Sl. No. (2) above, only 
individual employee who wishes to comply as exempted is allowed to 

14 
 
become the member of the Trust. This facility is given to the employee 
once in entire service. 
 With reference to case 3 mentioned at Sl. No. (3) above, a 
particular class of employee, which are well defined in the Trust Rules, 
are allowed to become the member of the Trust. All other employees not 
falling under the definition of class of employees ar e required to 
contribute to the stator fund of EPFO. However as per 2 above the 
employee can exercise option to join trust fund and vice -versa under this 
exemption (27A) once in his entire service as per para 27 (Individual 
exemption).  
 Since, the demarca tion of exempted and un -exempted employees 
is crystal clear, therefore compliance position of both the categories of 
employees are ascertained separately." 
2.3 When asked about the cases where the exempted establishment s 
catering to a specific class of emp loyee and othe rs are left out of any 
coverage and the action taken against such establishments as well as the 
mechanism followed to cover such emplo yees to protect their interests, 
the EPFO informed as under: 
 "...no eligible employee of any covered establishment under EPF & 
MP Act, 1952 is allowed to be left out from coverage.  However during 
compliance audit or on receipt of any complaint, if any employee is found 
left out an inquiry under Section 7A is initiated by RPFC to examine his 
eligibility a fter giving reasonable opportunity to establishment and 
employee also." 
2.4 When asked about the viability of small and very small Provident 
Fund Trusts, the EPFO stated as under: 
"As per the direction, EPFO has already started an exercise of 
identification of such establishments. Policy guidelines for imposing 
restriction of minimum corpus and membership has already been framed 
and is under submission before the Central Board of Trustees for 
approval. Once the said guidelines are approved and adopted, foll owing 
restriction will be imposed on the establishments seeking grant of 
exemption from the operation of EPF Scheme, 1952:- 
 
a) The establishment seeking grant of exemption should comply as un -
exempted for aminimum period of 05 years before applying for 
exemption. 
b) The establishment should have a corpus of more than 100 Cr. at 
time of seeking grant of exemption. 

15 
 
c) The establishment should have an employment strength of more 
than 500 hundred at time of seeking grant of exemption.  
Once the guidelines are approved, EPFO will try to undertake an exercise 
of either cancelling the exemptions of PF Exempted Establishments 
having smaller Trusts or merging of smaller PF Trusts into larger PF 
Trusts as per the extant guidelines and rules." 
2.5 During evidence held on 18.01 .2017 the EPFO  furnished a 
statement showing membership summary of the exempted 
establishments which also contained list of (180) establishments having 
membership strength of less than 20. 
  
2.6 The Committee are of the view that the Exempted 
Establishment are to be monitored by EPFO, for which there is 
a strong need to review the present system of monitoring. The 
Committee pursued this during their interaction with the 
representatives of the Ministry and EPFO. As a result, 
significant changes have since been initiated as follows: 
(i) development of a new better software through C -DAC 
for more effective monitoring; 
(ii) initiation of compliance audit of Exempted 
Establishment; 
(iii) In view of non -capturing of data about un -claimed PF 
amount of members with Trusts of PF Exempted 

16 
 
Establishment, initiation of formulation of guidelines 
for Trusts to transfer un-claimed amounts of EPFO; 
(v) Framing of new rates of surcharge for levying on  
account of deviation from the prescribed pattern of 
investment of BoTs of PF Exempted Establishment; 
and  
(vi) In-principle agreement to frame necessary 
guidelines/ amendments/notification to restrict BoTs 
of Exempted Establishment from investing in the 
instruments issued by the principal establishments 
and its sister concerns.  
 The Committee further note that after their  deliberations 
with the Ministry of Labour and Employment and EPFO, on 14th 
December, 2016 and 18th January, 2017, directions were issued 
promptly to all the Regional Provident Fund Offices for 
collection of data and inspections were conducted too.  The 
Committee, while taking note of the efforts made by the EPFO,  
desire that a definite timeline be given to all the Regional 
Offices for conducting compliance audit of the Exempted 

17 
 
Establishment. C -DAC, Pune, the company developing a 
software to contain data of all exempted returns, should also be 
asked for completing the task which will form the basis to 
monitor compliance of the provisions of the Act.  The 
Committee also impress upon the EPFO to speed up the 
formulation of policy guidelines for grant of exemption based 
on past performance, net  worth, collections, contributions,  
minimum corpus and membership which is statedly under 
submission to the Central Board of Trustees.  The Committee 
further recommend that once such guidelines are finalised by 
the EPFO, a complete review of all presently Exempted 
Establishments should be undertaken and completed within 
three months,  followed by appropria te decision to close 
defective/unhealthy/deviating exempted PF Trusts and 
transfer the same to EPFO. 
2.7 The Committee note that as per the latest information 
provided by EPFO,  there are 1549 Exempted Establishment all 
over India empl oying 84,42,241 workers. Further, the number 
of workers/employees covered under each of those 

18 
 
establishments varies from 1 to 3,25,997.  The Committee 
observe that some of the establishments are following dual set 
up i.e. some of their workers/employees we re subscribing to 
their own trust while some were subscribing to EPF. While an 
individual employee or a class of employees can be exempted 
under Section 17(2) read with Para 27 and 27(A) respectively, 
the Committee apprehend that in such a scenario, there could 
be a possibility of workers/employees being left out of coverage 
of either of the setup in confusion. Besides, in view of the very 
limited capability of the Exemption Division of EPFO to 
minutely monitor compliance, it may not, perhaps, be possible 
to detect exclusion of employees, even if it exists. They, 
therefore, desire that in the policy guidelines being formulated, 
adequate care needs to be taken to ensure that either all the 
eligible workers/employee subscribe to their own Trust or to 
EPFO as a  whole.  They also recommend that the enabling 
clause for choosing the Trust or EPF by the respective 
subscriber may be withdrawn with immediate effect. 

19 
 
2.8 The Committee find that there were 180 Exempted 
Establishment having membership strength of less th an 20.  
Out of those 180 establishments, 22 establishments have been 
shown as having 0 memberships. They therefore, desire that 
exemption granted to these establishments be reviewed 
immediately and suitable action may be taken. 
2.9 The Committee further fi nd that there are 118 Exempted 
Establishment having their total corpus of less than one crore. 
The last return filed by these establishments dated back to the 
years 2014 and 2015. Hence, the Committee feel that these 
establishments may not have taken any s teps to benefit their 
PF subscribers.  The Committee, note that the Ministry have 
now initiated identification of small/very small PF trusts  and 
framing of policy guidelines for imposing restrictions of 
minimum corpus and membership. They reiterate that s trong 
guidelines for grant of exemption may be made which make it 
mandatory to take into account past performance, net worth, 
group performance as well as minimum strength of workers, 

20 
 
collections, contributions and corpus of the 
company/establishment.    
II. TOTAL CORPUS 
2.10 As per information submitted by EPFO, as on 31st December, 2016, 
the total corpus of exempted establishments is around                                
₹ 25698372,02,795/- which includes unclaimed amount. However, after 
segregation of un claimed amount , the total corpus comes around                
₹  25150798,27,039/-. 
2.11 A consolidated figure of total corpus and unclaimed amount is as 
under: 
SL. 
NO. 
ZONE TOTAL CORPUS 
OF 
EXEMPTED 
ESTABLISHMENT
S AS ON 
31.12.2016 
UNCLAIMED 
AMOUNT 
LYING WITH 
THE TRUST 
AS ON 
31.12.2016 
TOTAL CORPUS - 
UNCLAIMED 
AMOUNT 
1 Andhra Pradesh, Telangana 
& Orissa 
₹ 3625219,65,023 ₹ 14170,38,723 ₹3611049,26,300 
2 Delhi & Uttarakhand ₹ 2153024,58,214 ₹ 37122,93,000 ₹2115901,65,214 
3 Gujrat & Madhya Pradesh ₹ 1325225,18,158 ₹ 9938,16,831 ₹1315287,01,327 
4 Haryana & Rajasthan ₹ 1133095,04,400 ₹ 262857,64,000 ₹ 870237,40,400 
5 Karnataka & Goa ₹ 1438921,38,000 ₹ 35684,00,000 ₹1403237,38,000 
6 Maharashtra & Chhattissarh ₹ 7983023,63,495 ₹ 157969,46,369 ₹7825054,17,126 
7 Punjab & Himachal Pradesh ₹ 226854,00,000 ₹ 3123,73,000 ₹ 223730,27,000 
8 Tamilnadu & Kerala ₹ 1147362,16,493 ₹ 9218,43,000 ₹1138143,73,493 
9 Uttar Pradesh & Bihar ₹ 221442,87,569 ₹ 81 15,64,656 ₹ 213327,22,913 
10 West Bengal , NER & 
Jharkhand 
₹ 6444203,51,443 ₹ 9373,36,177 ₹6434830,15,266 
 TOTAL ₹25698372,02,795 ₹ 547573,75,756 ₹25150798,27,039 
 
2.12 Asked about the details of unclaimed amount lying with these 
organisations and the guidelines for keeping the unclaimed amount with 
them, the EPFO informed as under: 
"No guidelines in this regard is available . Since, the extant guidelines 
regarding unclaimed amount lying with EPFO is also applicable in toto to 
the exempted establishments and the BoTs, therefore no exclusive 
guidelines for the BoTs have been framed." 
 

21 
 
2.13 They further stated as under: 
"Since no provision of EPF & MP Act, 1952 and EPF Scheme, 1952 or 
any extant guidelines restrict any Trusts of PF Exempted Establishments 
to keep un-claimed PF amount of members with them, therefore the said 
data was not captured by EPFO in their annual inspections. But after the 
said issue was raised by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, EPFO is 
in the process of formulation of guidelines under which Trusts of PF 
Exempted Establishments would be required to transfer the un -claimed 
accounts to the EPFO." 
2.14 When asked about the absence of any clear cut guidelines, how 
these establishments are utilising the unclaimed amount lying with 
them, the EPFO informed as under: 
"The unclaimed amount lying with the BoTs of exempted establishments 
cannot be used for any o ther purpose and will remain lying  in the PF 
account of the members of exempted establishments. However, in case of 
any closed establishments the past accumulation laying with the BoTs is 
transferred to the statutory Fund of EPFO alongwith the unclaimed 
deposits." 
2.15 As regards enabling provision to deter the exempted establishments 
to keep the unclaimed amount with them indefinitely, the EPFO informed 
as under: 
"There is no provision in Act and Scheme which can restrict a P.F. Trust 
to hold unclaimed deposit with them. However a proposal for transferring 
unclaimed deposits to the statutory fund is under active consideration of 
EPFO through proper provisions in the Act and Scheme."  
2.16 As regards measures proposed to ensure deposit of the unclaimed 
amount with EPFO, the EPFO further informed as under: 
"For depositing the unclaimed amount lying with the Trust of exempted 
establishments a proposal for amendment in the Scheme is under 
process. The said amendment will enable EPFO to receive the unclaimed 
deposits lying with the PF Trusts." 
2.17 As per the submission of  EPFO, it was informed that  the 
information regarding the details of unclaimed amount lying with the 
exempted establishment s, was not being captured by them till date. 

22 
 
However, after the issue  was raised by the Committee, the EPFO 
submitted as under: 
"A mechanism for capturing the data related to unclaimed deposits is 
being formulated on the suggestion of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Labour".  
2.18 On being asked about the absence of any such data, there could be 
cases where the exempted establishments would be using the unclaimed 
amount as their working capital, the EPFO informed as under: 
"It is true that no member wise data related to unclaimed deposits is 
collected. However, the PF Inspectors rely on the audited balance sheets 
of the exempted establishments and their Trust to see that no such 
amount is utilized in the working capital  of the exempted establishments 
during compliance audit." 
2.19 When asked about the reaso ns for the said amount going 
unclaimed as the respective establishments must be having the details of 
their subscribers viz. name, address, account number, employee code 
and their nominees etc., the EPFO informed as under: 
"The reasons for Provident Fund money going un-claimed in respect of PF 
Trusts of exempted establishments is not known to EPFO, but it must be 
having same reasons as in case of members of un - exempted 
establishments managed by EPFO. However, from the Provident Funds 
managed by Central Bo ard of Trustees, EPF following reasons are 
analysed for non-claiming of fund by outgoing members:- 
1. Migration. 
2. Illiteracy. 
3. Un-awareness. 
4. To enjoy benefits of Income Tax." 
2.20 As one of t he reasons cited by EPFO  for non-claiming of funds by 
the subscribers, was unawareness and illiteracy,  the Committee desired 
to be apprised of the steps taken for awareness campaign s and literacy 
programmes for the benefit for those subscribers.  The EPFO responded 
as under: 
"All out efforts have been made to increase the aw areness about the 
Provident Fund deposit which are lying unclaimed with the Provident 
Fund Trust. Various field offices adopt different strategies for increasing 

23 
 
the awareness among the EPF members. Some of the actions taken by 
field offices of EPFO are as follows:- 
i) Camps are organized regularly in the areas with high 
concentration of workers to make them aware of the provisions 
and benefits under the Act. Recently many camps were organized 
for UAN, KYC seeding and opening of Bank Account wherein such 
information was disseminated. For example Regional Office, 
Vadodara organized 40 camps/awareness programmes with the 
Trade Unions and subsequently 177 employees have submitted 
their claims.  
ii) List of members of unclaimed amount has been asked to be 
displayed on the notice boards of the establishments. Regional 
Office, Indore particularly is planning to issue directions for 
displaying names of such members on the website of the exempted 
establishments.  
iii) Many field offices have also directed P F Inspectors to arran ge a 
session during the compliance audit/inspection with the 
subscribers and the Trade Unions, wherein the illiterate and 
unawared subscribers are being given information about the 
provisions related to unclaimed deposits and related solutions.  
iv) Head Office have recently conducting meetings with the exempted 
establishments under Chairmanship of Central P. F. 
Commissioner, wherein the exempted establishments have been 
asked to undertake all out efforts for lowering the figures of 
unclaimed deposits.  
v) “NidhiAapKeDwar” is an awareness and interactive programme 
launched by EPFO on 10.07.2015 and all the field offices organized 
an interactive and informative session on 10 th day of every month. 
The said platform has been effectively used by the field office s for 
generating awareness related to unclaimed deposits among the 
members. 
vi) Help desk on website."  
2.21 As regards the efforts made by those organisations  to disburse the 
PF accumulation to their respective subscriber or his/her legal heir, the 
EPFO informed as under: 
"The P.F. accumulations are paid to the members and to the legal heirs 
of deceased members as per the Trust Rules of the exempted 
establishments which are aligned with the EPF Scheme, 1952. 
No information is available in this regard. However, EPFO has resorted to 
newspaper advertisement, helpdesk and its website for inviting claims 
from subscribers in respect of unclaimed accounts." 

24 
 
 During the oral evidence of representatives of some exempted 
establishments held on 18.01.2017, the following s uggestion was made 
by one of the witnesses: 
"...I would like to make a suggestion...when the annual accounts are 
finalized from a Trust Fund, may be there can be a schedule which 
should list out alongwith the name of individuals in respect of whom 
there is unclaimed amount available with the Trust and the same should 
be part of it." 
2.22 The Committee note that as on 31 st December, 2016, the 
total corpus of Exempted Establishment is around ₹ 2.57 lakh 
crore including the unclaimed PF amount of ₹ 5475 crore.  The 
Committee opine that the total corpus could have been more, 
had some of the establishments not violated the provisions of 
the Act.  The Committee are happy that of late, the compliance 
audit is being conducted by the EPFO and proposal for 
cancellation of exemption has also been under consideration.  
They therefore, desire that the pending proposals for 
cancellation of exemption be finalized at the earliest so that 
the concerned workers/employees could be covered under EPF 
provisions. 
2.23 The Committe e opine that the huge amount of ₹ 5475 
crore lying un -claimed with the Exempted Establishment 
particularly in two zones i.e. Haryana & Rajasthan and 

25 
 
Maharashtra & Chhattisgarh, is a matter of concern. As of now 
there is no provision in the Act and Scheme w hich can restrict 
a PF Trust to hold unclaimed deposit with them. The 
Committee feel that transparency is required in the matter. 
After their intervention, a proposal is stated to be under 
process for amendment in the Scheme in order to enable EPFO 
to receive the unclaimed deposits lying with the PF Trusts. The 
Committee desire that without losing further time, suitable 
amendment in the Scheme must be carried out so that in the 
Annual Account Statement of the PF Fund, name of workers, 
for whom unclaimed amo unt is available, not only gets 
reflected, but after specified period, gets transferred to EPFO.  
They also desire that possibilities of depositing the unclaimed 
amount so received in the Special Reserve Fund (SRF) may also 
be explored. 
2.24 Till the subje ct was taken up for examination by the 
Committee, the EPFO did not have any details of unclaimed 
amount lying with the Exempted Establishment. The 
Committee appreciate that, based on their suggestion, the 

26 
 
EPFO has now started developing a mechanism for cap turing 
the data related to unclaimed deposits lying with the exempted 
establishment. They, therefore, recommend that the 
mechanism must be put in place at the earliest.  They also 
desire that a time period should also be specified for keeping 
the unclaimed amount with the respective establishment, after 
which the amount be deposited with the EPFO. 
2.25 The Committee note that, as of now, there are no clear cut 
guidelines for Exempted Establishment to keep the unclaimed 
deposits hence during compliance audit, the PF Inspectors rely 
on the audited balance sheets of the Exempted Establishment 
and their Trusts to see that no such amount is utilized in their 
working capital. The Committee find from the documents 
furnished by the EPFO that in the past, there were hardly any 
compliance audits conducted by the EPFO. In fact the audit 
mechanism gained momentum after intervention of the 
Committee.  Hence the Committee feel that some of the 
Exempted Establishment could be using the unclaimed deposits 
as their working ca pital.   They therefore, desire that such 

27 
 
possibilities should be considered while framing the guidelines 
and stringent penalty may be prescribed in order to deter the 
Exempted Establishment from carrying out such illegal 
activities. 
2.26 The Committee not e that migration, illiteracy, un -
awareness and the intention to enjoy benefits of Income Tax 
are the probable reasons for non -claiming of PF dues by 
workers. The Committee feel that since the exempted 
organizations are expected to have all the details  of e ach 
worker/employee, like name, address, nominees etc., while 
employing them and thus can disburse PF dues to an employee 
or his/her heir.  They therefore, desire that the EPFO must 
impress upon those Exempted Establishment to make all 
efforts to trace the  workers/ employees/ nominees and 
disburse the amount in the first instance and thereafter, if 
some amount still remains, the same could be transferred to 
EPFO. 
 
 

28 
 
III. PATTERN OF INVESTMENT 
2.27 The Committee desired to know the pattern of investment followed 
by the exempted establishment s/establishments and the details of 
investments made by them, the EPFO informed as under: 
"Yes, Board of Trustees of exempted establishments are required to 
invest the Trust Funds in accordance with pattern of investment notified 
by the Government. Investment details of P.F. Trusts of exempted 
establishments are available with field offices concerned under whose 
original jurisdiction their monitoring lies. However,  no consolidated 
information is available." 
2.28 They further informed as under: 
"Board of Trustees of PF Exempted Establishments have to invest the 
Provident Fund accumulations as per the patter n of investment notified 
by the Government of India. As per the condition No. 17 of Appendix – „A‟ 
to para 27AA of EPF Scheme, 1952, Board of Trustees are liable to pay 
surcharge. In this context, EPFO has frame d new rates of surcharge to 
which surcharge will be levied on account of deviation from the 
prescribed pattern of investment. In case of more than three consecutive 
deviations, the Exemp tion shall be cancelled by giving  reasonable 
opportunity to the employer. 
Parliamentary Standing Committee also raised its concerned regarding 
investment made by Board of Trust ees in the instruments issued by 
either the parent company or its sister concerns. EPFO has agreed in 
principle and will very soon come out wi th necessary 
guidelines/amendments/notification, wherein Board of Trustees would 
be required to maintain an arm‟s length from the principle 
establishments and its sister concerns." 
2.29 Finding that some of the Board of Trustees (BOTs)  of exempted 
establishments are not following the pattern of investment , the 
Committee desired to know the reasons therefor and the penalty 
imposed, if any, the EPFO informed as under: 
"Sometime securities in the desired category are not available in the 
market. Also medium and small exempted establishments are not having 
expert fund managers." 
  

29 
 
They further informed as under: 
"It was observed that Board of Trustees of the exempted establishments 
were not adhering to patter n of investment prescribed by the 
Government for various reasons. Surcharge is levied by the Regional P. F. 
Commissioner on the BoT to regularize violations of this nature.  
However, the number of violations is restricted to 03, on this count and if 
further deviation by the BoT from the prescribed investment pattern is 
observed, Regional P.F. Commissioner concerned is required to process 
the case of the exempted establishment for cancellation of exemption.  
XX   XX   XX   XX" 
2.30 As regards the adequacy of penalty, the surcharge levied and the 
improvement observed thereafter, the EPFO stated as under: 
"The levy of surcharge is prescribed under Condition No. 17 of Appendix -
„A‟ to Para 27AA of EPF Scheme, 1952. The surcharge rates have been 
recently revised and enhanced vide order No. Exem/10(16)2016/28265 
dated 01.02.2017. The levy of surcharge is not the only penalty on 
establishments. The violation of not adhering to the prescribed pattern of 
investment is only limited to three instances and if the pattern of 
investment is not followed for the fourth time the exemption granted to 
the establishments can be cancelled." 
2.31 The Committee also desired to know the additional penalt ies 
proposed to be imp osed if no improvement is found. T he EPFO informed 
as under: 
"Further, the apprehension about the loss suffered by the Trust if the 
Trust Funds are not invested as per the prescribed pattern of investment 
is answered by Condition No. 6 & 28 of Appendix - „A‟ to Para 27AA of 
EPF Scheme, 1952, wherein any loss will be borne by the establishment. 
The Condition No. 6 & 28 has been reproduced as under:- 
Condition No. 6 - The employer shall bear all the expenses of the 
administration of the Provident Fund and also make good any other loss 
that may be caused to the Provident Fund due to theft, burglary, 
defalcation, misappropriation or any other reason. Condition No. 28 - In 
the event of any loss to the trust as a result of any fraud, defalcatio n, 
wrong investment decisions etc. the employer shall be liable to make 
good the loss.  However additional penalty on forth default in prescribed 
pattern of investment is to initiate for cancellation of exemption." 

30 
 
2.32 When asked about any  fool-proof measures taken/contemplated to 
ensure strict adherence to the G overnment-prescribed pattern of 
investment by the BoTs, the EPFO stated as under: 
"All the BoTs are required  to adhere to prescribed pattern of investment 
religiously. However, if f or some or the other reason the prescribed 
pattern of investment is not adhered to, then BoTs are liable to pay the 
surcharge. If the prescribed pattern of investment is not adhered for 
more than three consecutive years, then exemption granted to the 
establishment will be cancelled. Furthermore, any loss for any wrong 
investment decision will be borne by the establishment. Moreover the 
rate of levy of surcharge is revised  vide order No. 
Exem/10(16)2016/28265 dated 01.02.2017." 
2.33 The EPFO further informed as under: 
"All the establishments exempted from operation of EPF Scheme, 1952 
under EPF & MP Act, 1952 have to adhere to prescribed pattern of 
investment as notified by the Government. The investment of exempted 
establishments is monitored through the mon thly return  filed by the 
exempted establishment on the dashboard facility provided by EPFO.  
However Regional Office s also conduct the detailed examination during 
compliance audit." 
2.34 When asked about the establishments investing in private 
securities and the comparison of returns with Government Securities 
and how are they passed  on to the beneficiaries, the EPFO informed as 
under: 
"All the establishments exempted from operation of EPF Scheme, 1952 
under EPF & MP Act, 1952 have to adhere to prescribed pattern notified 
by Government of India and adopted by the CBT, EPFO.  The benefits are 
passed to beneficiaries in the form of interest earned on investments 
including private securities." 
 
2.35 It was observed that several companies, particularly those  having a 
negative growth/consistently incurring huge losses invest PF Trust funds 
in their own sick companies. It was also observed that many times, 
layers are created to invest funds in their own exempted establishments, 
which is extremely risky since in ca se such companies fail/get bankrupt, 
the employees may lose their PF contributions meant for their social 

31 
 
security. Regarding the investment  made by exempted establishments  in 
their own business via mutual funds route, the EPFO informed as under: 
"The latest pattern of investment for the Trusts of exempted 
establishments and the extant provisions of Act and Scheme do not 
impose any restriction for investment in their own business via mutual 
funds route. The latest pattern of investment for the Trusts of  exempted 
establishments issued by the Government  was notified in the Gazette of 
India Part II, Section III, No. 1134, dated 29.05.2015 . However, EPFO 
can frame guidelines which can restrict the Trust from investing in the 
exempted establishments, with the approval of the Government." 
2.36 The Committee were informed that if the Board of Trustees of  some 
of the exempted establishments do  not adher e to the pattern of 
investment, as prescribed by the Government, for various reasons , a 
surcharge is levied by the Regional PF Commissioners on the BOTs to 
regularise violations of this nature. The EPFO stated as under: 
"...surcharge is levied by the Regional PF Commissioner as per the rate 
prescribed by the Central PF Commissioner on taking approval of the 
Sub-Committee of CBT, EPF on Exempted Establishments. The said levy 
of surcharge is in accordance with the condition No. 17 of Appendix - „A‟ 
to Para 27AA of EPF Scheme, 1952. 
Sometime securities in the desired category are not available in the 
market. Also medium and small exempted establishments are not having 
expert fund managers." 
2.37 When asked about the number of BOTs on which surcharge was 
levied, the percentage thereof and the improvement observed thereafter , 
the EPFO furnished a "Zone-wise list of the cas es where surcharge have 
been levied is as under: (LOP 2 Question no. 7) 
Sl. No. Zone Number of BoTs where 
surcharge was levied 
1 West Bengal, NER & Jharkhand 82 
2 Tamil Nadu and Kerala 49 
3 Delhi and Uttarakhand 0 
4 Haryana and Rajasthan 11 
5 Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh 48 
6 Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Odisha 38 
7 Punjab and Himachal Pradesh 6 
8 Karnataka & Goa 22 
9 Uttar Pradesh and Bihar 12 
10 Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh 49 
Total 317 

32 
 
 
2.38 When asked about the total amount collected as surcharge, the 
EPFO stated as under: 
"It is very nominal and it is levied just to deter them from any deviation". 
   
2.39 The Committee note that the Board of Trustees (BOTs) of 
Exempted Establishment are required to invest the Trust Funds 
in accordance wi th pattern of investment notified by the 
Government.  They further note that in case of any deviation 
from the prescribed pattern of investment, the BOTs are liable 
to pay surcharge which is limited to three times and after that, 
the exemption is liable to  be cancelled by giving reasonable 
opportunity to the employer.  The surcharge levied by EPFO is 
statedly very nominal and is meant just to deter the 
establishments from any deviation. The Committee have now 
been informed that the EPFO has framed and notified new rates 
of surcharge on 1st February, 2017. However, the Committee 
apprehend that even the revised rate of surcharge may not act 
as an effective deterrent.  They therefore, desire that the 
effectiveness of the new rates of surcharge monitored closely  
revisited subsequently, if needed. 

33 
 
2.40 The Committee note that surcharge is levied on the BOTs 
of the Exempted Establishment which are deviating from the 
prescribed pattern of investment three times and after that if 
those are found to be indulging in sa me kind of deviation, the 
exemption is liable to be cancelled. From the list of 317 such 
establishments, on whose BoTs, surcharge was levied, the 
Committee observe that most of the establishments were 
closed against which the cancellation orders were issue d. The 
Committee therefore, desire that such a futile exercise needs 
to be tackled with regular physical inspection of the 
establishments by the Regional inspectors and if required, 
cancellation process be speeded up. The Committee further 
recommend that w hile formulating the guidelines, a provision 
may be made for review of exemption after a prescribed period, 
so that the EPFO is aware of the exact financial status of the 
establishment and precautionary measures are taken well in 
time and interests of the workers/employees are protected.  
2.41 From the deposition of EPFO the Committee note that the 
extant provisions of the Act and Scheme do not impose any 

34 
 
restriction on Exempted Establishment for investment of 
accumulated PF funds in their own  company/business/sister 
concerns via mutual funds route.  However, as per submission 
of EPFO, in -principle agreement has been reached to frame 
necessary guidelines which restrict the Trust from investing in 
their own ventures through this route. The Committee feel that 
investing in own business is improper and is being done to 
serve their own interests. They, therefore, desire that there is a 
need to have special inspection/audit of all such companies 
and the EPFO should take early action on the requisite process, 
for r estricting investment through this route  and take 
immediate corrective steps/redivert such investment s in other 
healthy investment instruments. 
IV. PHYSICAL INSPECTION OF SECURITIES 
2.42 As per the EPF&MP Act, 1952, all the exempted establishments 
have to adhere to prescribed pattern of investment as notified by the 
Government. In regard to physical inspection of securities  by those 
establishments, the periodicity of inspection and the number of 
inspections conducted during the last three years, the EPFO ha s 
informed as under: 
"As per the amendment in Para 27AA of Appendix – „A‟ of EPF Scheme, 
1952 vide GSR 853 (E) dated 29.10.2003, effective from 30.10.2003. The 
exempted establishments have t o maintain  securities in the DEMAT 
(Dematerialized-Electronic) format instead of physical form of securities. 

35 
 
In view of aforesaid amendment, there is no need of physical inspection 
of securities. They are inspected in only DEMAT format. A certificate of 
holding is obtained from the participant depository, who is normally a 
participant with NSDL/CDSL." 
2.43 The Committee note that as per the amendment made in 
Para 27AA of EPF Scheme, 1952, the Exempted Establishment 
have to maintain securities in the DEMAT format ins tead of 
physical form of securities.  The Committee were informed that 
since a certificate of holding is obtained from the participant 
depository, hence there is no need of physical inspection of 
securities.  The Committee find that some of the Exempted 
Establishment could be investing either in excess of the limit 
permitted under the guidelines in private securities or the 
parent company or its sister concerns, in which case they can 
provide a certificate of holding which in no way, can certify 
that the in vestments have been made in the Government 
prescribed securities only. Also the Committee are 
apprehensive about some of the private investments turning 
into bad debts in some cases of Exempted Establishment, for 
instance, District Cooperative Banks, etc. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that it should be made mandatory to 
check the DEMAT account to verify the pattern of investments 

36 
 
made as well as the returns thereof  received by the Exempted 
Establishment during the compliance audit. 
V. MONITORING 
2.44 The Committee desired to know the existent monitoring mechanism 
on the Exempted Organizations  and the constraints faced by the EPFO 
on the matter. The EPFO responded as under: 
"Monitoring of exempted esta blishments and their PF Trusts is done by 
Regional PF Commissioners of the field offices through annual 
Compliance Audit. Further, Regional P.F. Commissioner can cause Third 
Party Audit of the P.F. Trusts of exempted establishments wherever felt 
necessary by them. Furthermore, the exempted establishments and their 
Trusts are required to file returns online periodically which can be 
viewed by the field offices through Dashboard developed for the purpose.  
Presently EPFO, Head Office does not have effective tool for monitoring of 
exempted establishments and their P.F. Trusts. However, C -DAC Pune 
has been assigned the task of developing necessary software so that the 
database relating to exempted establishments and their Trusts can be 
extracted in a useful manner/format for and various infor mation so 
available will be helpful for monitoring purposes as well as for taking 
necessary decision at EPFO, Head Office level." 
2.45 During evidence the representatives of EPFO informed as under: 
"...then they have to get their accounts audited every yea r. These are the 
activities which they have to do as part of the exemption-cum-conditions. 
Actually exempted trusts are monitored by our Regional Provident Fund 
Commissioners. They are the monitoring agencies. We have a total of 123 
officers in the country." 
2.46 They further informed as under: 
"We are monitoring with the help of our software but our software is not 
up-to-mark.  We are collecting all the data and feeding it into the 
software.  We are in need of effective software and we have asked for 
developing new software." 
 

37 
 
2.47 As per the latest reply of EPFO, the Committee were  informed as 
under: 
"During the review it was found that compliance audit of many PF 
Exempted Establishments was not conducted during the last three years. 
The EPFO Head Office i mmediately took cognizance of the issue and 
issued necessary directions to all the field offices for ensuring upto date 
compliance audit of PF Exempted Establishments. Latest report in this 
regard has already been furnished to the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee in the second week of March. Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Labour has stressed that it should be regularly monitored 
on concurrent basis for all the Exempted Establishments." 
2.48 Asked about the preparation of  software by the C-DAC, the 
expected time of development and hand ing over the requisite software , 
the EPFO stated as under: 
"C-DAC has been asked to develop the exempted return through an 
agreement with EPFO signed on 16.07.2016. 
The exempted return has been planned to be develop ed in phase II for 
which the stipulated delivery date was 31.12.2016. However, the 
scheduled delivery has been delayed due to delay in phase I and the 
expected delivery is by the end of March 2017." 
2.49 They further informed as under: 
"EPFO had developed a monitoring dashboard for PF Exempted 
Establishments and their Trusts in May, 2014. Through the said 
dashboard PF Exempted Establishments were facilitated to file the 
statutory returns through online facility. However, it was felt that for 
more effective monitoring, a better dashboard/software should be 
prepared. In this endeavour, C -DAC has been entrusted the 
responsibility of developing a new software. Suggestionsof the 
Parliamentary Committee in the development of new software have been 
taken care of. The new software is in the final stage and will be delivered 
to EPFO very soon."  
2.50 When asked about the exemptions granted to the 
establishment/Trust long back and even now the EPFO Head Office do 
not have any effective monitoring system, the EPFO informed as under: 
"The EPFO Head Office did have a monitoring system, which was through 
submission of summary report by the field offices. Since 2014, a 

38 
 
dashboard for exempted establishments was developed, wherein the 
exempted establishments used to file various statutory returns online. 
The said system involved submission of statutory return in .pdf format.  
Since, filing of the return was in .pdf format, therefore a more efficient 
dashboard, wherein more technology has been infused, is under 
development with the help of C-DAC."  
2.51 When the Committee desired to know whether it is wise to leave the 
entire monitoring aspect to the Regional PF Commissioner , the EPFO 
informed as under: 
"Certainly not. EPFO as an organisation have a pan India presence and 
123field offices spread across length and breadth of the Country are 
responsible for efficient running of the three Schemes and enforcement of 
EPF & MP Act, 1952. 
The basic objective of monitoring an exempted establishments is to 
curtail the violations of various terms and condition under which the 
exemption has been granted. These violations can be of following nature:- 
i) Not extending provident fund benefits to all eligible employees. 
ii) Subterfuge of wages. 
iii) Not transferring the PF accumulations to the Trust in time.  
iv) Not investing the Trust Funds as per prescribed pattern of 
investment. 
v) Not declaring the rate of interest at par or more than as declared 
by EPFO etc. 
For discovering the aforesaid violations, physical inspection of the 
exempted establishments and  their trusts is essential and the said 
responsibility has been given to the field offices. Field offices fulfil the 
said responsibility through inspection which has been named as 
compliance audit. 
However, Head Office is discharging the overall responsibi lity of effective 
monitoring of exempted establishments." 
2.52 As the Committee desired to know the reasons for not having any 
central monitoring mechanism in place, the EPFO informed as under: 
"It is not true that no central monitoring mechanism was ever in place. 
As per the Head Office directions all field offices are required to submit a 
report regarding compliance audit conducted in the exempted 
establishments. Further, as a first step towards central monitoring 
mechanism, a dashboard was developed in 2 014 wherein exempted 
establishments were asked to submit the statutory returns on an IT 

39 
 
enabled platform. Presently EPFO is developing a more robust software 
for exempted establishments." 
2.53 Asked about the number of inspections conducted during the last 3 
years on the Exempted Organizations , shortcomings observed and action 
taken against the delinquent establishments, the EPFO stated as under: 
"Compliance Audit of exempted establishments is an annual exercise 
falling under the original jurisdiction of Regional PF Commissioners of 
the field offices concerned. The details thereof is being gathered from the 
field offices and will be furnished after compilation of the same." 
2.54 When asked about the periodicity prescribed for inspection of the 
exempted establishments by the Regional PF Commissioner  and whether 
they adhering to the prescribed periodicity, the EPFO stated as under: 
"The inspection of exempted establishments is done annually as per 
instructions of Head Office. 
Yes, the field offices adhered to  the prescribed periodicity. However, 
sporadic instance are seen where the field offices could not adhere to the 
prescribed periodicity of inspection."   
2.55 The account of the PF maintained by the BOT of an exempted 
establishment is subject to audit annu ally by a qualified independent 
Chartered Accountant. However, the CPFC or the RPFC-in-charge can get 
the accounts re -audited and the expenses are to be borne by the 
employer. In regard to such audits which were initiated, the EPFO stated 
as under: 
"Total 35 Third Party Audits have been conducted. List of number of 
Third Party Audits conducting in each zone is annexed as  
Sl. 
No. 
Zone Number of BoTs where 
surcharge was levied 
1 West Bengal, NER & Jharkhand 8 
2 Tamil Nadu and Kerala 12 
3 Delhi and Uttarakhand 0 
4 Haryana and Rajasthan 5 
5 Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh 3 
6 Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Odisha 2 
7 Punjab and Himachal Pradesh 0 
8 Karnataka and Goa 5 
9 Uttar Pradesh and Bihar 0 
10 Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh 4 
Total 39 

40 
 
 
2.56 As regards general inspection to ensure overall implementation of 
their instructions by th ose organisations, procedure as well as the foll ow 
up action taken subsequently, the EPFO stated as under: 
"Section 13 of EPF &  MP Act, 1952 mandates Inspectors of EPFO to 
inspect an establishment for ensuring the implementation of provisions of 
EPF & MP Act, 1952 and its Schemes in letter and spirit. With reference 
to the exempted establishments and their P.F. Trusts, these inspe ctions 
have been named as compliance audit.  
It is the duty of the Regional P.F. Commissioners of field offices to 
conduct a comprehensive Compliance Audit of all the exempted 
establishments and their Trusts lying in their jurisdiction.  Compliance 
Audit is conducted through a Squad comprising of Enforcement Officers 
(P.F. Inspectors) headed by an Assistant P.F. Commissioner or a Regional 
P.F. Commissioner – II. A month in a Financial Year is chosen and 
observed as an exempted month, wherein maximum compliance audits of 
the exempted establishments and their Trusts are done. Moreover 
Trust‟saccounts and balance sheets is audited by Chartered Accountant 
independently.  
The duties and responsibilities and various dimensions of 
inspection/compliance audit of exempted establishment has been 
annexed as Annexure – „I‟. 
After completing the compliance audit, Squad/Inspecting Team submits 
its report before the competent authority for scrutiny and examination.  
After scrutiny of Audit Report, deficiencies are commun icated to the 
exempted establishments and their Trusts. In case of default legal 
provisions like 7A, 14B and 7Q are invoked against the defaulting 
establishments for assessment of dues, levy of damages and interest 
respectively. 
As per the condition No. 24 (a) of Appendix – „A‟ to Para 27AA of the EPF 
Scheme, 1952, Central P.F Commissioner or Regional P.F. Commissioner 
In-charge of the Region have the right to have the accounts of Board of 
Trustees re-audited by any third party as qualified auditor." 
 
2.57 During the meeting held on 18th January, 2017, the 
representatives of EPFO were directed to conduct special audit of 
Maharashtra Cooperative Banks/State Electricity Boards, OCM, Shri 
Gauri Shanker Jute Mill, Rallis India and  Cable Corporation of India Ltd, 
the EPFO stated as under: 

41 
 
"As per the direction given by Hon‟ble Standing Committee on Labour in 
its meeting held on 18.01.2017,in the mentioned cases instruction had 
been issued to the field Regional Office/Sub Regional Offices through 
respective zonal Addl. Central P. F. Commissioner to conduct special 
audit in the initial report called by 02.02.2017. Since the compliance 
audit is comprehensive exercise and required a substantial time, as soon 
as the exercise is completed by the concerned Regional PF Commissioner, 
the report will be forwarded to the Hon‟ble Committee. However it is 
expected to get the report by March 2017." 
2.58 The Committee note that presently the Exempted 
Establishment and their Trusts are required to file returns 
online periodically which can be viewed by the field offices 
through a Dashboard developed for the purpose. However, this 
has not proved as an effective tool for monitoring of Exempted 
Establishment and their PF Trusts. It is evident from the 
EPFO's own submission before the Committee, to this effect. 
On the suggestion of the Committee, C -DAC Pune was assigned 
the task of developing necessary software in July, 2016, for 
which the stipulated delivery date was 31 st December, 2016. 
However, the scheduled delivery was reportedly d elayed and 
was expected by the end of March 2017.  The Committee desire 
to be apprised of the status and if not delivered, recommend 
that necessary instructions to C -DAC Pune may be issued for 
immediate delivery of the requisite software with complete 
features. As the data would be required to be migrated to the 

42 
 
new software, the Committee urge the Ministry to take up the 
matter and pursue it vigorously. 
2.59 As Third Party compliance audit of many Exempted 
Establishment was not conducted during the last several years, 
the Committee feel that several violations may have remained 
undetected. They further note that following their intervention 
in the matter, the EPFO issued directions to all the field offices 
for ensuring up -to-date compliance audit of Exempte d 
Establishment. However, no audits have been conducted in 
three zones i.e. Delhi and Uttarakhand, Punjab and HP and 
Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of reasons thereof. The Committee opine that once 
the review exercise of grant of exemptions is completed, 
carrying out compliance audit would become manageable for 
the RPFCs.  The Committee therefore, recommend that the 
formulation of new guidelines for grant of exemption be 
prioritised followed by the review of the exemption granted so 
that the same could be cancelled for the defaulting Exempted 
Establishment. They also desire that the consolidated report of 

43 
 
compliance special audit of the Establishments be furnished to 
them, as committed by the EPFO during the meeting held on  
18th January, 2017. 
2.60 The Committee note that presently the Regional Provident 
Fund Commissioners are monitoring the implementation of the 
Act through their 123 field offices spread across the Country.  
However it is surprising that at present there is  no Central 
monitoring mechanism available for ensuring that the checking 
of compliance of the Act by the Exempted Establishment by 
the RPFCS is done appropriately.  The Committee, therefore, 
opine that grant of exemption and its monitoring should be 
finalised Centrally through the Head Office, instead of leaving 
it solely to the RPFCs not only to keep a check on the 
malpractices/violations but also to maintain uniformity in 
grant of exemptions.  They therefore, recommend that all 
future requests for exempt ions, once examined by the field 
offices, should be referred to the EPFO Head Office for final 
decision and a Central monitoring mechanism must be put in 

44 
 
place which may also include physical inspections alongwith 
constant vigil on the digital database. 
VI. VIOLATIONS/MALPRACTICES 
2.61 The Committee desired to know about the irregularities/violations 
found in regard to PF compliance , the type of irregularity/violation, 
number of persons effected and the action taken against the 
organizations alongwith the penalty imposed, the EPFO stated as under:  
"It was observed that Board of Trustees of the exempted establishments 
were not adhering to patter n of investment prescribed by the 
Government for various reasons. Surcharge is levied by the Regional P. F. 
Commissioner on the BoT to regularize violations of this nature.  
However, the number of violations is restricted to 03, on this count and if 
further deviation by the BoT from the prescribed investment pattern is 
observed, Regional P.F. Commissioner concerned is  required to process 
the case of the exempted establishment for cancellation of exemption.  
The second type of violations is delay in transfer of P.F. contributions by 
exempted establishments to their P.F. Trusts within stipulated date. 
However, provisions under Section 14B and 7Q of the Act exist to deal 
with such violations. Regional P. F. Commissioners of the field offices 
take recourse to these provisions against the exempted and un - 
exempted establishments in a routine manner in deserving cases. 
However, the details thereof is being gathered from the field offices and 
will be furnished after compilation of the same." 
 
2.62 When asked about the complaints received from the unions of the 
workers of the subscribers of those exempted establishment s about 
irregularities/violations or misuse of funds, the EPFO stated as under: 
"List of exempted establishments where complaints have been received.  
However, action under Section 7A and 14B etc. are taken by respective 
field offices. The complaints received are as under: 

45 
 
 
2.63 During evidence, the Committee raised the point that the exempted 
establishments either do not declare the interest in time or declare the 
interest rate lower than the EPF rate.  The Committee also observed that  
some firms do not transfer the funds to the trust account in time . In this 
regard, the representatives of EPFO informed as under: 
"Monthly statements are filled in the software.  Through the software, we 
come to know of any kind of violation of conditions like some firm did not 
declare the interest in time or some firm declared the interest rate but 
that interest sometimes happens to be lower than the EPF rate . 
Sometimes, some firms do not transfer the funds in time to the trust 
account. These are the kind  of irregularities which we observe in the 
working of the exempted establishments. When these irregularities come 
to our notice, our field officers take action including prosecution. This is 
the action which we are taking and we are monitoring. When any of these 
irregularities happen, there is a prosecution provision and we can also 
cancel the exemption. Whenever these violations are observed, we are 
taking action. But sometimes the matter goes to the courts and they get 
rectified. This is the present state  of affairs. I would like to submit that 
we would like to improve the present monitoring system which is not 
fully satisfactory for us." 


46 
 
2.64 The Committee note that there are various types of major 
violations/malpractices of the exemption provisions being done 
by the Exempted Establishment, viz. (i) not adhering to the 
prescribed pattern of investment ; (ii) delay in transfer of PF 
contributions to Trusts within stipulated date; (iii) non -
declaration of interest or the declared rate of i nterest lower 
than the EPF rate; and (iv) investing PF funds in own company . 
The Committee were informed that whenever such violations 
are observed, there is a prosecution provision and even the 
exemption could be cancelled.  However, the details of action 
taken against the defaulting establishment on these counts are 
being gathered from the field offices  by EPFO after the matter 
was raised by the Committee. As the basic principle of granting 
exemption to some establishments is to ensure  similar or even 
better social security to workers , the Committee are of the 
strong opinion that if any establishment is committing 
violations, stern penal action must be taken by the regulating 
authority. The Committee therefore, recommend that 
irregularities/violations be viewed very seriously  by the EPFO 
and they must  ensure that appropriate prosecution action, as 

47 
 
enumerated in the Act, be taken against the defaulting 
establishment without fail. At some time, the Committee feel 
that RPFCs & EPFO have a statutory duty to keep a constant 
vigil on the violations committed, if any, and failure to do so 
should attract appropriate administrative action against them 
too. 
VII. PROPOSALS PENDING FOR GRANT OF EXEMPTION 
2.65 The processing and finalisation of all pending exemption propos als 
for forwarding the same to a ppropriate authority for exemption through 
the Central Board of Trustees, EPF could not be completed within the 
period s tipulated in the statute. It had  been extended several times by 
legislative intervention from 2007 to 2013. Even then, the processing and 
finalisation of all pending exemption proposals could not be completed. 
In this regard, EPFO has stated as under: 
"The proposal for grant of exemption is considered completed if the 
proposal meets all the guidelines issued for processing the proposal from 
time to time. The main reason in delay in processing the proposal for 
grant of exemption is due to presence of shortcomings in the proposals." 
2.66 The Committee note that proposals for grant of exemption 
are pending with EPFO for  years together because the process 
could not be completed within the statutorily period under the 
Act. Resultantly, the EPFO had to seek permission for 
extension of time from the Ministry of Finance several times 
for seven years during the period 2007 -13. Responding to the 

48 
 
query of the Committee for the reasons thereof, EPFO stated 
that the proposal for grant of exemption is considered 
complete if the proposal meets all the guidelines. The 
Committee, note that, presently the power to grant exemption 
rests with more than 100 Regional Provident Fund 
Commissioners, even than there are numerous cases pending 
for grant of exemption. Clearly the RPFCs have not been able to 
ensure that the proposals are complete in all respects for final 
decision on the cases. Therefore, the Committee opine that the 
policy guidelines need to be revisited to ensure that the 
pending proposals are disposed off in a time bound manner. As 
the  Ministry has statedly decided to frame necessary 
guidelines/amendments/notifications to addres s concerns 
expressed by the Committee with respect to exemptions, the 
Committee suggest that the pending proposals can be 
examined from the perspective of amended guidelines, so that 
the number of establishments seeking exemption could become 
manageable. T he Committee desire to be furnished with a 
detailed note on the final action taken by the Ministry to 
address all points raised in connection with the subject. 

49 
 
VIII. WITHDRAWAL OF EXEMPTION 
2.67 The Committee desired to know about the cases where the 
exemption was withdrawn, the reasons therefor and the compensation 
given to their subscribers, the EPFO stated as under: 
"Yes, there are cases where exemption granted to establishments have 
been cancelled by the appropriate Government in terms of Section 17 (4)  
of the EPF & MP Act, 1952 for having contravened terms and conditions 
of grant of exemption. 
As regards compensation to subscribers, there is no such provision. 
Liability towards subscribers is shifted from private P.F. Trust to EPFO to 
the extent of fund transferred from the BoT." 
2.68 The Committee then desired to know the terms used as 
'cancellation' and 'revocation' of exemption , the EPFO defined the terms 
as under: 
"As per the EPF & MP Act,1952 u/s 17, power to exemption is provided to 
appropriate gov ernment to grant exemption to establishment by 
notification and subject to such condition as may be specified in the 
notification. The said condition are available in “para 27AA” of EPF 
scheme,1952 in form of” Appendix -“A”, wherein term „cancellation‟ & 
„revocation‟ of exemption is available. 
i) Wherein, word “cancellation” may be invoked on violation of the 
condition for grant of exemption by the employer of the Board of 
Trustees. The Exemption granted may be cancelled after issuing a 
“Show Cause Notice” by Competent Authority. 
ii) Wherein, the word “Revoked” used in condition No.29 of Appendix -A 
of Para 27 AA of the EPF Scheme, 1952. Specifically, applied “in 
case of any change of legal status of the establishment which has 
been granted exemption, as a result of  merger, demerger, 
acquisition, sale amalgamation, formation of a subsidiary, whether 
wholly owned or not etc. The exemption shall stand revoked. 
 
As, per Oxford English Dictionary –“Revoked” means “Official Cancel “. 
 
While,in legal parlance “Revocation” is act of recall or annulment. It is the 
reversal of an Act, the recalling of grant or privilege, or the making of void 
some deed previously existing. 
The meaning mentioned aforesaid is understood in the general 
functioning of EPFO. 

50 
 
Further in cancellation  the establishment remains in existence but 
exemption is withdrawn and the establishment starts complying as an 
un-exempted establishment with Regional P F Commissioner. 
While in revocation, the existence of the establishment is vanished or 
changed as the case may be due to merger, amalgamation etc hence it 
neither remains as exempted nor un -exempted but the new 
establishment or the merged/amalgamated establishment continue as 
per its own status of exempted or un-exempted." 
2.69 The Committee note that ther e were cases of 
cancellation/revocation of exemption of Exempted 
Establishment like Jute Mills, State Electricity Boards, etc in 
terms of Section 17(4) of the EPF & MP Act, 1952.  However, 
there is no subsequent provision to compensate the subscribers 
and the liability towards subscribers is shifted from Private PF 
Trust to EPFO to the extent of fund transferred from the BoT.  
The Committee are note that apart from lack of clarity  on 
cancellation or revocation status in some establishment, there 
is no prov ision to prevent the innocent subscriber from being 
cheated on account of the irregularity committed by his/her 
employer and the resultant cancellation of the exemption. 
Moreover, since the industrial work force remains largely 
unaware of official procedur es, hence in cases where the legal 
status of an exempted establishment changes due to 

51 
 
'revocation', there could be innumerable cases of non -payment 
of claims remaining unresolved owing to long legal delays. In 
such cases many a times an employee dies and s ince there is 
hardly any willingness on the part of employers to trace legal 
heirs, his dues lie unclaimed in the employer's account. The 
Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of correct status of 
cancellation/revocation of Exempted Establishment in the last 
three years. Further, they recommend that in case of 
functioning establishments, where exemption is cancelled, 
heavy penalty needs to be imposed on the employers to recover 
the amount and in case of closure of defaulting establishment 
due to revoc ation, the subscribers needs t o be compensated 
through the SRF. The Committee desire that the matter must 
be examined in detail and appropriate legal provisions be 
framed to protect and disburse the lifetime savings of 
employees/workers in these situations. 
IX. MAINTENANCE OF DATA BASE 
2.70 Asked about the type of record/data the exempted establishments 
maintain about the subscribers and management of the PF accumulation 
by them, the EPFO stated as under: 

52 
 
"The P. F. Trusts of exempted establishments manage Trust funds in 
accordance with the provision laid under Condition No. 13 of Appendix – 
„A‟  to Para 27AA of the EPF Scheme, 1952 by maintaining individual 
ledger Accounts."  
2.71 In regard to the efforts made by EPFO in the matter of maintaining 
data base and developing appropriate software to manage the functioning 
in a more efficient manner, the EPFO stated as under: 
i) "In line with the e -governance policy of the Government, 
Electronic-Challan-cum-Return (ECR) has been introduced by 
EPFO to facilitate employers of all establishments,  which has 
eased their burden of filing numerous statutory returns in 
physical from and has also facilitated remittance of 
contribution/dues to EPFO through manual challan. 
ii) Online filing of returns by employer of exempted establishments 
and Trusts has been  developed, which has facilitated ease of 
compliance to them. 
iii) Dashboard for monitoring of filing of online returns by exempted 
establishments ad their Trust has also been developed for benefit 
of field offices. 
iv) Further, C -DAC Pune has been assigned the tas k of developing 
necessary software so that the database relating to exempted 
establishments and their Trusts can be extracted in a useful 
manner/format for and various information so available will be 
helpful for monitoring purposes as well as for taking n ecessary 
decision at EPFO, Head Office level." 
 
2.72 As regards the extraction of the database of the exempted 
establishment and their Trusts for taking necessary action/dec isions at 
the Head Office level, the EPFO informed as under: 
"Once the development is completed and the testing is done the new 
software will be deployed on the Unified Portal, data from the old portal 
will have to be migrated and then the same can be made available for 
action.  
The exempted establishments have been asked by the circular issued by 
the exemption section to keep the data ready for filing when the link is 
made available again (copy enclosed). 
Since, the delivery of the proposed software is expected in March 2017, 
therefore no secondary mechanism for extracting data has been proposed 
for such a short period." 

53 
 
 
2.73 The Committee note that presently the PF Trusts of 
Exempted Establishment manage Trust funds in accordance 
with the laid down provisions by maintaining individual ledger 
Accounts.  The Committee further note that in line with the e -
governance policy of the Government, Electronic -Challan-cum-
Return (ECR) has been introduced by EPFO for filing of returns 
by employer of Exempted Establishment and Trusts. A  
Dashboard for monitoring of filing of onli ne returns by 
Exempted Establishment and their trust has also been 
developed for benefit of field offices. In view of the rampant 
violations of the Act, the Committee opine that mere filing of 
returns has not proved to be enough to protect the workers of 
the Exempted Establishment hence there still remains scope 
for improvement in the checking of the returns filed by 
Exempted Establishment. They therefore recommend that the 
returns filed by the Exempted Establishment be checked 
randomly to detect misuse of the facility and appropriate 
action be taken against the defaulting establishments. 

54 
 
Meanwhile, the Committee desire to be apprised of the status 
of the new software being developed for EPFO by C -DAC, Pune, 
and the improvements brought therein to detect sho rt comings 
in returns and other violations more effectively. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;              DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA  
   6th April, 2017                          CHAIRPERSON,  
   16th Chaitra, 1938 (Saka)             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

55 
 
Appendix - I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 
 
Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on  Wednesday, the 14th December, 2016 from 1700 
hrs. to 1900 hrs. in Committee Room No. '63', Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Kirit Somaiya    –    CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  3. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
  4. Dr. Arun Kumar 
  5. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  6. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
  7. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
    
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  8. Shri Ram Narayan Dudi 
  9. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  10. Haji Abdul Salam 
  11. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
  12. Ms. Dola Sen 
  13. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
    
        
   SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Shri N.C. Gupta  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Additional Director  
  3. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 
 

56 
 
PART - I 
XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
PART-II 
Witnesses 
Representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment (MoLE) and 
Employees' Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) 
 
1. Shri R.K. Gupta Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Manish Gupta Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. V.P. Joy Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner (CPFC) 
2. The Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment (MoLE) and EPFO to the sitting, convened to have a 
briefing on the subject 'Exempted Organisations/ Trusts/ Establishments from 
EPFO, Investment of Corpus of EPFO in Exchange Trade Fund (ETF) and 
disbursement of dividend and PF Pension to the beneficiaries' . He then drew 
the attention of the represe ntatives to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the 
Speaker' regarding confidentiality of proceedings of the Committee during 
deposition before the Parliamentary Committees.  
3. Thereafter, the representative of MoLE, briefed on various aspects of the 
subject matter which inter-alia included running of three Schemes of the EPFO 
i.e., (i) The Employees' Provident Funds Scheme, 1952 (EPF), (ii) The 
Employees' Pension Scheme, 1995 (EPS), (iii) The Employees' Deposit Linked 
Insurance Scheme, 1976 (EDLI), provisi on of exemption 
Establishments/Organisations/ Trusts to run their own trust for the Scheme, 
power for giving such exemptions/relaxations, investments of funds, 
monitoring, inspections, etc.  Thereafter Members raised queries on various 
issues which, inter-alia, included monitoring mechanism, irregularities, basic 

57 
 
criteria for granting exemption, number of defaulters, unclaimed amount, total 
corpus, registration of CPWD and NDMC and collection of arrears, etc . The 
representatives then responded to the queries raised by the Members.  
4. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and briefing them on the subject. The Chairperson also directed the 
Joint Secretary, MoLE and CPFC to furnish written replies within 10  days in 
respect of those queries, for which information was not readily available with 
them during the meeting as well as which required detailed and statistical 
information. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
XX Do not pertains to this Report. 
  

58 
 
      Appendix - II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 
Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee  sat on  Wednesday, the  18th January, 2017 from 1130 
hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Main Committee Room , Parliament House Annexe , New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Kirit Somaiya    –    CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  4. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara 
  5. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
  6. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  7 Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  8. Shri Hari Manjhi 
  9. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
      
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  10. Shri Ram Narayn Dudi 
  11. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  12. Shri P.L. Punia 
  13. Shri Rajaram 
  14. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
  15. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
          
   SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad - Joint Secretary 
  2. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director 
  3. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Addl. Director 
  4. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
   
  
 

59 
 
 
Witnesses 
Representatives of the Ministries of Labour & Employment (MoLE) and 
Employees' Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO)  
 
1. Shri R.K. Gupta Joint Secretary 
2 Dr. V.P. Joy Central PF Commissioner 
 
Representatives of various exempted organisations 
1. Shri. Sandeep Verma, GM               
(Finance) 
Shri T.K. Mookherjee, 
Employees Relation Manager  
Fortis Healthcare Ltd. 
2. Shri V.R. Boraste, Manager, 
HRM 
Shri H.S. Nalawade, Dy. C.O. 
Estt & Tax Dept, HO 
Dhulia District Central Co-
operative Bank Ltd. 
3. Shri D.G. Kasle, Asstt. Adm, 
Manager 
Shri S.T Shirsekar, Astt. Adm. 
Manager 
Best Undertaking 
4. Shri Madhav Dhavale, Manager Rallis India Ltd. 
5. Shri Sanjay Kaushal, G.M. HR, 
Shri N.K. Das, GM(HR) 
Indian Oil Corporation (Refinery-
Panipat Div.) 
6. Shri Edwin A D'Cunha,         
Shri Nandkumar S. Tirumalai 
Tata Power Company Ltd. 
7. Shri Ravi, Chief Business 
Development Officer, 
Shri Yatrik Vin, Chief Financial 
Officer 
National Stock Exchange of India 
Ltd. 
8. Shri Hemant Sharma,             
Sr. Director, 
Shri Anand Srivastava, Director 
Price Waterhouse CO. 

60 
 
9. Shri D.R. Prabodhankar, 
Manager (Finance) 
Maharashtra State Cooperative 
Marketing Federation Ltd. 
10. Shri Dilip Dutta, Advisor, 
Shri V.K. Agarwal, CS 
Shri Gauri Shankar Jute Mills Ltd. 
11. Shri Ram Kumar Arora,          
GM Finance &CS, 
Shri Sunil Sharma, Manager 
(PF&ESI) 
OCM India Ltd. 
12. Shri Hansh Raj Prihar, CAO, 
Shri Atual, Manager (Account) 
Delhi Gymkhana Club Ltd. 
13. Shri Sanjeev M ittal, Senior 
Manager (Finance), 
Shri M.K. Mittal, Senior 
Manager (Finance) 
DCM ShriRam Sugar Division 
14. Shri Girish D Bhingarkar, 
Director, 
Shri Rajaram N Kasar, Assistant 
Vice- President-HR & 
Administration 
Cable Corporation of India Ltd. 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and the representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment (MoLE), 
Employees' Provident Fund Organisation  (EPFO) and the exempted 
establishments to the sitting, convened to take evidence  on the subject 
'Exempted Organisations/ Trusts/ Establishments from EPFO, Investment of 
Corpus of EPFO in Exchange Trade Fund (ETF) and disbursement of dividend 
and PF Pension to the beneficiaries'.  The Chairperson then drew attention of 
the representatives to Direction 5 8 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee during deposition before the 
Parliamentary Committees. He then asked the representatives of the Min istry 
to update the Committee on various issues relating to the subject matter. 
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment accordingly 
briefed the Committee on various aspects of the subject matter which inter-alia 
included action taken by the Ministry subsequent to the sitting of the 

61 
 
Committee held on 14th December, 2016, creation of data -base, issue of 
surcharge, etc. Thereafter, the representatives of the exempted establishments 
apprised the Committee, one by one, of the number of empl oyees in their 
respective establishments, total corpus, fund management, interest rate, 
settlement of claims, etc. The Members then raised queries on several issues 
which, inter-alia, included processing and finalisation of all pending 
applications, exemption, extension given by the Ministry of Finance year after 
year since 2007, investment of corpus in ETF securities prescribed by EPFO, 
investment of corpus in private securities, periodicity of audit of Fund 
Managers, physical inspection of securities, mon itoring mechanism put in 
place to ensure overall implementation of the instructions of EPFO, conditions 
for cancellation & revocation of exemption, investment in their own business 
via mutual funds route, special audit of Maharashtra Cooperative Banks/Stat e 
Electricity Boards and other exempted establishments, data base/bank of the 
audit of accounts of exempted establishments and action taken by EPFO 
thereon; recovery of funds from exempted establishments, employees' 
grievances, PF settlement cases pending with the exempted establishments, 
utilisation of and awareness campaign for unclaimed dividends, etc. The 
representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment, EPFO and exempted 
establishments responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
4. The Chairp erson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and rendering evidence on the subject matter. The Chairperson also 
asked the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment to furnish written 
replies within 10  days in respect of  those queries, for which information was 
not readily available with them  during the meeting as well as which required 
detailed and statistical information. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

62 
 
Appendix - III 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 
Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on  Thursday, the 6th April, 2017 from 1030 hrs. to 
1100 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Kirit Somaiya    –    CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
  3. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
  5. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  6. Dr. Arun Kumar 
  7. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  8. Shri Hari Manjhi 
  9. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  10. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
      
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  11. Shri N. Gokulkrishnan 
  12. Shri P.L. Punia 
  13. Ms. Dola Sen 
 14. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
   
   
          
   SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad - Joint Secretary 
  2. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director 
  3. Shri K.C. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
   
  
 

63 
 
 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of Draft Report on the 
subject 'Exempted Organisation/ Trust/ Establishments from EPFO: 
Performance, Issues and Challenges' pertaining to the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment. Giving an overview of the Recommendations made in th e Draft 
Report,  the Chairperson requested the Members to give their suggestions on 
them, if any. 
3. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the Draft Report and 
adopted the same after some discussions. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairpers on to present the Report to 
both the Houses. 
The Committee then adjourned. 