i 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Twenty-Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2017 -18) of the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment] 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
      
November, 2017/ Kartika, 1939 (Saka)  
 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
29 

ii 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-
Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (201 7-
18)' of the Ministry of Labour and Employment] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  28.12.2017 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  28.12.2017 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2017/ Kartika, 1939 (Saka) 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iv) 
INTRODUCTION        (v) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I. Minutes of the sit ting of the Committee held on  
23.08.2017.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action  Taken by Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 

iv 
 
 DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA - CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
17. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
18. Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
19. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
20. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
21. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
23. Shri N. Gokulkrishnan 
24. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
25. Shri P.L. Punia 
26. Shri Rajaram 
27. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
28. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
29. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
30. * Vacant 
31. ** Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Ms. Rhimjhim Prasad   -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Smt. Anita B. Panda   - Director 
 2.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Under Secretary 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
*vacancy occurred vice Haji Abdul Salam passed away on 28.2.2017. 
** Vacancy occurred vice Ms. Dola Sen retired w.e.f 18.8.2017 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Commi ttee on Labour (2016 -17) having 
been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this Twent y-
Ninth Report on 'Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-
third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (201 7-18) of the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
2. The Twenty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 20th March, 2017 . The Ministry of Labour and Employment 
furnished their r eplies indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-third Report on 14th July, 201 7. 
The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held 
on 23rd August, 2017. 
3. An analysis of the action take n by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;                 DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA  
 23rd August, 2017                        CHAIRPERSON,  
 1st Bhardrapada, 1937 (Saka)           STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Co mmittee contained in their Twenty -
third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (201 7-18) of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
 
2 The Twenty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 23rd March, 201 7. It contained 17  Observations/ 
Recommendations. Replies of the Government in respect of all these 
Recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government –                                                                                            
Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 
13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 
 
Total:15 
Percentage:94.12 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – Nil 
Total:00 
Percentage:00 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Rec. Para No. Nil 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature- 
Rec. Para No. 7 
 
Total:00 
 Percentage:00 
 
 
 
Total:01 
Percentage:5.88 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Note s in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action 
taken reply in respect of the Recommendation contained in Chapter V of 
this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the Government , 
may be furnished to them at the earliest.  

2 
 
I. Functions of DGFASLI/DGMS 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
4. In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed as under:  
"The Committee note that ‘The Factories Act, 1948’, ‘The Mines Act, 1952’, and 
‘The Dock Workers (Safety, Health & Welfare) Act, 1986’ are some of the legal 
instruments, that contain provisions regulating the health of workers in an 
establishment.  The Acts are framed/amended by the Mi nistry of Labour and 
Employment whereas the implementation part rests with the State Governments 
concerned.  The Committee find that whenever any accident occurs, the affected 
worker suffers on account of injury as well as lack/delay in grant of 
compensation thereof.  While deposing before the Committee, the Secretary, 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated that the Act is confined to setting up of 
parameters/guidelines etc. and if any incident happens due to faulty 
implementation of parameters, the State G overnment concerned is responsible 
for prosecution.  The Committee opine that mere setting up of parameters is not 
sufficient for the safety of workers and the monitoring part must be 
strengthened for their safety in a hazardous work environment.  They the refore, 
desire that the Ministry must convey to them various observations that emerge 
following the safety audit exercise due to be held in 2 months as well as action 
taken by the Ministry accordingly." 
5. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Commit tee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:  
 "Under the Constitution of India, safety, welfare and health of workers 
employed in mines are the concern of the Central Government (Entry 55 -Union 
List-Article 246).  The objective is re gulated by the Mines Act, 1952 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder. These are administered by the Directorate -
General of Mines Safety (DGMS), under the Union Ministry of Labour & 
Employment. Apart from administering the Mines Act and the subord inate 
legislation there under, DGMS also administers some other allied legislation, 
including the Indian Electricity Act. 
 Functions of DGMS broadly include: 
 
1. Inspection of mines 
 
2. Investigation into - 
(a)  Accidents 
(b)  Dangerous occurrences - emergency response 
(c)  Complaints& other matters 
  
3. (a)  Grant of : 
(i)  Statutory permission, exemptions & relaxations 
(ii) Approval of mine safety equipment, material & appliances 
(b) Interactions for development of safety equipment, material and safe  
work practices through workshop etc. 
(c)  Development of Safety Legislation & Standards 
(d) Safety Information Dissemination 

3 
 
 
4. Conduct of examinations for grant of competency certificates. 
 
5.  Safety promotional initiatives including:  
 
(a) Organisation of -  
 Conference on Safety in Mines  
 National Safety Awards 
 Safety Weeks & Campaigns 
(b) Promoting  - 
- safety education and awareness programmes 
- workers’ participation in safety management through - 
 workmen’s inspector 
 safety committee 
 tripartite reviews 
 
The issue of payment of compensation to work persons due the death, 
injury or of contracting of notified diseases does not come under the purview of 
the Mines Act, 1952 or its subordinate rules and regulations. 
 
Inspecting officers of t his Directorate enforces compliance of the 
provisions stipulated in the statute which includes safety and provisions of 
occupational safety and health of work persons employed in the mines. 
 
In the year 2016, the following activities have been done by DGMS: 
 
Total  number of inspections made 14885 
Total number of Improvement Notices served 270 
Total number of Prohibitory Orders issued 248 
Total number of Prosecutions launched 17 
Total number of Statutory Permissions dealt 3605 
Total  number of Field Trial Approvals accorded 124 
Total number of Regular Approval accorded 243 
Total number of Statutory Examinations regarding 
competency conducted 
231 
 
The Factories Act, 1948 is a central legislation for regulating the safety 
and health of the workers working in the factories registered under the Act. The 
state governments are empowered under the enabling provisions of the Act to 
frame their own State Fa ctories Rules and both the Act and the Rules framed 
thereunder are enforced by the respective state governments. For violation of 
any of the provisions of the Act or the Rules framed thereunder, the inspectors 
are empowered under Section 105 of the Act to file a complaint in a Court of law 
for imposing penalties for the offences. The penal provisions are prescribed 
under Sections 92 and 96A the Act. The proviso clause to Section 92 prescribes 
a minimum fine of twenty five thousand rupees in case of an accid ent causing 
death, and five thousand rupees in the case of an accident causing serious 
bodily injury. The same is being revised by six times in the proposed Factories 
(Amendment) Bill, 2014. The aspect of compensation prescribed under the 
Employees Compens ation Act is enforced by the State Governments and the 

4 
 
inspectors of factories are required to send a report to such authorities for 
processing the same. In case the workers are covered by the ESI schemes 
provided by the occupiers, the compensation is give n by the appropriate 
authorities. DGFASLI, through correspondence with the Chief Inspectors of 
Factories collects state -wise data on the status of compliance of the Act and 
accident statistics and the same are compiled and published in the Standard 
Reference Note of DGFASLI which is uploaded in public domain. The state -wise 
latest information available with DGFASLI in respect of the prosecutions and 
convictions under Sections 92 and 96A and accident data are enclosed as 
Annexure-IA and Annexure -IB respectiv ely. DGFASLI holds the Conference of 
the Chief Inspector of Factories of the states/ UTs in which the accidents are 
discussed and appropriate amendments to the Model Factories Rules framed by 
DGFASLI are suggested which are adopted by the State Governments  in their 
State Factories Rules thus ensures an enhancement OSH standards thus 
results in reducing the accidents in factories. Further, The Factories 
(Amendment) Bill, 2014 seeks to empower the Central Governments, in addition 
to the State Governments to f rame Rules under the Act. On passage of the Bill, 
the Central Government will be able to monitor and implement safety and health 
provisions of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder. 
The Dock Worker (Safety, Health and Welfare) Act 1986 and the 
Regulations, 1990 framed thereunder are enforced by DGFASLI. The 
Inspectorate of Dock Safety offices are functional in the major ports of India to 
ensure continuous and efficient monitoring of safety and health aspects in them. 
The implementation of the Ac t and the Regulations are carried by DGFASLI and 
penal actions are initiated for violations of the provisions of the Act and the 
Regulations. The data on the enforcement and accident data in major ports are 
compiled in the Standard Reference Note of DGFASL I which is available in 
public domain. The latest information on number of prosecutions filed and 
accidents, as available with DGFASLI, are enclosed as Annexure -IIA and 
Annexure-IIB respectively." 
6. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had desire d the 
Ministry to convey to them various observations that could have emerged 
following the Factory and Mines Workers' safety audit exercise, which was 
due to be held within 2 months  i.e. by May, 2017  in the establishments 
covered under the Factories Act, the Mines Act and the Dock Workers 
(Safety, Health and Welfare) Act . The Committee note that  the Action 
Taken by Government has not been reflected in the response.  They, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire to be 
informed about the sepcific action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 

5 
 
 
II. Coverage of eligible worker by ESIC 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
7. In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed as under: 
 "As regards ESIC, the Committee note their achievements in the year 
2016-17, which include revision of wage ceiling from ₹ 15000 p.m. to ₹ 21,000 
p.m. w.e.f. 1.1.17 and enhancement in per IP medical expenditure ceiling from ₹ 
2150 to ₹ 3000 p.a. w.e.f. 1.4. 17. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry and ESIC should adopt a time -bound programme to ensure coverage of 
all legally entitled yet uncovered workers under ESIC scheme. The Committee 
have also noted that a new infrastructure in terms of Hosp itals/Dispensaries is 
being planned to be rolled out in FY 2017 -18.  While the Committee await the 
outcome of these initiatives at action taken stage, they cannot but reiterate that 
an audit of the existing scenario in ESI hospitals must be carried out to ensure 
maximum bed occupancy in them. They hope that the system of awarding 
contracts for constructing ESI hospitals/dispensaries would also be reviewed in 
order to ensure transparency and accountability." 
8. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Com mittee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows: 
 "For the Coverage of more employees under the sch eme - Survey of the 
new units/Establishments are conducted by the concerned regions on the basis 
of the list obtained/provided from/by the different Govt. offices like EPFO, 
District Industries Office, labour Office etc.  
 Recently a Scheme to promote Regi stration of Employers/Employees 
(SPREE), the one -time drive, was launched for the period from 20.12.2016 to 
31.03.2017 to extend the social security benefits to all -eligible under the Act, 
who had till then been kept out of the ESI coverage.  
Looking to th e references from Employers and Employers’ Association in the 
matter-said Scheme has been extended up to 30.06.2017 for the coverage of 
more employees.  
 In addition to above, a letter either from Hon’ble Minister L&E to all State 
Labour Ministers or from Secretary, MOL&E to Chief Secretaries of State for 
issuing Notifications for bringing all Casual/Contract employees and 
contractors’ employees in Govt. Offices including such employees of various 
projects like NACO, Skill Development Project, State Health Societies under the 
ambit of ESI Act and declaring the concerned Departmental Officer as Principal 
Employer for such employees and for appropriate directions to their all 
subordinate offices to ensure coverage of employees engaged through 
outsourcing, which are now not covered in almost all cases.   
 The audit of ESI Hospital is carried out by the Comptroller  & Auditor 
General (Central). ESI Corporation also evaluates/monitors performance of ESI 

6 
 
Hospitals by conducting inspection through a team consisting o f ESIC 
stakeholders. Recently, ESIC has taken up the issue with Quality Council of 
India for carrying out assessment of quality services in ESIC hospitals. 
 Since 2016, capital projects are being awarded to empanelled public 
sector undertakings on competition basis for Centage / Agency fee, on deposit 
works basis. This is in accordance in its 166th  Meeting held on 07.08.2015 as 
well as the Rule 126(3) of GFR." 
9. The Committee note that the ESIC  are relying upon the survey of 
the new units/Establishments conducted by the concerned regions on the 
basis of the list obtained/pro vided from/by the different Government  
offices like EPFO, Distric t Industries Office, L abour Office etc.  and they 
are also expecting the employers/employees associations to come forward 
for their enrolment under the ESIC. The Committee feel that the ESIC, on 
their own , make efforts to cover the un -covered workers who are 
otherwise legally coverable. The Committee  insist that mapping process 
of ESIC must  be strengthened to cover the existing  eligible/legally 
coverable workers. The Committee further desire that the latest figures of 
number of workers covered may be furnished to them. 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER-II  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 The Committee observe that during XII Plan period an amount of ₹ 13223 
crore was approved against the Ministry's projection of ₹ 34914.72 crore, out of 
which the Ministry could utilize an amount of ₹ 5498.74 crore. The un der-
utilisation of funds has been attributed mainly to the transfer of the Schemes 
worth ₹ 11814.19 crore to Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
after its creation in May, 2015; as well as transfer of the Rashtriya Swasthya 
Bima Yojana (RSBY) to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare w.e.f. April, 
2015 and also due to the fact that the Scheme of U -WIN could not take off 
timely.  The Committee have been constantly advising the Ministry for the past 
few years to make the budgeting exercise mor e prudent and also to strengthen 
the monitoring mechanism so as to achieve maximum utilization of funds. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry has been making its budgetary exercise more realistic.Bureau 
Heads have been directed to strictly adhere to duly appr oved Monthly 
Expenditure Planso that at the end the financial year 2017 -18, expenditure in 
respect of Ministry of Labour & Employment is as budgeted.Secretary L&E is 
also taking regular meetings with Bureau Heads to review the pace of 
expenditure. 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 The Committee note that during the Annual Plan 2016 -17, the Ministry 
were allocated an amount of ₹1550 crore out of which ₹ 1000 crore i.e. 64.51% 
belonged to Pradhan Mantri Rojgar Protsahan Yojana (PMRPY) a flagship 
scheme for employment generation.  However, the same was later revised 
downwards to a mere ₹ 200 crore as the Scheme could receive approval only in 
August, 2016.  Further, against an allocation of ₹ 30 crore, for U -WIN Card 
Scheme, the Ministry was able to utilize only ₹1.39 crore due to delay in 
finalisation of the Scheme.  The Committee are of the view that once the 
approval process is completed, the funds could be sought at the RE stage 
proportionately so that the performance of the Ministry could improve. The 
Committee may be apprised about the steps initiated in this regard. 
 

8 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry had sent a draft SFC memo for creation of a nati onal 
platform for unorganized workers and allotment of Aadhaar seeded 
identification number to them with a cost implication of Rs.471.30 crore over 
three years from 2017 -18 to 2019 -20 to Department of Expenditure(DoE) for 
seeking in-principle approval. A m eeting in this regard was also held in DoE 
based on which DoE asked for certain clarifications/ modifications in the SFC. 
Based on the discussions, the project cost was revised to Rs.402.7 crore over 
two years from 2017 -18 to 2018 -19. Department of Expendi ture has given in -
principle approval of the project.  SFC meeting was held under the 
chairpersonship of Secretary (L&E) on 25.05.2017. The SFC has been 
submitted for the approval of Hon’ble MOS (IC)(L&E). 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 From the details submitted on the U -Win Card Scheme, the Committee 
feel that the same has remain a non -starter since the beginning.  They note 
that the Scheme was initiated in the year 2014 to be completed within three 
years.  However, during the examinati on of Demands for Grants for the year 
2015-16 the Committee were informed that the allocation of ₹ 320.52 crore had 
to be surrendered as the Scheme could not take off. According to the Secretary, 
(MOLE), a pan India social security platform was to be devel oped which was 
being looked into by the Cabinet Secretariat but there was neither any clarity 
on its character and size nor about the role and responsibility of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment.  Besides, service delivery modules to deliver benefits 
were to be prepared by respective scheme Ministries/Departments.  Later, at 
the Action Taken stage the Ministry had conveyed to the Committee that the 
Central Government was re-examining the need to issue a separate smart Card 
in the light of the near universal coverage of Aadhaar. The Committee now note 
that the Component of Scheme for bio -metric authentication using smart card 
has been dropped and Central Government is considering the delivery of the 
most public welfare benefits through Aadhaar enabled pla tforms and DietY 
(Department of Electronics & Information Technology) has been asked to 
prepare a policy on the delivery of various public services and social security 
schemes using Aadhaar, Jan Dhan Policy(JDY) account and existing platforms 
without the issuance of new smart card.  The Committee are also apprehensive 
of the delivery of various public services and social security schemes to the 
workers belonging to Jammu & Kashmir and NE region, where Aadhaar is not 
mandatory.  Nevertheless since now 2 comp onents of U -Win Scheme i.e. 
creation of database and providing an identity to the unorganized workers 
remain unchanged, the Committee desire that the action plan for delivery of 

9 
 
various public services and social security schemes in the States, particularl y 
in J&K and NE region, must be chalked out so that the unorganized workers 
could be benefitted under the Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
 It has been decided to give all unorganized workers a unique number 
without issuance of a smart card. Department of E xpenditure has given in -
principle approval of the project. SFC meeting was held under the 
chairpersonship of Secretary(L&E)on 25/05/2017. The SFC has been 
submitted for the approval of Hon’bleMoS(IC)(L&E). 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 The Committee find that the Ministry had kept budget provisions in 
2016-17 even for the Schemes which stood transferred to other Ministries in 
the year 2015 itself, resulting in non/under utilization of funds.  The 
Committee opine that at least minimal budge t should have been 
proposed/sought for those Schemes in 2016 -17 which were transferred to 
other Ministries for consequential expenses only. 
Reply of the Government 
 Rashtriya Swasthiya Bima Yojana (RSBY) was transferred to Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare(MoHWF) on 01.04.2015 and Ministry of Labour & 
Employment (MoLE) was to carry out identification, registration and related 
activities for unorganized workers. The Budget was kept to carry out the above 
scheme. However, the scheme was modified/revise d multiple times by MoHFW 
and was not finalized. Now the MoHFW is implementing the scheme in totality. 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 The Committee  note that there is a mutual agreement between the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and the Ministry of Labour & Employment 
that the development of new IT architecture for enrolment and issuance of 
Smart Card to Rashtriya Swasthaya Bima Yojana (RSBY) would be handled by 
Ministry of Labour and Employment and service delivery would be entrusted  
with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.  The Committee are unable to 
figure out the need for a separate Smart Card which again would be a repetitive 
step, as the RSBY is also meant for un -organised workers.  Since RSBY was 
transferred to Ministry of  Health and Family Welfare in April, 2015, the 

10 
 
Committee would like to know the current status of the Smart Card provision 
under the Scheme as well as the arrangement between the two Ministries on it, 
if any.  The Committee feel that delivery of RSBY benef its may also be 
considered through Aadhaar/other delivery mechanism conceived for other 
Social Security Schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
 RSBY is being implanted in totality by MoHFW. 
 
 MoLE is working on creation of a nationalized platform for unorganized 
workers and allotment of Aadhaar seeded identification number to them 
without the issuance of smart card. 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 The Committee note that the Cess fund under ‘The Beedi Workers 
Welfare Fund Act, 1976’ had been allowe d to continue after 01.04.2016.  The 
Committee note that despite the lone welfare fund in operation, satisfactory 
performance against the targets set for each of the activity undertaken viz. 
Scholarship, RIHS, Health etc. during 2016 -17 was not achieved.  As cess 
funds are meant for the welfare of the most underprivileged section of 
unorganized workers population, the Committee once again impress upon the 
Ministry to strengthen the implementing mechanism so that the cess fund 
collected is fully utilised and  the benefits of welfare Schemes financed through 
the fund actually reach the intended beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government 
 The details of the Welfare Schemes, which are implemented for the welfare 
of BeediWorkers are as follows:  
 
1. Financial Assistance for Education:- 
 
After introduction of National Scholarship Portal 2 (NSP.2), Scholarships 
of all Ministries are to be paid through this Portal and PFMS Bridge. Since due 
to several issues/technical problems in NSP.2 and PFMS, payment files were  
sent to us only in the mid of March 2017, no online payment could be made till 
that time (only Backlog payment of approxRs. 45 crore were spent through 
NEFT). Due to this, the budgetary allocation was reduced to Rs. 66.36 at RE 
State. However, after recei pt of the payment files in March 2017, budget was 
increased to Rs. 77.47 crore at FE Stage. We spent around 99% of our FE 

11 
 
Allocation. Efforts will be taken so that maximum allocated funds could be 
utilized in coming financial year. 
 
2. Housing Scheme:- 
 We were providing a housing subsidy of Rs. 40,000/ - under RIHS 2007, 
which was very less in comparison to the Housing Scheme provided by M/o 
HUPA and M/o RD. Due to very less subsidy amount, workers were not keen to 
avail housing subsidy. Therefore due to le ss number of applications, BE worth 
Rs. 55.12 crore was reduced to Rs. 21 crore at FE stage. We revised the 
housing subsidy amount to Rs. 1.50 Lakh w.e.f. January 2017 and have 
removed the criteria for workers contribution (Rs. 5,000/ -). By March 2017, we 
could spend 98% of the FE and we expect to utilize BE of Rs. 60 crore to the 
maximum extent possible during this Financial Year 2017-18. 
3. Cell Collection and Expenditure:- 
 
The cess collected and expenditure incurred on the Beedi Workers Welfare 
Fund is as follows: 
 
 
 In order to streamline the disbursement of benefits and ensure no 
duplicacy, efforts are being taken to see that disbursal of these benefits are 
done through Aadhar Based Payment System put in place by the PFMS, under 
the Ministry of Finance. Also to achieve this, the  Field units have been 
instructed to educate the workers on the importance of linking their Aadhar 
Numbers with their bank accounts. 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
  
2015 -16 (Rs. In crores)  2016-17 (Rs. In crores) 2017-
18 (Rs. 
In 
crores) 
Cess 
collectio
n  
BE  RE  
 
FE 
 
Exp.  Cess 
collec
tion  
BE  RE  FE Exp.  BE 
158.71 252.67 248.6 237.49 175.77 114.0 261.06 201.70 209.79 206.99 324.06 

12 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 The Committee note that ‘The Factories Act, 1948 ’, ‘The Mines Act, 
1952’, and ‘The Dock Workers (Safety, Health & Welfare) Act, 1986 ’ are some 
of the legal instruments, that contain provisions regulating the health of 
workers in an establishment.  The Acts are framed/amended by the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment whereas the  implementation part rests with the State 
Governments concerned.  The Committee find that whenever any accident 
occurs, the affected worker suffers on account of injury as well as lack/delay in 
grant of compensation thereof.  While deposing before the Comm ittee, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment stated that the Act is confined to 
setting up of parameters/guidelines etc. and if any incident happens due to 
faulty implementation of parameters, the State Government concerned is 
responsible for pros ecution.  The Committee opine that mere setting up of 
parameters is not sufficient for the safety of workers and the monitoring part 
must be strengthened for their safety in a hazardous work environment.  They 
therefore, desire that the Ministry must conve y to them various observations 
that emerge following the safety audit exercise due to be held in 2 months as 
well as action taken by the Ministry accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
 Under the Constitution of India, safety, welfare and health of workers employed 
in mines are the concern of the Central Government (Entry 55-Union List-Article 
246).  The objective is regulated by the Mines Act, 1952 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder. These are administered by the Directorate -
General of Mines Sa fety (DGMS), under the Union Ministry of Labour & 
Employment. Apart from administering the Mines Act and the subordinate 
legislation there under, DGMS also administers some other allied legislation, 
including the Indian Electricity Act. 
Functions of DGMS broadly include: 
 
1. Inspection of mines 
 
2. Investigation into - 
 (a)  Accidents 
 (b)  Dangerous occurrences - emergency response 
 (c)  Complaints& other matters 
  
3. (a) Grant of : 
  (i)  Statutory permission, exemptions & relaxations 
  (ii) Approval of mine safety equipment, material & appliances 
 (b) Interactions for development of safety equipment, material and safe 
work practices through workshop etc. 

13 
 
 (c)  Development of Safety Legislation & Standards 
 (d) Safety Information Dissemination 
 
4. Conduct of examinations for grant of competency certificates. 
 
5.  Safety promotional initiatives including:  
 
 (a) Organisation of -  
 Conference on Safety in Mines  
 National Safety Awards 
 Safety Weeks & Campaigns 
 (b) Promoting  - 
  - safety education and awareness programmes 
  - workers’ participation in safety management through - 
 workmen’s inspector 
 safety committee 
 tripartite reviews 
 
 The issue of payment of compensation to work persons due the death, 
injury or of contracting of notified diseases does not come under the purview of 
the Mines Act, 1952 or its subordinate rules and regulations. 
 
Inspecting officers of this Directorate enforces compliance of the 
provisions stipulated in the statute which includes safety and provisions of 
occupational safety and health of work persons employed in the mines. 
 
 In the year 2016, the following activities have been done by DGMS: 
 
Total  number of inspections made 14885 
Total number of Improvement Notices served 270 
Total number of Prohibitory Orders issued 248 
Total number of Prosecutions launched 17 
Total number of Statutory Permissions dealt 3605 
Total  number of Field Trial Approvals accorded 124 
Total number of Regular Approval accorded 243 
Total number of Statutory Examinations regarding 
competency conducted 
231 
 
The Factories Act, 1948 is a central legislation for regulating the safety 
and health of the workers working in the factories registered under the Act. The 
state governments are empowered under the enabling provisions of the Act to 
frame their own State Factories Rules and both the Act and the Rules framed 
thereunder are enforced by the respective state governments. For violation of 
any of the provisions of the Act or the Rules framed thereunder, the inspectors 

14 
 
are empowered under Section 10 5 of the Act to file a complaint in a Court of 
law for imposing penalties for the offences. The penal provisions are prescribed 
under Sections 92 and 96A the Act. The proviso clause to Section 92 prescribes 
a minimum fine of twenty five thousand rupees in case of an accident causing 
death, and five thousand rupees in the case of an accident causing serious 
bodily injury. The same is being revised by six times in the proposed Factories 
(Amendment) Bill, 2014. The aspect of compensation prescribed under the 
Employees Compensation Act is enforced by the State Governments and the 
inspectors of factories are required to send a report to such authorities for 
processing the same. In case the workers are covered by the ESI schemes 
provided by the occupiers, the comp ensation is given by the appropriate 
authorities. DGFASLI, through correspondence with the Chief Inspectors of 
Factories collects state -wise data on the status of compliance of the Act and 
accident statistics and the same are compiled and published in the Standard 
Reference Note of DGFASLI which is uploaded in public domain. The state -wise 
latest information available with DGFASLI in respect of the prosecutions and 
convictions under Sections 92 and 96A and accident data are enclosed as 
Annexure-IA and Annex ure-IB respectively. DGFASLI holds the Conference of 
the Chief Inspector of Factories of the states/ UTs in which the accidents are 
discussed and appropriate amendments to the Model Factories Rules framed 
by DGFASLI are suggested which are adopted by the S tate Governments in 
their State Factories Rules thus ensures an enhancement OSH standards thus 
results in reducing the accidents in factories. Further, The Factories 
(Amendment) Bill, 2014 seeks to empower the Central Governments, in 
addition to the State Governments to frame Rules under the Act. On passage of 
the Bill, the Central Government will be able to monitor and implement safety 
and health provisions of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder. 
 The Dock Worker (Safety, Health and Welfare) Act 1986 a nd the 
Regulations, 1990 framed thereunder are enforced by DGFASLI. The 
Inspectorate of Dock Safety offices are functional in the major ports of India to 
ensure continuous and efficient monitoring of safety and health aspects in 
them. The implementation of  the Act and the Regulations are carried by 
DGFASLI and penal actions are initiated for violations of the provisions of the 
Act and the Regulations. The data on the enforcement and accident data in 
major ports are compiled in the Standard Reference Note of  DGFASLI which is 
available in public domain. The latest information on number of prosecutions 
filed and accidents, as available with DGFASLI, are enclosed as Annexure -IIA 
and Annexure-IIB respectively. 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
  

15 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 The Committee find that a major component of the budget allocation this 
year i.e. ₹4771.18 crore has been provisioned for Employees ’ Pension Scheme 
(EPS 1995).  However, the Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment, in her 
deposition before the Committee , stated that the allocation is insufficient as 
there is an arrear of about ₹ 6942 crore payable to EPFO from the Government 
side.  The Committee apprehend that the calculations made for EPS arrears 
require a relook since they feel that the calculations mu st have been done for 
all the EPF subscribers irrespective of operational and dead accounts.  Besides, 
there is every possibility of cases where no claims would be filed by few 
subscribers.  They, therefore, desire that details of calculations be redone in  a 
realistic fashion and subsequently furnished to the Committee before a 
recommendation to the Government for release of funds therefore could 
accordingly be considered by them. 
Reply of the Government 
 The calculation of Government’s share of pension con tribution under 
Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995 is being calculated every year on the basis 
of actual contribution received by Employers in Account No. 10 for all active 
subscribers in a financial year. There is no role of EPF contribution or 
subscribers in the same. However, a detailed calculation sheet for example of 
financial year 2015-16 may be referred at annexure-III. Further, the calculation 
of cumulative balance of arrear is as under:- 
Year Arrears of Government 
share in the beginning of 
the year 
Claim from 
Government during 
the year 
Contribution 
received 
Cumulative 
balance of 
arrear 
2015-16 3639.97 4042.16 3030.20 4651.93 
2016-17 4651.93 4525.81 3525.00 5652.74 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 As regards ESIC, the Committee note their achievements in the year 
2016-17, which include revision of wage ceiling from ₹15000 p.m. to ₹21,000 
p.m. w.e.f. 1.1.17 and enhancement in per IP medical expenditure ceiling from 
₹2150 to ₹3000 p.a. w.e.f. 1.4.17. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry and ESIC should adopt a time -bound programme to ensure coverage 
of all legally entitled yet uncovered workers under ESIC scheme. The 
Committee have also noted that a new infrastructure in terms of 
Hospitals/Dispensaries is being planned to be rolled out in FY 2017 -18.  While 

16 
 
the Committee await the outcome of these initiatives at action taken stage, they 
cannot but reiterate that an audit of the existing scenario in ESI hospitals 
must be carried out to ensu re maximum bed occupancy in them.  They hope 
that the system of awarding contracts for constructing ESI 
hospitals/dispensaries would also be reviewed in order to ensure transparency 
and accountability. 
Reply of the Government 
For the Coverage of more employees under the scheme - Survey of the 
new units/Establishments are conducted by the concerned regions on the 
basis of the list obtained/provided from/by the different Govt. offices like 
EPFO, District Industries Office, labour Office etc.  
 Recently a Scheme to promote Registration of Employers/Employees 
(SPREE), the one -time drive, was launched for the period from 20.12.2016 to 
31.03.2017 to extend the social security benefits to all -eligible under the Act, 
who had till then been kept out of the ESI coverage.  
Looking to the references from Employers and Employers’ Association in 
the matter-said Scheme has been extended up to 30.06.2017 for the coverage 
of more employees.  
      In addition to above, a letter either from Hon’bl e Minster L&E to all State 
Labour Ministers or from Secretary, MOL&E to Chief Secretaries of State for 
issuing Notifications for bringing all Casual/Contract employees and 
contractors’ employees in Govt. Offices including such employees of various 
projects like NACO, Skill Development Project, State Health Societies under the 
ambit of ESI Act and declaring the concerned Departmental Officer as Principal 
Employer for such employees and for appropriate directions to their all 
subordinate offices to ensure cov erage of employees engaged through 
outsourcing, which are now not covered in almost all cases.   
 The audit of ESI Hospital is carried out by the Comptroller Auditor 
General (Central). ESI Corporation also evaluates/monitors performance of ESI 
Hospitals by  conducting inspection through a team consisting of ESIC 
stakeholders. Recently, ESIC has taken up the issue with Quality Council of 
India for carrying out assessment of quality services in ESIC hospitals. 
 Since 2016, capital projects are being awarded to  empanelled public 
sector undertakings on competition basis for Centage / Agency fee, on deposit 
works basis. This is in accordance in its 166th  Meeting held on 07.08.2015 as 
well as the Rule 126(3) of GFR. 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 

17 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 As regards under coverage of workers under EPFO, the Committee urge 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment and EPFO to bring all legally entitled 
workers, who still remain uncovered, under the EPF Scheme within a definite 
time frame. Further, the Committee a ppreciate that among the other initiatives 
the EPFO has also formulated a new clause 68 BD under the EPF Scheme, 
1952 to make housing available to more EPF subscribers.  The Committee 
would desire to be apprised of the status of the scheme at the action ta ken 
stage. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Government has taken a decision for modification in the Employees’ 
Provident Fund (EPF) Scheme,1952to add a new paragraph 68BD vide 
Notification no.S -35012/9/2016-SS-II, Government of India, Ministry of 
Labour and Em ployment. Notification has been published in the Gazette of 
India vide G.S.R 351(E) dated 12.04.2017. 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Rojgar Protsahan Yojana 
(PMRPY) was announced in the Budget Speech of 2016-17 with an allocation of 
₹1000 crore which were revised downwards to ₹200 crore at the RE stage, as 
the contours of the Scheme could be design ed and approved in August, 2016 
only.  The Committee further note that an amount of ₹ 124.95 crore & ₹ 30 
crore had been transferred to EPFO on account of PMRPY and Pradhan Mantri 
Paridhan Rojgar Protsahan Yojana (PMPRPY) respectively on 18 th October 
2016.  However, till 3 rd January, 2017 only ₹ 15,67,024 and ₹ 2,30,930 have 
been reimbursed to the respective employers.  The Committee take note that 
the estimation for reimbursement was done for 1,25,000 employees whereas 
reimbursement was done only in respec t of 1672 and 556 employees for both 
PMRPY and PMPRPY.  The Committee, while acknowledging that the low 
performance in achieving the targets was due to late start of the Scheme, desire 
that consolidated efforts must be taken now to accelerate the pace of 
reimbursements to intended beneficiaries for achieving the targets in the 
ensuing financial year. 
Reply of the Government 
 Comments have been noted and steps are being taken to accelerate the 
pace of expenditure. Publicity and awareness of the Scheme is als o being 
undertaken. 

18 
 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 The Committee note that the Scheme of PMPRY was initially meant for 
the additional employment made by the employers.  However, later on, the 
Scheme included all new appointments made after August, 2016.  The 
Committee further note that the Budget Estimates  were made assuming that 
their wages would be ₹15,000 p.m.  The Committee observe that ₹ 15,000 p.m 
wages is the ceiling to be covered under the EPF Scheme, thereafter it is 
voluntary to subscribe to EPF. The Committee are of the view that all the new 
appointments may not fall in the category of wages prescribed under the 
scheme hence they desire that the funds required should be worked out in 
such a manner so that at the end of FY, the performance of the Ministry appear 
satisfactory. 
Reply of the Government 
Comments noted and steps are being taken in this regard. 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 The Committee note that the due to imposition of model code of conduct 
in the wake of State Assembly elections, publicity for the Scheme co uld not 
commence.  Now as the Elections are over, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry may give wide publicity to the Scheme for creating awareness of the 
employers as well as intended beneficiaries. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Comments noted and steps  are being taken for publicity and awareness 
campaigns. 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 The Committee note that the budgetary allocations amounting to ₹ 1000 
crore are in accordance with estimated funding requirement for 10 lakh new 
employments in the first year of operations followed by 5 lakh additional 

19 
 
employment in the subsequent years.  The Committee are of the view that the 
role of the Ministry is c onfined to transferring the funds to EPFO for making 
reimbursement to respective employers. As regards generation of employment 
they have no role to play.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
may coordinate with other Ministries like the Min istry of Textiles where the 
employment opportunities are generated so as to enable them to meet the 
physical and financial targets.  At the same time, the Committee urge EPFO to 
utilize all the digital interventions to the fullest to exercise an effective control 
over its operations. 
Reply of the Government 
 Comments noted. The PMPRY platform is completely online and makes 
full used of digital technology. 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 The Committee note that as per Census 2011, there are 1,01,28,663 
economically active children in the age group of  5 -14 years which include 
main+marginal+workers who worked for less than 3 months.  They further note 
that out of the identified children only 12 lakh children have been 
mainstreamed and also the re have been possibility of children going back to 
work after being rehabilitated.  While noting the large gap between the 
identified and rehabilitated child labour, the Committee are pained to note that 
additions have been witnessed in the number of child  labour during the last 6 
years after the census of 2011.  The Committee also feel that a large gap 
between the identification and rehabilitation of child labour would ultimate 
lead to these children getting lost into the vicious circle of being a labourer  
again.  They therefore, desire that the rehabilitation process must be 
strengthened along with appropriate monitoring mechanism so that the 
process of rehabilitation be speeded up leaving no scope for the identified 
children to go back to work.  The Commi ttee also feel the need to identify child 
labour in domestic households and also in the motion pictures/documentaries 
industry, and rehabilitate them.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
measures the Ministry proposes to take in this direction. 
Reply of the Government 
 Child Labour is an outcome of various socio -economic problems such as 
poverty, economic backwardness and illiteracy etc. Government is following a 
multi-pronged strategy for elimination of child labour comprising of statutory 
and legislative measures, reha bilitation and universal elementary education 
along with convergence with other schemes for socio economic development.  

20 
 
 Government has amended the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) 
Act, 1986 and enacted the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Amendment 
Act, 2016 which came into force w.e.f. 1.9.2016. The employment of children or 
adolescents in contravention of the provisions of the Act is now a cognizable 
offence. Labour being in the concurrent list, enforcement of the provisions of 
the Act is the responsibility of both central and state governments in their 
respective sphere. The Child & Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) 
Act, 1986 provides for conferring power and imposing duties on District 
Magistrate for effective implementation of  the provision of the Act. Further, the 
Act also provides for periodic inspection and monitoring of the implementation 
of the Act. Besides, a State Action Plan has been circulated to all State 
Governments/UTs to provide action points subsequent to the Amen dment in 
the Act.  
 Government is implementing National Child Labour Project (NCLP) 
Scheme and this scheme guidelines are in consonance with the recent 
amendment in the Act. The revised NCLP Guidelines issued in this regard have 
come into force w.e.f 1.4.2 016. As per the revised Guidelines, children 
rescued/withdrawn from work in the age group of 5 -8 years are directly linked 
to the formal educational system through a close coordination with the 
SarvaShikshaAbhiyan (SSA). Children rescued/withdrawn from work in the age 
group of 9 -14 years are enrolled in the NCLP Special Training Centres, where 
they are provided with bridge education, vocational training, mid day meal, 
stipend, health care, etc. before being mainstreamed into formal education 
system. The ado lescent (14 -18 years) engaged in hazardous occupation or 
process is identified through survey and they are facilitated by District Project 
Society for skill training in legally permissible domain.  
 NCLP Guidelines emphasizes that priority to these children in admission 
to residential schools such as those under the Kasturba Gandhi Balika  
Vidyalaya scheme, ashram pathshalas, hostels, etc. would help in retention of 
these children in the mainstream schools. The district administration / State 
Government is therefore required to oversee this crucial support to children 
rescued from work and admitted to NCLP Special Training Centres.  
 Further, Child Labour Monitoring, Tracking and Reporting System 
(CLMTRS) is under implementation by the Ministry. The in formation would be 
entered in the Child Labour Monitoring, Tracking and Reporting System 
(CLMTRS) by the Project Society. The tracking of beneficiary child will be for 
one year after mainstreaming in the case of child labour and withdrawal of 
adolescent wo rker from hazardous occupations and processes. The District 
Project Society through its volunteers would maintain record of mainstreaming 
data and update it for next one year since mainstreaming. The updation of 

21 
 
tracking data is to be done after 3 months, 6 months and after one year since 
mainstreaming. This will help in better rehabilitation of beneficiaries.  
 Further, as far as Monitoring is concerned, monitoring at Central level, 
State level and district level has been strengthened as per revised NCLP 
Guidelines which envisage National Project Monitoring Cell (NPMC) at Central 
level, State level Monitoring Committee at the State level and Vigilance and 
Monitoring Committee at District level.  
 The Main starting point of the Child Labour Project is the su rvey as per 
NCLP Guidelines. All district administration(s) have been informed to assess 
the presence of child labour and if there is high incidence of child labour, NCLP 
Society may be constituted and baseline -survey may be done for which 
Ministry releases Rs. 4 lakhs on the recommendation of State Government. 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 The Committee note that as of now the NCLP Scheme is implemented in 
270 districts across 21 States where the incidences of child and adolescent 
labour is high.  They further note that expansion of this scheme has been made 
to all other districts and accordingly district administration and State 
Governments/UT Administrations have been requested to assess the presence 
of child and adolescent labour.  The  Committee further find that for carrying 
out survey, a fund of   ₹ 4 lakh is given to the District Administration with the 
recommendation of the State/UT Administration to the Ministry.  However, so 
far only 4 such requests from new districts have been re ceived for release of 
survey fund.  The Committee opine that getting requests only from 4 new 
districts could be due to communication gap with the District Administration 
or other factors like shortage of man -power etc.  They therefore, desire that 
under the NCLP, a strategy be worked out to give further boost to the demand 
for releasing the survey fund followed by strict monitoring of the funds released 
and results achieved so that the entire child labour in all concerned districts 
could be rehabilitated. 
Reply of the Government 
 At present the NCLP Scheme is sanctioned in 280 Districts of 21 States 
in the country. Efforts are being made for expansion of the NCLP Scheme to 
other districts which are not covered under NCLP. The procedure for release of 
survey fund both for new as wel l as already sanctioned NCLP Society has been 
simplified. In this regard, several communications have been made to 
State/District Administration for assessing the presence of child labour in new 
districts and sending request to Ministry for release of surv ey fund if incidence 

22 
 
of child labour is observed. This is being done time to time and again to remind 
State/District Administration(s)/NCLP Society Staff. Ministry considers the 
request on Priority for approval for release of fund and the same is 
communicated to District Administration. In last two financial years i.e. during 
2015-16 and 2016 -17, funds for conducting fresh survey has been given to 
about 104 District Project societies. So far, 8 requests from new districts have 
been received in the Ministry for release of survey fund. 
(No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER-V  
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 The Committee note that  against the proposed allocation of  ₹ 8351.69 
crore, the Ministry have been allocated ₹ 7188.38  crore including a provision 
of ₹ 1000 crore for Pradhan Mantri Rojgar Protsahan Yojana (PMRPY) and ₹ 
4771.18 crore for EPS, 1995, implying that only ₹ 1417.20 crore have been 
allocated to MoLE for other heads like Industrial Relations, Working condition 
and Safety, particularly Mines Safety and accident analysis etc.  The 
Committee are particularly concerned to note the allocation of ₹ 27 crore made 
for Directorate General Mines Safety (DGMS) specially keeping in view its 
mandate as well as the recent incidents of mine accidents.   The Committee 
expect that the funds allocated for DGMS be utilized for the measures 
enumerated by the Ministry and also urge  the Ministry to strive for a robust 
performance so that more funds could be sought at the RE stage, if required. 
Reply of the Government 
Measures proposed by Directorate General of Mines Safety in 2017-18 for 
accelerating safety in mines and optimum utili zation of the allocation of Rs. 27 
crores are given below: 
1. Conducting (Blitz) impact inspections by officers of DGMS to assess 
prevailing system in mines and suggest remedial measures to prevent 
disasters and accidents due to explosion, inundation and ground 
movement which are major causes of accidents in mines. 
 
2. Facilitating and training for implementation of Safety Management Plans 
in mines. 
 
3. Analysis of current accident reports and issue of alerts and circulars to 
mining industry to prevent recurrence of accidents. 
 
4. Occupational Health Survey of persons employed in unorganized sector in 
different states. 
 
5. Provide continual support to the mining industry by setting appropriate 
standards, protocols & guidelines by conducting scientific studies and 
R&D projects on various subjects in key problem areas of mining. 
 

26 
 
6. Interact with top leadership to bring their commitment to OSH matter by 
 
a. Conducting interactive sessions on importance and course of action 
for development and implementation of safety management plan 
 
b. Documenting commitment from top authorities on safety management 
plan 
 
7. Organize interactive sessions with unions for sensitization on principles of 
self-regulation in each zone / regions. 
 
8. Development of Structured Inspection and Audit Guidelines for mines. 
 
9. Updation of emergency preparedness and response system guidelines. 
 
10. Modernizing Mine Accidents and Mine Information Databas e by 
computerization and digitization. 
 
11. Organizing National Conference on Safety in Mines for appropriate 
recommendation for the cause of safety in mines. 
 
12. Digitization of working mine plans and abandoned mine plans. 
 
13. Organizing program for safety awareness in small unorganized mines with 
the help of state governments. 
 (No.G-25015/2/2017-B&A) 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                         (DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA)  
23rd August, 2017                     CHAIRPERSON,  
1st Bhardrapada, 1937 (Saka)             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

27 
 
APPENDIX-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
Minutes of the Twenty-Sixth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 23rd August, 2017 from 1400 hrs. 
to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room  'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Kirit Somaiya    –    CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Ashok Dohare 
  4. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara 
  5. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
  6. Dr. Boora Narasiah Goud 
  7. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  8. Dr. Arun Kumar 
  9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  10. Shri R. Parthipan 
  11. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania  
  12. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
               
   RAJYA SABHA 
          
  13. Shri P.L. Punia 
  14. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
  15. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
  16. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
  17. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan 
        
   SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri K.C. Pandey          - Deputy Secretary 
                   3.       Smt Archana Srivastva  -       Under Secretary 
   
 
  

28 
 
PART-I 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of Draft Action Taken 
Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty 
Third Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2017 -18)' of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment'. Giving an overview of the 
Recommendations made in the Draft Report, the Chairperson requested the 
Members to give their suggestions on them, if any. 
3. The Committee, then, took up the Draft Action Taken Report on 'Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty Third Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 
'Demands for Grants (2017-18)' of the Ministry of Labour and Employment' for 
consideration and adopted the same with minor additions/modifications. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present t he Report to 
both the Houses. 
PART-II 
XX   XX   XX   XX   XX 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
XX Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
 
  

29 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-THIRD REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations          17 
  
II. Observations/Recommendations which have     15           94.12   
 been accepted by Government 
 (Recommendation Para. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,6,8,9,10, 
 11,12,13,14,15,16 and 17. 
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the     00                   00% 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s replies - Nil 
      
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of     00                   00% 
 which Government’s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration –  Nil  
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of       01          5.88% 
 which replies of Government are of interim  
 in nature- Recommendation  Para No. 7 
   
                         ----------- 
               100% 
                                    ------------ 
 
 