 
i 
 
19 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-2016) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
[DEPLOYMENT OF CONTRACT/CASUAL/SANITATION 
WORKERS FOR PERENNIAL NATURE OF JOBS IN MTNL] 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
August, 2016/Shravana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 


 
ii 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-2016) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
[DEPLOYMENT OF CONTRACT/CASUAL/SANITATION 
WORKERS FOR PERENNIAL NATURE OF JOBS IN MTNL] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  11.08.2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2016 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2016/Shravana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
  


 
iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                               PAGE(S) 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE              (iv) 
INTRODUCTION         (vi)  
PART-I (I) Introductory       1-2 
 
  (II) Services Outsourced      3-4 
 
  (III) Payment of Wages       5-8 
 
  (IV) Extension of social security benefits/    8-9 
   statutory benefits      
 
  (V) Settlement of Disputes       10 
   
  (VI) Maintenance of Registers           11-12 
 
  (VII) Retention of Contract Workers      12 
 
   
PART-II OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS          13-22 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
Annexure: Report of inspection conducted by the CLC Office          23-29 
 
APPENDIX 
Appendix:  Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held          30-34 
 on 20.11.2015 and 09.08.2016.      
   
  

 
iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 
 DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR-CHAIRPERSON   
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
17. Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
18. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
19. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
23. Shri P.L. Punia 
24. Shri Rajaram 
25. Haji Abdul Salam 
26. Ms. Dola Sen 
27. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
28. Shri R.K. Sinha 
29. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
30. Shri N. Gokulkrishnan 
31. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
 
 
 

 
v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  -  Additional Secretary 
 2.    Shri N.C. Gupta   - Joint Secretary 
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Director  
 4.    Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Additional Director 
 5.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Under Secretary 
 
 
  

 
vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
           I,  the  Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2015 -16), having 
been authorized by the Com mittee do present on their behalf this Nin eteenth 
Report on 'Deployment of Contract/Casual/Sanitation Workers for Perennial 
Nature of Jobs in MTNL' relating to the Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications). 
2. The Committee obtained background material and written information 
from the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department 
of Telecommunications) and MTNL in connection with the examination of the 
subject. The Committee took evidence of  the representatives of the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Telecommunications) and MTNL on the subject on 20 th November, 2015. The 
Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Commun ications and Information Technology (Department of 
Telecommunications) and MTNL for appearing before the Committee and 
placing before them their views and also for providing detailed written 
information on the subject, as desired by the Committee. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting 
held on 9th August, 2016. 
4. For ease of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
 9th August, 2016                                           CHAIRPERSON 
18th Shravana,1938 (Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 

 
1 
 
REPORT 
PART-I 
 
 I. INTRODUCTORY  
 
 The Mahanagar Telephone Nig am Limited (MTNL) was incorporated on 
February 28, 1986 under the Companies Act as a wholly owned Govt. 
Company, and on April 01, 1986, assumed responsibil ity for the control, 
management and  operation of the telecommunication networks in Delhi and 
Mumbai. MTNL is the principal provider of fixed-line telecommunication service 
in these two metropolitan cities and for GSM Mobile services (four peripheral 
towns: NOIDA, Gurgaon, Faridabad and Ghaziabad, along with Delhi city). The 
areas falling under the Mumbai Municipal Corporation, New Mumbai 
Corporation and Thane Municipal  Corporation along with Mumbai city  also 
come under the jurisdiction of the company.  MTNL launched Broadband 
service based on the state of -the-art ADSL2+ technology in the year 2005 and  
3G services in 2008 against the spectrum allotted in August 2008. 
2. At the time of absorption in 1998, MTNL  had got huge legacy of staff 
which was around 61,456 employees out of whom 46271 were in Group  C & D 
categories.  The s taff strength was much more than what was required by 
MTNL. Since then, due to natural attrition , the staff strength , as on 
30.06.2015, has come down to 32905. 

 
2 
 
3. MTNL's core business is control, management and operation of the 
telecommunication networks in Delhi and Mumbai and being a commercial 
organisation, the company is allowed to adopt  suitable mechanism to provide 
services within the f ramework of the law of the land. As the Company felt that 
many of its non -core activities cou ld be better delivered through outsourced 
specialised agencies, MTNL took registration certificates from the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment. A ccordingly, for di scharging non -core activities, 
MTNL has been permitted to employ contract labour under  the provisions of 
'The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970', in the areas of 
Security, Customer Care Services and House Keeping services. 
4. With a vie w to gauging the working conditions, health, safety, welfare 
and social security of the contract workers deployed in MTNL, the Committee 
took up the subject for examination and report. In the process, the Committee 
obtained background notes, written replies and other requisite documents from 
the MTNL.  The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Telecommunications) and MTNL on  20 th November, 2015.  Based on the 
written and oral depositions of the Ministry and MTNL and inputs gathered 
from the Regional Labour Commissioner, Employees' Provident  Fund 
Organisation (EPFO) and the Employees State Insurance Corporation (ESIC), 
the Committee deliberated upon the subject as enum erated in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 

 
3 
 
II. SERVICES OUTSOURCED 
5. The Committee desired to know the nature of jobs/works/services 
outsourced by MTNL and the procedures followed for such outsourcing.  In 
reply, the MTNL stated that t he specified areas and the  nature of 
job/work/services outsourced by MTNL  were Security Services deployed at 
Buildings for the security of vital Installations. This work was outsourced only 
to Directorate General Resettlemen t ( DGR) sponsored Security Agencies,  
Customer Care Services through Call Centres, provisioning of Broad b and and 
maintenance. The Committee were also informed that , as a policy , MTNL did 
not engage workers directly on contract basis. When the Committee desired to 
know whether any contractual  appointments were made against permanent 
posts, the MTNL informed that there are no contractual appointments against 
the permanent posts. It was also stated that the existing manpower was being 
trained in new skills to the extent possible to deploy them g ainfully.  However, 
there was surplus manpower mainly in Group 'C' and 'D' categories which 
needed to be reduced as with one -third of the present staff strength, MTNL 
could manage its core business.  
6. Asked to state the measures taken to train the surplus staff to deploy 
them for those duties which were being outsourced by MTNL, the Ministry 
submitted that all efforts were being made to train them and upgrade their 
skills, but many of these employees we re not professionally qualified and were 
on the higher side of age (50+) to cater to the requirements of the fast changing 

 
4 
 
technology.  However, despite that , some of the surplus employees have been 
retrained and placed in call centres and security service s, sales and marketing 
etc.  Further, attempts were being made to incentivize acquiring new skills and 
deploying excess staff to alternate jobs by imparting training.  In view of these 
limitations, the Company was resorting to outsourcing some of its non -core 
activities to ensure delivery of quality service 
7. In evidence, the representative of the MTNL deposed tha, redeployment of 
staff was being done in Delhi and Mumbai, and the Company was 
endeavouring to gainfully utilise most of the surplus staff accor ding to the 
demand. 
8. The list of c ontractors as provided by the MTNL was forwarded to EPFO, 
ESIC and the Chie f Labour Commissioner for cross -verification and carrying 
out inspections regarding the coverage of workers in ESI/EPF under each 
contractor, wherever applicable and issuance of Labour license, etc. 
9. According to the inspection report submitted by the Labour authorities , 
most of the contractors engaged  by the MTNL are not required to obtain 
license, and ESIC and EPFO coverage, as they are having  less number of 
workers than the stipulated one. However, there were 108 Guards engaged 
through the Security Guard Board for whom EPF compliance was not there. 
 
 

 
5 
 
III. PAYMENT OF WAGES 
10. The Committee desired to know about the procedure adopted for 
ensuring proper/timely disbursement of wages to the contract workers. In 
reply, the Ministry stated that necessary clauses were included in the 
agreement in line to the Tender conditions. The Ministry further submitted that 
as per the Payment of Wages Act,  1936 the payment was  regulated and the 
contractors were given the target date for making payment to the contract 
labourers on the  7th of every month. It had  also been mandate d that the 
payment to workers was  made by cheque/ECS and as a proof a copy of sam e 
was obtained from the contractor.   
11. When a sked whether any cases of under -payment of wages had been 
reported or brought to the notice of the Company, the Ministry stated that so 
far no such case had come to the notice of MTNL.  However,  cases of non -
payment of wages/delayed payment of wages has been detected against one 
contractor in the last three years. When asked about the punitive action taken 
against the contractors found contravening the provisions of wage payments, 
the Ministry submitted that i n case of default by the contrac tor, punitive 
actions like with holding of contractor payment  and invoking penalties as per 
tender clauses were taken  against the contractors  whenever any violation was 
noticed.  Asked to state the action taken against the c ontractor concerned, the 
Ministry responded that MTNL ha d made payment of unpaid wages to the 

 
6 
 
contract workers  directly and the payment of the contractor for the same 
duration had been deducted. 
12. The Committee then asked whether there was any difference in wages 
paid to the contractual workers in Delhi and Mumbai.  The Ministry in their 
reply stated that the minimum wage for different category of workers was being 
notified by both the Central and State Governments. In case the rate decided 
by the State Government was higher than that of the Central Government, the 
former prevailed. Therefore, there might be sometimes a difference in the wages 
paid to the contract workers in Delhi and Mumbai. 
13. Not satisfied, the Committee asked in evidence the reasoning for payment 
of higher wages in Delhi in comparison to Mumbai. In response, the 
representative of MTNL submitted as under:- 
"The first point which Chairman rightly stated that the wages should be 
given at par with the wages given by Central Government. As per your 
instructions, the case will be investigated in detail according to prevailing 
law within the prescribed time period because I have to take both the 
parties into consideration i.e. DoT and MT NL as it could be possible that 
there is some controversy in BSNL. We will have to give equal justice to 
both the parties that's why I could not tell you the exact time limit but 
your suggestion is completely valid because BSNL is also Central 
Government entity. In my opinion the system is same in BSNL, but I will 
have to check because I am not sure about it. 
The representative further stated as under:- 
"You stated rightly tha t this point is mandatory, the D irector presented 
MTNL's view-point. I would like to assure on behalf of DoT that we will 
sort out this matter within two months". 

 
7 
 
14. The Committee sought inputs from the CLC Office regarding 
disbursement of wages to the contract workers deployed in  the MTNL. As per 
the Report of the CLC Office, there were three cases of contravention of the 
provisions: two cases in r/o M/s COSMOS; one is  for overtime wages from 1 st 
August to 31st December, 2012 (still pending); another case of not giving salary 
as per the Minimum Wages Act (24 workers) for which Regional Labour 
Commissioner (RLC) imposed a penalty of Rs. 17.9 lakh. The third case 
pertained to non-disbursement of salary to 71 contract workers for the month 
of September-October, 2014. 
15. The Committee th en enquired about the inspection and oversight 
mechanism evolved by the MTNL as the principal employer, to avoid 
exploitation of the contract workers from underpayment and extended working 
hours. In reply, the Ministry submitted as follows: 
"it is being en sured in the Agreement that the contractor is duty bound 
to the Act. The nodal officers have been assigned the job to ensure that 
there is no exploitation of contract labour on account of underpayment 
and taking work beyond prescribed working hours. It has been mandated 
that the payment to the contract labour are made by cheque in front of 
Nodal officer. The Admn. representative of GM Unit also keeps a check on 
this." 
16. Asked to state categorically the penalty provisions prescribed and 
adopted in case of contravention of the labour laws, the Ministry deposed as 
under: 
"In case any provision of the Act is contravened by the contractors 
actions are being taken against the erring contractors as per the penalty 
clause of the contract agreement, and in case if any MTNL employee is 
found guilty he is exposed to relevant penalty as stipulated in Contract 
Labour Act, as well as in MTNL's CDA rule no. 5 (5) 1. Such act will be 

 
8 
 
treated as misconduct and will be punishable under Rule 3 under minor  
or major penalties depending on gravity of offence." 
17. When the Committee desired to know whether any surprise inspections 
were carried out to detect any malpractices on the part of the Contractors as 
well as the nodal officers of the MTNL, the Ministry responded as under: 
"In order to safeguard the interest of the contract labours the nodal 
officers have been nominated. Further, to avoid any malpractices by the 
nodal officers and contractors, the Area GM/Administration Units 
concerned Areas/Head Quarter representatives carry out inspections." 
 
IV. EXTENSION OF SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS/ STATUTORY 
BENEFITS 
18.  When asked about the social security schemes available for the contract 
workers and mechanism put in place by the MTNL to ensure the c overage of 
the contract workers under the Scheme, the Ministry stated that the provision 
of social security schemes , including payment of EPF and ESI available to the 
contract workers , was  ensured by obtaining challan copies of the payment 
before releasing the payments of contractor. The Committee were also informed 
that the nodal officer of the MTNL, at the time of payments, also checked and 
ensured that due amount was received by the contract labour. 
19. As regards mechanism put i n place to ensure provision of amenities like 
medical facilities, housing and sanitation and education to the wards of the 
contract labourers by the contractors, the Ministry submitted that the wage 
components of contract labour did include HRA component to be paid to the 

 
9 
 
workmen. As regards medical facilities, it is ensured that each contract worker  
was covered under ESI.  Further, at the time of monthly payment, all ESI 
challans countersigned by ESI authorities were required to be furnished by the 
respective contractors. Contractors wer e also under contractual obligations to 
provide Canteen, Restrooms, sufficient who lesome drinking water, etc. to the  
workers. 
20. In evidence, the representatives of MTNL elaborated that the MTNL was 
ensuring EPF, ESI and Bonus facilities to the contract w orkers and the 
payment was made to the contractors only when they deposited the document 
sheet of EPF and ESI and he has the registration number for both. 
21. The representative of the MTNL further apprised as under:- 
"The problem in regard to our worker i s that according to law the 
provision of gratuity is only applicable if he is working with us for five 
years continuously. As in the case of contractor we renew the contract on 
yearly basis so the workers are not with us on regular basis, they may 
not be c ontinuously working with us for five years. Even if an MTNL 
employee works with us for 4 years and 364 days he is not liable to 
gratuity payment. Gratuity payment is not a mandatory payment so far 
as less than five years are concerned. Even after this prov ision is quite 
rare that any contractual labour work with us for less than five years. We 
are ensuring that this clause be included in our contractual provision as 
on date. Certainly we have never thought regarding gratuity with this 
angle". 
 
 

 
10 
 
V. SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 
22. The Committee then desired to know the mechanism evolved to deal with 
the disputes between a contractor and the contract worker and whether any 
such dispute had come to the notice of the Principal Employer. The Ministry ,  
in thei r reply , submitted that the disputes were settled as per the terms of 
contracts and wherever required punitive actions we re being taken against the 
contractors. The Ministry further stated that  disputes between the contractor 
and the contract labours were attended to and resolved by the nodal officer and 
subsequently by senior Managers/DGM level officers as per contract terms & 
conditions. In case the issues we re not resolved at the level of the MTNL, the 
matter was dealt with at ALC/DLC level that set out the procedure for 
grievance redressal.  The Committee were informed that s o far no such case 
has come to the notice of MTNL, the Principal Employer , for intervention . 
However, in case any dispute was reported, the case was to be examined by the 
nodal officer and depending on the finding s, if any violation was  found, then 
action would be taken against the contractor as per the Agreement conditions. 
23. However, a scrutiny of the Annexure provided with the replies by the 
Ministry revealed that there were five  Court cases pending against MTNL:  (i) 
Industrial dispute/Complaint between management of MTNL and Delhi 
Mazdoor Sangh; (ii) Labour enforcement officer (LEO) Vs DP Singh, CGM ; (iii) 
Charan Singh V/s MTNL V/s COSMOS; (iv)Neeraj Giri & others V/s MTNL; and 
(v) overtime wages. 

 
11 
 
 
 VI. MAINTENANCE OF REGISTERS 
24. As regards m aintenance of registers by the c ontractors and upkeep and 
supervision of the records of contractors, the Committee were informed that 
records of the contractors we re maintained in separate files by the respective 
Area GMs offices  and the records of the contract workers  maintained by the 
contractors were checked by MTNL Nodal officers. 
25. Asked to state the mechanism put in place to check/verify the 
registers/muster rolls, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"the nodal officers nominated by MTNL checks the muster roll, 
wages and deduction details maintained by the contractors before 
monthly bills are cleared. Appropriate  provisions are made in the 
agreements, so  that overtime is not required to be performed by 
the contract workers. The records are also time to time checked by 
the Area Head/Admn. representative." 
26. In evidence, the Committee desired to see a sample copy of the register 
maintained by the contractor and the same was provided by th e MTNL.  When 
pointed out by the Committee that the signature of the nodal officer of MTNL 
was without date and stamp, the representatives of the MTNL assured that 
henceforth registers maintained by the c ontractors would be properly 
monitored and the date would invariable be mentioned by the MTNL nodal 
officer responsible for the purpose. 

 
12 
 
27. As per the report of inspections conducted by the CLC Office, " Register of 
contractors (Form XII Register) has not been maintained at all' (Annexure-I). 
 
VII. RETENTION OF CONTRACT WORKERS 
28. The Committee desired to know about the fate of the workers of the 
Contractors whose contract got over after a certain period of time or for the 
duration for which the contract was entered into. Asked about giving 
preference to the workers of the earlier contractor as per The Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947,  the representative of the MTNL submitted in evidence that 
since the contracts were mainly for  temporary work, and not in continuation, 
the Company had not issued any dir ections to the new contractors to engage 
the contract workers of the earlier contractors. However, the representative of 
the MTNL assured that if there was any lacunae in the process, they would 
surely re-visit it. 
 
 
  

 
13 
 
PART - II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. The Committee observe that i n view of the requirements 
felt by the Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL) to 
better deliver some of its non -core activities through 
outsourced specialised agencies, the Company had obtained 
registration certificates from the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and were permitted to deploy contract labour 
under the provisions of the Contract Labour (Regulation and 
Abolition) Act, 1970 for discharging its non-core activities like 
Security, Custom er Care and House -keeping services. In the 
process of examination of such deployment of contract labour 
by MTNL to perform some non -core activities, th e Committee 
have come across some issues of concern and have accordingly 
given their considered opinion/s uggestions in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
2. The Committee note that , as a policy, MTNL does not 
engage workers directly on contract basis , and the Committee 
further appreciate the fact that MTNL is not making 

 
14 
 
contractual appointments against permanent post s. The 
Committee believe that MTNL would continue to uphold the 
sanctity of the Labour Act and adhere to the enshrined 
provisions therein regardin g deployment of contract labour  in 
the Company. 
3. The Committee note that in the year 1998, when staff was 
transferred from DoT and absorbed in MTNL, there were 61456 
employees; their number has come down to 32905 as on 
30.06.2015 on account of natural attrition. The Committee 
also note that the surplus staff is mainly in Group C & D 
categories and i s much more in excess vis -a-vis requirement. 
The Committee are concerned to observe that on one hand 
there is surplus staff , especially in Group 'C' & 'D' categories, 
whereas on the other, MTNL is resorting to deployment of 
contract labour through outsourc ed agencies for  its non-core 
activities. The Committee are of the considered opinion that 
the available surplus staf f can be gainfully utilised on those  
services which are  now being outsourced, by  way of imparting 
training and upgrading the new skills of such surplus staff. This 

 
15 
 
will not only help in  addressing the issue of  reducing excess 
staff strength and consequential financial burden on the 
Company but will also facilitate adequate utilization  of more 
experienced and proficient working strength as compared to 
the outsourced personnel. The Committee therefore, 
recommend that concerted efforts should be made to 
productively utilise the surplus staff in non -core activities so 
as to reduce dependence on outsourcing.  
4. According to DoT/MTNL, records of contractors are 
maintained by the Company's respective Area GM's Offices and 
the register of contract workers is  maintained by the  
respective contractors. Such registers are reportedly checked 
by MTNL nodal officers. Much to the dismay of the Committee, 
a scrutiny of a copy of the register, as provided by MTNL, 
revealed that signatures of the nodal officer on the register 
have been without  any date and stamp.  What is more 
worrisome is the revelation of the inspection conducted by the 
CLC Office that " Register of contractors has not been 
maintained at all ".  The Committee , while taking a serious 

 
16 
 
view of the matter, would like to caution  MTNL to exercise 
utmost care and ensure submission of authentic facts to them 
in future. The Committee further stress that henceforth all the 
records/registers as stipulated in Labour Laws be maintained 
by MTNL as well as the contractors concerned and whatever 
shortcomings/deficiencies that are  observed be rectified 
forthwith in accordance with the provis ions of the Contract 
Labour Act, 1970. 
5. As per DoT/MTNL's submission, the Company ensures 
payment of wages by the 7th of each month and there is only 
one case of non -payment/delayed payment of wages reported 
against one contractor in the last three years.  However, 
according to the inspection report of the CLC office, there were 
three cases of contravention of labour laws: one is  for overtime 
wages from 1 st August to 31 st December, 2012 (still pending); 
another case is of not giving salary as per the Minimum Wages 
Act (24 workers) for which RLC impos ed penalty of  Rs. 17.9 
lakh; and the third case is of non-disbursement of salary for the 
month of September -October, 2014 to 71 workers.  It implies 

 
17 
 
that MTNL, as a Principal Employer, is not keeping track of the 
infirmities reported by the CLC office , thus defaulting on the 
roles and responsibilities expected from the Principal 
Employer. The Committee express their displeasure at these  
lapses that have occured on the part of MTNL and recommend 
that DoT should impress upon MTNL to shoulder the 
responsibility required under the law from a Principal Employer 
so as to timely mitigate the workers' grievances reported 
against the delinquent contractors in a time-bound manner.   
6. The Committee note that the minimum wages paid to the 
contract workers in Delhi  are higher than that  being paid in 
Mumbai  as the Company is following minimum wages as 
prescribed by the respective State Governments. In this 
context, the Committee find that the minimum wages of Delhi 
Government are higher by more than Rs. 200/ - as compared to 
the minimum wages prescribed by the Maharashtra 
Government. The Ministry have reasoned that the minimum 
wage, notified by both the Central and State Governments, is 
paid to the contract workers after taking into account the 

 
18 
 
higher wage prescribed.  While appreciating the contentions of 
DoT/MTNL,  the Committee are , however, of the view that 
since MTNL operates in two cities only, there should not be any 
impediment in making wage payment uniform in both the 
Cities after considering the highest wage p rescribed by the 
Central Government, the Delhi Government and the 
Maharashtra Government. As assured in evidence by the 
representatives of DoT/MTNL, the Committee recommend that 
the matter of making the minimum wages uniform at both the 
places be sorted ou t at an earl y date so that contract labour 
deployed by MTNL get the benefit of  higher and equal wages. 
7. DoT/MTNL have claimed that payment to a  contractor is 
released only after obtaining copies of challan furnished and 
verifying that the contractor has actually deposited the EPF 
and ESI contribution of the contract workers. However, the 
Committee are concerned to note from the report submitted by 
the EPFO that EPF is not being deposited by  one of the 
security agencies which  is providing security guards to MTNL. 
The Company has reportedly been under the impression that 

 
19 
 
security agencies are exempte d from coverage of EPF.  
However, according to  the EPFO, such exemption was 
withdrawn long back  and all the security agencies are now 
covered under the EPFO. While expressing their reservation  
over such misconception of MTNL, the Committee recommend 
that MTNL should now ensure that all the security personnel 
hired by it from security agencies be cov ered under the EPFO 
with effect from the date of withdrawal of the exemption and 
the contribution of employee -employer be deposited with the 
offices of EPF, in consultation with EPFO.  The Committee also 
recommend that before finalising any contractual 
engagements, including that of security personnel, the EPF and 
ESI codes of the contractors should invariably be checked and 
verified from EPF and ESI.  Simultaneously, the list of 
personnel engaged through respective contractors may also be 
sent to EPF and E SI invariably for cross -checking and 
authenticating the number and identity of the beneficiaries.  
8. The Committee further desire that immediate steps be 
taken to instruct the nodal officer responsible/deputed for 

 
20 
 
checking and ensuring the compliance of L abour Laws with a 
view to providing Smart Cards and Unique Identification 
Number linked to Aadhaar to all the contract w orkers deployed 
by MTNL so that random verifications of the provision of social 
security and other facilities intended for the contract workers 
are facilitated. 
9.  The Committee note that in order to become eligible for 
gratuity, a minimum of five years of  service is to be rendered 
by a  worker/employee; but it is not necessary that he/she 
should have worked under a single  contractor/employer as 
clarified by the Regional Labour Commissioner in evidence. The 
Committee also noted that when tenders are floated for shorter 
durations, viz. two years after the completion of work, if the 
contractor changes, the next contractor either deploys his own 
people or refuses to acknowledge the services rendered by the 
workers deployed by the previous contractor. In such a 
scenario, the sufferers are the hapless contract workers.  The 
Committee, therefore, are of the considered opinion that it is 
imperative on the part of MTNL to evolve an effective 

 
21 
 
mechanism to  deduct the gratuity amount from the previous 
contractor's final bill in case he does not protect the interest of 
the workers and put it in a dedicated fund or hand it over to 
the next contractor  to be used as gratuity cover for the 
contract workers.  
10. The Committee are deeply concerned to observe that 
MTNL has not issued any directions to contractors to retain  
workers of the earlier contractors  for works which are in 
continuation, in violation  of the provisions contained in the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. However, as the representatives 
of DoT/MTNL have assured the Committee to look into the 
matter, the Committee desire that urgent requisite measures 
be taken to issue instructions to the con tractors to deploy 
those contract workers who offer themselves to be re -engaged 
even when the contract changes so that the problem of 
providing gratuity cover to contract workers is eliminated once 
and for all. 
11. The Committee were informed that  disputes between 
contractor and contract labourers are attended and resolved by 

 
22 
 
the nodal officer and subsequently by senior Managers/DGM 
level officers of MTNL as per contract terms and conditions. 
The DoT/MTNL have submitted that so far no disputed case has 
come to the notice of MTNL for intervention.  However, the 
Committee note from the  replies provided to them that there 
are five pending court cases pertaining to the contract workers 
of MTNL. The Committee take a serious view of 
misrepresentation of facts and call upon DoT/MTNL to resort 
to proactive measures and set up a robust grievance redressal 
machinery so as to avoid litigations and provide succour  to the 
aggrieved employees/workers. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                    DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
 9th August, 2016                               CHAIRPERSON 
18th Shravana,1938 (Saka)   STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 

 
23 
 
ANNEXURE   


 
24 
 
 
 
 


 
25 
 
 
 


 
26 
 


 
27 
 


 
28 
  


 
29 
 
 


 
30 
 
      Appendix 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 
 
Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 20th November, 2015 from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. 
in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  – CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Ashok Dohrey 
  4. Shri Boora Narsaiah Goud 
  5. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  6. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
  8. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  9. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
  10. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
  11. Dr. Arun Kumar 
  12. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam  
   
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  13. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
  14. Shri Rajaram 
  15. Ms. Dola Sen 
   
    
   
    SECRETARIAT 
 
  1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan   - Addl. Secretary 
           2. Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
  3. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 

 
31 
 
 
Witnesses 
 
Representatives of Department of Telecommunications (DoT) 
 1. Shri S.K. Jain, DDG (Estt.) 
 2. Shri Hoshlar Singh, Director (Staff) 
 
Representatives of the MTNL 
 1. Shri N.K. Yadav,  Member (Services) & Ex-Officio Secretary to  
     Government of India 
 2. Shri P.K. Purwar, Director (Finance) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Telecommunications and Information 
Technology (Department of Telecommunications) along with officials of MTNL to 
the sitting of the Committee, convened to take evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry on the subject 'Deployment of Contract/ Casual 
workers/Sanitation workers for perennial nature of jobs in MTNL' . Impressing 
upon the witnesses to keep the proceedings of the Committee `Confidential', 
the Chairperson asked the representatives of the  Department of 
Telecommunications to give an overview of the subject matter.  
3. The CMD, MTNL,  accordingly, briefed th e Committee  on the subject 
highlighting inter-alia the functioning of MTNL and the facilities provided to 
contract workers. The CMD also gave a power -point presentation elaborating 
on the setting up of MTNL, its mandate, etc. The CMD  and other 
representatives of th e Ministry responded to various queries raised by  the 
Members regarding the manpower pattern, the services outsourced and the 
number of contractors, their license number, ESI, EPF code, etc. 

 
32 
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry  
for appearing before the Committee and  apprising them on several aspects of 
the subject.  The Chairperson  also asked the  CMD to furnish written replies 
within 15 days to the list of points handed over to them and to those  queries, 
which remained un-answered during the meeting. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
33 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty Second Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 9 th August, 2016 from 10 00 hrs. to 1030 hrs. in  
Room No. '131', Chairperson's Chamber ,  Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  - Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
     
  2. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
  3. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  4. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  5. Dr. Arun Kumar 
  6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  7. Shri R. Parthipan 
  8. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
         
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  9. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  10. Shri P.L. Punia 
  11. Smt. Dola Sen 
  12. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
  13. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri N.C. Gupta  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
  3. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Additional Director 
  4. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 

 
34 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the draft Report on 
the subject 'Deployment of Contract/Casual/Sanitation Workers for Perennial 
Nature of Jobs in M TNL'. Giving an overview of the main/important 
Recommendations contained in the d raft Report, the Chairperson requested 
the Members to give their suggestions on them, if any. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up  the draft Report for consideration and 
adopted the same after some discussions. 
 
4.  The Committee authorized the Cha irperson to finalise the Report  in the 
light of consequential changes that might ar ise out of the factual verification of 
the draft Report and present/lay the same to both the Houses. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 