i 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok  
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016-17)] 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
      
                    March, 2017/Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) 
22 

ii 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT   
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2016-17) 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for 
Grants (2016-17)' of the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship] 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on   20.03.2017  
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on      20.03.2017 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
                    March, 2017/Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) 
                     
  
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iv) 
INTRODUCTION        (v) 
        
  CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on  
22.02.2016.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/ Recomm endations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 
 DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA-CHAIRPERSON   
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
17. Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
18. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
19. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
23. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan 
24. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
25. Shri P.L. Punia 
26. Shri Rajaram 
27. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
28. Haji Abdul Salam 
29. Ms. Dola Sen 
30. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
31. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Ms. Rimjhim Prasad   - Joint Secretary  
 2.    Smt. Anita B. Panda   -  Director 
 3.    Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Additional Director 
 4.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Under Secretary 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2016 -17) having 
been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this Twent y-
Second Report on 'Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Sixteenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of the Ministry 
of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship. 
2. The Six teenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 26th April, 2016. The Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship furnished their replies indicating Action Taken on the 
Observations/ Recomm endations contained in the Six teenth Report on 6th 
December, 2016. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at 
their sitting held on 22nd February, 2017. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Six teenth Rep ort of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;              DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA 
   2nd    March, 2017                     CHAIRPERSON,  
  11th     Phalguna, 1938 (Saka)       STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
 This Report deals with action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their S ixteenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of the Ministry 
of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. 
2 The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 26th April, 2016. It contained 24 Observations/ Recommendations. 
Replies of the Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been 
received and are categorized as under:-  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government –                                                                                            
Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 
15, 17, 19, 23 and 24   
 
 Total:16 
Percentage:66.67 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – 
Rec. Para Nos. 12 and 13 
Total:02 
Percentage:08.33 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Rec. Para Nos. 7, 20 and 21 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature- 
Rec. Para Nos. 16, 18 and 22 
 
Total:03 
Percentage:12.50 
 
 
 
Total:03 
Percentage:12.50 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action 
taken reply in respect of the Recommendation s contained in Chapter V of 
this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the Government, 
may be furnished to them at the earliest.  

2 
 
I. Placement to the Trained Candidates under PMKVY 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
4. In their S ixteenth Report, the Co mmittee had observed that out of the 
total number of 14.27 lakh candidates who had completed their training, only 
55,712 candidates i.e. around four percent had been given placement. Taking 
note of the fact that PMKVY Scheme Guidelines  had mandated placem ents for 
the trained candidates w.e.f. December, 2015, the Committee  had urged the 
Ministry to intensify their efforts and ensure a leverage in the percentage of 
placement vis-a-vis the trained youth all over the Country, with special focus 
on North-Eastern States and other remote areas. 
5. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have submitted as under: 
 "The revised PMKVY 2.0 scheme has the targets to provide skill training 
and certification to one crore candidates with an estimated Budgetary allocation 
of Rs 12,000 crore.  
 There is a detailed provision for boosting placements of trained youths. 
The place ment of the candidates is the primary responsibility of the Training 
Centres (TCs) instead of Training Partner. Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) will 
liaison between the TC and employers for ensuring the placement of candidates.  
For leveraging the percentage of placement, provisions for placement incentive 
have been introduced. The post placement support is provided in order to 
enable the newly skilled candidates settle into their new jobs, is to be provided 
to them directly.  The relaxation in the provisions for availing the placement 
benefits is given for NE and J&K States." 
 
6. The Committee acknowledged the revised PMKVY  2.0 scheme. The 
Committee feel appropriate efforts are being taken by the Government to 

3 
 
attain healthy training and appropriate placement.  The Committee desire 
to be apprised of the latest position with regard to the placement of 
trained persons at the action taken stage. 
II. Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure (ESDI) in NE 
States and Sikkim  
(Recommendation Para No. 20) 
7. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that the Scheme 
'Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure' which was formulated in 2011 at 
a total cost of Rs. 57.39 crore ha d been extended upto 31st March, 2017 at a 
revised cost of Rs. 298.13 crore with the aim to establish 22 new ITIs in the 
seven North -Eastern States and Sikkim, besides upgradation of 20 ITIs and 
supplementing infrastructure development in 28 ITIs. Finding that out of the 
proposed 22 new ITIs, only in two ca ses construction of building had  been 
completed whereas in the r emaining cases, construction had  either started or 
was yet to start, the Committee had exhorted the Ministry to further intensify 
the measures and resort to vigorous monitoring so as to ensure that there was 
minimal time overrun beyond March, 2017 in completion of the targeted 
projects intended towards skill development of the people of the North -Eastern 
Region and Sikkim. 
8. In their Action Ta ken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship have stated as follows: 
"Under the scheme “Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure in NE 
States & Sikkim (ESDI)” as recommended by the committee visits to 
project sites have been done in the current financial year in Assam (10 
ITIs), Manipur (8 ITIs) and Sikkim (3 ITIs). More such visits are planned 
in the future.  An amount of Rs. 19.38 crore has been released so far to 
the States during the current financial year 2016-17." 
 

4 
 
9. The Committee feel that along with the field visits, further efforts 
be made to implement ‘Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure’ in 
North-Eastern States and Sikkim. A revised action plan may be framed. 
The Committee wish that the progress/development about the 
implementation of plan/project be reported to them. 
III. Skill Development in States/Districts Affected by Left Wing 
Extremism. 
(Recommendation Para No. 21) 
10. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that out of the projected 
creation of 102 infrastructure under the 'Skill Development Scheme in 34 
Districts Affected by Left Wing Extremism' which was approved in March  2011 
for a period of five years at a cost of Rs. 241.65 crore, only 25 Projects had 
been completed, 34 Projects were  under progress and 43 Projects were yet to 
take off. Similarly, out of the 2987 persons trained under the Scheme in the 
nine affected States, not a single person was trained in Maharashtra. Not 
satisfied with the outcome despite the Ministry's claim of regular interf ace with 
the State Governments concerned  and in view of the proposed extension of the 
Scheme by another three years i.e. upto March 2017, the Committee had 
impressed upon the Ministry to look into the matter with a sense of urgency so 
as to actually deliv er the intended benefits to the youth in the affected 
Districts/States. 
11. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have deposed as under: 

5 
 
 "The scheme “Skill Development in 34 Districts Affected by Left Wing 
Extremism” was operational till 31st March, 2016. SFC has approved 
continuation of the scheme with revised cost of Rs. 407 crore upto 31st March, 
2019 with additional 13 districts identified by MHA. States are being followed 
up through meetings, video conference, visits to speed up the progress." 
12. While acknowledging the revised plan of Skill Development in the 34 
districts affected by the Left Wing Extremism of R s.407 crore, the 
Committee feel that the Ministry may chalk out a detailed action plan to 
implement this revised plan and apprise the Committee of the same. 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER-II  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 The Ministry of Ski ll Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) was created 
on 9th November, 2014. to address the need and urgency of an effective coordination 
of the efforts of all stakeholders in the field of skill development and entrepreneurship, 
as per the needs of the industry, removal of disconnect between demand and supply of 
skilled manpower, building new skills through vocational and technical training 
framework, and upgrading skills, The primary purpose is to help create an appropriate 
ecosystem that would facilitate  imparting employable skills to India's growing 
workforce over the next few decades. The Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) was brought under the purview of Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Labour w.e.f. 5th May, 2015. This is the  first Demands for Grants of 
MSDE that has been examined in detail by this Committee and their considered views 
on the performance and requirements of the Ministry have been enumerated in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
Reply of the Government 
 The observation of the Committee has been noted. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry have been allocated Rs. 1804.28 crore i.e. 
Rs. 1700 crore for Plan expenditure and Rs. 104.28 crore for Non -Plan expenditure 
during the year 2016-17. The Committee are deeply concerned to observe that against 
the Minist ry's budgetary proposal of Rs. 8062.35 crore, i.e. Rs. 7887 crore towards 
Plan expenditure and Rs. 175.35 crore towards NonPlan expenditure during 2016 -17, 
the Ministry of Finance , without assigning any reasons, have pruned down the 
MSDE's proposal and al located Rs. 1804.28 crore only, as mentioned above. What is 
more worrisome is the huge reduction made in the Ministry's flagship and ambitious 
programmes like the Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojna (allocation of Rs. 1100 
crore against the proposal of Rs. 4078 crore), Technical Assistance Scheme for NSDC 
(allocation of Rs. 250 crore against the demand of Rs. 1401 crore), Multi Skill Training 
Institutes (allocation of Rs. 50 crore against the proposal of Rs. 750 crore), Apprentice 
and Training Programmes (al location of Rs. 286.17 crore against the proposal of Rs. 
1450.65 crore) and Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (allocation of Rs. 50 crore 

7 
 
against the proposal of Rs. 240 crore). No wonder, the Ministry have expressed their 
apprehension in achieving th e targets set under the abovementioned 
Schemes/Programmes during 2016 -17. In view of the large and ambitious mandate 
conferred on the Ministry to provide skill training to fresh entrants to the workforce 
and upskilling or re -skilling of those already in th e workforce through creation of 
various new institutional arrangements for skill development and entrepreneurship, 
the Committee are of the considered opinion that there is a justifiable case for 
significant increase in the Plan Outlay for the Ministry. Th e Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Secretary, MSDE, should earnestly take up the matter with his 
counterpart in the Ministry of Finance and also at other appropriate fora so that the 
MSDE's Plan Outlay is substantially increased at the RE stage in order to enable them 
to achieve the ambitious targets set for 2016-17 fiscal. 
Reply of the Government 
 In pursuance of the observations made by the Committee regarding enhancing 
the plan outlay for the Ministry, the matter has been taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance during pre-budget discussion which was held on 28.10.2016 for finalization of 
RE 2016-17 and BE 2017-18. Further, it may be stated here that the Cabinet has also 
approved on 13.07.2016 an outlay of Rs. 12,000 crore for a period of 4 years from 
2016-17 to 2019-20 for Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojna (PMKVY) for skilling of 1 
crore people. Further, the Cabinet also on 05.07.2016 has approved an outlay of Rs. 
10,000 crore for National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme (NAPS) having a target of 
15 lakh apprentices to be trained by 2019-20. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 The Committee note that during 2014 -15, the Ministry were allocated an 
amount of Rs. 564.85 crore towards Plan expenditure. B ut, there was no separate 
Demands for Grants for the Ministry as it was created after finalisation of the  Budget 
for the financial year 2014-15. As a stop gap arrangement, the essential functional 
expenditure of the Ministry was met from the Demands of the Ministry of Youth Affairs 
and Sports and as such there was no Plan expenditure by MSDE. While appreciating 
the impediments on the part of the Ministry in utilizing the earmarked Plan Outlay 
during 2014-15, the Committee, however, are of the view that Plan  allocations to a 
newly created Ministry and that too after finalisation of the Budget approvals make 
little sense as such allocations could have been gainfully utilised elsewhere. 
Reply of the Government 
 The observation of the Committee has been noted. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 

8 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 The Committee note that during 2015 -16, the Budget Estimate for both Plan 
and Non -Plan expenditure by the Ministry was Rs. 1983.82 crore, i.e. Rs. 1880.41 
crore for Pl an expenditure and Rs. 103.41 crore for Non -Plan expenditure which was 
reduced to Rs. 1345.98 crore, i.e. Rs. 1252 crore for Plan expenditure and Rs. 93.98 
core for Non-Plan expenditure at the RE stage. The Actual Expenditure by the Ministry 
as on February  2016 was Rs. 697.82 crore i.e. Rs. 614.97 crore towards Plan 
expenditure and Rs. 82.85 crore towards Non-Plan expenditure. The Secretary, MSDE, 
while deposing before the Committee, reasoned that since the process of transfer of 
responsibilities to MSDE was done in three phases which continued till May, 2015 and 
as the Budget proposals and allocations involved three Ministries/Departments during 
the year 2015 -16, the utilisation of the RE allocations was around 50 percent till 
February, 2016. Updating the C ommittee during evidence, the Secretary, MSDE, 
submitted that against the RE of Rs. 1252 crore during 2015 -16, the Ministry had 
already utilised Rs. 850 crore and a proposal to utilise Rs. 250 crore more has been 
sent to the Finance Ministry in view of the ir instructions not to exceed 15  percent 
expenditure during the month of March. While taking note of the initial constraints 
faced by the Ministry as well as the confidence exuded by the Secretary, MSDE, that 
they would be able to utilise hundred percent o f the 2015 -16 RE allocations, the 
Committee, are constrained to observe that mere 50 percent utilisation of the 
Budgetary allocations in the first eleven months of a financial year does not project a 
very good picture, irrespective of the efforts made to o ptimally utilise the remaining 
amount in the last one month. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry, 
that as they have now settled to a great extent, the imperative need of utilisation of 
Budgetary allocations evenly in the coming years has to  be taken care of so that there 
is a strong ground not only for getting the proposed amount of allocations but also for 
not pleading with the Finance Ministry for exceeding the prescribed expenditure limit 
in the month of March. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has noted the observation of the Committee and the actual 
expenditure for 2015-16 (BE & RE) for Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) 
is as under: 
     (Rs. in crore)  
Name of Scheme  BE 
2015-16 
RE 2015 -
16 
Actual 
Expenditure 
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana 
(PMKVY) 
1000.00 900.00 900.00 
 

9 
 
 The Ministry being new Ministry, without required resources in terms of space 
and manpower could not achieve 100% expenditure, However, Ministry would make 
all efforts to achieve its targets in subsequent years. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry are taking a number of measures which 
inter-alia include regular follow ups, meetings, reviews, on -line monitor ing of the 
Scheme/Programmes, etc. for optimal utilisation of funds during 2016 -17. The 
Committee particularly appreciate the assurance of the Ministry that specific focus 
would be given for the North -Eastern Region as well as 34 Districts affected by Left  
Wing Extremism for various skill development programmes, including PMKVY, during 
2016-17. The Committee are of the view that these are steps in the right direction and 
should be followed up in right earnest with special focus on priority areas and 
monitoring of the implementation of the Schemes/ Programmes right from the 
beginning so as to enable the Ministry to utilise the earmarked funds to the maximum 
extent during 2016-17 and get additional requirement at the RE stage. 
Reply of the Government 
 The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 Further, under the schemes (i) Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure 
(ESDI) and (ii) Skill Development in 34 Districts Affected by Left Wing Extremism 
(LWE), the concerned States have been i nformed about the recommendations of the 
standing committee and asked to act accordingly. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 The Committee note that the Prime Minister Kaushal Vikas Yojna (PMKVY), 
approved on 20th March, 2015 with the objective to enable and mobilise a large 
number of Indian youth to take up outcome based skill training and become 
employable, has a target of imp arting training to 14 lakh youth throughout the 
country, besides 10 lakh persons through Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL). The 
Committee find that as on 22nd March, 2016, 17.89 lakh youth have been enrolled in 
29 States and 6 UTs out of whom 11.87 lakh youth have completed the training. 
Results have been uploaded in case of 7.67 lakh youth and 4.45 lakh youth have been 
certified and placement has been given to 55,712 youth. The Committee further note 
that a target to skill one crore youth under the Schem e has been fixed for three years, 

10 
 
i.e. 2016 -17 to 2018 -19. For the financial year 2016 -17, the target has been 
tentatively set at 28 lakh. As regards measures taken to bridge the gap between 
enrolments and training completed, the Ministry are planning to i ncentivise 
candidates at various stages of training so that more and more candidates could meet 
the milestones and complete their training. The Committee feel that as the objective of 
the Scheme is to train as many youth as possible, there should be, as fa r as possible, 
no gap between the number of candidates enrolled and those who actually complete 
their training. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to make region -
specific assessment studies/surveys, besides incentivising candidates at vari ous 
stages of training, so that requisite corrective measures are taken to motivate the 
maximum number of enrolled candidates to complete the training. The Committee 
further desire that once a batch completes training and candidates are assessed, there 
should not be any delay in uploading the results either by the Sector Skill Councils or 
the Assessment Agencies. 
Reply of the Government 
 Based on the learnings under PMKVY (2015 -16), Ministry with the approval of 
Cabinet has revised its guidelines for the ne xt four years (2016-20) under PMKVY 2.0. 
Under PMKVY 2.0, there is provision of mandatory recording of attendance of trainees 
and trainers through Biometric attendance system. NSDC is mandated to 
maintain/capture comprehensive data on training real time ba sis. Skill-Up portal and 
Mobile App for mobilization of youth and Smart Centre Portal for monitoring of 
training activities to be launched shortly. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 The Committee appreciate that the National Skill Development Council (NSDC) 
Training Partners are chosen after a thorough process of due diligence, proposal 
evaluation and approvals. The Committee, however, are concerned to observe that the 
Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) have their own norms for selecting Training Partners and 
Training Centre Approval. In view of possible mismatch in the quality of training 
imparted because of selecting the Training Partners through different methods, the 
Committee recommend that a uniform me chanism should be put in place to choose 
the Training Partners after exercising utmost care. 
Reply of the Government 
 Under New PMKVY 2.0, a uniform mechanism has been adopted in the 
selection of training centers instead of Training Partner. Under this, al l TCs (Private 
Training Partners, corporate and Government Affiliated centers) would be accredited 
and affiliated as per SOP document - Centre Accreditation and Affiliation Guidelines.  

11 
 
The target allocation would be based on the Stars assigned to the TC by  the Centre of 
Accreditation and Affiliation Committee. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry are making efforts to 
encourage the Training Partners through various incentives to open Training Centres 
in those States and UTs where the coverage is relatively low. The Committee also note 
that the PMKVY Scheme is being widely publicised through Print, Electronic and 
Social Media as well as through Public Relations Campaigns and Kaushal Melas in 
order to generate awareness amongst the youth regarding the advantages of 
undergoing skill development trainings. The Committee feel that these are steps in the 
right direction and the momentum ought to be maintaine d uninterrupted so as to 
encourage both the Training Partners and the trainers to participate in a big way in 
the training programmes for skill development under the PMKVY Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
 Under PMKVY 2.0, TCs would conduct various outreach  campaigns across the 
districts in which they are located. The out -reach campaign may comprise a 
combination of door -to-door visits, mobile vans, and interaction with community -
based groups and local leadership. All outreach efforts are to target school dr op-outs 
and undergraduate college drop-outs. Mass enrolment of students shall not be allowed 
under the Scheme. Kaushal Melas should be conducted in coordination with 
State/Local representatives at least once every six months, in accordance with the 
Kaushal and Rozgar Mela Guidelines. TCs are required to ensure that their 
mobilisation efforts are visible on print, outdoor and digital media platforms, in 
accordance with the Branding and Communication Guidelines. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 The Committee note that while the fresh training component of the PMKVY 
Scheme has picked up, performance in the Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) training 
programme has remained minimal and has not spread to all the States and UTs while 
a target of training 25 lakh persons over a period of three years has been fixed under 
RPL. In order to mobilise and enroll more candidates for the RPL training, the Ministry 
are reportedly taking a number of measures which inter-alia include direct transfer of 
pay out to the Training Partners, increase and uniform reward amount irrespective of 
the job role, reductions in assessment fees and reward money along with a mark-sheet 

12 
 
to the candidates who score above 25 percent, even if they do not pass/qualify for 
certification. As training under RPL is as beneficial as training courses conducted for 
the freshers, the Committee recommend that the measures initiated by the Ministry be 
intensified and additional innovative measures be e xplored to motivate and enroll 
more and more candidates for RPL training programmes so that the target to train 25 
lakh persons in three years is achieved and the objective fulfilled. 
Reply of the Government 
 Under PMKVY 2.0, the different approaches are adopted for RPL across various 
sectors for organised workforce in Industry and unorganized workforce in the Market. 
RPL is carried out through PIA under different implementation modalities consisting of 
five steps namely; mobilization, counselling & pre -screening, orientation, final 
assessments and certification payout. PIA identifies industrial clusters, job roles and 
geography to conduct RPL. PIA also ties up with employers and mobilised potential 
candidates to RPL camp. PIA may engage mobilising agencies  such as Associations, 
NGOs, Training Partner to assist in on ground mobilisation of potential candidates. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 The Committee further appreciate that the Ministry, with a view to gauging the 
quality of training being imparted by the Training Centres under PMKVY, have 
inspected 200 such Centres as a result of which two Centres have been blacklisted. 
The Ministry are reportedly making efforts to physically inspect each and every 
Training Centre. The Committee impress upon the Ministry to chalk out a phase -wise 
inspection programme of all the Training Centres at the earliest so as to ensure that 
they conform to the prescribed quality norms. The Committee further desire that t he 
in-built safety mechanism under PMKVY for assessing quality of training by third 
party independent agency should be persisted with so that requisite corrective 
measures as and when required, are enforced for ensuring high quality training. 
Reply of the Government 
 Under PMKVY 2.0, the Scheme shall be monitored through a multi -layer 
checking. The Inspection Agency, along with the PMKVY Monitoring Team shall be 
responsible to continuously monitoring all the TCs based on the Compliance and 
Performance Standard Metrics. 
 While the monitoring of each TC shall be done by the Inspection Agency, the 
PMKVY Monitoring Team shall monitor the overall Scheme. PMKVY Monitoring Team 
shall also monitor the performance of the Inspection Agency by periodically checking a 

13 
 
sample base to ensure that the Inspection Agency is monitoring the TCs in the right 
and desired manner.   
 The PMC shall monitor the overall Scheme progress, and the performance of 
PMKVY Monitoring Team on a fortnightly basis. States shall also be empowered  to 
monitor the Scheme. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 The Committee take note of the statement of the Secretary, MSDE, that between 
2004 and 2011, industry growth at the highest was 9.5 percent but employment in 
industry grew only by 1.3 percent which shows that the industry is growing for labour 
displacing high technologies. In order to neutralise the decline in the employable 
feasibility of trained labours in the conventional sectors, the Minis try are focusing on 
unconventional areas like construction, e -commerce, beauty awareness, hospitality 
services, etc. The Committee concur with the intent and efforts of the Ministry and 
desire that an effective action plan be put in place to encourage and guide the trained 
persons to move to unconventional areas for getting self -employed rather than 
depending upon conventional industry jobs which tend to gradually dry up. 
Reply of the Government 
 This Ministry is taking concrete steps aimed at engaging India’s youth in 
creative pursuits by developing appropriate skills and promoting entrepreneurship. 
The primary objective of the National Policy for Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship is to create a holistic entrepreneurial eco -system focussing on 
entrepreneurship education, skill development and changing the mind-set of the youth 
towards entrepreneurship. Keeping in view above, this Ministry is in the process to 
train students through 2200 colleges, 300 schools (10+2), 500 ITIs and 50 
Entrepreneurship Development Centres (EDCs) which aims to deliver 
entrepreneurship education and training to over 7 lakh youths over the period of five 
years to enable them to become entrepreneurs and thus become self-employed. 
 Under PMKVY 2.0, the different approaches ar e adopted for RPL across various 
sectors for organised workforce in Industry and unorganized workforce in the Market. 
RPL is carried out through PIA under different implementation modalities consisting of 
five steps namely; mobilization, counselling & pre -screening, orientation, final 
assessments and certification payout. PIA identifies industrial clusters, job roles and 
geography to conduct RPL. PIA also ties up with employers and mobilised potential 
candidates to RPL camp. PIA may engage mobilising agenci es such as Associations, 
NGOs, Training Partner to assist in on ground mobilisation of potential candidates. 
MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 

14 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 The Committee are glad to note that the Ministry have alr eady signed and also 
planning to sign MOUs with a number of countries like Germany, UK, China, UAE, 
Australia and Canada to adopt their curriculum and best practices for skill 
development, besides imparting training to the Indian Trainers by them. The 
Committee would like to encourage the Ministry to endeavour towards signing more 
such MOUs with other countries and adopt the best practices prevalent there so as to 
increase the overseas employment opportunities for the trained and skilled Indian 
entrepreneurs. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is actively engaged 
with world in skill development through collaborations with foreign governments and 
institutions. Numbers of countries have expressed interest in coll aboration with 
MSDE. Countries like UK, Singapore considered as global leaders in the area of 
vocational education and skill development have offered to collaborate with MSDE to 
share best practices. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 The Committee note that 3.95 lakh seats have been located in 259 designated 
trades for Trade Apprentices in 28,500 establishments out of which 2.20 lakh seats 
are utilised. Though the earmarked seats for Trade Apprenticeship training courses 
are not being optimally utilised, the Committee appreciate that approximately 40,000 
Apprentices have been added in the last one year only under NSDM, whereas during 
the last 50 years, on an average, 10,000 Apprentices were coming up annually. The 
Committee are also happy to note that in order to encourage the industry to evince 
interest in the Apprentices, the Government of India have embarked upon a liberal 
policy since November, 2014 whereby the industry has been given a n umber of 
incentives/autonomies, including the option to appoint Apprentices in any post. The 
Committee are of the considered view that encouraging the industry through 
incentives to induct Apprentices for on -the-job training is a step in the right directio n 
which would hopefully result in an appreciable increase in the number of Trade 
Apprentices in the country. The Committee would simultaneously like to caution the 
Ministry and Directorate General of Training (DGT) to remain more vigilant and ensure 
provision of effective safeguards so as to check misuse of the Government's forward 
looking policy, leading to the exploitation of Trade Apprentices by the Industry. 
 

15 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The observation of committee has been noted for compliance. The Regional 
Directorates of Apprenticeship Training (RDATs) are monitoring Apprenticeship 
Training Scheme under control of the MSDE. Field officers from (RDATs) located at 
Faridabad, Kanpur, Mumbai, Kolkata, Hyderabad and Chennai regularly visit 
establishments under their jurisdiction to ensure quality in training. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 The Committee appreciate to note that as per the Cabinet decisions of 1st July, 
2015, there would be a 'Co mmon Norm' w.e.f. 1st April, 2016 for imparting training 
courses conducted by various Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. 
Under such norm, there would be uniformity in the duration of training courses and 
stipend paid to the Trainees. While acknowledging the commendable efforts made by 
the Union Government for bringing in the much desired uniformity in the training 
patterns, the Committee impress upon the MSDE to continue their endeavour in 
coordinating and convincing the State Governments to follow suit. 
Reply of the Government 
 The observation of the Committee has been noted.  
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
 Another new Scheme contemplated by the Ministry that merits attention is the 
establishment of 1500 Multi Skill Training Institutes (MSTIs) in the Central Sector 
through active participation of industries/private partners in unserviced blocks/areas 
with emphasis on imparting technical skills to the youth from the under privilege d, 
economically backward and disadvantaged categories in order to improve their 
prospects of gainful employment. But the Committee are deeply concerned to find that 
against a total requirement of Rs. 5,400 crore and immediate requirement of Rs. 750 
crore during 2016-17 to implement the first phase, a sum of Rs. 50 crore only has 
been allocated to the Ministry. Expressing their serious displeasure over such a 
meagre allocation of fund towards the highly ambitious Scheme intended to benefit the 
under privileg ed and economically backward sections of the society, the Committee 
urge the Secretary, MSDE, to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance so that 
MSDE are able to execute the establishment of the projected MSTIs. 

16 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Meeting of the Expenditure Finance Committee for considering the above 
proposal for the scheme held on 19th April, 2016. Cabinet Note is under preparation. 
Once the scheme is approved, it will be implemented expeditiously. An EOI has been 
issued through NSDC for invi ting applications for setting up of MSTIs in unserved 
blocks on 24/09/2016. Good response has been received against the EOI. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
 The Committee are also concerned to note that apart from fund constraints, the 
MSDE are facing acute shortage of manpower particularly when viewed against the 
ambitious mandate conferred upon them. Against the sanctioned strength of 67 staff, 
only 34 personnel are in position whereas the Ministry's additional requirement is 102 
more posts. Not only that, the Ministry are currently having their offices at several 
scattered locations. As a centralised office building and adequate and qualified 
manpower are an essential requirement of any Ministry/  Department to function 
efficiently, the Committee impress upon the Secretary, MSDE, to take up the matter at 
the appropriate fora so that the Ministry get the requisite staff and office space in 
order to deliver effectively. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of Finance has been requested time and again for sanction of 
adequate posts for the Ministry. The current sanction strength has gone upto 60 
against a figure of 34 as noted by the Committee. Ministry of Finance, Cabinet 
Secretariat and DOPT are be ing requested regularly for posting of person against the 
sanctioned posts as well as creation of additional posts. It may be further added that 
the Ministry of Urban Development has allotted land measuring 1.354 acres near new 
Moti Bagh for construction o f the permanent building for the Ministry i.e. Kaushal 
Bhawan. 
 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 The Committee note that under the Skill Development Initiative Scheme (SDIS), 
which has been in vogue since May, 2007 to provide vocational training to people 
through a network of Vocational Training Providers located across the co untry, 13.67 
lakh persons were trained or directly tested during the XI Plan. A target to train 25 
lakh persons under the Scheme has been fixed for the XII Plan with some specific 
changes/improvements to facilitate smooth implementation of the Scheme. Till date, a 
total number of 25.25 lakh people have already been trained. What is a matter of 
concern to the Committee is the fact that during the XI Plan, providing employment to 
the trainees by VPTs under the Scheme was not mandatory and no mechanism is 
available with the Ministry for tracking employment given to the persons out of the 
13.67 lakh persons trained/directly tested during the earlier Plan period. In view of 
the fact that providing training to lakhs of persons without keeping track of their 
employment/placement defeats the very purpose of the SDI Scheme, the Committee 
call upon the Ministry to develop a robust mechanism to maintain and update the 
data on the number of trained/directly tested persons getting placements. The 
Committee further desire that providing employment to the trained persons by the 
VTPs under the SDI Scheme be made mandatory, if it has not done so far, with 
requisite incentives and safeguards. 
Reply of the Government 
 Skill Development Initiative Scheme (SDIS) has been closed.  
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that no action plan has been 
framed for future to train/directly test more people under the SDI Scheme as no funds 
have been provided during 2016 - 17 fiscal for the purpose. The Committee are 
surprised that on one hand the Government are publicizing and popularising the skill 
development initiatives whereas on the other no fund has been allocated to impart 
skill training under the SDI Scheme. The Committee firmly suggest that the Secretary, 
MSDE should take up the matter at the appropriate level so that the Ministry's fund 
requirement is catered to and the Scheme gathers further momentum to provide 
vocationally trained skilled manpower for the industry.   

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Skill Development Initiative Scheme (SDIS) has been closed.  
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 Another disquieting aspect that has engaged the serious attention of the 
Committee is the placement given to the candidates all over the country, including in 
the North-Eastern States, Andaman Nicobar Islands and Daman & Diu vis -a-vis the 
number of candidates who have completed the training under PMKVY. To illustrate, 
out of the total number of 14.27 lakh candidates across the country who have 
completed their training, 55,712 candidates have been placed which is around four 
percent o f the trained candidates. Similarly, in the North -Eastern States, Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands and Daman & Diu, out of the 44,798 trained candidates, 
placement has been given to 1367 candidates which is around three percent. In this 
context, the Committee f ind that the PMKVY Scheme guidelines did not initially 
mandate placement which was later on put into effect from December, 2015 after 
which the Training Partners did not have sufficient time to align themselves and create 
capacity for placing the youth being skilled under PMKVY. The Committee further note 
that the Training Partners and Sector Skill Councils are now constantly being 
encouraged, through monetary incentives, to promote placements to the trained 
candidates under PMKVY. As the entire process of enrolment, training and 
certification of the youth should logically conclude in their suitable placement, more 
so when the PMKVY guidelines have now categorically prescribed so, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to make more concerted efforts and ensure a le verage in the 
percentage of placement vis -a-vis the trained youth all over the country, with special 
focus on the North-Eastern Region and other remote areas. 
Reply of the Government 
 The revised PMKVY 2.0 scheme has the targets to provide skill training a nd 
certification to one crore candidates with an estimated Budgetary allocation of Rs 
12,000 crore.  
 There is a detailed provision for boosting placements of trained youths. The 
placement of the candidates is the primary responsibility of the Training Cen tres (TCs) 
instead of Training Partner. Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) will liaison between the TC 
and employers for ensuring the placement of candidates.  For leveraging the 
percentage of placement, there is provisions for placement incentive have been 
introduced. The post placement support is provided in order to enable the newly 
skilled candidates settle into their new jobs, is to be provided to them directly.  The 

20 
 
relaxation in the provisions for availing the placement benefits is given for NE and J&K 
States. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 The Committee note that the Scheme 'Enhancing Skill Development 
Infrastructure' which was formulated in 2011 at a total cost of Rs. 57.39 crore has 
been extended upto 31st March, 2017 at a revised cost of Rs. 298.13 crore with the 
aim to establish 22 new ITIs in the seven North -Eastern States and Sikkim, besides 
upgradation of 20 ITIs and supplementing infrastructure development in 28 ITIs. But 
the Committee are deeply concerned to find that out of the proposed 22 new ITIs, only 
in two cases construction of building has been completed whereas in the remaining 
cases, construction has either started or is yet to start. Similarly, so far as 
upgradation and infrastru cture development is concerned, work relating to five ITIs 
has been completed whereas in the remaining cases, either land acquisition is under 
process or buildings are under construction. The Ministry have reasoned that due to 
non-receipt of timely proposals from the State Governments, fund constraints, difficult 
terrains, etc., the progress of work is lagging behind. The Committee apprehend that 
at such a slow pace, the earmarked targets for establishment and upgradation of ITIs 
in the North-Eastern States and Sikkim are unlikely to be achieved by March, 2017, a 
fact which has also been corroborated by the Ministry. Now that the Ministry are 
taking some corrective measures like increase in the frequency of site visits, more 
meetings and follow up with the S tate Governments and ensuring requisite funds in 
proper object head, the Committee exhort the Ministry to further intensify the 
measures and resort to vigorous monitoring so as to ensure that there is minimal time 
overrun beyond March, 2017 in completion o f the targeted projects intended towards 
skill development of the people of the North-Eastern Region and Sikkim. 
Reply of the Government 
 Under the scheme “Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure in NE States & 
Sikkim (ESDI)” as recommended by the committee visits to project sites have been 
done in the current financial year in Assam (10 ITIs), Manipur (8 ITIs) and Sikkim (3 
ITIs). More such visits are planned in the future. 
 An amount of Rs. 19.38 crore has been released so far to the States during  the 
current financial year 2016-17. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
 

21 
 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 The Committee note that the Scheme of 'Skill Development in 34 Districts 
Affected by Left Wing Extremism' was approved in Marc h, 2011 for a period of five 
years at a cost of Rs. 241.65 crore to impart skill training courses to the youth of the 
affected areas as well as to create requisite infrastructure there. But the Committee 
are perturbed to note that out of the projected crea tion of 102 infrastructure in the 
affected Districts, only 25 projects have been completed, 34 projects are under 
progress whereas as many as 43 projects are yet to take off. Similarly, out of the 2987 
persons trained in the nine States, not a single perso n has been trained in 
Maharashtra under Short Term and Long Term category. Moreover, no instructor 
training has been imparted in the States of Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and 
Madhya Pradesh. Though the Ministry are repeatedly requesting the State 
Governments to enhance the pace of implementation of the programme, as reported, 
the Committee are not satisfied with the outcome. Now that the Scheme is proposed to 
be extended by another three years, i.e. upto March, 2019, the Committee impress 
upon the Minis try to look into the matter with a sense of urgency, find out ways to 
remove the impediments and regularly interface with the State Governments so that 
the intended benefits are actually delivered to the affected youth in the said 
Districts/States. 
Reply of the Government 
 The scheme “Skill Development in 34 Districts Affected by Left Wing 
Extremism” was operational till 31st March, 2016. SFC has approved continuation of 
the scheme with revised cost of Rs. 407 crore upto 31st March, 2019 with additional 
13 districts identified by MHA. States are being followed up through meetings, video 
conference, visits to speed up the progress. 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 The Committee note that training courses under the Craftsmen Training 
Scheme, which were launched way back in 1956 through 50 ITIs, are now being 
offered through a network of 2,293 Government ITIs and 10,182 Private ITIs located all 
over the country and affiliated to the National Council for Vocational Training (NCVT) 
with a total seating capacity of 18.65 lakh persons and with the objective to provide 
skilled workforce to the industr y in 126 Trades. The Committee also note that the 
Prime Minister's Office (PMO) has given a mandate to the MSDE for opening 7,000 new 
ITIs across the country to enhance the seating capacity to 25 lakh persons. 
Accordingly, Tender notices have been issued a nd so far around 6,500 proposals have 
been received, but the Ministry are planning to extend the date so as to receive more 
applications for opening the targeted 7,000 new ITIs. Since Industrial Training 
Institutes play a vital role in the nations economy,  especially in terms of providing 
skilled manpower to the industry, the Committee urge the Ministry to expedite the 
completion of the formalities within a definite time -line and embark upon concrete 
measures to establish the proposed 7,000 new ITIs within one year. The Committee 
would also like to encourage the Ministry to go ahead with their proposal of tying up 
with the HRD Ministry so that those Engineering Colleges/Institutes, where 
infrastructure exists but are not running due to one reason or the other, are converted 
into ITIs. 
Reply of the Government 
 Total 1924 cases were forwarded by QCI after accreditation. These were 
considered in various meetings of Sub -Committee of NCVT dealing with affiliations, 
held for the grant of affiliation with NCVT for   August 2016session. This figure 
includes new as well as existing ITIs. 
 
 To enhance the seating capacity by 07 lakh without compromising with the 
quality of training, the following strategy has been adopted: 
 
 Efforts are being made to upgrade 1500 ITIs runn ing under State Council for 
Vocational Training and bring them under the aegis of NCVT. A special window 
has been created at the application stage of QCI portal for this purpose. 
 AICTE has issued notification to run ITI courses in 500 Polytechnics in their  
spare capacity across the country for better utilization of infrastructure. 

23 
 
 For setting up of 1500 Multi Skill Training Institutes (MSTIs) in unserved 
blocks/areas, meeting of the Expenditure Finance Committee was held on 19th 
April, 2016. Cabinet Note is under preparation 
 
 Apart from increasing the number of ITI(s) & seating capacity; following 
qualitative aspects are also being taken into consideration for these Industrial 
Training Institutes. 
 
 A committee has been constituted to standardize the norms for ITI Building/ 
Infrastructure to improve the quality of Institutes. 
 
 Letter has been issued to make Aadhaar based biometric attendance mandatory 
in all training institutes for the session 2016 -17. Guidelines have been approved for 
“ISO 29990 Certificati on”. Information is being sought regarding bank details from 
State Directors/ UT administrator for transferring funds.  
 
 “Grading of ITIs". 
 
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 The Committee note that  the MSDE have been asked in November, 2015 to 
develop an action plan to reach a target of 10 63 lakh Apprentices from the existing 
2.84 lakh Apprentices. In this context, the Committee are concerned to find that 
though the policy, regulation and rules for  all categories of Apprentices fall under the 
domain of MSDE, in terms of actual implementation, MSDE's responsibility is limited 
to Trade Apprentices that account for 75 percent of all apprentices whereas the 
Department of Higher Education under the HRD M inistry is resoponsible for the other 
three categories of Apprentices, viz. Graduate, Technician and Technician (Vocational). 
The Committee are of the firm view that sometimes such duality of responsibilities 
might create an anomalous situation besides cau sing inconveniences for the industry 
to interact and coordinate with multiple Government agencies for different categories 
of Apprentices. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Secretary, MSDE should 
initiate urgent requisite action so that all types o f Apprentices are brought under 
MSDE for ensuring a single implementation framework and the industry's seamless 
interface with a single Government agency to achieve the target of 10 lakh 
Apprentices. 
 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The matter was taken up with Ministry of HRD vide D.O. No. MSDE -
48(1)/2015-AP dated 15th October, 2015. Final decision is awaited.  
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry are embarking upon some new 
Schemes like setting up of 27 Advanced Training Institutes (ATIs) under PPP mode, 
eight Central Institutes exclusively for women, upgradation of 1396 Government ITIs 
through PPP mode and Vocational Training Improvement Projects (VTIPs) with World 
Bank assistance. The Committee find that the implementation of these new Schemes 
are in different stages of formulation/realisation. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
make concerted efforts to implement these new Schemes in a time bound manner so 
that the  Government's intent of developing skill and entrepreneurship is translated 
into concrete outcomes. 
Reply of the Government 
 2 stage Bidding has started. RFQ issued for 12 ATIs, 19 organizations have 
responded to the RFQ. New Transaction Advisor (TA) is ap pointed. Evaluation of Bids 
have been done by TA. Only 4 bidders have qualified and the response has been very 
poor. The scheme is therefore under review.  
(MSDE's O.M. No. H-11013/01/2016-SDE-I (Parl.), dated 06.12.2016) 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;              DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA  
   2nd    March, 2017                      CHAIRPERSON,  
  11th    Phalguna, 1938 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

25 
 
Appendix I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on  Wednesday, the 22nd February, 2017 from 1 030 
hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Kirit Somaiya    –    CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Ashok Dohare 
  4. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  5. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
  6. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
  7. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  8. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  9. Dr. Arun Kumar 
  10. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  11. Shri Hari Manjhi 
  12. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  13. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
      
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  14. Shri Ram Narayn Dudi 
  15. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  16. Shri Rajaram 
  17. Ms. Dola Sen 
  18. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
  19. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
  20. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan        
   SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad - Joint Secretary 
  2. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director 
  3. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
   

26 
 
PART - I 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee convened to (i ) consider and adopt the draft Report on 'Action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship; (ii) ) XX    XX       XX; and (iii) XX       XX      XX. The 
Committee first took up the draft Action Taken Report on the  
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Sixteenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of the Ministry 
of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship for consideration and adoption. 
Giving an overview of the Recommendations made/reiterated in the Draft 
Action Taken Report,  the Chairperson requested the Members to give their 
suggestions on them, if any. 
3. The Committee adopted the same, without any addition/modification. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Report to both 
the Houses. 
5. XX   XX   XX   XX 
PART-II 
XX   XX   XX   XX   XX 
PART-III 
XX   XX   XX   XX   XX 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
XX Does not pertain to this Report. 

27 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations          24 
  
II. Observations/Recommendations which have     16           66.67%   
 been accepted by Government - 
 (Recommendation Para. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,  
 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 17, 19, 23 and 24  
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the     02               08.33% 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s replies -  
 (Recommendation Para Nos. 12 and 13) 
      
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of     03       12.50% 
 which Government’s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration -                       
  (Recommendation Para. Nos. 7, 20 and 21) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of       03       12.50% 
 which replies of Government are of interim  
 in nature -  
 (Recommendation Para Nos. 16, 18 and 22) 
                             ----------- 
                 100% 
                                       ----------- 