1 
 
12 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-2016) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
[Action Taken by the Government  on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on `Regularisation 
of Casual Workers/Artists of Radio Kashmir, CBS Radio 
Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar’] 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
December,  2015/Pausha , 1937 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-2016) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government  on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on `Regularisation 
of Casual Workers/Artists of Radio Kashmir, CBS Radio 
Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar’] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  22.12.2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2015 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December,  2015 /Pausha , 1937 (Saka) 
 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 
03.12.2015.    
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
   

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 
 DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR-CHAIRPERSON   
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
17. Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
18. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
19. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
23. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
24. Shri P.L. Punia 
25. Shri Rajaram 
26. Haji Abdul Salam 
27. Ms. Dola Sen 
28. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
29. Shri R.K. Sinha 
30. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
31. Vacant* 
 
* Shri P.Kannan retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 06.10.2015 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  -  Additional Secretary 
 2.    Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Director  
 4.    Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Additional Director 
 5.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Under Secretary 
 
 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
           I,  the  Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2015 -16), having 
been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this Twelfth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained  in their Fourth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Regularisation of Casual Wo rkers/Artists of Radio 
Kashmir, CBS Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar ' relating to  
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and  laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 18th March, 2015.  The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting furnished 
their replies indicating action taken on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth  Report on 3rd August, 2015 .  The Committee  
considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 3rd December, 
2015.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by  the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
15 December, 2015                                  CHAIRPERSON  
24 Pausha,1937 (Saka)                STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on `Regularisation of casual Workers/Ar tists of 
Radio Kashmir, CBS Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar’. 
 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 18 th March, 2015.  It contained 1 4 Observations/Recommendations. 
Replies of  the Government in res pect of all the Recommendations have been 
received and are categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government –  
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 
12, 13 
 
Total: 09 
percentage: 64.3 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – 
-NIL- 
Total: 0 0 
percentage:     00 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Recommendation Para Nos. 2, 11 
 
 
Total: 0 2 
percentage:  21.4 
 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature -  
Recommendation Para Nos. 3, 4, 14 
 
Total: 0 3 
percentage:  14.3 
 
  

8 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Replies in respect of 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final Action Taken Replies 
in respect of Recommendations contained in Chapter -V; for which only 
interim replies have been furnished by the Government , be furnished at 
the earliest.  
A. Engagement of casual artists on long-term contract 
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
4. The Committee, in their Fourth Report , had observed that p ursuant to 
their suggestions, the Ministry/Prasar Bharati ha d initiated some measures , 
including working out a scheme for engaging eligible casual artists on contract 
basis, issue of directions to all the Kendras not to lay off casual workers at 
local level, expediting the formulation of Recruitment Rules for Prasar Bharati, 
sorting out various irreg ularities pertaining to the engagement of casual 
assignees, etc. However, nothing concrete beyond assurance ha d come up, 
though the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati had 
assured the Committee to engage casual artists on long term co ntract till they 
attain the age of superannuation. The Committee, therefore re commended that 
the measures initiated be implemented with full fidelity and expeditiously 
considering the protracted plight of these aggrieved casual assignees. 
5. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
have stated as follows: 
"Prasar Bharati has informed that instructions have already been issued 
that no casual worker be laid off at the local level and proposals, if any 
for laying off the casual  workers invariably be sent to Prasar Bharati for 
appropriate action. Further, Prasar Bharati, following  approval of the 
Government, has notified Recruitment Regulations (RRs) for 11 
categories of posts and remaining RRs are under inter -Ministerial 
consultations between this Ministry and the Department of Expenditure, 
Department of Personnel & Training and Prasar Bharati. In the RRs so 
far notified, a provision has been made for giving age relaxation to the 
casual artists in direct recruitment to the posts  for which they are being 
booked, subject to fulfilling the educational and other qualifications of 
the relevant regulation." 
 
6. The Committee appreciate the measures taken by the Ministry like 
not laying off casual workers at the local level without the permission of 
Prasar Bharati, framing of Recruitment Rules (RRs) for 11 categories of 

9 
 
posts, etc.  However, the Committee  are deeply concerned over  the  
conspicuous silence of the Ministry on the assurance given to the effect 
that the casual artists would be engaged on long -term contract till they 
attain the age of superannuation .  It is no consolation that a provision 
has been made in the RRs to give age relaxation to the casual artists in 
direct recruitment.  The Committee find it very disconcerting that even 
after rendering decades of service, the casual artists who must be in their 
late forties/early fifties, are being compelled to appear in examinations , 
and that too competing with freshers.  Expressing their displeasure over 
this insensitive approach on the part of the Ministry/Prasar Bharati, the 
Committee call for  a firm commitment that the casual artists would be 
engaged on long-term contracts till they attain the age of superannuation 
and even the slightest of deviation in this regard should be allowed. 
 
B. Adoption of transparent procedure for regularizing the contract/ 
 casual workers 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
7. In their Report, t he Committee had found that  some casual assignees 
were regularized, some of them were converted to Temporary Status Worker 
(TSW) and the rest were left out. It was thus apparent that no transparent 
procedure was adopted to honour the DOPT circular in regularizing the 
contract/casual workers. The Committee were of the firm view that performing 
similar nature of job for the same duration with equal proficiency should  have 
been the only criteri on for regularization/conferment of TSW status upon the 
casual /contract assignees and there s hould have absolutely been no pick and 
choose policy or other extraneous consideration for the purpose. The 
Committee, therefore, had exhorted the Ministry/Prasar Bharati to take urgent 
requisite measures to rectify the aberrations and put in place a trans parent 
system so that justice is done to all the affected casual assignees. 
 
8. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
have stated as follows: 
"Prasar Bharati has informed that regularization of casual artists/casual 
workers have been done under two separate schemes in Doordarshan 
strictly as per provisions of the schemes. The details are as follows: 
(i) Scheme for regularization of casual artists in Doordarshan under 
Doordarshan Scheme of 1992-94 

10 
 
Casual artists eligible for regularization under this scheme which was 
prepared under Court directions and was approved by the Hon’ ble CAT 
had been done earlier. A thorough check of all the pending cases has 
been undertaken. Based on this scrutiny by two different Committees 
and with the approval of Prasar Bharati Board, orders for regularization 
of 233 casual artists who are found eligible for regularization under the 
scheme have since been issued. 
(ii) DoPT scheme for regularization of labourer [grant of Temporary 
Status Workers (TSW) and regularization scheme 1993] 
202 TSWs have been regularized based on the approval accorded by 
Prasar Bharati Board. Case of 19 TSWs is sub -judice. No further TSW is 
remaining for regularization". 
 
9. The Committee are please d to note that under the Doordarshan 
Scheme of 1992 -94, orders for regularisation of 233 casual artists, who 
were found eligible for regularisation under the Scheme have been issued.  
They find it  also equally heartening to observe that under the DoPT 
Scheme for regularisation  of labourer s, 202 Temporary Status Workers 
(TSWs) out of 221 such workers have been regularised.  However, the case 
of 19 TSWs has been stated to be  sub-judice.  While acknowledging the 
commendable efforts made by the Ministry/Prasar Bharati in regularisi ng 
the casual artists/TSWs, the Committee would like to be apprised of the 
fate of the remaining 19 TSWs, as and when their case is decided.  The 
Committee also desire the Ministry/Prasar Bharati to adopt a more 
compassionate approach towards the plight of the se casual artists , 
especially the TSWs, so as to avoid litigations and Court cases in future. 
 
 C. Comprehensive policy for contractual engagements 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
10. In their Fourth Report, the Committee had found that the comprehensive 
policy for contractual engagements had been finalized as late as in 2012 and 
even then the examination could not be held which  could have enabled the 
casual and contractual assignees to become regular workers . The Committee 
had opined that h ad the comprehensive policy been finalized earlier, the 
contractual/casual assignees would have got the benefit of age on their side.  
As most of the contractua l/casual assignees must be in their late forties , the 
Committee had viewed that it would be unfair to expect such older people to 

11 
 
compete with the freshers in the examination . The Committee had urged that 
they might be considered for regularization for the rest of their service period as 
a one-time gesture so that they  could get all the financial benefits available to 
regular employees and lead a peaceful retired life.  
11.  In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
have stated as follows: 
"For regularization of casual artists working in Radio Kashmir, CBS 
Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra Srinagar, a proposal has been 
received in the Ministry from Prasar Bharati vide their D.O. letter dated 
11.2.2015, for approval as a special case by de -linking it from 
regularization of casuals in other parts of the country. On examination, 
the said proposal of Prasar Bharati was found sketchy and without the 
basic details, including those related to the casuals proposed to be 
regularized, e.g. their names, period of engagement, remunerations 
drawn, mode of recruitment, duties assigned, etc., posts to which these 
casuals are proposed to be regularized, financial implications involved 
and the mode by which these casuals can be regularized . Accordingly, 
Prasar Bharati was requested on 16.3.2015 to furnish the above details 
for further processing of the proposal. Reply of Prasar Bharati is still 
awaited." 
 
12. The Committee are perturbed to note that the proposals for 
regularisation of casua l artists working in Radio Kashmir, CBS Radio 
Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar, as sent by  the Prasar Bharati 
to the Ministry on 11th February, 2015 have been "found to be sketchy 
and without the basic details " for which the Prasar Bharati was asked on 
16th March, 2015 to furnish the details for further processing of the 
proposals.  What is more worrisome is the fact that even after a lapse of 
six months , i.e. from March 2015 to August 2015 (when the ATN was 
furnished to the Committee), the reply of Prasar Bharati is still awaited.  
The Committee fail to comprehend as to why  the proposal for 
regularisation of casual artists  was submitted to the Ministry without the 
basic details, and the required course correction has not been done even 
after six months.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to impress 
upon the Prasar Bharati to display requisite professional urgency and 
resubmit the proposal with all the required details without further loss of 
time so that the aggrieved casual artists get the  much needed succor and 
relief. 
  

12 
 
D. Finalisation of Recruitment Rules 
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
13. In their Report, t he Committee had noted that even after lapse of 1 8 
years, the Prasar Bharati had  been able to formulate and notify only 09 RRs. 
Consequently, the Prasar Bharat Recruitment Board  had also not been 
constituted. While cautioning the Ministry/Prasar Bharati, the Committee had 
exhorted them for initiating and expediting  urgent and effectiv e measures to 
finalize all the remaining RRs at the earliest so that the Recruitment Board was 
constituted and over dependence on SSC/UPSC for recruitment in Prasar 
Bharati was minimized significantly.  
 
14.  In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
have stated as follows : 
(A)  Regarding Recruitment Regulations (RRs) for Prasar Bharati employees: 
i. The Recruitment Regulations (RRs) for 122 categories of employees were 
notiﬁed in 2001 -2002. These RRs were kept in abeyance because of 
dissatisfaction of the employees concerned. The Group of Ministers on 
Prasar Bharati (GOM) in their meeting held on 16.04.2010, directed to 
take immediate steps to frame and notify new RRs and service conditions 
for its employees. It was decided  that the employees who were recruited 
till 05.10.2007. i.e. the employees who are on deemed deputation to the 
Prasar Bharati, shall continue to be governed by the existing RRs, framed 
under Article 309 of the Constitution and new RRs will be framed for th e 
employees of the Prasar Bharati Corporation. 
ii. The Prasar Bharati Board had approved draft RRs in respect of 195 
categories of employees of the Prasar Bharati recruited after 5.10.2007, 
in April, 2010 which were subsequently referred to the Ministry. 
Following examination of the proposal in the Ministry, the draft RRs were 
referred to the Department of Personnel & Training (DOP&T). Several 
stages of consultations were held between the Ministry and the DOP&T.  
Based on the comments dated 26.3.2012 of the DOP &T and first stage 
comments of the Department of Expenditure (DOE) dated 27.6.2012, 
Prasar Bharati was requested to modify the draft RRs.  In the meanwhile 
Prasar Bharati vide their letter dated: 05.06.2012 conveyed their decision 
to reduce the number of p osts for which new Recruitment Regulations 
are to be framed to 125 categories of posts on account of merger of posts 
and dropping some cadres which were considered obsolete in view of 

13 
 
technology change, administrative reasons, DOP&T instructions and 
functional requirement of Prasar Bharati. 
iii. As on 01.7.2015, new RRs in respect of 11 categories of posts covering 
12,502 posts viz. Programme Executive, Transmission Executive, 
Engineering Assistant, Head Clerk, Technician, Cameraman Grade -II, 
News Reader–cum-Translator (NRT) cadres (viz. NRT Grade-I, NRT Grade-
II and NRT Grade -III), Senior Financial Officer and Financial Officer to 
Chief Engineer (Civil), have been notified by Prasar Bharati with the 
approval of the Government. RRs pertaining to the remaining cat egories 
of posts are at various stages, including RRs in respect of 15 categories 
of posts are under inter -Ministerial consultation with the Department of 
Expenditure (DOE) and DOP&T, RRs in respect of 19 categories are 
under examination in the Ministry, P rasar Bharati has to furnish 
clarifications in respect of 43 categories of posts and RRs in respect of 37 
categories of posts are yet to be originated from Prasar Bharati.   
 
(B)  Regarding Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board : 
i. As per section 10 of the Prasar  Bharati Act, 1990, Prasar Bharati 
Recruitment Board (PBRB) is to be constituted.  A draft Cabinet Note for 
creation of posts of Chairperson and Members of PBRB, at the level of 
Additional Secretary and Joint Secretary respectively, was circulated on 
16.7.2014 for inter -ministerial consultation. The proposal was re -
examined in the light of the comments received from PMO and Ministry 
of Finance. 
ii. In a meeting between Secretary (I&B) and CEO, Prasar Bharati (PB) held 
on 01.12.2014, the Ministry had shared comm ents of other Ministries/ 
Departments received against the draft Cabinet Note with PB. Further, it 
was decided that Prasar Bharati would forward a proposal for revising 
the Cabinet Note, in the light of comments received.   
iii. Prasar Bharati forwarded the rev ised draft Cabinet Note and the Rules 
for setting up of Prasar Bharati Recruitment and Services Board (PBRSB) 
on 19.3.2015. The proposal has been examined in the Ministry. It has 
been observed that the proposal envisages substantial modification in 
the dra ft Rules for PBRB, prepared by the Ministry on the basis of 
approved proposal of Prasar Bharati Board (in the meeting dated 
16.05.2012) and following inter -Ministerial consultations with DOP&T, 
Department of Expenditure (DOE) and Ministry of Law. 

14 
 
iv. Since the new modifications suggested by Prasar Bharati at this stage, 
require fresh approvals of PMO, DOE and DOP&T, Prasar Bharati has 
been requested on 29.4.2015 to forward firmed up proposal with the 
approval of the Prasar Bharati Board. 
 In the matter, a meeti ng was also held with Member (Personnel), Prasar 
 Bharati on 12.5.2015 wherein this issue of PBRB was discussed at 
 length.  In the meeting, Member (Personnel) mentioned that he would 
 discuss the matter with Chief Executive Officer and Chairperson, Prasar  
 Bharati for a final decision.  Reply of PB is still awaited. 
 
15. The Prasar Bharati came into existance in the year 1997.  The 
Committee find that Recruitment Rules (RRs) in respect of 122 categories 
of posts out of a total number of 198 posts  were notified in 2001 -02, but 
were kept in abeyance for nearly 10 years without taking a final call  
thereon.  In 2010 , the Group of Ministers (GOM) had directed the Prasar 
Bharati to frame and notify the new RRs.  In 2012, after 
discussions/deliberations amongst the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, DoPT and Department of Expenditure for two and half  
years, a decision had been taken to reduce the number of categories of 
posts to 125.  Out of these 125 categories even a fter a lapse of three  
years, i.e. in 2015; the Prasar Bharati had only been able to notify RRs for 
11 categories of posts  while for 37 categories of posts  the pro cess of 
framing of the RR is yet to be initiated by the Prasar Bharati and   RRs in 
respect of rest of the categories are st ill lying at different stages  of 
finalisation.  The Committee express their displeasure over the inordinate 
delay in framing  the RRs for all categories of posts.  The Committee, 
therefore, stress that RRs for the remaining category of posts be finalised 
and put in place within a definite time -frame for the benefit of the 
aggrieved employees. 
16. The Committee note that the process for constitution of the Prasar 
Bharati Recruitment and Services Board (PBRSB) was mooted  in July, 
2014.  They further note that  pursuant to the comments received from 
the PMO and the M/o Finance , the Prasar Bharati had revised the draft 
Cabinet Note and the Rules for the setting up of PBRB on 19.03.2015 .  
According to the Ministry, the revis ed proposal of  the Prasar Bharati 
carries substantial modifications in the draft Rules for PBR SB, prepared 
by the Ministry on the basis of the approved proposal of the Prasar 
Bharati Board.  The Ministry have further submitted that since the new 
modifications suggested by the Prasar Bharati require fresh approvals 

15 
 
from the PMO, DoE and DoPT, the Prasar Bharati has been requested to 
submit a concrete and definite proposal.  The Committee are anguished to 
observe the state of affairs prevailing in the Ministry and Prasar Bharati in 
the matter of delaying the constitution of PBRSB.  The Committee are of 
the considered opinion that it should not be at all an issue with  the 
Ministry to seek fresh approvals from the PMO, DoE and DoPT on the 
revised proposal of the Prasar Bharati Board-who on their part should also 
expedite submitting the fresh proposal in the interest of the Organisation.  
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry and the Prasar Bharati to 
work in unison so that the PBRSB is constituted at an early date to enable 
the Prasar Bharati to frame their own recruitment rules and service 
conditions and the dependence on UPSC & SSC for recruitment in the 
Prasar Bharati is finally eliminated.    
 
 
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No.1) 
 The Committee's examination of the subject has revealed some 
disquieting aspects pertaining to the state of affairs in Radio Kashmir, CBS 
Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar which inter -alia include 
opaque procedure and gross mal practices in the appointment of casual 
assignees, lack of uniform policies in regularization of the casual 
announcers/artists/workers, exploitation of the casual workers; disparities in 
the payment of wages/emoluments  to the casual assignees performing similar 
nature of jobs, payment of wages to these casual assignees for 06 days only 
though they work for entire month, non -coverage of the casual workers under 
any social security schemes viz. ESI and EPF, etc.  Based on  the clarifications 
of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting/Prasar Bharati/DOPT and 
inputs gathered during the field visit to Srinagar, the Committee  have given 
their considered recommendation and observations in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
Reply of the Government 
 In this paragraph, the Committee has given brief of the 
observations/recommendations contained in the subsequent paragraphs. The 
complete report of the Committee was forwarded to Prasar Bharati for their 
comments. Action Taken Replies of the Ministry on subsequent Paras No. 2 to 
14 has been given against specific observation/recommendation of the 
Committee based on inputs received from Prasar Bharati. As intimated in reply 
to Para -4 of the report, Prasar Bharati has constituted a Fact Find ing 
Committee to verify the data of casual artists engaged at Radio Kashmir 
Srinagar, CBS Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra Srinagar. Prasar 
Bharati has intimated that the report is yet to be finalized. 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 's F.No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.5) 
 The Committee are constrained to note that there were glaring anomalies 
in the payment of wages to the casual assignees performing same/similar 

17 
 
nature of jobs. Surprisingly, the Ministry /Prasar Bharati have stated in their 
written submission that "there is no difference in wages of casual workers 
performing similar nature of jobs" though the detailed list of wages paid to the 
casual workers, as furnished by Prasar Bharati, speaks to the c ontrary.  For 
example, in the coordination section, some casuals are getting Rs.3000/ - p.m. 
whereas some are getting Rs.4000/ - p.m.  Similarly in the Transport Section 
some are getting Rs.4000/ - p.m, some Rs.6000/ -p.m and some other 
Rs.8000/-p.m.  Similar discrepancies have been observed in Scenic Section, 
Camera Section, Graphic Section, Editing Section etc.  The Committee 
deprecate the misleading statement given by the Ministry/Prasar Bharati and 
would like to caution them to exercise utmost care in futur e while deposing 
before the Committee.  The Committee also emphasize that the Ministry/Prasar 
Bharati should take immediate measures to find out cases of disproportionate 
wages being paid to the casuals and ensure that uniform and equal 
wages/emoluments are paid to the casual assignees performing same/similar 
kind of jobs. 
Reply of the Government 
Prasar Bharati has informed thatAll India Radio (AIR) have reported that 
there is no instances of disparity in wages in respect of casuals performing the 
same duties. The difference in wages earned by different casuals is on account 
of number of bookings in a month that a particular casual may get. The fee 
being paid to different types of casuals is in accordance with the Rate Card 
(which is different for differ ent categories of casuals) approved by Prasar 
Bharati Board from time to time. 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 's F.No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.6) 
 The Committee note with serious concern the low wages being paid to the 
casual assignees and non revision of their wages periodically.  However, they 
draw some satisfaction from the orders issued by the Ministry/Prasar Bharati 
to enhance, by at least 65 per cent the fee being paid to the causal assignees in 
AIR and Doordarshan.  The Committee would like to be assured that there is 
no aberration in the effective implementation of the said order by any Regional 
Kendra/Station.  The Committee would also like the Ministry/Prasar Bharati to 
ensure that periodical revi sion of wages being paid to the casual assignees is 
carried out earnestly and the Committee be apprised.  
  

18 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Prasar Bharati has informed thatthere is no aberration in the effective 
implementation of the order relating to enhancement  of wages of the casual 
artists. Periodic review of the wages would be carried out.  
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 's F.No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.7) 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the casual workers 
(programme staff) were booked and paid wages only for six days but made to 
work for 30/31 days in a month.  The Committee are not satisfied with the 
contention of the Ministry/Prasar Bharat i that casual announcers are booked 
for six days in a month so that their total booking for a year does not exceed 72 
days as per the existing policy.  Equally unconvincing is the assurance that "in 
case any casual announcer is booked for more than six day s in a month, he 
shall be paid accordingly", as many instances of irregularities on this count 
have been brought to the notice of the Committee.  Therefore, instead of 
disregarding the gravity of the issue, the Ministry/Prasar Bharati should 
seriously look  into the matter and ensure payment of actual wages to the 
casual assignees proportionate with the number of days they are made to work 
so as not only to honour the Labour Laws of the land but also to give fillip to 
the enabling Principles of State policy contained in our Constitution.   
Reply of the Government 
Prasar Bharati has informed thatstrict instructions have been issued to 
pay the casual artists including Announcers for the actual number of days 
booked. Any instance brought to the notice of the Management violating these 
instructions would be viewed seriously and strict action would be taken against 
the concerned person responsible for any violation.   
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 's F. No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.8) 
 The Committee find that pursuant to a circular issued by the DOPT for 
regularization of contract/casual workers, some casual assignees were 
regularized, some of them were converted to Temporary Status Worker (TSW) 

19 
 
and the rest were  left out.  It is thus apparent that no transparent procedure 
was adopted to honour the DOPT circular in regularising the contract/casual 
workers.  The Committee are of the firm view that performing similar nature of 
job for the same duration with equal pr oficiency should be the only criteria for 
regularization/conferment of TSW  status upon the casual/contract assignees 
and there should  absolutely be no pick and chose policy or other extraneous 
consideration for the purpose.  The Committee, therefore, exh ort the Ministry/ 
Prasar Bharati to take urgent requisite measures to rectify the aberrations and 
put in place a transparent system so that justice is done to all the affected 
casual assignees. 
Reply of the Government 
Prasar Bharati has informed thatregularization of casual artists/casual 
workers have been done under two separate schemes in Doordarshan strictly 
as per provisions of the schemes. The details are as follows: 
(i) Scheme for regularization of casual artists in Doordarshan under 
Doordarshan Scheme of 1992-94 
 Casual artists eligible for regularization under this scheme which was 
prepared under Court directions and was approved by the Hon’ ble CAT 
had been done earlier. A thorough check of all the pending cases has been 
undertaken. Based on this scrutiny by two different Committees and with 
the approval of Prasar Bharati Board, orders for regularization of 233 
casual artists who are found eligible for regularization under the scheme 
have since been issued. 
(ii) DoPT scheme for regularizati on of labourer[grant of Temporary Status 
Workers (TSW) and regularization scheme 1993] 
 202 TSWs have been regularized based on the approval accorded by 
Prasar Bharati Board. Case of 19 TSWs is sub -judice. No further TSW is 
remaining for regularization.  
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 's F.No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.9) 
 The Committee were informed that the Ministry/Prasar Bharati sought 
approval of DOPT for relaxing the provisions of DOPT scheme for regularization 
of Temporary Status Workers, which is still awaited.  The Committee desire 
that the matter be seriously pursued with the DOPT, if required, by preparing a 

20 
 
fresh proposal highlighting inter -alia the special circumstances in which these 
casual assignees were engaged, the number of years of service rendered by 
them despite severe adverse circumstances etc. so that t he TSWs are 
regularized at an early date and the requisite financial benefits are extended to 
them in due course. 
Reply of the Government 
 Prasar Bharati has informed that the matter of regularization of 
Temporary Status Workers (TSWs)under DOP&T scheme of  1993 was approved 
by Prasar Bharati Board subject to legal opinion.  Based on the legal opinion, 
orders for regularization of 202 TSWs, eligible for regularization under DOP&T 
Scheme of 1993, have been issued by Prasar Bharati. 
(Ministry of Information an d Broadcasting's F. No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.10) 
 The Committee note that as per the comprehensive policy for contractual 
engagements formulated and implemented in September, 2012, all the casual 
assignees were allowed to appear for examination by relaxing the age, for the 
post for which they were engaged . But, the proposed examination could not be 
conducted as the Recruitment Rules of Parasar Bharati could not be 
formulated/finalised. The Committee find that the said comprehensive policy 
was finalised as late as in 2012 and even then the examination to en able the 
casual and contractual assignees to become regular workers could not be held 
which does not speak well about the seriousness of the Ministry towards these 
hapless assigness.  Needless to mention, had the comprehensive policy been 
finalised earlier, the contractual/casual assignees would have got the benefit of 
age on their side.  After serving the sensitive Kendras at J&K for decades, most 
of the contractual/casual assignees must be in their late forties, to say the 
least.  In the considered view o f the Committee it would be unfair to expect 
such older people to compete with the freshers in the examination for 
appointment as regular workers.  On the other hand, by virtue of the years of 
service rendered and experience gathered, the contractual/casua l assignees 
can commendably accomplish the job assigned vis -a-vis as regular workers 
who may take time to gain the requisite experience.  Hence, taking into 
consideration the vast experience and dedicated service rendered by them in 
hostile conditions, the  Committee urge that they may be considered for 
regularization for the rest of their service period and such relaxation, may be 
made as a onetime appreciable gesture so that they get all the financial 

21 
 
benefits available to  regular employees and are able t o lead a peaceful retired 
life. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 For regularization of casual artists working in Radio Kashmir, CBS Radio 
Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra Srinagar, a proposal has been received in 
the Ministry fromPrasar Bharati vide their D.O. let ter dated 11.2.2015,for 
approval as a special case by de -linking it from regularization of casuals in 
other parts of the country.On examination, the said proposal of Prasar Bharati 
was found sketchy and without the basic details, including those related to  the 
casuals proposed to be regularized, e.g. their names, period of engagement, 
remunerations drawn, mode of recruitment, duties assigned, etc., posts to 
which these casuals are proposed to be regularized, financial implications 
involved and the mode by w hich these casuals can be regularized. Accordingly, 
Prasar Bharati was requested on 16.3.2015 to furnish the above details for 
further processing of the proposal. Reply of Prasar Bharati is still awaited. 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting's F. No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.12) 
 The Committee are anguished to note that the staff strength of Prasar 
Bharati has been reduced by 15/16 thousand due to retirement of employees 
and non -filling up of the vacant posts wh ereas the number of Stations have 
doubled over the years.  Worse, hundreds of posts have lapsed causing 
immense difficulties in the smooth running of the Stations.  The Committee are 
given to understand that though Prasar Bharati is perceived to be an 
autonomous organization,  due autonomy has not been accorded to the State 
Broadcasting Corporation.  In view of the yeomen services rendered by the 
Doordarshan Kendras and All India Radio Stations to the nation over many 
years, it is high time the Government s hould recognize their contribution, 
identify the grey areas that impede their functioning and take effective 
measures including creation of adequate posts and according due autonomy to 
Prasar Bharati, with necessary safeguards, so that they function seamle ssly 
and compete with the private channels effectively. 
 

22 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Group of Ministers (GOM) on Prasar Bharati had undertaken a 
comprehensive review of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 and recommended 
certain amendments to the Act.Based on the recommendations of GOM, the 
Ministry had circulated a draft Cabinet note for inter -Ministerial consultation 
for implementation of some of these recommendations of the Group of 
Ministers for amendment of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990.  As it was felt 
necessary to further assess and analyse the issues in the draft Cabinet Note, 
the Ministry has withdrawn the said draft Cabinet Note. 
 The Ministry is re -assessing and analyzing the proposals made in the 
earlier draft Bill towards making amendments to certain  clauses of the Prasar 
Bharati Act, 1990 and shall formulate a view on fresh draft Cabinet Note for 
inter-Ministerial consultation.  The recommendations made by the Committee 
have been noted for consideration. 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting's F. No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.13) 
 The Committee find that during the transitional years, Prasar Bharati 
engaged retired personnel as a stop gap arrangement to run Prasar Bharati, 
they being experienced and proficient.  The practice is still going on and in 
Srinagar Station 29-30 days booking are given  to the retired employees.  This 
has reportedly created a resentment amongst the casual/contractual assignees 
that they are being ignored/overlooked despite to iling hard for many years in 
hostile conditions.  While recognizing the unquestionable dedication and 
proficiency of the retired employees, the Committee would like Prasar Bharati 
to appoint them in such a manner that the casual/contractual assignees, 
working for many years, do not feel victimized. 
Reply of the Government 
 Prasar Bharati has stated that it would be ensured that engagement of 
retired Government servants has no adverse effect on the interests of the 
casual/contractual assignees.  
(Ministry of  Information and Broadcasting's F. No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No.2) 
 The Committee note that pursuant to their suggestions subsequent to 
the first -hand knowledge gathered during their study visit to Srinagar, the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati have initiated some specific measures which inter-alia 
include working out a scheme for engaging eligible casual artists on contract 
basis, issue of directions to all the Kendras not to lay off casual workers at 
local level, expediting the formulation of Recruitment Rules for Prasar Bharati, 
sorting out various irregularities pertaining to th e engagement of the casual 
assignees, etc. The Committee however note with concern that almost nothing 
concrete beyond assurances has come up, though the Ministry of Information 
& Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati had assured to engage the casual artists on 
long term contract till they attain the age of superannuation. The Committee, 
therefore reiterate that the measures initiated be implemented with full fidelity 
and expeditiously considering the protracted plight of these  aggrieved casual 
assignees. 
Reply of the Government 
 Prasar Bharati has informed that instructions have already been issued 
that no casual worker be laid off at the local level and proposals, if any for 
laying off the casual workers invariably be sent to Prasar Bharati for 
appropriate action. (Copy of order dated 21.3.2012 issued by DG Doordarshan 
is at Annexure -I). Further, Prasar Bharati, following approval of the 
Government, has notified Recruitment Regulations (RRs) for 11 categories of 
posts and remaining RRs are under inter -Ministerial consultations between 
this Ministry and the Department of Expenditure, Department of Personnel & 
Training and Prasar Bharati. In the RRs so far notified, a provision has been 
made for giving age relaxation to the casual artists in direct recruitment to t he 
posts for which they are being booked, subject to fulfilling the educational and 
other qualifications of the relevant regulation. 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting's F. No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.11) 
 The Prasar Bharati came into existence in the year 1997.  At the time of 
formation of Prasar Bharati, there were 198 categories of posts for which the 
Recruitment Rules (RRs) were to be formulated and got to be approved by the 

25 
 
Ministry of I&B/DOPT.  Subseq uently, following consultations with DOPT and 
the Department of Expenditure (DOE), the Prasar Bharati decided to reduce the 
number of cadres to 125.  The regulations were to be scrutinized and notified 
in batches. The Committee note with profound concern t hat even after lapse of 
18 years, the Prasar Bharati have been able to formulate and notify only 09 
RRs.  Consequently, the Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board, whose constitution 
depends on the finalization of all the Recruitment Rules, has not seen the ligh t 
of the day even after 18 years of the formation of the Broadcasting Corporation. 
The matter has been inordinately  delayed to say the least.  Cautioning the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati against the such unacceptable callousness, whatever 
reasons notwithstanding, the Committee exhort that, instead of leaving things 
to take their own course, the Ministry/Prasar Bharati should initiate and 
expedite urgent and effective measures to finalize all the remaining RRs at the 
earliest so that the Recruitment Board is con stituted and over dependence on 
SSC/UPSC for recruitment in Prasar Bharati is minimized significantly. The 
Committee are hopeful that such finalization of the RRs and consequential 
formation of the Recruitment Board would take due care and protect the 
interest of casual, contractual and regular employees. 
Reply of the Government 
 (A)  Regarding Recruitment Regulations (RRs) for Prasar Bharati 
employees: 
iv. The Recruitment Regulations (RRs) for 122 categories of employees 
were notiﬁed in 2001 -2002. These RRs were kept in abeyance because 
of dissatisfaction of the employees concerned. The Group of Ministers 
on Prasar Bharati (GOM) in their meeting held on 16.04.2010, directed 
to take immediate steps to frame and notify new RRs and service 
conditions for its emp loyees. It was decided that the employees who 
were recruited till 05.10.2007. i.e. the employees who are on deemed 
deputation to the Prasar Bharati, shall continue to be governed by the 
existing RRs, framed under Article 309 of the Constitution and new 
RRs will be framed for the employees of the Prasar Bharati Corporation. 
v. The Prasar Bharati Board had approved draft RRs in respect of 195 
categories of employees of the Prasar Bharati recruited after 5.10.2007, 
in April, 2010 which were subsequently referred to the Ministry. 
Following examination of the proposal in the Ministry, the draft RRs 
were referred to the Department of Personnel & Training (DOP&T). 
Several stages of consultations were held between the Ministry and the 
DOP&T.  Based on the comments date d 26.3.2012 of the DOP&T and 
first stage comments of the Department of Expenditure (DOE) dated 

26 
 
27.6.2012, Prasar Bharati was requested to modify the draft RRs.  In 
the meanwhile Prasar Bharati vide their letter dated: 05.06.2012 
conveyed their decision to reduce the number of posts for which new 
Recruitment Regulations are to be framed to 125 categories of posts on 
account of merger of posts and dropping some cadres which were 
considered obsolete in view of technology change, administrative 
reasons, DOP&T i nstructions and functional requirement of Prasar 
Bharati. 
vi. As on 01.7.2015, new RRs in respect of 11 categories of posts covering 
12,502 posts viz. Programme Executive, Transmission Executive, 
Engineering Assistant, Head Clerk, Technician, Cameraman Grade -II, 
News Reader –cum-Translator (NRT) cadres (viz. NRT Grade -I, NRT 
Grade-II and NRT Grade -III), Senior Financial Officer and Financial 
Officer to Chief Engineer (Civil), have been notified by Prasar Bharati 
with the approval of the Government. RRs pertainin g to the remaining 
categories of posts are at various stages, including RRs in respect of 15 
categories of posts are under inter -Ministerial consultation with the 
Department of Expenditure (DOE) and DOP&T, RRs in respect of 19 
categories are under examination in the Ministry, Prasar Bharati has to 
furnish clarifications in respect of 43 categories of posts and RRs in 
respect of 37 categories of posts are yet to be originated from Prasar 
Bharati.   
 
(B)  Regarding Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board : 
v. As per se ction 10 of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990, Prasar Bharati 
Recruitment Board (PBRB) is to be constituted.  A draft Cabinet Note for 
creation of posts of Chairperson and Members of PBRB, at the level of 
Additional Secretary and Joint Secretary respectively, w as circulated on 
16.7.2014 for inter -ministerial consultation. The proposal was re -
examined in the light of the comments received from PMO and Ministry 
of Finance. 
vi. In a meeting between Secretary (I&B) and CEO, Prasar Bharati (PB) held 
on 01.12.2014, the Mi nistry had shared comments of other Ministries/ 
Departments received against the draft Cabinet Note with PB. Further, it 
was decided that Prasar Bharati would forward a proposal for revising 
the Cabinet Note, in the light of comments received.   
vii. Prasar Bharati forwarded the revised draft Cabinet Note and the Rules 
for setting up of Prasar Bharati Recruitment and Services Board (PBRSB) 

27 
 
on 19.3.2015.The proposal has been examined in the Ministry. It has 
been observed that the proposal envisages substantial mo dification in 
the draft Rules for PBRB, prepared by the Ministry on the basis of 
approved proposal of Prasar Bharati Board (in the meeting dated 
16.05.2012) and following inter -Ministerial consultations with DOP&T, 
Department of Expenditure (DOE) and Ministry of Law. 
viii. Since the new modifications suggested by Prasar Bharati at this stage, 
require fresh approvals of PMO, DOE and DOP&T, Prasar Bharati has 
been requested on 29.4.2015 to forward firmed up proposal with the 
approval of the Prasar Bharati Board. 
ix. In the matter, a meeting was also held with Member (Personnel), Prasar 
Bharati on 12.5.2015 wherein this issue of PBRB was discussed at 
length.  In the meeting, Member (Personnel) mentioned that he would 
discuss the matter with Chief Executive Officer and Ch airperson, Prasar 
Bharati for a final decision.  Reply of PB is still awaited. 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting's F. No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation No.3) 
 
 The Committee note that the casual workers/artists of Radio Kashmir, 
CBS Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra Srinagar worked in extreme 
conditions at the time of insurgency (1990 onwards) for diffe rent assignments 
like announcers, drivers, cooks, helpers, typists, programme staff, newsreaders 
etc. as regulars workers either left the State or stayed away from work due to 
insurgency. These casual workers contributed immensely towards running 
successfully the public broadcasting/telecasting services in the insurgency 
prone State, even risking their lives. One such casual worker reportedly lost his 
life when the DDK, Srinagar was attacked by the terrorists. The Committee 
note with profound concern that e ven after more than 20 years of continuous, 
dedicated and commendable services, these casual assignees have not been 
regularized though they were repeatedly assured at the time of their 
engagement that they would be absorbed in regular services in due cour se.  
These casual assignees have already given the prime period of their lives to 
these organizations without taking up any other assignment and in the hope 
that one day they would be regularized.  Considering  length of their service, 
age, proficiency in their respective fields, dedication and devotion to duty in 
severely hostile and adverse  conditions all these years, the Committee are of 
the considered view that these assignees deserve special, sympathetic and 
favourable consideration.  The Committee, t herefore, urge that those casual 
assignees who have rendered decades of service should either be adjusted 
against the existing vacancies or some posts be created for them, as an 
exception and on special consideration, so that all of them are regularized 
before attaining the age of superannuation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Prasar Bharati has informed that a Committee has been constituted to 
visit Srinagar and verify the data of casual artists engaged at Radio Kashmir 
Srinagar, CBS Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra Srinagar. In the 
Recruitment Regulations formulated/to be formulated in respect of various 
posts, a provision has been/ is being incorporated for providing age relaxation 
to casuals in direct recruitment. This relaxation is to the extent of service 
rendered by them as casual artist. Working for minimum 120 days i n a year 

29 
 
makes them eligible for age relaxation of one year. This provision has already 
been implemented in the recent recruitment made through Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC) for the posts of Programme Executive, Transmission 
Executive and Production Ass istant. On receipt of the report of the Committee 
which would indicate the actual and genuine number of casuals engaged, a 
view would be taken about the way forward of their regularization as per rules. 
Meanwhile orders for regularization of 233 casual art ists who were eligible for 
regularization under 1992 -94 Doordarshan scheme of regularization, have 
been issued (copy enclosed at Annexure II). In addition, 202 workers with 
temporary status have also been regularized (copy enclosed at Annexure III).  
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting's F. No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.4) 
 
The Committee are perturbed to find the unabated gross malpractices 
committed for years together in the appointment of casual assignees and their 
subsequent exploitation in Radio Kashmir, CBS Radio Kashmir and 
Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar.  It is a matter of serious concern that no 
specific procedure for booking of casuals was ever followed nor any records 
were maintained regarding the selection of such casuals. The Committee take 
serious note of the fact that certain persons were given regular employment, 
out of turn  bypassing the normal recruitment porcess. The then Secretary, 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting candidly admitted that there was no 
transparency in appointing them.  As regards, remedial action taken, the 
Committee are informed that direc tions have been issued to all the Kendras to 
invariably send all the proposals for appointment/laying off the casual workers 
to the Prasar Bharati Corporation.  So far as fixing of responsibilities is 
concerned, the CEO, Prasar Bharati has apprised that on  the plea of 
insurgency in J&K, irregularities were committed by some Station Directors, 
who have since retired and it would be difficult to take action against them.  He 
has, however, assured the Committee that every possible step would be taken 
to improve the situation.  According to the Committee, it appears that earlier 
neither the Ministry nor the Prasar Bharati cared to find out the apparent 
irregularities committed by J&K Kendras.  However, now that assurances have 
been given by both the Ministry and  Prasar Bharati to stem the rot in the 
regional Kendras, the Committee trust that a robust mechanism would be put 
in place and monitoring system strengthened so as to foster transparency and 
stop recurrence of irregularities, as experienced in J&K Kendras.  
 

30 
 
  
 
 Reply of the Government 
As already indicated against para -3, Prasar Bharati has informed that a 
Committee has been constituted to visit Srinagar and verify the data of casual 
artists engaged at Radio Kashmir Srinagar, CBS Radio Kashmir and 
Doordarshan Kendra Srinagar.  On receipt of the report of the Committee, 
necessary steps would be taken to strengthen the system and ensure 
transparency & stop recurrence of irregularities in the empanelment of casual 
artists. In the meantime instructions have been issued to develop a web -based 
software to monitor booking & payment in respect of casuals artists to ensure 
that malpractices are not committed in the matter of their bookings and 
payments. As a matter of precaution, all stations/channels of AIR situated in 
Delhi including the External Services Division do take an undertaking from the 
causal announcers being booked for a particular day that they are not being 
booked by any other AIR station/channel of Delhi on the same day. 
Instructions have been issued to both the Directorates to take strict action 
against persons violating guidelines issued by the respective Directorates on 
this issue.    
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting's F. No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
 
(Recommendation No.14) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that pursuant to the advice of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment to cover the casual 
announcers/artists/workers under ESI and Bonus, the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting has asked Prasar Bharati to take necessary action in the 
matter.  The Committee trust that Prasar Bharati would take urgent action to 
cover all the casual assignees working in various Regional Kendras, especially 
in J&K, under ESI and Bonus schemes.  As regards extending EPF faciliti es to 
the casual assignees, the Committee are informed that the facility extends to 
the whole of India except the State of J&K, as per EPF and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952.  The Committee would, however, like the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcast ing/Prasar Bharati to explore the feasibility of 
extending any other similar or special social security to the casual assignees 
working in the J&K Kendras so that they are benefited appropriately and 
commensurately . 

31 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The matter w ould be examined in consultation with Prasar Bharati 
keeping in view the legal provisions and financial implications. 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting's F. No. 45011/16/2011-
BAP(Vol.III), dated 03/08/2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                  DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
December, 2015                                     CHAIRPERSON 
Pausa,1937 (Saka)      STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

32 
 
                                          APPENDIX-I     Confidential 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 
Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 03 rd December, 2015 from 103 0 hrs. to 1 100 hrs. 
in Room No. `131’ (Chairperson's Chamber),   Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  - Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
     
  1. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  2. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
  3. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  4. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  6. Shri R. Parthipan 
  7. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  8. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
   
   RAJYA SABHA 
  9. Shri P.L. Punia 
  10. Ms. Dola Sen 
  11. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
   
  SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan   - Addl. Secretary 
           2. Shri Shiv Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
  3. Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
  4. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Addl. Director 
  5. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 

33 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee,  convened for consideration and adoption of two Draft Action 
Taken Reports. Giving an overview of the Recommendations made/reiterated in 
both the Draft Action Taken Reports,  the Chairperson requested the Members 
to give their suggestions on them, if any. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the following Draft Action 
Taken Reports and adopted them after some discussions: 
 
(i)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(ii)  Draft Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Regularisation of casual workers/artists of Radio Kashmir, CBS 
Radio Kashmir and Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar'. 
 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Reports to both 
the Houses. 
 
   
The Committee then adjourned. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX  Do not pertain to this report 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations          14  
  
II. Observations/Recommendations which have     09          64.3%   
 been accepted by Government 
 (Recommendation Para. Nos.,1,5,6,7,8,9,10,12,13)  
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the     00                00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s replies-  
     NIL 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
 which Government’s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration –              02       21.4% 
  (Recommendation Para. Nos. 2,11) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of       03      14.3% 
 which replies of Government are of interim  
 in nature   
 (Recommendation Para. Nos.3,4,14)      
                          ----------- 
               100% 
                                      ----------- 
 
 
       