i 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
 (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Twenty-Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Exempted 
Organisations/Trusts/Establishments from EPFO: Performance, 
Issues and Challenges'] 
 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
      
July, 2018/ Shravana, 1940 (Saka)  
 
 
  
37 

ii 
 
 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations of the Committee contained  in their 
Twenty-Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Exempted 
Organisations/Trusts/Establishments from EPFO: Performance, 
Issues and Challenges'] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  24.07.2018 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  24.07.2018 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2018/ Shravana, 1940 (Saka)  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iv) 
INTRODUCTION        (v) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on  4th July, 
2018.    
 
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by  Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
  
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
 DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA - CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
17. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
18. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
19. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
23. Shri N. Gokulkrishnan 
24. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
25. Shri P.L. Punia 
26. Shri Rajaram 
27. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
28. Ms. Dola Sen 
29. Dr. Banda Prakash 
30. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
31. Shri Madanlal Saini 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Ms. Rimjhim Prasad   - Joint Secretary  
 2.    Smt. Anita B. Panda   -  Director 
 3.    Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Additional Director 
 4.    Shri Devudu Babu Badireddi - Executive Assistant 
  

v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2016 -17) 
having been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this 
Thirty-Seventh Report on 'Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations of the Commit tee contained in their 
Twenty-Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Exempted 
Organisations/Trusts/Establishments from EPFO: Performance, Issues 
and Challenges' pertaining to the Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
2. The Twenty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 7th April, 2017. The Ministry of Labour and Employment 
furnished their replies indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Sixth Report on 12th 
February, 2018. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report 
at their sitting held on 4th July, 2018. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at 
Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;               (DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA)  
19th July, 2018                        CHAIRPERSON,  
28th Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
 This Report deals with action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty -
sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "Exempted Organisations/Trusts/ 
Establishments from EPFO: Performance, Issues and Challenges". 
 
2 The Twenty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 7th April, 201 8. It contained 20  Observations/ 
Recommendations. Replies of the Gover nment in respect of all these 
Recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government –                                                                                            
Rec. Para Nos. 2.9, 2.25, 2.26, 2.39, 2.40, 2.41, 
2.43, 2.58, 2.64, 2.69, 2.73 
 
Total:11 
Percentage: 55 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – Nil 
Total:00 
Percentage:00 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Rec. Para No. 2.23 and 2.24 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature- 
Rec. Para No. 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.22, 2.59, 2.60 and 
2.66 
 
Total:02 
Percentage:10 
 
 
 
Total:07 
Percentage:35 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Note s in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final action 
taken reply in respect of the Recommendation contained in Chapter V of 
this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the Government , 
may be furnished to them at the earliest.  

2 
 
I. Amendment in the EPF&MP Act to bring in better Compliance & 
Monitoring 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.6) 
4. In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed as under:  
 "The Committee are of the view that the Exempted Establishment are to be 
monitored by EPFO, for which there is a strong need to review the present system 
of monitoring. The Committee pursued this during their interaction with the 
representatives of the Ministry and EPFO. As a result, significant changes have 
since been initiated as follows: 
(i) development of a new better software through C -DAC for more effective 
monitoring; 
(ii) initiation of compliance audit of Exempted Establishment; 
(iii) In view of non-capturing of data about un -claimed PF amount of members 
with Trusts of PF Exempted Establishment, initiation of formulation of guidelines 
for Trusts to transfer un-claimed amounts of EPFO; 
(v) Framing of new rates of surcharge for levying on account of deviation from 
the prescribed pattern of investment of BoTs of PF Exempted Establishment; and  
(vi) In-principle agreement to frame necessary guidelines/ 
amendments/notification to restrict BoTs of Exempted Establishment from 
investing in the instruments issued by the principal establishments and its sister 
concerns.  
 The Committee further note that after their  deliberations with the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment and EPFO, on 14th December, 2016 and 
18th January, 2017, directions were issued promptly to all the Regional Provident 
Fund Offices for collection of data  and inspections were conducted too. The 
Committee, while taking note of the efforts made by the EPFO,  desire that a 
definite timeline be given to all the Regional Offices for conducting compliance 
audit of the Exempted Establishment. C -DAC, Pune, the com pany developing a 
software to contain data of all exempted returns, should also be asked for 
completing the task which will form the basis to monitor compliance of the 
provisions of the Act. The Committee also impress upon the EPFO to speed up the 
formulation of policy guidelines for grant of exemption based on past 
performance, net worth, collections, contributions, minimum corpus and 
membership which is statedly under submission to the Central Board of Trustees. 
The Committee further recommend that once s uch guidelines are finalised by the 
EPFO, a complete review of all presently Exempted Establishments should be 
undertaken and completed within three months, followed by appropriate decision 
to close defective/unhealthy/deviating exempted PF Trusts and tran sfer the same 
to EPFO." 
 
 

3 
 
5. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:  
 "As per the direction of the Committee, EPFO vide circular No. 
Exem/10(20)/2016/Standing Committee/7963 dated 26.07.2017 (copy enclosed 
as Annexure – ‘A’) had directed all the field offices to ensure Compliance Audit of 
all the exempted establishments before 31.08.2017. The office -wise list of 
exempted establishments, alongwith the details of compliance audi t has been 
annexed as Annexure – ‘B’. 
 The requisite software regarding submission of online returns has already 
been delivered by C-DAC and is operational from 27.05.2017.  
 In compliance to the direction of the Committee the formulation of policy 
guidelines for grant of exemption based on past performance, net worth, 
collections, contributions, minimum corpus and membership was expeditiously 
completed by EPFO. The guidelines in nutshell   framed in this regard are as 
follows –  
 The establishment should c omply as an un -exempted establishment for a 
minimum period of five years.  
 The employment strength for such establishment should be more than five 
hundred.  
 The corpus size should be more than one hundred crores of Rupees at the 
time the establishment is seeking grant of exemption.  
 For laying down of the above guidelines, a amendment in the EPF Scheme, 
1952 is under consideration. 
 However, the proposal was returned by Legislative Department, Ministry of 
Law and Justice. Ministry of Law and Justice has proposed that if the said 
guidelines are to be framed, then they should be incorporated in the EPF & MP 
Act, 1952 itself and not in the EPF Scheme, 1952. Amendment to the Scheme can 
be done through notification by the Government of India. However, amendmen t to 
the Act can only be carried out by the Parliament. Necessary amendments in 
various sections under EPF & MP Act, 1952 are under consideration." 
6. The Committee appreciate the fact that the Ministry are in 
agreement with their recommendations for formulation of policy guidelines 
for grant of exemption based on past performance, net worth, collections, 
contributions, minimum corpus and membership and have initiated action 
for amending the guideline for the grant of exemption to Organisations/ 
Establishments. However, the proposal was return by the Ministry of Law 
and Justice, with the rider that if the guidelines have to be framed, they 

4 
 
should be incorporated in the Act itself by not in the scheme. However, the 
Committee are concern to note that the Minis try has not initiated any 
action on the recommendations of the Ministry of Law and Justice till 
date. The Committee, being of the considered opinion that the present 
lacunae in the EPF Act can only be overcome by amending the Act or rules 
by the Parliament, exhort upon the Ministry to initiate ground work for the 
same immediately so that the necessary amendments in the EPF Act/ 
Rules can be placed before the Parliament in the ensuing Monsoon Session, 
2018. They would also like to be apprised of the progress achieved herein.  
 In a nutshell, the Committee observe that due to lack of guidelines or 
any provisions in the Act, the procedure to grant exemption resulted into 
non-transparent exemptions. The guidelines and basic terms and 
conditions to exempt the Provident Fund could be accommodated provided 
in the rules and regulations. The Committee hence reiterate the need for 
specific guidelines and opine that it is for the Government to decide as to 
whether it should be provided in the Rules or Act.   
II. Unclaimed Amount 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.23) 
7. In their  next original recommendation, the Committee had observed as 
under: 
 "The Committee opine that the huge amount of ₹5475 crore lying un -
claimed with the Exempted Establishment particularly in two zones i.e. Haryana 
& Rajasthan and Maharashtra & Chhattisgarh, is a matter of concern. As of now 
there is no provision in the Act and Scheme which can restrict a PF Trust to ho ld 
unclaimed deposit with them. The Committee feel that transparency is required in 
the matter. After their intervention, a proposal is stated to be under process for 
amendment in the Scheme in order to enable EPFO to receive the unclaimed 
deposits lying w ith the PF Trusts. The Committee desire that without losing 

5 
 
further time, suitable amendment in the Scheme must be carried out so that in 
the Annual Account Statement of the PF Fund, name of workers, for whom 
unclaimed amount is available, not only gets re flected, but after specified period, 
gets transferred to EPFO.  They also desire that possibilities of depositing the 
unclaimed amount so received in the Special Reserve Fund (SRF) may also be 
explored." 
8. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Commi ttee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows: 
 "Finance Act, 2015 (No. 20 of 2015) dated 14.05.2015 and Senior Citizens’ 
Welfare Fund Rules 2016, Section 122(2) of the Finance Act, 2015 (No. 20 of 
2015) read with Finance Act, 2016 (No. 28 of 2016) stipulate that notwithstanding 
anything contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, any 
credit balance in any of the accounts under EPF & MP Act, 1952 remaining 
unclaimed for a period of seven years from the date of its d eclaration as an 
inoperative account shall be transferred by the respective institution holding them 
to the fund.      
 In view of the above, it has become the statutory responsibility of various 
institutions defined in the rules to transfer the unclaimed amount which remains 
inoperative for 7 years, to the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund. Rule No 3(c) of the 
Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund Rules 2016 clearly lays transfer of unclaimed 
amounts from the accounts of Employees’ Provident Fund. Hence, Trusts of 
establishments exempted under Section 17 of the EPF & MP Act, 1952 also comes 
under the ambit of the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund Rules 2016 and are required 
to transfer the requisite amount as required by the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund 
Rules 2016 to the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund. In compliance to the provisions 
of Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund Rules, PF Trust of exempted establishments vide 
EPFO, Head Office circular No. Exem/32(18)/2016/Exemption/14780 dated 
13.10.2017 (copy enclosed as Annexure – ‘D’) have been directed to comply with 
provisions of the said rules." 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.24) 
9.  In their  next original recommendation, the Committee had observed as 
under: 
 "Till the subject was taken up for examination by the Committee, the 
EPFO did not have any details of unclaimed amount lying with the Exempted 
Establishment. The Committee appreciate that, based on their suggestion, the 
EPFO has now started developing a mechanism for capturing the data related to 
unclaimed deposits lying with th e exempted establishment. They, therefore, 
recommend that the mechanism must be put in place at the earliest.  They also 
desire that a time period should also be specified for keeping the unclaimed 
amount with the respective establishment, after which the amount be deposited 
with the EPFO." 

6 
 
10. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows: 
 "As stated in reply to para No. 2.23, Trusts of exempted establishments 
are required to transfer the unclaimed P.F. amounts of the members to the Senior 
Citizens’ Welfare Fund. Vide EPFO, Head Office letter No. Exem/32(18)/2016/  
Exemption/14780 dated 13.10.2017 (copy enclosed as Annexure – ‘D’) all the 
exempted establishments have been directed to keep  accounts and full employee 
wise details of each member whose amount is transferred to Senior Citizens’ 
Welfare Fund including P.F. Account No., Pension Account Number, name and 
father’s/spouse’s- name of the employee, amount transferred, date of birth, da te 
of joining, last known address of employee along with Bank Account Number, 
Aadhar Card Number, Nominee details, list of family members etc. (wherever 
available). It has been further directed that the audited balance sheet of Trust 
should also reflect th e total year wise amount transferred to Senior Citizens’ 
Welfare Fund and Fund lying unclaimed with Government for less than 25 years 
in Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund as contra entry in assets and liabilities both. 
 Where no request or claim as specified i n section 124 of Finance Act 2015 
is made within a period of 25 years from the date of credit of the unclaimed 
amount to the Fund, it shall escheat to the Central Government unless a court 
otherwise orders. In such an eventuality aforesaid contra entry in assets and 
liability side of Balance Sheet will get reduced to the extent of amount escheated 
the Central Government.  
 Similarly, in case of settlement of unclaimed amount already transferred 
to Senior Citizen Welfare Fund, aforesaid contra entry equivale nt to the principal 
amount transferred for such member will get reversed.  
 As per the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund Rules 2016, the Trusts of 
exempted establishments can keep the P.F. accumulations lying in an account, 
which has become inoperative, for se ven years and after that the amount shall be 
required to be transferred to the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund." 
 
11. The Committee appreciate that the Government has taken note of 
the observations made by them in their original report on the subject 
about t he unclaimed/non -operative balance/accounts. As per their reply 
the Government has informed the committee that new provisions have 
been made to transfer such amount to Senior Citizen Welfare Fund. The 
Committee would like to reiterate that details/calculat ion/the system of 
treating and accounting of unclaimed/non -operative accounts may also be 

7 
 
explained in detail by the Ministry in their Action Taken Statement. The 
Committee would also like to know how and when such amount will be 
transferred to Senior Citi zen Welfare Fund and how it will be utilized. The 
Committee feel that more clarity is needed in the whole procedure. 
 
III. Illegal Utilisation of Unclaimed Amount 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.25) 
12.  In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed as under: 
 "The Committee note that, as of now, there are no clear cut guidelines for 
Exempted Establishment to keep the unclaimed deposits hence during 
compliance audit, the PF Inspectors rely on the audited balance sheets of the 
Exempted Establishment and their Trusts to see that no such amount is utilized 
in their working capital. The Committee find from the documents furnished by the 
EPFO that in the past, there were hardly any compliance audits conducted by the 
EPFO. In fact the audit m echanism gained momentum after intervention of the 
Committee.  Hence the Committee feel that some of the Exempted Establishment 
could be using the unclaimed deposits as their working capital.   They therefore, 
desire that such possibilities should be consi dered while framing the guidelines 
and stringent penalty may be prescribed in order to deter the Exempted 
Establishment from carrying out such illegal activities." 
13. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows: 
 "Strict legal provisions are already present in the Act and Scheme, which 
act as deterrence for the establishments not to utilize the unclaimed amounts of 
the members as the working capital and no such incident has been report ed from 
field offices. Some of the provisions are mentioned as under :- 
 Condition No. 6 of Appendix – ‘A’ to Para 27AA of the EPF Scheme, 1952 -  
The employer shall bear all the expenses of the administration of the Provident 
Fund and also make good any o ther loss that may be caused to the Provident 
Fund due to theft, burglary, defalcation, misappropriation or any other reason.  
 Condition No. 28 of Appendix – ‘A’ to Para 27AA of the EPF Scheme, 1952 -   
In the event of any loss to the trust as a result of  any fraud, defalcation, wrong 
investment decisions etc. the employer shall be liable to make good the loss.  
 The above two conditions make the employer liable to recoup the losses 
occurred in the Trust Fund. 

8 
 
 Further, if the employer refuses to make good  the losses occurred in the 
Trust Fund, then determination of money dues from the employer can be done by 
conducting a quasi-judicial inquiry under Section 7A of EPF & MP Act, 1952. The 
amount assessed thereby includes the amount due from the employer, pen al 
damages under Section 14B of EPF & MP Act, 1952 and interest under Section 
7Q of EPF & MP Act, 1952.  
 Further a criminal case can also be filed against the employer under IPC 
405 / 409 for Criminal Breach of Trust.    
 The provision for Criminal Breach  of Trust is mentioned in Chapter XVII 
under section 405 of Indian Penal Code. Section 405, of Indian Penal Code states, 
‘Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over 
property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to h is own use that property, or 
dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law 
prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal 
contract , express or implied, which he has made touching the disc harge of such 
trust, or willfully suffers any other person so to do, co mmits criminal breach of 
Trust." 
14. The Committee note that inspite of the provisions to penalise any act 
of criminal breach of trust in the EPF&MP Act, there was no monitoring of 
those exempted establishments which may be using the funds dishonestly 
as despite the Committee being convinced of such cases, the Ministry has 
claimed that no such cases have been reported. The Committee are of the 
apprehension that even till date, the Ministry of Labour & Employment and 
EPFO are not in possession of any data of such establishments as their PF 
inspectors fall back upon  the exempted establishment's audited balance 
sheet only. The Committee, therefore, desire that taking cue from the 
extant provisions of the Act, the Ministry  must put in place a deterrent 
mechanism well in  time to keep ta b on such errant establishments along 
with appropriate use of the  provision for  imposing stringent penalty on 
them, which would act as a deterrent fo r the future. The Committee would 
also like to be apprised of the progress achieved herein. 
IV. Software for on-line return filing 

9 
 
Recommendation (Para 2.73) 
15. In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed as under: 
 ''The Committee note that presently the PF Trusts of Exempted 
Establishment manage Trust funds in accordance with the laid down provisions 
by maintaining individual ledger Accounts. The Committee further note that in 
line with the e -governance policy of the Government, Electro nic-Challan-cum-
Return (ECR) has been introduced by EPFO for filing of returns by employer of 
Exempted Establishment and Trusts. A Dashboard for monitoring of filing of 
online returns by Exempted Establishment and their trust has also been 
developed for benefit of field offices. In view of the rampant violations of the Act, 
the Committee opine that mere filing of returns has not proved to be enough to 
protect the workers of the Exempted Establishment hence there still remains 
scope for improvement in the ch ecking of the returns filed by Exempted 
Establishment. They therefore recommend that the returns filed by the 
Exempted Establishment be checked randomly to detect misuse of the facility 
and appropriate action be taken against the defaulting establishments.   
Meanwhile, the Committee desire to be apprised of the status of the new 
software being developed for EPFO by C -DAC, Pune, and the improvements 
brought therein to detect short comings in returns and other violations more 
effectively.'' 
16. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows: 
 ''Basic software for filing of online returns was delivered by C -DAC on 
27.05.2017. During the compliance audit of the exempted establishm ents, 
cross verification of the online returns is done as a standard practice. In case 
any discrepancy is noticed between the returns filed by the establishment and 
records produced by the establishment at the time of inspection, then the 
inspecting squad mentions the same in the compliance audit report and 
recommends for appropriate legal action against the establishment as per the 
EPF & MP Act, 1952.'' 
17. The Committee note that  based on their recommendation, Ministry 
of Labour & Employment  has got a basic software for filing of online 
returns developed by C-DAC on 27.05.2017. The Committee would like to 
know about the features of the software and its impact on detecting 
shortcomings in returns and other violations more effectively.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress achieved herein. 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER-II  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No. 2.9) 
The Committee further find that there are 118 Exempted Establishment having 
their total corpus of less than one crore. The last return filed by these 
establishments dated back to the years 2014 and 2015. Hence, the Committee 
feel that these establishments may not have taken any steps to benefit their PF 
subscribers.  The Committee, note  that the Ministry have now initiated 
identification of small/very small PF trusts  and framing of policy guidelines for 
imposing restrictions of minimum corpus and membership. They reiterate that 
strong guidelines for grant of exemption may be made which make it 
mandatory to take into account past performance, net worth, group 
performance as well as minimum strength of workers, collections, 
contributions and corpus of the company/establishment. 
Reply of the Government 
For dealing with the exempted establis hments of small size, guidelines have 
already been framed taking into account the past performance, corpus size of 
the Trust and minimum strength of workers. Necessary amendments in various 
sections under EPF & MP Act, 1952 are under consideration. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
(Recommendation No. 2.25) 
 The Committee note that, as of now, there are no clear cut guidelines for 
Exempted Establishment to keep the unclaimed deposits hence during 
compliance audit, the PF Inspectors rely on the audited balance sheets of the 
Exempted Establishment and their Trusts to see that no such amount is 
utilized in their working capital. The Committee find from the documents 
furnished by the EPFO that in the past, there were hardly any compliance 
audits conducted by the EPFO. In fact the audit mechanism gained momentum 
after intervention of the Committee.  Hence the Committee feel that some of the 
Exempted Establishment could be using the unclaimed deposits as their 
working capital.   They therefore, desire that such possibilities should be 
considered while framing the guidelines and stringent penalty may be 
prescribed in order to deter the Exempted Establishment from carrying out 
such illegal activities. 

11 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Strict legal provisions are already present in the Act and Scheme, which 
act as deterrence for the establishments not to utilize the unclaimed amounts 
of the members as the working capital and no such incident has been reported 
from field offices. Some of the provisions are mentioned as under :- 
Condition No. 6 of Appendix – ‘A’ to Para 27AA of the EPF Scheme, 1952 -  The 
employer shall bear all the expenses of the administration of the Provident 
Fund and also make good any other loss that may be ca used to the Provident 
Fund due to theft, burglary, defalcation, misappropriation or any other reason.  
Condition No. 28 of Appendix – ‘A’ to Para 27AA of the EPF Scheme, 1952 -   In 
the event of any loss to the trust as a result of any fraud, defalcation, wrong 
investment decisions etc. the employer shall be liable to make good the loss.  
The above two conditions make the employer liable to recoup the losses 
occurred in the Trust Fund. 
Further, if the employer refuses to make good the losses occurred in the  Trust 
Fund, then determination of money dues from the employer can be done by 
conducting a quasi -judicial inquiry under Section 7A of EPF & MP Act, 1952. 
The amount assessed thereby includes the amount due from the employer, 
penal damages under Section 14 B of EPF & MP Act, 1952 and interest under 
Section 7Q of EPF & MP Act, 1952.  
Further a criminal case can also be filed against the employer under IPC 405 / 
409 for Criminal Breach of Trust.    
The provision for Criminal Breach of Trust is mentioned in Cha pter XVII under 
section 405 of Indian Penal Code. Section 405, of Indian Penal Code states, 
‘Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion 
over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that 
property, or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any 
direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or 
of any legal contract , express or implied, which he has made touching the 
discharge of such trust, or willf ully suffers any other person so to do, commits 
criminal breach of Trust.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
 
 
 

12 
 
(Recommendation No. 2.26) 
 The Committee note that migration, illiteracy, un -awareness and the 
intention to enjoy benefits of Income Tax are the probable reasons for non -
claiming of PF dues by workers. The Committee feel that since the exempted 
organizations are expected to have all the details of each worker/employee, like 
name, address, nominees etc., while employing them and thus can disburse PF 
dues to an employee or his/her heir.  They therefore, desire that the EPFO 
must impress upon those Exempted Establishment to make all efforts to trace 
the workers/ employees/ nominees and disburse the amou nt in the first 
instance and thereafter, if some amount still remains, the same could be 
transferred to EPFO. 
Reply of the Government 
 Necessary instructions have been issued to the exempted establishments 
vide EPFO, Head Office circular No. Exem/32(18)/20 16/Exemption/14780 
dated 13.10.2017 (copy enclosed as Annexure – ‘D’) to make all efforts to trace 
the workers /employees’ nominees and disburse the amount to members / his 
her heirs. Further Rule No. 7 of the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund Rules 2016 
prescribes for the publication of unclaimed amounts lying in the members’ 
accounts as under: 
Publication of Information.-  
(1)  Each institution shall, before crediting the unclaimed amount to the 
Fund, publish the information relating to accounts in which uncl aimed 
deposits are lying, in the manner provided under this rule.  
(2)  The Institution shall identify the unclaimed amounts and prepare a list 
of the accounts containing details of the unclaimed amount by the 30th day of 
September of each financial year.  
(3)  The Institution shall try to contact each of the account holder of the 
unclaimed amount, by all reasonable means of communication, including 
written notice, e -mail and telephone, on at least two occasions, within a span 
of a period of sixty days.  
(4)  The Institution shall display the list prepared under sub -rule (2) for the 
general information of the public, on the notice boards of the relevant offices 
and on the website of the Institution concerned for at least a period of sixty 
days, inviting claims, if any. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  

13 
 
(Recommendation No. 2.39) 
 The Committee note that the Board of Trustees (BOTs) of Exempted 
Establishment are required to invest the Trust Funds in accordance with  
pattern of investment notified by the Government.  They further note that in 
case of any deviation from the prescribed pattern of investment, the BOTs are 
liable to pay surcharge which is limited to three times and after that, the 
exemption is liable to b e cancelled by giving reasonable opportunity to the 
employer.  The surcharge levied by EPFO is statedly very nominal and is meant 
just to deter the establishments from any deviation. The Committee have now 
been informed that the EPFO has framed and notifie d new rates of surcharge 
on 1st February, 2017. However, the Committee apprehend that even the 
revised rate of surcharge may not act as an effective deterrent.  They therefore, 
desire that the effectiveness of the new rates of surcharge monitored closely 
revisited subsequently, if needed. 
Reply of the Government 
 As per the direction of the Committee, EPFO has revisited the rates and 
has infact increased the rates. The new rate of surcharge had been circulated 
vide EPFO, Head Office Circular No. Exem/10(16) 2016/28265 dated 
01.02.2017 (copy enclosed as Annexure – ‘E’). 
Since, the increase in the rates have been done in 2017 therefore the effect of 
the same will be monitored for the two financial years i.e. 2017 -18 and 2018 -
19 and the effectiveness of increase  in the surcharge further will be revisited 
subsequently.  
The surcharge as provisioned under condition No. 17 of Appendix – ‘A’ to Para 
27AA of EPF Scheme, 1952 is levied on the Board of Trustees for not investing 
the money as per the pattern notified by the Government. However, if any loss 
is occurred to the Trust or the Trust is unable to give the rate of interest at par 
with the rate of interest declared by EPFO due to wrong investment 
decision/non-compliance of the pattern of investment/otherwise, then  
following conditions also act as safeguard so that the workers’ P.F. 
accumulations do not get jeopardised – 
Condition No. 28 of Appendix – ‘A’ to Para 27AA of the EPF Scheme, 1952 -   In 
the event of any loss to the trust as a result of any fraud, defalcation, wrong 
investment decisions etc. the employer shall be liable to make good the loss.  
Condition No. 7 of Appendix – ‘A’ to Para 27AA of the EPF Scheme, 1952 -   Any 
deficiency in the interest declared by the Board of Trustees is to be made good 
by the employer to bring it up the statutory limit. 

14 
 
Surcharge is only the penalty imposed on the Board of Trustees for not 
following the pattern of investment, whether it has caused any loss to the Trust 
Fund or not. Making good the loss or the deficiency in the interest rate has to 
be done by the employer. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
(Recommendation No. 2.40) 
The Committee note that surcharge is levied on the BOTs of the Exempted 
Establishment which are deviating from the prescribed pattern of investment 
three times and after that if those are found to be indulging in same kind of 
deviation, the exemption is liable to be cancelled. From the list of 317 such 
establishments, on whose BoTs, surcharge was levied, the Committee observe 
that most of the establishments were closed against which the cancellation 
orders were issued. The Committee therefore, desire that such a futile exercise 
needs to be tackled with regular physical inspection of the establishments by 
the Regional inspectors and if required, cancellation process be speeded up. 
The Committee further recommend t hat while formulating the guidelines, a 
provision may be made for review of exemption after a prescribed period, so 
that the EPFO is aware of the exact financial status of the establishment and 
precautionary measures are taken well in time and interests of  the 
workers/employees are protected. 
Reply of the Government 
As desired by the Committee, to tackle the problem of early identification of 
violations such as deviation from the pattern of investment, EPFO has directed 
all the field offices to complete the  compliance audit, which includes physical 
inspection of the establishment by the Inspector every year. Copy of the EPFO, 
Head Office circular No. Exem/10(20)/2016/Standing Committee/7963 dated 
26.07.2017 is enclosed as Annexure – ‘A’).  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
(Recommendation No. 2.41) 
From the deposition of EPFO the Committee note that the extant provisions of 
the Act and Scheme do not impose any restriction on Exempted Establishment 
for investment of accumulated PF funds in their own company/business/sister 
concerns via mutual funds route.  However, as per submission of EPFO, in -
principle agreement has been reached to frame necessary guidelines which 
restrict the Trust from investing in their own ve ntures through this route. The 

15 
 
Committee feel that investing in own business is improper and is being done to 
serve their own interests. They, therefore, desire that there is a need to have 
special inspection/audit of all such companies and the EPFO should  take early 
action on the requisite process, for restricting investment through this route 
and take immediate corrective steps/redivert such investments in other 
healthy investment instruments. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the direction of the Committee,  instructions to all the field offices 
regarding adhering to arm’s length principle of investment and physical 
verification of securities has been given, so that establishments may be 
restricted from investing in their own company/business/sister concerns and 
same may be detected at the earliest and immediate corrective steps may be 
taken by EPFO, so that the P.F. accumulations of the workers do not get 
jeopardised. The related circulars are enclosed as Annexures – ‘G’ and ‘H’. 
Further, the new pattern of i nvestment prescribed by the Government also 
takes care of the concerns of the Committee. Para 8 of the pattern of 
investment notified on 29.05.2015 (copy enclosed as Annexure – ‘I’) stipulates 
the following :- 
The investment of funds should be at arm’s len gth, keeping solely the benefit of 
the beneficiaries in mind. For instance, investment (aggregated across such 
companies/organizations described herein) beyond 5% of the fresh accretions in 
a financial year will not be made in the securities of a company/o rganization or 
in the securities of a company/organization in which such a 
company/organization holds over 10% of the securities issued, by a fund created 
for the benefit of the employees of the first company/organization, and the total 
volume of such investments will not exceed 5% of the total portfolio of the fund at 
any time. The prescribed process of due diligence must be strictly followed in 
such cases and the securities in question must be permissible investments under 
these guidelines.   
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
(Recommendation No. 2.43) 
The Committee note that as per the amendment made in Para 27AA of EPF 
Scheme, 1952, the Exempted Establishment have to maintain securities in the 
DEMAT format in stead of physical form of securities.  The Committee were 
informed that since a certificate of holding is obtained from the participant 
depository, hence there is no need of physical inspection of securities.  The 
Committee find that some of the Exempted E stablishment could be investing 

16 
 
either in excess of the limit permitted under the guidelines in private securities 
or the parent company or its sister concerns, in which case they can provide a 
certificate of holding which in no way, can certify that the i nvestments have 
been made in the Government prescribed securities only. Also the Committee 
are apprehensive about some of the private investments turning into bad debts 
in some cases of Exempted Establishment, for instance, District Cooperative 
Banks, etc.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that it should be made 
mandatory to check the DEMAT account to verify the pattern of investments 
made as well as the returns thereof received by the Exempted Establishment 
during the compliance audit. 
Reply of the Government 
The securities holding are always verified by the inspecting squad during the 
compliance audit. Whether the Trust of the exempted establishment is 
following pattern of investment or not is reported in the compliance audit 
report. However, in com pliance to the directions of the Committee, necessary 
directions vide EPFO, Head Office circular No. Exem/10(20)/2016/Vol. 
III/4044 dated 13.06.2017 has been issued to verify the certificate issued by 
Depository Participant holding the securities in DEMAT form (copy enclosed as 
Annexure – ‘H’). 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
(Recommendation No. 2.58) 
The Committee note that presently the Exempted Establishment and their 
Trusts are required to file returns online periodically which can be viewed by 
the field offices through a Dashboard developed for the purpose. However, this 
has not proved as an effective tool for monitoring of Exempted Establishment 
and their PF Trusts. It is evident from the EPFO's own su bmission before the 
Committee, to this effect. On the suggestion of the Committee, C -DAC Pune 
was assigned the task of developing necessary software in July, 2016, for 
which the stipulated delivery date was 31st December, 2016. However, the 
scheduled deliv ery was reportedly delayed and was expected by the end of 
March 2017.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the status and if not 
delivered, recommend that necessary instructions to C -DAC Pune may be 
issued for immediate delivery of the requisite softwar e with complete features. 
As the data would be required to be migrated to the new software, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to take up the matter and pursue it vigorously. 
 
 

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
The software has been delivered by C -DAC and has been made  operational 
w.e.f. 27.05.2017. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
(Recommendation No. 2.64) 
The Committee note that there are various types of major 
violations/malpractices of the exemption provisions being done by the 
Exempted Establishment, viz. (i) not adhering to the prescribed pattern of 
investment; (ii) delay in transfer of PF contributions to Trusts within stipulated 
date; (iii) non-declaration of interest or the declared rate of interest lower than 
the EPF rate; and (iv) investing PF funds in own company. The Committee were 
informed that whenever such violations are observed, there is a prosecution 
provision and even the exemption could be cancelled.  However, the details of 
action taken against the de faulting establishment on these counts are being 
gathered from the field offices by EPFO after the matter was raised by the 
Committee. As the basic principle of granting exemption to some 
establishments is to ensure similar or even better social security t o workers, 
the Committee are of the strong opinion that if any establishment is 
committing violations, stern penal action must be taken by the regulating 
authority. The Committee therefore, recommend that irregularities/violations 
be viewed very seriously by the EPFO and they must  ensure that appropriate 
prosecution action, as enumerated in the Act, be taken against the defaulting 
establishment without fail. At some time, the Committee feel that RPFCs & 
EPFO have a statutory duty to keep a constant vigil o n the violations 
committed, if any, and failure to do so should attract appropriate 
administrative action against them too. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the direction of the Committee, necessary instructions to all the field 
offices has been given vide E PFO, Head Office circular No. 
Exem/10(20)/2016/Vol. III/10735 dated 29.09.2017 (copy enclosed herewith 
as Annexure – ‘F’) for taking stern penal actions against the defaulting 
establishments as per the EPF & MP Act, 1952. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment  O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
  

18 
 
(Recommendation No. 2.69) 
The Committee note that there were cases of cancellation/revocation of 
exemption of Exempted Establishment like Jute Mills, State Electricity Boards, 
etc in terms of Section 17(4) of the EPF & MP Act, 1952.  However, there is no 
subsequent provision to compensate the subscribers and the liability towards 
subscribers is shifted from Private PF Trust to EPFO to the extent of fund 
transferred from the BoT.  The Committee are note that apart from lack of 
clarity  on cancellation or revocation status in some establishment, there is no 
provision to prevent the innocent subscriber from being cheated on account of 
the irregularity committed by his/her employer and the resultant cancellation 
of the exemption. Moreover, since the industrial work force remains largely 
unaware of official procedures, hence in cases where the legal status of an 
exempted establishment changes due to 'revocation', there could be 
innumerable cases of non -payment of c laims remaining unresolved owing to 
long legal delays. In such cases many a times an employee dies and since there 
is hardly any willingness on the part of employers to trace legal heirs, his dues 
lie unclaimed in the employer's account. The Committee, the refore, desire to be 
apprised of correct status of cancellation/revocation of Exempted 
Establishment in the last three years. Further, they recommend that in case of 
functioning establishments, where exemption is cancelled, heavy penalty needs 
to be imposed on the employers to recover the amount and in case of closure of 
defaulting establishment due to revocation, the subscribers needs to be 
compensated through the SRF. The Committee desire that the matter must be 
examined in detail and appropriate legal pr ovisions be framed to protect and 
disburse the lifetime savings of employees/workers in these situations. 
Reply of the Government 
As per condition No. 6, 7 and 28 of Appendix –‘A’ to Para 27AA of the EPF 
Scheme, 1952 regarding loss to the Provident Fund, a ny deficiency in the 
interest rate declared by the Board of Trustees and any loss to the Trust 
respectively has to be made good by the employer. The said conditions have 
been reproduced as under :- 
Condition No. 6 of Appendix – ‘A’ to Para 27AA of the EPF Scheme, 1952 -  The 
employer shall bear all the expenses of the administration of the Provident 
Fund and also make good any other loss that may be caused to the Provident 
Fund due to theft, burglary, defalcation, misappropriation or any other reason.  
Condition No. 7 of Appendix – ‘A’ to Para 27AA of the EPF Scheme, 1952 -   Any 
deficiency in the interest declared by the Board of Trustees is to be made good 
by the employer to bring it up the statutory limit. 
Condition No. 28 of Appendix – ‘A’ to Para 27AA of the EPF Scheme, 1952 -   In 
the event of any loss to the trust as a result of any fraud, defalcation, wrong 
investment decisions etc. the employer shall be liable to make good the loss.  

19 
 
Therefore, even in case of cancellation/revocation of exemption, assessment of 
financial liability is carried out and any loss in the Provident Fund has to be 
made good by the employer before the past accumulations are taken into CBT, 
EPF account and SRF for exempted establishment does not exist.  
The status of the cancellation /revocation of Exempted Establishment in the 
last three years is enclosed as Annexure – ‘J’. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
(Recommendation No. 2.73) 
The Committee note that presently the PF Trusts of Exempted Establishment 
manage Trust funds in accordance with the laid down provisions by 
maintaining individual ledger Accounts.  The Committee further note that in 
line with the e -governance policy of the  Government, Electronic-Challan-cum-
Return (ECR) has been introduced by EPFO for filing of returns by employer of 
Exempted Establishment and Trusts. A  Dashboard for monitoring of filing of 
online returns by Exempted Establishment and their trust has also been 
developed for benefit of field offices. In view of the rampant violations of the 
Act, the Committee opine that mere filing of returns has not proved to be 
enough to protect the workers of the Exempted Establishment hence there still 
remains scope for improvement in the checking of the returns filed by 
Exempted Establishment. They therefore recommend that the returns filed by 
the Exempted Establishment be checked randomly to detect misuse of the 
facility and appropriate action be taken against the defau lting establishments. 
Meanwhile, the Committee desire to be apprised of the status of the new 
software being developed for EPFO by C -DAC, Pune, and the improvements 
brought therein to detect short comings in returns and other violations more 
effectively. 
Reply of the Government 
Basic software for filing of online returns was delivered by C -DAC on 
27.05.2017. During the compliance audit of the exempted establishments, 
cross verification of the online returns is done as a standard practice. In case 
any discrepancy is noticed between the returns filed by the establishment and 
records produced by the establishment at the time of inspection, then the 
inspecting squad mentions the same in the compliance audit report and 
recommends for appropriate legal action agai nst the establishment as per the 
EPF & MP Act, 1952. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
 

20 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 2.23) 
The Committee opine that the huge amount of ₹ 5475 crore lying un -claimed 
with the Exempted Establishment particularly in two zones i.e. Haryana & 
Rajasthan and Maharashtra & Chhattisgarh, is a matter of concern. As of now 
there is no provision in the Act and Scheme which can restrict a PF Trust to 
hold unclaimed deposit with them. The Committee feel that transparency is 
required in the matter. After their intervention, a proposal is stated to be under 
process for amendment in the Scheme in order to enable EPFO to receive the 
unclaimed deposits lying with the PF Trusts. The Committee desire that 
without losing further time, suitable amendment in the Scheme must be 
carried out so that in the Annual Account Statement of the PF Fund, name of 
workers, for whom unclaimed amount is available, not only gets r eflected, but 
after specified period, gets transferred to EPFO. They also desire that 
possibilities of depositing the unclaimed amount so received in the Special 
Reserve Fund (SRF) may also be explored. 
Reply of the Government 
Finance Act, 2015 (No. 20 of 2015) dated 14.05.2015 and Senior Citizens’ 
Welfare Fund Rules 2016, Section 122(2) of the Finance Act, 2015 (No. 20 of 
2015) read with Finance Act, 2016 (No. 28 of 2016) stipulate that 
notwithstanding anything contrary contain ed in any other law for the time 
being in force, any credit balance in any of the accounts under EPF & MP Act, 
1952 remaining unclaimed for a period of seven years from the date of its 
declaration as an inoperative account shall be transferred by the respe ctive 
institution holding them to the fund.      
 In view of the above, it has become the statutory responsibility of various 
institutions defined in the rules to transfer the unclaimed amount which 
remains inoperative for 7 years, to the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund. Rule No 
3(c) of the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund Rules 2016 clearly lays transfer of 
unclaimed amounts from the accounts of Employees’ Provident Fund. Hence, 
Trusts of establishments exempted under Section 17 of the EPF & MP Act, 
1952 also c omes under the ambit of the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund Rules 
2016 and are required to transfer the requisite amount as required by the 
Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund Rules 2016 to the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund. 
In compliance to the provisions of Seni or Citizens’ Welfare Fund Rules, PF 

22 
 
Trust of exempted establishments vide EPFO, Head Office circular No. 
Exem/32(18)/2016/Exemption/14780 dated 13.10.2017 (copy enclosed as 
Annexure – ‘D’) have been directed to comply with provisions of the said rules. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
(Recommendation No. 2.24) 
Till the subject was taken up for examination by the Committee, the EPFO did 
not have any details of unclaimed amount lying with the Exempted 
Establishment. The Committee appreciate that, based on their suggestion, the 
EPFO has now started developing a mechanism for capturing the data related 
to unclaimed deposits lying with the exempted establishment. They, therefore, 
recommend that the mechanism must be put in place at the earliest.  They also 
desire that a time period should also be specified for keeping the unclaimed 
amount with the respective establishment, after which the amount be 
deposited with the EPFO. 
Reply of the Government 
As stated in reply t o para No. 2.23, Trusts of exempted establishments are 
required to transfer the unclaimed P.F. amounts of the members to the Senior 
Citizens’ Welfare Fund. Vide EPFO, Head Office letter No. 
Exem/32(18)/2016/Exemption/14780 dated 13.10.2017 (copy enclosed a s 
Annexure – ‘D’) all the exempted establishments have been directed to keep 
accounts and full employee wise details of each member whose amount is 
transferred to Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund including P.F. Account No., 
Pension Account Number, name and fa ther’s/spouse’s- name of the employee, 
amount transferred, date of birth, date of joining, last known address of 
employee along with Bank Account Number, Aadhar Card Number, Nominee 
details, list of family members etc. (wherever available). It has been fur ther 
directed that the audited balance sheet of Trust should also reflect the total 
year wise amount transferred to Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund and Fund lying 
unclaimed with Government for less than 25 years in Senior Citizens’ Welfare 
Fund as contra entry in assets and liabilities both. 
Where no request or claim as specified in section 124 of Finance Act 2015 is 
made within a period of 25 years from the date of credit of the unclaimed 
amount to the Fund, it shall escheat to the Central Government unless a court 
otherwise orders. In such a n eventuality aforesaid contra entry in assets and 
liability side of Balance Sheet will get reduced to the extent of amount 
escheated the Central Government.  

23 
 
Similarly, in case of settlement of unclaimed amount already transferred to 
Senior Citizen Welfare Fund, aforesaid contra entry equivalent to the principal 
amount transferred for such member will get reversed.  
As per the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund Rules 2016, the Trusts of exempted 
establishments can keep the P.F. accumulations lying in an account , which 
has become inoperative, for seven years and after that the amount shall be 
required to be transferred to the Senior Citizens’ Welfare Fund.  
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER-V  
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Recommendation No. 2.6) 
The Committee are of the view that the Exempted Establishment are to be 
monitored by EPFO, for which there is a strong need to review the present 
system of monitoring. The Committee pursued this during their interaction 
with the representatives of the Ministry and EPFO. As a result, significant 
changes have since been initiated as follows: 
(i) development of a new better software through  C-DAC for more 
effective monitoring; 
(ii) initiation of compliance audit of Exempted Establishment; 
(iii) In view of non -capturing of data about un -claimed PF amount of 
members with Trusts of PF Exempted Establishment, initiation of 
formulation of guideli nes for Trusts to transfer un -claimed amounts of 
EPFO; 
(v) Framing of new rates of surcharge for levying on account of 
deviation from the prescribed pattern of investment of BoTs of PF 
Exempted Establishment; and  
(vi) In-principle agreement to frame neces sary guidelines/ 
amendments/notification to restrict BoTs of Exempted Establishment 
from investing in the instruments issued by the principal establishments 
and its sister concerns.  
 The Committee further note that after their  deliberations with the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment and EPFO, on 14th December, 2016 and 
18th January, 2017, directions were issued promptly to all the Regional 
Provident Fund Offices for collection of data and inspections were conducted 
too. The Committee, while taking note of  the efforts made by the EPFO,  desire 
that a definite timeline be given to all the Regional Offices for conducting 
compliance audit of the Exempted Establishment. C -DAC, Pune, the company 
developing a software to contain data of all exempted returns, shou ld also be 
asked for completing the task which will form the basis to monitor compliance 
of the provisions of the Act. The Committee also impress upon the EPFO to 
speed up the formulation of policy guidelines for grant of exemption based on 
past performance, net worth, collections, contributions, minimum corpus and 
membership which is statedly under submission to the Central Board of 
Trustees. The Committee further recommend that once such guidelines are 

25 
 
finalised by the EPFO, a complete review of all prese ntly Exempted 
Establishments should be undertaken and completed within three months, 
followed by appropriate decision to close defective/unhealthy/deviating 
exempted PF Trusts and transfer the same to EPFO. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the direction of t he Committee, EPFO vide circular No. 
Exem/10(20)/2016/Standing Committee/7963 dated 26.07.2017 (copy 
enclosed as Annexure – ‘A’) had directed all the field offices to ensure 
Compliance Audit of all the exempted establishments before 31.08.2017. The 
office-wise list of exempted establishments, alongwith the details of compliance 
audit has been annexed as Annexure – ‘B’. 
The requisite software regarding submission of online returns has already been 
delivered by C-DAC and is operational from 27.05.2017.  
In co mpliance to the direction of the Committee the formulation of policy 
guidelines for grant of exemption based on past performance, net worth, 
collections, contributions, minimum corpus and membership was expeditiously 
completed by EPFO. The guidelines in nu tshell   framed in this regard are as 
follows –  
The establishment should comply as an un -exempted establishment for a 
minimum period of five years.  
The employment strength for such establishment should be more than five 
hundred.  
The corpus size should be more than one hundred crores of Rupees at the time 
the establishment is seeking grant of exemption.  
For laying down of the above guidelines, a amendment in the EPF Scheme, 
1952 is under consideration. 
However, the proposal was returned by Legislative Department, Ministry of Law 
and Justice. Ministry of Law and Justice has proposed that if the said 
guidelines are to be framed, then they should be incorporated in the EPF & MP 
Act, 1952 itself and not in the EPF Scheme, 1952. Amendment to the Scheme 
can be done through notification by the Government of India. However, 
amendment to the Act can only be carried out by the Parliament. Necessary 
amendments in various sections under EPF & MP Act, 1952 are under 
consideration. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H-11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  

26 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 2.7) 
The Committee note that as per the latest information provided by EPFO, there 
are 1549 Exempted Establishment all over India employing 84,42,241 workers. 
Further, the number of workers/employees covered under each of those 
establishments varies from 1 to 3,25,997.  The Committee observe that some of 
the establishments are following dual set up i.e. some of their 
workers/employees were subscribing to their own trust while some wer e 
subscribing to EPF. While an individual employee or a class of employees can 
be exempted under Section 17(2) read with Para 27 and 27(A) respectively, the 
Committee apprehend that in such a scenario, there could be a possibility of 
workers/employees bein g left out of coverage of either of the setup in 
confusion. Besides, in view of the very limited capability of the Exemption 
Division of EPFO to minutely monitor compliance, it may not, perhaps, be 
possible to detect exclusion of employees, even if it exis ts. They, therefore, 
desire that in the policy guidelines being formulated, adequate care needs to be 
taken to ensure that either all the eligible workers/employee subscribe to their 
own Trust or to EPFO as a whole.  They also recommend that the enabling 
clause for choosing the Trust or EPF by the respective subscriber may be 
withdrawn with immediate effect. 
Reply of the Government 
Para 27 and 27A of EPF Scheme, 1952 enables the individual employee and the 
class of employees to seek exemption from the opera tion of the EPF Scheme, 
1952. For ensuring all the eligible workers/employees to subscribe to their own 
Trust or to EPFO as a whole, Para 27 and 27A is required to be amended. 
Necessary amendments in various sections under EPF & MP Act, 1952 are 
under consideration. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
(Recommendation No. 2.8) 
The Committee find that there were 180 Exempted Establishment having 
membership strength of less than 20.  Out of those 180 establishments,  22 
establishments have been shown as having 0 memberships. They therefore, 
desire that exemption granted to these establishments be reviewed immediately 
and suitable action may be taken. 
 

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
The exemption granted to said establishment s have been reviewed and the 
status is annexed as Annexure –‘C’.  Necessary amendments in various 
sections under EPF & MP Act, 1952 are under consideration. 
After carrying out necessary amendments in the said Act, all the exempted 
establishments will be re viewed based on the new eligibility criterion and 
further decision on cancellation of exemption of such establishments will be 
taken, which will not qualify the prescribed eligibility. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
 (Recommendation No. 2.22) 
The Committee note that as on 31st December, 2016, the total corpus of 
Exempted Establishment is around ₹2.57 lakh crore including the unclaimed 
PF amount of ₹5475 crore.  The Committee opine that the total corpus could  
have been more, had some of the establishments not violated the provisions of 
the Act.  The Committee are happy that of late, the compliance audit is being 
conducted by the EPFO and proposal for cancellation of exemption has also 
been under consideration.   They therefore, desire that the pending proposals 
for cancellation of exemption be finalized at the earliest so that the concerned 
workers/employees could be covered under EPF provisions. 
Reply of the Government 
Cancellation of exemption of exempted esta blishments is an ongoing process 
and is done under Section 17(4) of the EPF & MP Act, 1952. For streamlining 
the process of cancellation of exemption, necessary amendments in various 
sections under EPF & MP Act, 1952 are under consideration. 
Subsequent to the amendment, all the exempted establishments will be 
reviewed based on the new eligibility criterion and further decision on 
cancellation of such establishment will be taken, which will not qualify the 
prescribed eligibility. 
(Ministry of Labour and Empl oyment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
(Recommendation No. 2.59) 
As Third Party compliance audit of many Exempted Establishment was not 
conducted during the last several years, the Committee feel that several 
violations may have remained undetected. They further note that following 

28 
 
their intervention in the matter, the EPFO issued directions to all the field 
offices for ensuring up -to-date compliance audit of Exempted Establishment. 
However, no audits have been conducted in three zones i.e. Delhi and 
Uttarakhand, Punjab and HP and Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh. The 
Committee desire to be apprised of reasons thereof. The Committee opine that 
once the review exercise of grant of exemptions is completed, carrying out 
compliance audit would become manageable for the RPFCs.  The Committee 
therefore, recommend that the formulati on of new guidelines for grant of 
exemption be prioritised followed by the review of the exemption granted so 
that the same could be cancelled for the defaulting Exempted Establishment. 
They also desire that the consolidated report of compliance special au dit of the 
Establishments be furnished to them, as committed by the EPFO during the 
meeting held on 18th January, 2017. 
Reply of the Government 
In compliance to the direction of the Committee the formulation of policy 
guidelines for grant of exemption base d on past performance, net worth, 
collections, contributions, minimum corpus and membership was expeditiously 
completed by EPFO. The guidelines in nutshell   framed in this regard are as 
follows –  
i. The establishment should comply as an un-exempted establishment for a 
minimum period of five years.  
ii. The employment strength for such establishment should be more than 
five hundred.  
iii. The corpus size should be more than one hundred crores of Rupees at 
the time the establishment is seeking grant of exemption.  
 
For laying down of the above guidelines, aamendmentin the EPF Scheme, 1952 
is under consideration. 
However, the proposal was returned by Legislative Department, Ministry of Law 
and Justice. Ministry of Law and Justice has proposed that if the said 
guidelines are to be framed, then they should be incorporated in the EPF & MP 
Act, 1952 itself and not in the EPF Scheme, 1952. Amendment to the Scheme 
can be done through notification by the Government of India. However, 
amendment to the Act can only be carried out by the Parliament. Necessary 
amendments in various sections under EPF & MP Act, 1952 are under 
consideration. The office -wise status of the compliance audit of the exempted 
establishments is enclosed as Annexure – ‘B’. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O.  M. No. H-11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  

29 
 
(Recommendation No. 2.60) 
The Committee note that presently the Regional Provident Fund 
Commissioners are monitoring the implementation of the Act through their 123 
field offices spread across the Country.  However it is surprising that at present 
there is no Central monitoring mechanism available for ensuring that the 
checking of compliance of the Act by the Exempted Establishment by the 
RPFCS is done appropriately.  The Committee, therefore, opine that grant of 
exemption and its monitoring should be finalised Centrally through the Head 
Office, instead of leaving it solely to the RPFCs not only to keep a check on the 
malpractices/violations but also to maintain uniformity in grant of exemptions.  
They therefore, r ecommend that all future requests for exemptions, once 
examined by the field offices, should be referred to the EPFO Head Office for 
final decision and a Central monitoring mechanism must be put in place which 
may also include physical inspections alongwit h constant vigil on the digital 
database. 
Reply of the Government 
Requests for exemption once examined by the field offices of EPFO are referred 
to the Head office of EPFO.  Necessary amendments in various sections under 
EPF & MP Act, 1952 are under conside ration. System of online monitoring of 
the exempted establishments has been started with the launch of newly 
developed software by C-DAC. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
(Recommendation No. 2.66) 
The Committee note that proposals for grant of exemption are pending with 
EPFO for years together because the process could not be completed within the 
statutorily period under the Act. Resultantly, the EPFO had to seek permission 
for extension of time from th e Ministry of Finance several times for seven years 
during the period 2007 -13. Responding to the query of the Committee for the 
reasons thereof, EPFO stated that the proposal for grant of exemption is 
considered complete if the proposal meets all the guide lines. The Committee, 
note that, presently the power to grant exemption rests with more than 100 
Regional Provident Fund Commissioners, even than there are numerous cases 
pending for grant of exemption. Clearly the RPFCs have not been able to ensure 
that the proposals are complete in all respects for final decision on the cases. 
Therefore, the Committee opine that the policy guidelines need to be revisited 
to ensure that the pending proposals are disposed off in a time bound manner. 
As the  Ministry has sta tedly decided to frame necessary guidelines/  
amendments/notifications to address concerns expressed by the Committee 
with respect to exemptions, the Committee suggest that the pending proposals 
can be examined from the perspective of amended guidelines, so  that the 

30 
 
number of establishments seeking exemption could become manageable. The 
Committee desire to be furnished with a detailed note on the final action taken 
by the Ministry to address all points raised in connection with the subject. 
Reply of the Government 
Regarding the observation stated in the above para i.e. power to grant 
exemption rests with more than Regional P.F. Commissioner, it is submitted 
that Regional P.F. Commissioners examine the proposals and forward it to the 
Head Office for onward s submission to the Central Board of Trustees. On the 
recommendations of the Central Board of Trustees the proposals are forwarded 
to the appropriate Government for grant of exemption. 
In compliance to the direction of the Committee, the formulation of pol icy 
guidelines for grant of exemption based on past performance, net worth, 
collections, contributions, minimum corpus and membership was expeditiously 
completed by EPFO. The guidelines in nutshell   framed in this regard are as 
follows and pending proposa ls will be examined from perspective   of amended 
guidelines –  
i. The establishment should comply as an un-exempted establishment for a 
minimum period of five years.  
ii. The employment strength for such establishment should be more than 
five hundred.  
iii. The corpus size should be more than one hundred crores of Rupees at 
the time the establishment is seeking grant of exemption.  
For laying down of the above guidelines, a formal proposal for amendment is 
under consideration of the Ministry.  
However, the proposal was returned by Legislative Department, Ministry of Law 
and Justice. Ministry of Law and Justice have proposed that if the said 
guidelines are to be framed, then they should be incorporated in the EPF & MP 
Act, 1952 itself and not in the EPF Scheme, 1952. Am endment to the Scheme 
can be done through notification by the Government of India. Necessary 
amendments in various sections under EPF & MP Act, 1952 are under 
consideration. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment O. M. No. H -11025/1/2017 SS-II dt. 
7.2.2018)  
 
 
New Delhi;                DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA  
19th July, 2018                        CHAIRPERSON,  
28th Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

31 
 
Appendix - I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-fourth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 4 th July, 2018 from 1200 hrs. to 
1250 hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Parliament House Annexe - Extension 
Building,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya, MP –  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar, MP 
3. Shri Ashok Kumar dohrey, MP 
4. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey, MP 
5. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara, MP 
6. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam, MP 
7. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, MP 
8. Shri C.N. Jayadevan, MP 
9. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli, MP 
10. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar, MP 
11. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore, MP 
12. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania, MP 
   RAJYA SABHA 
13. Shri Ram Narain Dudi, MP 
14. Shri P.L. Punia, MP 
15. Shri Rajaram, MP 
16. Shri Amar Shankar Sable, MP 
17. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan, MP 
18. Ms. Dola Sen, MP 
19. Dr. Banda Prakash, MP 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad - Joint Secretary (RP) 
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata - Additional Director 
  

32 
 
 
2. The Committee first took up following draft Reports for consideration:  
i. Action taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty -
Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Exempted Organisations/  
Trusts/Establishments from EPFO: Performance, Issues and 
Challenges'; 
ii. XX  XX  XX  XX  
iii. XX  XX  XX  XX 
3. After some deliberation, the Committee adopted both draft Action Taken 
Reports and authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light of 
consequential changes that might arise out of factual verification of the Draft 
Reports and to present the same to both the Houses. 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
5. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  
The Committee then adjourned. 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
XX Does not pertain to this Report. 
  

33 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations          20 
  
II. Observations/Recommendations which have     11              55%   
 been accepted by Government 
 (Recommendation Para. Nos. 2.9, 2.25, 2.26, 2.39,  
 2.40, 2.41, 2.43, 2.58, 2.64, 2.69 and 2.73 
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the     00                    00% 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s replies - Nil 
      
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of     02                    10% 
 which Government’s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration –  2.23 and 2.24 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of      07            35% 
 which replies of Government are of interim  
 in nature- Recommendation  Para No. 2.6, 2.7, 2.8,  
 2.22, 2.59, 2.60 and 2.66 
   
                               ---------- 
                  100% 
                                           ---------- 
 