i 
 
40 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS AND MINISTRY OF LABOUR 
& EMPLOYMENT 
[OVERSEAS EMPLOYMENT OF WOMEN WORKERS INCLUDING 
NURSES AND MAIDS, ISSUES AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK] 
 
FORTIETH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka) 


ii 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS AND MINISTRY OF LABOUR 
& EMPLOYMENT 
[OVERSEAS EMPLOYMENT OF WOMEN WORKERS INCLUDING 
NURSES AND MAIDS, ISSUES AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK] 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 9th August, 2018     
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 9th August, 2018 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Page No. 
 
GIST OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AS CONTAINED IN 
THIS REPORT 
1 
CHAPTER I  
INTRODUCTORY  5 
CHAPTER II  
I. ROLE OF PROTECTOR GENERAL OF EMIGRANTS (PGE) 12 
II. NEED FOR MULTI AGENCY INTERACTION AND 
COLLABORATION AT CENTRAL AND STATE LEVEL 
14 
CHAPTER III   
I. REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 37 
II. REMEDIAL ACTION 43 
III. REGUALTORY FRAMEWORK FOR NURSES 55 
IV. PROVISIONS FOR REDRESSAL OF GRIEVANCES 58 
ANNEXURES  
Annexure I - Complaints Received by Indian Missions from 
Emigrant Workers including Women. 
67 
Annexure II- Detailed Criteria laid down for Inspection of Recruiting 
Agencies. 
70 
APPENDICES  
Appendix I- Minutes of twenty-seventh sitting of the Committee (2016-
17) held on 31.08.2017. 
72 
Appendix II- Minutes of sixth sitting of the Committee (2017 -18) held 
on 30.11.2017. 
75 
Appendix III- Minutes of nineteenth sitting of the Committee (2017-18) 
held on 24.05.2018. 
78 
Appendix IV- Minutes of twenty -fifth sitting of the Committee (2017 -
18) held on 18.07.2018. 
82 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2017-18) 
 DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA - CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
17. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
18. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
19. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
@21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
  *22. Dr. Banda Prakash 
23. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
24. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan 
25. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
26. Shri P.L. Punia 
27. Shri Rajaram 
28. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
 29. Ms. Dola Sen 
#30. Shri Madanlal Saini 
$31. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
 ______________________________________________________________________________
_ 
 @ Vacancy occurred vice Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy resigned w.e.f 20th June, 2018. 
* Nominated w.e.f 2nd June, 2018. 
#  Nominated w.e.f 2nd June, 2018. 
$ Nominated w.e.f 2nd June, 2018. 
SECRETARIAT 
         1.    Ms. Rhimjhim Prasad   -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Smt. Anita B. Panda   - Director 
 3.    Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Additional Director 
 4.    Shri Mohinder Paul Rana  - Executive Assistant 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2017 -18) 
having been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this 
Fortieth Report on 'Overseas Employment of Women Workers including 
Nurses and Maids, Issues And Regulatory Framework ' pertaining to the 
Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
2.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of External Affairs alongwith the representatives of the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment  on 31st August, 2017 and 30 th November, 2017. 
The Committee took further oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of External Affairs alongwith the representatives of the Ministry 
of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship on 24 th May, 2018 . The 
Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held 
on 18th July, 2018. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
officers of the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Labour & 
Employment and Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepre neurship for 
tendering oral evidence and placing before them the detailed written 
notes and post evidence information as desired by the Committee. 
3.  For ease of reference, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                        DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA 
25th July, 2018                        CHAIRPERSON, 
3rd Shravana, 1940 (Saka)        STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

1 
 
REPORT 
GIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. Every year, a large number of Indian Citizens, including women 
workers, go abroad for overseas employment purpose. As  per 
Ministry of External Affairs, around 3.9 1 lakh workers emigrated 
from India in 2017. Many of these emigrants are less educated, 
particularly those going for employment as maids, nurses 
construction workers, etc. in the Gulf countries. Hence, the 
Standing Committee on Labour decided to take up the subject for 
detailed examination on priority.   
2. In the present report, the Committee have observed that in a large 
number of cases, unregistered/unscrupulous agents send 
uneducated/semi-educated persons on tou rist and other such visas, 
and not on the legal work visas/permit, to foreign countries by 
promising lucrative employment opportunities upon extracting 
substantial sums from them.  Thereafter, these workers, including 
women, are left in the foreign soil at  the mercy of private 
employers.  
3.  The Committee have also observed that thousands of such workers, 
who are lured in the name of overseas jobs by illegal agents are 
getting exploited in the foreign countries, with nobody to help 
them. Some of the major com plaints of overseas workers including 
women workers, are, non -payment of salaries, denial of legitimate 

2 
 
labour rights, longer working hours, non -provision of medical and 
insurance facilities, confinement/abandoning of maids, etc. The 
Government Departments  in India including State Governments, 
State Police, MHA and MEA do not proactively accept the 
grievances/complaints of such people leaving them completely 
helpless in a foreign land.  The Committee hence have felt that a 
strong mechanism for grievances re dressal system and 
penalties/punishment to such agents need to be developed 
immediately in coordination by the Ministry of External 
Affairs/Ministry of Labour & Employment/ Ministry of Home Affairs 
and the State Governments. The Committee have strongly 
recommended that such a mechanism should be developed and 
made public to save overseas workers from exploitation and to take 
strong action against those unscrupulous/unregistered agents who 
lure them.  The Committee have also recommended setting up of 
cells as well as appointment of a nodal officer for the purpose by all 
State Governments. 
4. At present, the MEA’s e -Migrate Portal captures data in respect of 
ECR passport, holding Indians going to 18 ECR countries for 
employment.  However, the Indian Missions/post s have no 
mechanism to collect such data.  The Committee have noted that 
recently the MEA has started mandatory registration of Non -ECR 
passport-holding Indian Emigrants going to 18 ECR countries for 

3 
 
employment purposes in the Indian Missions/posts on pilo t basis.  
The MEA plans to off -load emigrants without registration, after the 
pilot phase.  The MEA has also informed the Committee about 
replicating this initiative for all countries where Indian workers are 
present.  The Committee have desired to be appr ised of the results 
achieved after the pilot phase and recommended the MEA to 
develop a suitable technological tool to share data between POEs 
and the relevant Indian Missions/posts so that help is available to 
all those overseas employees who face exploit ation/harassment in 
any form. 
5. The Committee have further recommended coordination between 
the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Home Affairs so 
that details of both ECR and ECNR passport holders could be shared 
and the issue of persons overs taying on tourist visas to obtain 
employment could be addressed. 
6. On the issue of educating persons going for overseas employment on 
the labour laws in the foreign countries, the Committee have noted 
that the MEA are in the process of signing labour agreeme nts with 
such destination countries, which will facilitate provision of labour 
security and welfare.  There is also an MO U between MEA and the  
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship for 
implementation of Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana to enhance skill set 
of potential overseas employees in ECR countries under the ‘Pre -

4 
 
Departure Orientation Training (PDOT)’.  The Committee feel that 
such efforts need to be enhanced for the betterment of wages and 
facilities available to the Indian Emigrant workers. 
7. On the issue of involving State Governments, the MEA have statedly 
initiated a campaign in States like Telangana, from where cases of 
women emigrant workers being trafficked in Gulf countries have 
been reported.  These campaigns aim to educate the potenti al 
overseas workers about taking necessary precautions before leaving 
India and contacting Indian Missions/Embassies in the countries 
where they are employed.  The Committee have desired that such 
efforts must be replicated by the Government Governments in  UP, 
Bihar, Tamil Nadu and all other States from where overseas workers 
emigrate in large numbers.  Also, a cell for such tasks need to be set 
up in all States along with appointing a Nodal Officer to interact 
with MEA on related matters.  
8. The Government s hould increase the number of State Government 
Recruiting Agencies since potential women candidates desirous of 
overseas employment need to undertake long journey to these six 
Government Recruiting Agencies for completion of all necessary 
formalities and ma ny a times f all prey to illegal or unscrupulous 
agents. 
  

5 
 
Chapter-I 
INTRODUCTORY 
1.1 Every year, a large number of people from India go abroad for overseas 
employment purposes. Major outflow of emigrant workers from India in the last 
few years has been to the Gulf countries where more than eight million India n 
workers are estimated to be employed. A vast majority of migrants to West 
Asia, including Gulf countries, are semi -skilled and unskilled workers and 
most of them are temporary migrants who return to I ndia after expiry of their 
contractual employment. 
1.2 As per the Annual report of the Ministry of External Affairs (2017 -18), 
there was generally a steady increase in the number of Indian s emigrating for 
employment abroad but due to economic slowdown in G ulf Cooperation 
Council (GCC) countries, there is declining trend during the recent years of 
Emigration Check Required (ECR) passport holders. Emigration Clearances 
(EC) granted to the ECR category persons going to Emigration Check Required 
countries (name ly Afghanistan, Bahrain, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, 
Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Sudan, Sudan, 
Syria, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen) during the years from 2012 
to 2017 is as follows: 
(in lakhs) 
Year 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 
No. of Emigration Clearances 
granted by Protector of 
Emigrants Offices 
7.47 8.19 8.05 7.84 5.21 3.91 
 
1.3 Countries where protection/welfare of emigrants/workers is not strong, 
have been designated by Government of India as Emigration Check Required 
(ECR) countries. Many of these ECR emigrants are less educated and less 
skilled/unskilled; their Passports are i ssued with an 'Emigration Check 
Required' (ECR) remark affixed on their Passports. Before they travel abroad for 

6 
 
employment, they are required to obtain an 'Emigration Clearance' from offices 
of Protectors of Emigrants (PoE) Emigration clearance is a safet y measure 
issued only after verifying employment details like offered salary, working 
terms and conditions in the Employment Contract as well as credentials of 
Foreign Employer etc. so as to ensure that emigrants are not duped overseas. 
The Emigration Clearance is now issued online by ten Protectors of Emigrants 
whose offices are located in Chandigarh, Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad, Jaipur, 
Kochi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Rae Bareli and Thiruvananthapuram. Due to 
complaints of exploitation in respect of nurses last yea r, the 'Nurses' as a 
category were brought under 'Emigration Check Required' and that too to be 
recruited initially only by Government Recruiting Agents (RAs) for safeguarding 
the nurses going for overseas employment. PoE -wise EC issued by the ten PoE 
offices during the last three years and current year , as per the Annual Report 
(2017-18) of the Ministry of External Affiars, are as under: 
S. No. Name of PoEs 2014 2015 2016 2017 (As on 31.12.17) 
1. Delhi 125190 185632 101000 62536 
2. Chandigarh 56862 36815 30317 44294 
3. Jaipur 56271 47573 31957 13205 
4. Rae Bareli 21984 16468 18937 7068 
5. Hyderabad 77726 48760 39006 41839 
6. Cochin 26923 24079 16932 12392 
7. Trivandrum 8501 18772 8872 2453 
8. Mumbai 391368 353591 231609 170787 
9. Chennai 30463 41665 27491 26567 
10. Kolkata 9717 10797 14817 9883 
TOTAL 805005 784152 520938 391024 
 
1.4 A number of students and highly skilled professionals also move to 
countries such as USA, UK, Canada, Australia etc.., where labor and 
employment laws are well defined and workers' interests are protected under 
the law. No emigration clearance is required to be obtained for emigrating to 

7 
 
such countries for employment. Similarly, 'Seafarers' from India have to also 
register on the e -Migrate system, before proceeding for overseas deployment 
since September, 2017. 
1.5 Briefly the sole purpose of emigration cle arance process is to ensure that 
the ECR passport holding Indian workers emigrate safely, after skill 
development and pre -departure orientation, and have a safe stay overseas 
during the period of employment. 
1.6 The said Annual Report (2017 -18) of the Mini stry of External Affairs, in 
order to regulate overseas employment especially for protection of less educated 
and blue collar workers, the ECR process is regulated through an electronic 
system called "e -Migrate". E -Migrate is an e -Governance project which 
facilitates emigration of ECR category of emigrants going to notified countries 
for employment purpose. Through an online portal e -Migrate enables 
streamlined and efficient emigration which is integrated with Passport Seva 
Project (PSP) for validation of p assport details of ECR category workers being 
registered. The system is also integrated with Bureau of Immigration (BoI) of 
the Ministry of Home Affairs used at Immigration Check Post (ICP) at airports 
for online validation of the emigration clearance gran ted by POEs. Integration 
with BoI system enables e -Migrate system to record departure and arrival 
information of ECR category workers. It provides a comprehensive and online 
database of emigrants, missions, recruiting agents, foreign employers, and 
insurance agencies to all stakeholders. This ensures that all stakeholders of 
the emigrants are on the same electronic -platform, which greatly enhances the 
"Ease-of-doing-business" and ensures prompt and easy action on all fronts to 
all the stakeholders includin g quick redressal of grievances of emigrants or 
their relatives who complain. Whenever an emigrant arrives at an airport or 
check post to proceed abroad, their passport details are validated online by the 
immigration officers and only those who have obtain ed EC are allowed to 
travel. This is a measure to ensure protection against possible exploitation of 
the Indian workers on arrival and during their stay abroad. 

8 
 
1.7 The e-Migrate system has also facilitated registration of Indian 'Seafarers' 
going for over seas placement through legal channel. This registration ensures 
more safety and protection to the seafarers. 
1.8 The "e-Migrate" system functions under the control of Protector General 
of Emigrants who exercises powers and responsibilities under the Emigra tion 
Act 1983, through this system, to ensure protection and welfare of Indian 
emigrants proceeding abroad for overseas employment. 
1.9 During the year 2017 ( as on 30 November, 2017), 3.61 lakh workers 
emigrated from India after obtaining emigration clearance. Country -wise 
number of emigration clearances given for emigration to major ECR countries 
during the current year are given in the table below: 
Workers emigrated (in lakh) 
S.No. Name of Countries Year -2017 (31.12.2017) 
1. Saudi Arabia 0.78 
2. UAE 1.50 
3. Kuwait 0.56 
4. Qatar 0.25 
5. Oman 0.53 
6. Bahrain 0.12 
7. Malaysia 0.14 
8. Others 0.03 
 Total 3.91 
 
1.10 States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Rajasthan, 
Punjab, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala, were the leading States in 
order of the numbers who emigrated. The number of persons emigrated from 
these States during the year 2017 (30 Nove mber, 2017) are depicted in the pie 
chart below:- 

9 
 
 
1.11 In the last few years India has emerged as a  leading global service 
provider for highly skilled, semi -skilled and unskilled  workers. Owing to 
the high  job proficiency, Indian workers are in high dema nd at va rious 
countries. The blue collared workers fall into the category of unskilled 
and semi -skilled workers and the white collared workers fall into the 
category of highly skilled workers. The blue collared workers are generally 
seeking employment in W est Asia i.e. the Gulf Countries  and the white 
Collared workers look for work in  the United State of America.  The 
Committee note  that Countries of the West Asia Region have been 
designated by the Government of India (GoI) as Emigration Check 
Required Count ries (ECR) as in these Countries , protection/welfare of 


10 
 
emigrants/workers is not strong. In order to protect these workers from 
exploitation and to ensure their safety and well being, particularly as their 
level of education is low, these workers are required to obtain an 
Emigration Clearance from office of Protector of Emigrants  (POE) and the 
same is affixed on their passports. However, in spite of this, there have 
been numerous instances wherein workers including maids  have faced 
harassment and exploit ation in these c ountries. Moved by their plight, 
the Committee have taken up this Subject for a holistic view and 
recommended remedial course of action through the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment, Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs as well 
as State Governments  in coordination with each other  so that all 
emigrant workers from India have a safe and gainful stay during the 
course of their overseas employment and on its completion , are able to 
return safely to their homeland. 
1.12 The Committee note that prior to the economic slowdown in 
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries , there was  a steady 
increase in the number of Indians emigrating for employment. The 
high point was the year 2013 wherein 8.1 9 lakh Emigration 
clearances were granted by Protector of Emigrants Offices. However , 
the subsequent years witnessed  a decline i.e in 2015 it fell to 7. 84 
lakh, in 2016 it was further reduced to 5.21 lakh and in 2017, the 
figure had fallen down to 3. 91 lakh. While the reasons for economic 

11 
 
slowdown in GCC countries is beyond the purview of the MEA, yet, 
the Committee are of the firm o pinion that even in times of an 
economic slowdown, there will always be a demand for cheap and 
skilled blue collar workers, albeit in a reduced scale. Further, Indian 
Workers are facing stiff competition from those coming from other 
Asian countries like Ba ngladesh, Nepal, Philippines etc. The 
Committee exhort upon  the Ministry of Labour & Employment 
through the MEA and in particular the Overseas Indian Affairs 
Division to undertake an in depth study of this issue and come out 
with factors responsible for a substantial decrease in the number of 
Indian overseas workers in last five years. The need of the hour is to 
ensure that Indian blue collar workers do not lose out good 
employment opportunities overseas to those coming from  other 
countries. This would ensu re that Indian workers continue to be in 
high demand in the GCC countries, thereby assuring a steady flow of 
foreign exchange remittance  to India, but would also reduce  the 
number of workers being sent, illegally by unregistered and 
unscrupulous recruiting agents.  

12 
 
Chapter-II 
ROLE OF PROTECTOR GENERAL OF EMIGRANTS (PGE) 
 The Committee have been informed that Protector General of Emigrants 
(PGE) in the Ministry of External Affairs is the authority respons ible for 
protecting the interests of Indian workers proceeding abroad for employment 
purposes. PGE is also the Registering Authority to issue Registration Certificate 
(RC) to the Recruiting Agent (RA) for overseas manpower exporting business. 
He exercises the following powers; under the Emigration Act, 1983:   
 Power to grant the RC under Sections 11 and 12 of the Emigration Act, 
1983 and renew the same under Section 13 of the Act.   
 Power to suspend, cancel and revoke the RC under Section 14 of the Act. 
 Power to issue permit to the Foreign Employer (FE) and Project Exporter 
(PE) under Section 15 (2) of Chapter IV of the Act.   
 Power to sanction prosecution for offences and penalties under Sections 
24 and 25 of the Act, to CBI or State Police Departments.   
 Power to search, seize and detain persons/conveyance, etc. just as 
conferred to an officer of Customs under the Customs Act, 1962.   
 Power to prescribe any return, record or register for the RAs and inspect 
the same as well at their office under Section 36 of the Act.  
 Power of Civil Court under Section 37 of the Act.  
 Power to perform all or any of the functions assigned to any Protector of 
Emigrants under Section 3 (4) of the Act.  
In all the above functions the PGE is assisted by 10 field officers also  known as 
the Protector of Emigrants (POEs). 
2.2 On being asked to furnish a detailed note on the role of Protector General 
of Emigrants (PGE) in monitoring the emigration activities in India, Ministry of 
External Affairs (MEA) in their written replies submitted as under: 

13 
 
 "The Emigration Act, 1983, which came into effect from 30 th December, 
1983 embodies the guidelines enunciated by the Supreme Court of India in its 
judgment dated 20.03.1979 (Kanga Vs. Union of Indian &  Others) and provides 
a regulatory framework in respect of safe emigration of Indian workers for 
overseas employment and seeks to safeguard their interests, and ensure their 
protection and welfare.  The Act provides for: 
1. Duties of Protectors of Emigrants – Sections 3 and 4. 
2. Regulation of activities of Recruiting Agents – Sections 9 to Section14. 
3. Direct recruitment by Foreign Employers – Sections 15 to Section 21. 
4. Mandatory Emigration Clearance (EC) – Sections 22. 
5. Emigration offences and penalties – Sections 24 to Section-26. 
6. Power to exempt certain countries or employers – Section 41. 
 Procedural safeguards have been provided under the law for protection of 
emigrants. The Act regulates recruitment for overseas employment and 
departure of the intending emigrants from India. It provides for penalties against 
offences. The operational matters relating to emigration, the provision of 
emigration services to emigrants and the enforcement of Emigration Act, 1983 
are administered by the Protector Ge neral of Emigrants (PGE) through 10 
Regional Protector of Emigrants (PoE) offices. The PGE is a statutory authority 
under the Emigration Act who is responsible for the welfare and protection of 
emigrant workers who fall in the ECR category. He also oversee s the 
administration and functional aspects of the ten field offices of the  Protectors of 
Emigrants(PoEs). The Emigration Act, 1983 (Section 10) requires that those who 
wish to recruit Indian citizens for employment abroad  shall  register themselves 
with the registering authority, i.e., the Protector General of Emigrants (PGE).  
The fee prescribed under Rule (7) (2) for registration is Rs.25,000/ -. Initially, the 
Registration Certificate (RC) is valid for a period of five years . Any Indian 
intending to obt ain a registration certificate  for overseas recruitment activities 
can apply online on emigrate.gov.in.  The applicant is required to deposit Bank 
Guarantee for an amount of Rs. Fifty lakhs on being found eligible for grant of 
Registration Certificate. The criteria laid down for issuing Registration Certificate 
includes antecedent verification of the applicant and office premises by the 
appropriate Police Authorities, applicant should possess qualification of 
bachelor‟s degree or two years diploma or equiv alent from a recognized 
university or institute , minimum 50 Sq. Meter area for the office premises, 
financial soundness etc.  The registration of Recruiting Agents under the 
Emigration Act, 1983, commenced from January, 1984, and as on 21.05.2018, 
there are presently about 1611 active recruiting agents .  Major concentration 
of Recruiting Agents is at Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai and Kerala." 
2.3 The Committee note that consequent to the enactment of the 
Emigration Act, 1983, w.e.f 30th December, 1983, the Protecto r General 
of Emigrants (PGE) is the authority responsible for protecting and 

14 
 
safeguarding the interests of Indian workers proceeding abroad for 
employment, as well  as a  registering authority to issue Registration 
Certificate (RC) to the Recruitment Agent ( RA) for overseas manpower 
exporting business. At present 1611 active recruiting agents from Delhi, 
Mumbai, Chennai and Kerala, which are registered with PGE.  While 
applauding the work of the PGE, the Committee cannot but contemplate 
the enormity of the tas k at hand. Being of the considered opinion that a 
lot needs to be done for safeguarding the interest of the vulnerable blue 
collar workers both in India, as well as overseas, the Committee cannot 
but stress upon the pivotal role to be played by PGE so that they are ever 
ready to safeguard the interests of emigrant India workers at all times.  
They, therefore, recommend that the PGE adopt a pro -active approach 
and use all available resources i.e. human and technolo gical, to ensure 
safety and security of migrant India workers especially in the Emigration 
Check Required (ECR) Countries.  
II. NEED FOR MULTI AGENCY INTERACTION AND COLLABORATION AT 
CENTRAL LEVEL AND STATE LEVEL 
2.4 Being moved by the plight of vulnerable  Indian women workers, the 
Committee had decided to take up the subject 'Overseas Employment of 
Women Workers Including Nurses and Maids - Issues and Regulatory 
Framework'. However on perusing the Background Note furnished by the 
Ministry of Labour and Emp loyment, the Committee were concerned to note 
that while Ministry of Labour and Employment have a plethora of welfare 
programmes for domestic women workforce, they have not catered at all to the 
welfare of emigrant women workers. 

15 
 
2.5 This fact though glari ng was further evident during the course of a 
briefing meeting when the Secretary, Labour & Employment submitted as 
under: 
"Basically, the Overseas Indian Affairs Department, a long time ago, was a part 
of the Ministry of Labour and Employment. It is now under the Ministry of 
External Affairs. While we take care of the workers in our country, as far as the 
international emigran ts are concerned, we have one particular area on this 
regarding the social security in the organised sector. When members who are 
with the EPFO go outside to work, we have signed agreement with 18 countries 
wherein in the foreign country they do not have t o pay social security in that 
particular country but can continue to contribute to our EPF and the benefits 
will keep accruing to them. The same thing applies to those countries‟ citizens 
who are coming to India for working here. The rest of it is all mana ged by the 
Ministry of External Affairs. So, I would intervene if and when other issues 
arise." 
2.6 The same saga continued during the course of oral evidence when the 
representative of Ministry of Labour & Employment stated that he had nothing 
to add because most of the questions which where raised by the hon 'ble 
Members related to the Ministry of Overseas. 
2.7 On being asked as to w hether Ministry of External Affairs has any tie up 
with the Ministry of Labour & Employment for overseas employment . The 
Ministry responded as under: 
"The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) is the nodal Ministry for safety, 
security and welfare of the Indian emigrant workers and framing rules 
and regulations for overseas employment. However, MEA does not have 
any tie up with Ministry of Labour & Employment at present.  MEA seeks 
inputs from different Ministries as and when issues arise in overseas 
employment such as Ministry of Shipping for overseas deployment of 
Seafarers etc." 
2.8 The Committee further desired to know about any  tie-up with any other 
Central Ministry for the overall betterment and skill up gradation of Indians 
seeking overseas employment with partic ular reference to ECR countries. In 
response, the Ministry stated as under: 
"A  Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed on July 2, 2016 
between the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Skill 

16 
 
Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) for implementation of the 
Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY). The scheme aims at enhancing the 
skills set of potential emigrant workers in select sectors and job roles, in 
line with international standards, to facilitate overseas employment.  The 
initial focus of the scheme is   on sectors that are in demand in 
Emigration Check Required C ountries (ECR countries) including 
domestic workers, drivers and construction workers. Subsequently, the 
scheme will be expanded to cover other parts of the world." 
2.9 When the Committee drew the attention of the Ministry on educating 
migrant workers on t he existing Labour Laws in the Country of their potential 
employment, the following was submitted: 
""bäÉÎº]xÉä¶ÉxÉ BÉEÆ]ÅÉÒVÉ BÉEä ãÉä¤É® ãÉÉìVÉ BÉEä ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå £ÉÉÒ +ÉÉ{ÉxÉä àÉÖqÉ =~ÉªÉÉ cè, iÉÉä <ºÉàÉå càÉ =xÉ 
bäÉÎº]xÉä¶ÉxÉ BÉEÆ]ÅÉÒVÉ BÉEä ºÉÉlÉ ãÉä¤É® AO ÉÉÒàÉå] BÉE® ®cä cé, ÉÊVÉºÉBÉEä iÉciÉ ´Éä nä¶É <ºÉBÉEÉÒ ÉÊVÉààÉänÉ®ÉÒ ãÉä ãÉå 
ÉÊBÉE càÉÉ®ä ªÉcÉÆ ºÉä VÉÉä ¤ÉÆvÉÖ +ÉÉè® ¤ÉcxÉå VÉÉiÉÉÒ cé, =xÉBÉEÉÒ ºÉÖ®FÉÉ +ÉÉè® BÉEãªÉÉhÉ BÉEä ÉÊãÉA |ÉÉäÉÊ´ÉVÉxÉ BÉE®å, 
<ºÉBÉEä ÉÊãÉA càÉxÉä ºÉ£ÉÉÒ nä¶ÉÉå BÉEä ºÉÉlÉ AOÉÉÒàÉå] ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ cè* 
´ÉcÉÆ BÉEÉÒ VÉÉä ºÉ®BÉEÉ®å cé, ´Éä £ÉÉÒ càÉÉ®ä ºÉÉlÉ ÉÊàÉãÉBÉE® BÉEÉàÉ BÉE® ®cÉÒ cè* ABÉE <¶ªÉÖ ÉÊàÉÉÊxÉàÉàÉ ´ÉäVÉ BÉEÉ 
lÉÉ* VÉèºÉä ÉÊàÉÉÊxÉàÉàÉ ´ÉäVÉ nºÉ cVÉÉ® âó{ÉªÉä +ÉÉè® BÉEàÉ VªÉÉnÉ nºÉ ªÉÉ {Éxpc |ÉÉÊiÉ¶ÉiÉ, iÉÉÉÊBÉE càÉÉ®É ãÉä¤É® 
´ÉcÉÆ BÉEà{ÉÉÒ]ÉÒÉÊ]´É cÉä +ÉÉè® £ÉÉ®iÉ àÉå ÉÊVÉiÉxÉÉ ÉÊàÉãÉiÉÉ cè, =ºÉºÉä BÉEàÉ xÉ ÉÊàÉãÉä* ªÉcÉÆ ºÉä VÉÉxÉä ºÉä {ÉcãÉä 
=ºÉxÉä VÉÉä BÉEVÉÉÇ ÉÊãÉªÉÉ cè ªÉÉ =ºÉBÉEä VÉÉä BÉEÉÊàÉ]àÉå]ÂºÉ cé, =ºÉBÉEÉÒ {ÉÚÉÌiÉ BÉE®xÉä àÉå ºÉÖÉÊ´ÉvÉÉ cÉä* AããÉÉÒMÉãÉ 
¥ÉèBÉEä] àÉå VÉ Éä ãÉÉäMÉ cé, =xcå nºÉ ãÉÉJÉ, {Éxpc ãÉÉJÉ âó{ÉA BÉEÉÒ ¤ÉéBÉE MÉÉ®Æ]ÉÒ ãÉäBÉE® BÉDªÉÉ £ÉäVÉxÉä BÉEÉÒ 
<VÉÉVÉiÉ nä nå, ÉÊVÉºÉºÉä ÉÊBÉE ªÉä ºÉ£ÉÉÒ ãÉÉäMÉ càÉÉ®ä ÉÊºÉº]àÉ àÉå +ÉÉ VÉÉAÆMÉä* +ÉMÉ® ªÉä ABÉE ¤ÉÉ® ÉÊºÉº]àÉ àÉå 
+ÉÉ VÉÉAÆ iÉÉä <xÉ {É® ÉÊxÉMÉ®ÉxÉÉÒ ®JÉ xÉÉ +ÉÉºÉÉxÉ cÉäMÉÉ* càÉ BÉEÉäÉÊ¶É¶É BÉE®åMÉä ÉÊBÉE c® àÉÖqä BÉEÉ BÉÖEU xÉ BÉÖEU 
ºÉàÉÉvÉÉxÉ ÉÊxÉBÉEãÉä*'' 
2.10 The Ministry also impressed upon the need for setting up a Cell for 
emigrant workers in all States and appoint a Nodal Officer who would be in 
constant touch with Ministry of External Affairs officials round the Clock. 
2.11 Commenting on the issue of involving State Governments, the 
representative stated as under: 
""càÉÉ®É ABÉE BÉEèà{ÉxÉ cè, <ºÉBÉEä ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå ®ÉVªÉ ºÉ®BÉEÉ®Éå BÉEÉä ¤ÉiÉÉ BÉE®, BÉÖE U ÉÊ{ÉEãàÉ ÉÊlÉªÉä]ºÉÇ àÉå ÉÊnJÉÉxÉä 
BÉEÉÒ BÉEÉäÉÊ¶É¶É BÉEÉÒ cè* ¤ÉäÉÊºÉBÉE nÉä -iÉÉÒxÉ àÉÖqä cé ÉÊBÉE {ÉÉºÉ{ÉÉä]Ç +ÉÉè® +ÉxªÉ BÉEÉMÉVÉÉiÉÉå BÉEÉÒ ABÉE |ÉÉÊiÉ PÉ® {É® 
®JÉ BÉE® VÉÉ<A* ´ÉcÉÆ VÉÉiÉä cÉÒ Aà¤ÉèºÉÉÒ ºÉä ºÉÆ{ÉBÉEÇ BÉE®å BÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉE càÉÉ®ÉÒ ªÉc £É ÉÒ PÉÉä­ÉhÉÉ ®cÉÒ cè ÉÊBÉE 
'{É®nä¶É àÉå +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÉ nÉäºiÉ, £ÉÉ®iÉÉÒªÉ nÚiÉÉ´ÉÉºÉ', càÉxÉä =ºÉBÉEÉ £ÉÉÒ ABÉE xÉªÉÉ BÉEèà{ÉäxÉ SÉãÉÉªÉÉ cè* ÉÊ´Énä¶É àÉå 

17 
 
VÉÉxÉä BÉEä ¤ÉÉn +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÉÒ c® MÉÖilÉÉÒ BÉEÉä Aà¤ÉèºÉÉÒ ºÉÖãÉZÉÉ ºÉBÉEiÉÉÒ cè, <ºÉÉÊãÉA =xÉBÉEä ºÉÉlÉ BÉEÉ àÉ BÉE®xÉÉ 
VÉ°ô®ÉÒ cè* àÉÉxÉxÉÉÒªÉ ºÉÉÆºÉn £ÉÉÒ +É{ÉxÉä SÉÖxÉÉ´É FÉäjÉÉå àÉå, ÉÊ´É¶Éä­ÉBÉE® +É{ÉPÉÉiÉ |É´ÉhÉ FÉäjÉ, VÉèºÉä ÉÊBÉE 
iÉäãÉÆMÉÉxÉÉ BÉEä nÉä -iÉÉÒxÉ ÉÊVÉãÉä cé, VÉcÉÆ àÉÉÊcãÉÉ+ÉÉäÆ BÉEÉÒ <ãÉÉÒMÉãÉ ]ÅèÉÊ{ÉEÉËBÉEMÉ ¤ÉcÖiÉ cÉäiÉÉÒ cè, càÉxÉä ´ÉcÉÆ 
BÉEèà{ÉäxÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ cè* +ÉMÉ® àÉÉxÉxÉÉÒªÉ ºÉÉÆºÉn ¤ÉÉäãÉåMÉä iÉÉä =ºÉBÉEÉ ¤ÉcÖiÉ +ÉºÉ® cÉäMÉÉ*'' 
2.12 Regarding data on ECR and ECNR, it was submitted as under: 
"Many years ago, when the subject was handled in the Ministry of 
Labour, there was a view that every country‟s data should be captured 
and it should be available so that we know who is going where, 
particularly if it pertains to women. This list was scrutinised by a 
Committee of Secretaries and the Government had decided to prune this 
list because w e did not simply have the mechanism to collect the data 
worldwide. There were only 18 countries which were selected to be 
designated as ECR countries because it was found at that point of time 
that the labour laws operating in those countries were not strong enough 
to protect. The Government felt that it is necessary at least in these 18 
countries where there is  a lot of migration of Indian workers we must 
bring them under MOU; we must also have the complete data, only ECR 
category workers data will be cap tured. I do not have the wh erewithal to 
collect data of ECN R passport holders. However, because of request 
coming and our data management and collection of statistics, hon. 
Minister of External Affairs took a meeting with the Director IB, Chief of 
NIA and Home Secretary  in May this year. We said that we require the 
data – you are also talking about the data not being available - with effect 
from June 2016 the MHA itself has started sharing their data. They are 
not sharing it on line but it is happening off  line. We have got data up to 
July 2017. Today we say 3.20 lakh emigrants have gone out of the 
country in the last 12 months, 19 lakh ECNR passport holders have gone 
out to these 18 ECR countries. So, the data base and the collection of 
data process has al ready commenced. We cannot say that we are only 
collecting ECR data, we are also getting this data from MHA. We will be 
in a position to give this data for other categories – how many went on 
tourist visa, how many went on employment visa, we have two portals  in 

18 
 
operation since 2014 – e-migrate; we are now going to register even the 
ECNR passport holder  - before they travel they will be required to fill a 
one page form, either on internet or through their mobile through an 
application which is under devel opment, giving basic data what is their 
profession, where are they going, which country are they travelling and 
who will be their employer. This idea is to capture  more and more data 
so that we are in a position to reach out to them, should they be in 
distress; and also this data will be useful for better policy formulation in 
the days to come." 
2.13 On being as ked by the Committee to furnish  a detailed note on Pravasi 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY) highlighting its mission/ objectives/modus 
operandi and its impact, the Ministry replied as under: 
 "A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed on July 2, 2016 
between the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) for implementation of the 
Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY). The scheme aims at enhancing 
the skills set of potential emigrant workers in select sectors and job 
roles, in line with international standards, to facilitate overseas 
employment.  The initial focus of the scheme is   on sectors that a re in 
demand in Emigration Check Required Countries (ECR countries)  
including domestic workers, drivers and construction workers. 
Subsequently, the scheme will be expanded to cover other parts of the 
world. 
 
  The Scheme includes Domain training (technica l top up) and 
certification benchmarked to international standards (MSDE‟s 
responsibility) and Pre Departure Orientation including language and 
soft-skill training modules (MEA‟s responsibility) for migrant workers.  
National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) is the implementation 
partner. As part of the scheme, India International Skills Centers 
(IISCs) have been set up in various parts of the country to exclusively 
focus on skilling, assessment and qualifications that are 
internationally acceptable. In  the pilot phase, 16 centers have been 
launched across various sectors including Domestic Workers, Retail, 
Tourism & Hospitality, Capital Goods, Healthcare, Construction, 
Automotive and Security. Around 500 candidates are enrolled in these 
Centres. Presently, MSDE is in process of reviewing the IISCs. 
 

19 
 
  Pre-Departure Orientation Training is aimed at sensitizing 
prospective emigrants on safe and legal migration and in terms of 
culture, language, traditions and local rules and regulations of the 
destination country. India Centre for Migration (ICM) that serves as a 
research think-tank of the MEA on all issues related to international 
migration has also brought out a comprehensive Pre -Departure 
Orientation Training (PDOT) Manual in collaboration with 
International Organization for Migration. The Manual has been 
translated into Hindi and Telugu languages as well. Apart from the 
Manual, Handbooks on Pre -departure orientation have also been 
developed, both for general category and women migrant workers. Pre -
departure training/ Training of the Trainers (ToT) programmes have 
also been organized.  In addition, one -day Pre Departure 
Orientation Training (PDOT) Program as part of the Pravasi 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana, has also been rolled out in Mumbai and 
New Delhi on a pilo t basis in two Centres each for the workers 
going to the Gulf region from the beginning of this year. It seems 
to be developing as a success story. Over 10,000 prospective 
emigrant workers have been imparted PDOT till May 18, 2018. 
MEA is working towards s caling up this program to other major 
departure points notably, Hyderabad, Chennai, Kochi and 
Lucknow." 
 
2.14 The Committee were further informed that as per the MoU signed 
between the two ministries, the roles defined for each ministry are as follows: 
"Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship: 
 
i. Make available the database of people who are skilled and certified 
through NSDC/SSC; NCVT, Apprenticeships, or any other 
database of skilled candidates of any government skill training 
programme available  with MSDE to identify potential emigrants 
for linkage with recruitment agencies and/or foreign employers  
ii. Candidates enrolled in PMKVY will indicate whether they would 
like to seek overseas employment opportunities. Other 
ministries/departments implementi ng skill development 
programmes may also be encouraged to seek the same 
information. This would help in identifying potential emigrants to 
be considered for coverage under PKVY.  
iii. Shortlist training institutes who have competencies and are willing 
to provide technical top up training, from the MSDE‟s network of 
training partners/institutions in the key States/regions identified 
by MEA for top up training PKVY, in order to cater to the high 

20 
 
demand of overseas employment in these areas. Some of these 
training centres may be required to have residential facilities. 
MSDE may enlist additional training centres for the purpose, if 
required.  
iv. Ensure in collaboration with MEA that skill training, assessment 
and certification under PMKVY, and other similar schemes, for the 
purposes of overseas employment are aligned to the standards 
acceptable in the destination countries concerned. 
v. Assist Steering Committee in monitoring the progress of the PKVY.  
 
Ministry of External Affairs 
 
i. Facilitate mobilization of individuals for Pre Departure Orientation 
Training (PDOT) training under PKVY and share data of overseas 
skill requirements wherever feasible.  
ii. Identify the key job roles and destination countries for overseas 
migration.  
iii. Identify the key states/regions in India from where people migrate 
for overseas employment.  
iv. Allocate budget for implementation on PKVY including advocacy 
and marketing of the scheme, advertisement (press and social 
media), top up training and training of the tra iners for the top up 
training. The entire cost for the top up training and training of 
trainers for the top up training will be borne by MEA under PKVY, 
and will be transferred to National Skill Development Fund (NSDF) 
for execution of PKVY scheme through MSDE and its agencies.  
v. MEA will develop training modules for PDOT and corresponding 
Training of Trainers programmes, for PKVY in collaboration with 
MSDE and its agencies/institutions." 
2.15 Asked to furnish a  detailed note on the PDOT in regard to the var ious 
Emigration Check Required (ECR) Countries, t he Ministry of Skill Development 
& Entrepreneurship replied as under: 
"Given the need to orient potential migrant workers with regards to 
language, culture, do‟s and don‟ts in the destination country, the 
emigration process and welfare measures, and PDOT program has been 
launched.  Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) in collab oration with 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is 
conducting the PDOT program. NSDC is the implementing agency for 
this program.  
A longer, 160 hours PDOT program is offered at all IISCs which consists 
of country orientation, langua ge and digital literacy. A shorter, one day 

21 
 
PDOT program is offered to all migrant workers who are likely to depart 
soon and register for the training through registered recruitment agents.  
Both versions of the PDOT program are delivered by trainers who h ave 
undergone Training of Trainers (ToT) program organized by MEA. So far, 
52 trainers from existing IISCs and NSDC Training Partners have 
undergone the ToT. 
The one -day PDOT program was piloted in 2 locations of Bombay and 
Delhi each and commenced on 10th January 2018. Since inception, over 
8,000 candidates have received training (as of 15th April 2018) under 
One-Day PDOT Program. In the near future, this program is expected to 
be scaled up to include four more locations namely Hyderabad, Cochin, 
Chennai and Lucknow." 
2.16 During the course of oral deposition before the Committee on 
24.05.2018, the representative of the Ministry of External Affairs informed the 
Committee about the benefits of Pre -Departure Orientation programme for  
semi- skilled and blue collared workers going for overseas employment.  
"I will focus on what are the new opportunities that are available for us. हमारी  विदेश मंत्री जी 
का  भी इस ओर  काफी  ध्यान रहता  है। हमारा  फोकस  अभी भी लो  और  सेमी-वककल्ड  िककसक की  वकक वल ंग पर  है, 
तावक  उनका  िेल फे यर  और  प्रोटेक्शन आवद अच्छे से हो सके । गल्फ  में वदक्क तें हैं, वफर  भी गल्फ  में हमार े नंबर  
इस बार  भी बढ़े हैं। आज जब हम यहााँ बात कर  र हे हैं, तो इस समय हमार े 90 लाख  लोग  जी.सी.सी. कं ट्रीज़ में 
हैं। हमने िहााँ एम.एस.डी.ई. के  साथ एम.ओ.यू. कर  के  प्रिासी कौशल  विकास योजना की  शुरू आत की  है। इसमें 
हमारा  फोकस  इसी पर  है वक  इसमें उन प्रोफे शंस को  वलया  जाए, वजनको  ज़्यादा से ज़्यादा इंवडयंस अपनाते हैं। 
लो  और  सेमी-वककल्ड , ब्ल ू कॉलर  िककसक की  ज़्यादा प्रॉब्लम्स आती हैं। इसके  वलए  हमने तीन सैक्टसक 
प्रायॉर ेटाइज़ वकए  हैं - इसमें कं कट्रक्शन िककसक, ड्राइिसक और  डॉमेवकटक  िककसक हैं। हमने देखा है वक  इनकी  ही 
सब से ज़्यादा वडमांड होती है और  सब से ज़्यादा समकयाएं भी इन्हीं की  आती हैं। इस ककीम  के  ब्रॉडली दो 
कं पोनेंट्स हैं – पहला  कं पोनेंट टैवक्नक ल  ट्रेवनंग देने का  है। उसे एम.एस.डी.ई. देख रहा  है। इसका  दूसर ा 
कं पोनेंट कु छ सॉफ्ट वकक्ल्स  बढ़ाना है। We call it Pre -Departure Orientation Training, वजसके  तहत 
उन्हें कु छ रूल्स  और  ररकपॉवन्सवबवलटीज़  बता वदए जाएं, जब िे िककसक विदेशों में जाएं। यह काम  पी डॉट 
एम.ई.ए. का  है। पी डॉट एम.ई.ए. में हमने बड़ा ही क ॉम्प्रेहेंवसि मैन्युअल  बनाया है। इंवडया सेंटर  फॉर  माइग्रेशन 
के  नाम से हमारा  एक  वथंक  टैंक  भी है। िह आई.ओ.एम. और  यू.एन. के  साथ भी क ोल ैब्रेट करता  है। हमने यह 
क ॉम्प्रेहेंवसि मैन्युअल  सन् 2016 के  एंड में बना वलया  था। उसके  बेवसस पर  हमने ट्रेवनंग कटाटक कर  दी है। यह 
ट्रेवनंग आई.आई.एस.टीज़. में भी हो रही  है। इसके  वलए  इस साल  की  शुरू आत से हमने पायल ेट बेवसस पर  चार  
सेंटसक वलए  हैं, क्योंवक  यह काम  तो चल  ही रहा  है, ल ेवक न इसके  अलािा हमने सोचा वक  जो िककसक िहााँ जा र हे 
हैं, कम  से कम  उन्हें एक  वदन का  पी.डॉट देना शुरू  वकया  जाए। इस ड्यूर ेशन को  एक  वदन का  इसवलए  रखना  
पड़ा, क्योंवक  हमार े ज़्यादातर िककसक वदल्ली  और  मुंबई से आते हैं। वदल्ली  और  मुंबई - इन दोनों जगहों पर  

22 
 
िककसक को  सब से बड़ी समकया यह आती है वक  उनके  पास र हने के  वलए  कोई  जगह नहीं होती है। इस कारण  
हमने यह प्रोग्राम वसफक एक  वदन के  वलए  ही िकक-आउट वकया।  मुंबई में हमार े दो सैंटसक हैं - वजनमें से एक  हमारा  
अपना विदेश भिन है और  दूसर ा एस.मैक्स. का  सैंटर  है। इसी प्रकार  वदल्ली  में भी हमार े दो सैंटसक हैं। इसके  
नतीजे काफी  अच्छे आए हैं। शुरू  के  चार  महीनों में ही हमने िहााँ लगभग  दस हजार  लोगों  को  भेज वदया है। 
इसके  साथ ही हमने इस पर  भी फोकस  वकया  है वक  हम वकस  प्रकार  नए माके ट्स आईडेंवटफाई क र ें, जहााँ 
हमारी  वकक्ल्ड  और  लोअर  वकक्ल्ड  मैनपािर  जा सके । इस वदशा में भी हम क ायक कर  र हे हैं। हम वकक्ल्ड  मैनपािर  
को  वकक्ल ंग दे सक ते हैं, ल ेवक न इसके  वलए  यह ज़रूरी  है वक  िे माके ट्स भी हमार े वलए  ओपन होने चावहए। इस 
साल  माचक के  हमने अपना पहला  क ॉम्प्रेहेंवसि एग्रीमेंट फ्ााँस के  साथ साइन वकया।  इसका  नाम माइग्रेशन एंड 
मोवबवलटी  क ॉम्प्रेहेंवसि पाटकनर वशप एग्रीमेंट है। इस एग्रीमेंट में िीज़ा फै वसवल टेशन भी है। हमार े जो कटूडेंट्स 
माकटसक एंड अबि क र ने के  वलए  विदेशों में जा र हे हैं, उन्हें दो साल  के  वलए  एक्सटेंवडड र ेवसडेंवशयल  पर वमट्स 
भी वदए जाएंगे। वजन कं पवनयों का  िहााँ इकटैवब्ल शमैंट है, उनका  भी िीज़ा फै वसवल टेशन होगा। So, it is a big 
step by itself. अब हम इसे बाकी  ई.यू. कं ट्रीज के  साथ र ेवलल के ट क र ने की  कोवशश  कर  र हे हैं। इसके  अलािा  
हमार े वजतने भी वमशन्स और  पोकट्स हैं, उनके  साथ हमने एक  सिे वकया , वजसके  तहत हमने उनसे कहा  वक  - 
आप गैलस आइडेंवटफाई कीवजए।  Also, identify what are the skills and demands. इस डेटा को  हमने 
एम.एस.डी.ई. के  साथ शेयर  भी वकया  है। ब्रॉडली, हम इन दो डायर ेक्शंस में काम  कर  र हे हैं। जहााँ तक  प्रिासी 
कौशल  विकास योजना की  बात है, उसमें ई.एम. खुद भी काफी  इंटर ेकट ल े रही  हैं। इस संबंध में 17 अप्रैल  को  
ई.एम. और  एम.एस.डी.ई. वमवनकटर  धमेंद्र प्रधान जी की  अध्यक्षता में एक  हाई-ल ेिल  मीवटंग हुई थी, वजसमें 
उन्होंने पूर ी प्रविया की  समीक्षा की  और  फदकर  वनदेश वदए वक  इसे कै से और  सुदृढ़ वकया  जाना चावहए।  
 वमवनकट्री ऑफ वकक्ल  डेिल पमेंट ने जो प्रेज़ेंटेशन वदया है, उसमें उन्होंने काफी  वडटेल  में इन सभी 
विषयों को  छूने का  प्रयास वकया  है, वजनके  तहत हमार े देश का  ल ेबर  विदेशों में जाकर  काम  क र ेगा। इसमें इन्होंने 
बताया है वक  विदेश में काम  के  वलए  जाने िाल े कामगारों  की  वकस  प्रकार  की  तैयार ी होनी चावहए। वमवनकट्री ऑफ 
एक्सटनकल  अफे यसक का  अपना अलग  काम  है। अब से पहल े, जब तक  वमवनकट्री ऑफ वकक्ल  डेिल पमेंट का  
फॉमेशन नहीं हुआ था, तब तक  वककल  डेिल पमेंट करना  और  कामगारों  को  तैयार  करना  और  विदेश की  
कं डीशंस के  बार े में जानकारी  देना - ये दोनों काम  वमवनकट्री ऑफ एक्सटनकल  अफे यसक करती  थी। अब luckily 
हमारी  कं ट्री मे वककल  डेिल पमेंट की  एक  अलग  वमवनकट्री बन गई है। अब यह वमवनकट्री अपने कतर  पर  आदमी में 
हुनर  बढ़ाने हेतु सवटकवफके शन का  काम , उनकी  ट्रेवनंग का  काम  और  कपेवसवफक ल ी उस क्षेत्र की  जानकारी  देने 
का  काम  करती  है, जहााँ िह आदमी जाकर  काम  क र ने िाला  है।" 
2.17 In response to the Committee's specific query as to whether the Ministry 
of Labour & Employment should be involved in PDOT as they deal with all 
kinds of labour and labour laws , the Ministry of Skill D evelopment &  
Entrepreneurship stated:  
"The Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) aims  at enhancing soft 
skills of potential emigrants in terms of culture, language, traditions and 
local rules and regulations of the destination countries.  They are also 

23 
 
briefed about the Indian regulatory framework for overseas employment 
and Schemes for their welfare and protection. This does not relate to 
Indian labour laws." 
2.18 On being asked by the Committee to furnish details of the 9000 trainees 
including their profession and country of employment , the  Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship responded as under: 
"The mobilization and registration of candidates is done by registered 
recruitment agents. Details such as profession and country of 
employment are not captured on the registration portal currently. 
Ministry of External Affairs to add further". 
2.19 The Committee desired to  be furnished details of Emigration clearance 
granted by each of the 10 Protector of Emigrant Offices during the last five 
years. In response the Ministry of External Affairs stated as under: 
"Emigration Clearance granted to ECR passport holder Indian workers, 
PoE-wise, during the last five years 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
PoEs 
2013 2014 
 
2015 
 
2016 2017 
1 Delhi 150115 125190 185632 101000 62536 
2 Chandigarh 116682 56862 36815 30317 44294 
3 Jaipur 50704 56271 47573 31957 13205 
4 Rae Beily 12100 21984 16468 18937 7068 
5 Hyderabad 62745 77726 48760 39006 41839 
6 Cochin 21864 26923 24079 16932 12392 
7 Trivandrum 6400 8501 18772 8872 2453 
8 Mumbai 368281 391368 353591 231609 170787 
9 Chennai 20941 30463 41665 27491 26567 
10 Kolkata 9869 9717 10797 14817 9883 
TOTAL 819701 805005 784152 520938 391024 
  
2.20 The Committee asked about the rationale for a mere one day PDOT and 
the short time frame to fine tune the desired soft -skills of the workers 
embarking on overseas employment . In response the Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship has stated as under: 
"1 day PDOT was conceptualized and initiated on request of MEA and 
was targeted for the migrant workers who are about to depart from 

24 
 
country for overseas employment. Due to very limited time such migrant 
workers have before leaving the country, it was deci ded to initiate a one-
day PDOT program.  
  MEA to comment further". 
2.21 The Committee desired to know from the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship about their observation on qualitative benefits of the PDOT 
on workers since its inception in c omparison to those workers who went 
abroad prior to the commencement of PDOT, as well as details of those workers 
who have been trained under PMKVY and PKVY eligible for the PDOT. The 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship submitted as under: 
"PDOT is aimed at empowering the migrant workers and to equip them to 
navigate effectively through the new environment of a foreign country. 
While no comparison has been made to identify any qualitative benefits, 
it is difficult to comment on the qualitativ e benefits as it is just been 5 
months since the training has commenced. 
...All migrant workers who are departing the country are eligible for 
enrolling in one-day PDOT program. Registration and mobilization of the 
candidates is done by Recruitment Agents registered with MEA." 
2.22 When asked further by the Committee to furnish the selection criteria for 
any institute to be selected for imparting PDOT program, the number of 
institutes etc., the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship replied as 
under: 
"As requested by MEA, the primary criteria was to set up one -day PDOT 
training centres in major ports of departure where maximum ECR 
migration is observed, i.e. cities such as Delhi & Mumbai. Apart from the 
location criterion, other factors such as inf rastructure capability, 
availability of trained trainers,  accessibility of the centres via public 
transportation were also taken into consideration.  
Since it was pilot, four NSDC partner institutes which met the above -
mentioned criteria were selected for the testing the one -day PDOT 
program. 
In order to test the capability of the training centres and robustness of 
the training programme, only 4 centres were initially selected. Moreover, 

25 
 
the mobilization of candidates through the recruitment agents was bein g 
tried for the first time and hence there was a certain level of uncertainty 
in the operational model. Therefore, it was suggested by MEA to initially 
test the concept only in four locations. However, in the near future, there 
are plans to set up similar centres in four  other “ports of departure” - 
Hyderabad, Cochin, Chennai and Lucknow". 
2.23 When a sked to furnish the details of the awareness generation 
programmes conducted by Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
and Ministry of External Affairs for PDOT and also to provide details of training 
imparted by each of the institutes, along with details of training staff and 
number of trainees , t he Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
responded  as follows: 
 "The mobilization and reg istration is done by MEA registered 
Recruitment agents and the candidates are then directed to the 
respective training centre. 
 
 
 
P
D
P
DO Training Staff details: 
 
  
 
 
2.24 The Committee desired to be apprised about the challenges being 
encountered in implementation of one -day PDOT. In their response,  the 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship submitted as under:  
 
 
PDOT Centre Location Capacity Trained 
% 
Utilization  
Mumbai-VideshBhavan-A Mumbai 5200 3204 62% 
Mumbai-ASMACS SKILL-B Mumbai 7125 4516 63% 
Don Bosco Technical Institute-A Delhi 4150 1324 32% 
Orion Edutech-B Delhi 5170 379 7% 
Total 21645 9423 43% 
PDOT Centre Location Location Start date Trainers 
Mumbai-Videsh Bhavan-A Mumbai 10-Jan-18 1 
Mumbai-ASMACS SKILL-B Mumbai 10-Jan-18 1 
Don Bosco Technical Institute-A Delhi 29-Jan-18 2 
Orion Edutech-B Delhi 29-Jan-18 2 

26 
 
"Challenges faced in implementation of one-day PDOT 
 Uncertainty in the number and scheduling of candidates due to 
which centre infrastructure remains under-utilized 
 Verification of candidates and monitoring 
 PDOT content not concise enough; Hindi version created but 
translation into other vernacular languages required 
 Certificate generation and distribution is hampered due to lack of 
digital signatures from signing authorities 
Other challenges where better coordination and support is required: 
• Sharing of up -to-date, granular migration data for better planning – 
declining ECR numbers and lack of ECNR data make it tough to make 
future projections 
• Technology support and i ntegration of e -migrate with PDOT portal 
and NSDC SDMS for effective scale up 
• Strengthening of technology platform to include verification of 
candidates and enhance monitoring of program eg. Link with 
passport/aadhar database 
• Linking IISC candidates with R ecruitment Agents and Overseas 
Employers for enhancing placements" 
2.25 The Ministry of Skill Development also informed the Committee on the  
Action Plan of both MEA and MSDE to launch and implement PKVY for 
potential migratory workforce in select sectors: 
 "District level data is being compiled by MEA to map the source 
districts and in demand job roles 
 Based on the locations (districts) and job roles, NSDC is identifying 
training partners with the requisite infrastructure and capacity for 
training 
 Operational plan including training standards, assessment & 
certification, mobilization through recruitment agents is being 
finalized" 
2.26 The Committee asked to  know whether  MSDE and MEA observed any 
impact of PDOT on enhancing the employment prospects o f Indian workers in 
the overseas market and especially in the ECR Countries , i n response the 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship stated that this issue 
pertains to the Ministry of External Affairs: 

27 
 
2.27 The Committee desired to know whether MSDE have any institute/s that 
provides skill training and certification benchmarked to international 
standards and if so, to furnish State-wise details of such institute/s along with 
the various streams in which training is provided, number of people trai ned as 
well as those employed overseas after successful completion of training.  In 
response the Ministry stated as under: 
"IISCs are set up to provide domain training on training on transnational 
standards.  
Below are the details of IISC centres.  
In the pilot phase, 16 IISCs have been operationalized across 9 job roles 
in 8 sectors: Domestic Workers, Retail, Tourism & Hospitality, Capital 
Goods, Healthcare, Construction, Automotive and Security; 538* 
students enrolled in 22 batches. Till Date, 106 candidat es have received 
employment with domestic employers. Below is the details and progress 
on international placements: 
 1 student from General Mason, Maharajganj, has been provisionally 
matched to employer in Dubai.  
 2 students from General Mason, Kolkata, have been placed in Dubai.  
 4 students from General Mason batch, Kolkata have been 
provisionally matched to employer in Qatar. 
 1 student from Domestic Worker batch, Ranchi has been placed in 
Singapore 
Sr. 
No. IISC Name Job Role Location  State No.  of 
Batches  
No. of 
students 
enrolled 
1 Quivan 
Skills 
Mason 
General Maharajganj Uttar 
Pradesh 3 76 
2 Orion 
Edutech 
General 
Duty 
Assistant 
Varanasi Uttar 
Pradesh 1 11 
3 Synchro 
Serve 
F&B 
Steward Hyderabad Telangana 1 28 
4 Force 10 
Protection 
Unarmed 
Security 
Guard 
Ernakulam Kerala 1 13 
5 
Empower 
Pragati 
Sales 
Associate Allahabad Uttar 
Pradesh 
1 30 
 
F&B 
Steward Allahabad 1 30 

28 
 
6 Mahendra 
Skills 
Retail Sales 
Associate Lucknow Uttar 
Pradesh 1 30 
7 Labournet General 
Mason Gorakhpur Uttar 
Pradesh 1 30 
8 Prayas JAC General 
Housekeeper Ranchi Bihar 2 60 
9 IL&FS 
Skills  
 Commercial 
Vehicle 
Driver 
Ajmer,  Rajasthan 1 25 
10 Quivan 
HTTC  
General 
Mason Kolkata West 
Bengal 1 12 
11 Moti Babu 
Institute 
General 
Mason   Forbesganj, 
Araria, Bihar 
1 20 
 MIG Welder  1 15 
12 
Quivan 
Institute  MIG Welder  
North 24, 
Parganas,   
West 
Bengal 
2 38 
13 
ERAM 
Skills 
MIG Welder  
Ernakulum Kerala 
1 30 
Electrical 
Foreman 1 30 
14 
Gulf 
Enterprises  
General 
Mason Kutch Gujarat 1 30 
15 
GM 
Shiptech 
General 
Mason Chennai 
Tamil 
nadu 1 30 
16 Mecton 
Electrical 
Foreman Chennai 
Tamil 
nadu 
1 
Training 
Yet to be 
started 
 
2.28 During the course of the detailed examination of the subject, 
the Committee observed that the Ministry of Labour & Employment 
is the nodal department for protecting and safeguarding interests of 
workers and hence  has a mandate for safeguarding the interests of 
India E migrant Workers. On their part, the Ministry of External 
Affairs claim to be  the nodal Ministry for safety, security and 

29 
 
welfare of Indian emigrant workers, framing rules/regulations for 
overseas employment . The Committee note  that at present the 
Ministry of External Affairs  does not have any tie up with the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment  on the issue of overseas emigrant 
workers. Not at all satisfie d at the prevalent state of affairs, the 
Committee feel that  the Ministry of External Affairs and the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment  need to come together on the 
issue of protection and security of emigrant Indian workers , 
including women. They are also of the opinion  that the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment should be the nodal Ministry for educating 
workers seeking overseas employment about details of the prevalent 
labour laws, social security laws as well as minimum wages 
prevalent in a particular countr y. The Indian Missions/Posts in 
various Countries can facilitate the process owing to the locations 
in various Countries.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment must work together on this v ital aspect  urgently by 
setting up a J oint Committee of both the Ministries which can be  
co-chaired/alternatively chaired by the Secretaries of both the 
Ministries and should comprise of members from all line 
Ministries/Departments/Organisations v iz. Ministry of Skill 

30 
 
Development & Entrepreneurship, Ministry of Home Affairs, State 
Governments, etc. The progress achieved herein  may be reported to 
the Committee.  
2.29 The Committee note that the Ministry of External Affairs has 
complete details of Emigration Check Required (ECR) category 
workers for the 18 ECR countries. However,  it came out during oral 
evidence that the  Ministry of External Affairs are not in possession 
of any data of Indians going to  these nations on Tourist Visas and 
then overstaying illegally and seeking employment in these 
countries. Also, Ministry of External Affairs have no details of those 
Indian citizens visiting these  18 ECR countries or any other 
country, who are holders of Emigration Check Not Required (ECNR)  
as details of ECNR Passport Holders going abroad falls under the 
domain of the Ministry of Home Affairs.  Also, lack of  adequate co-
ordination between the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of 
Home Affairs further aggravates the issue. In the unfort unate event 
of any Indian citizen staying on illegally  in a foreign nation and 
meeting some misfortune, the Ministry of External Affairs  is not in 
the position to promptly extend  help to that particular Indian 
citizen due to lack of details. The Committee feel that the time has 
finally dawned for  establishing close  cooperation between the 

31 
 
Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs in terms of 
sharing details of ECR and ECNR passport holders going abroad , 
either for employment or touris m. The Committee desire that this 
issue be dealt with  the requisite alacrity so that online and  offline 
data sharing between Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of 
Home Affairs on ECR and ECNR passport holders visiting abroad is 
available in real time. This  would not only address the issue of 
persons overstaying on tourist visas to obtain employment but 
would also  enable the Ministry of External Affairs to come to the 
rescue of stranded Indian workers abroad at the earliest. 
2.30 The Committee are in complete agreement with the suggestion 
of the Ministry of External Affairs that there is an urgent need for 
setting up a cell for emigrant workers in all States/UTs and 
appointment of a Nodal Officer who would be in constant touch with  
officials of Ministry of External Affairs 24x7. If this is accomplished, 
it would not only ensure better co -ordination between States/UTs 
and the Ministry of External Affairs, but would ultimately benefit 
the blue collar India n emigrant workers as all their details would be 
passed on by their respective  State Government to the Ministry of 
External Affairs. The Committee are also of the firm opinion that 
this cell should insist upon all emigrant workers to deposit a copy of 

32 
 
their passports alongwith the details of their overseas employer with 
this nodal agency, as well as keep a similar copy at home with their 
family members/relatives. Further, the State nodal agency should 
impress upon all emigrant workers of their State/UT to contact the 
Indian embassy upo n their arrival in their country of employment 
and contact the embassy officials once in two months, so that the 
embassy is kept abreast about their latest employment details and 
in case of any emergency, swiftly come to their aid. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that immediate action be taken to  issue 
necessary advisory in order to  ensure that the said nodal agency is 
set up in all States/UTs at the earliest. They further desire to be 
apprised of the progress achieved in this regard. 
2.31 The Committee  express their satisfaction on noting that the 
Ministry of External Affairs has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding on 2nd July, 2016, with the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship for implementation of the 
Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana  (PKVY). This scheme aims at 
enhancing the skill set of potential emigrant workers in select 
sectors and job roles in line with international standards to 
facilitate overseas employment. The initial focus of the Scheme is 
on sectors that are in demand in ECR cou ntries i.e. domestic 

33 
 
workers, drivers and construction workers. Subsequently, the 
scheme will be expanded. The Committee, also note that under 
Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY) , the role of Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship is technical top up i.e. domain 
training and certification , benchmarked to international standards . 
The  responsibility of Ministry of External Affairs is Pre -Departure 
Orientation which includes language and soft -skill training modules 
for migrant workers. Also, Natio nal Skill Development Corporation 
(NSDC) is the implementation partner. While appreciating the novel 
initiative of both the Ministries  to enhance the overall employment 
quotient of the migrant Indian worker, the Committee desire that 
both Ministries should strive hard in this endeavour so that Pravasi 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY) is successful in achieving its mandate. 
2.32 The Committee note that under Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana 
(PKVY), Sixteen India International Skill Centres (IISCs) have been 
set up on a pilot basis in various parts of the Country. These centres 
exclusively focus on skilling, assessment and qualifications that are 
internationally acceptable. Training is imparted in v arious sectors 
including domestic workers, retail, tourism and hospitality, capital 
goods, healthcare, construction, automotive and security. As per the 
figures furnished to the Committee, about 538 candidates have been 

34 
 
imparted training in the fifteen cen tres as one centre is not 
functional. However, t he extremely low rate of international 
placement i.e. 8 candidates from the 538 candidates is cause of 
concern to the Committee, as in the year 2017, around 3.91 lakh  
Indians were granted Emigration Clearance  to work in the ECR 
countries. This yawning gap between number of Indian migrant 
workers granted emigration clearance to work in ECR countries viz-
a-viz candidates imparted training in IISCs and then receiving 
international placement is one which needs to be addressed. T he 
figures clearly reveal that majority of the potential migrant workers 
are still not aware of the existence of IISCs and the qualitative 
improvement that it is likely to bring in their job prospect. The 
Committee, therefore, exhort upon th e Ministry of External Affairs 
and Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship to work upon 
this lacunae in real earnest, as to ensure that not only the number 
of candidates imparted training by IISCs witnesses a quantum 
increase, but also the international placement of IISC pass outs  
increases. They also desire that an action plan be formulated at the 
earliest and the Committee be apprised of the same. 
2.33 In regard to one day Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) 
programme, the Committee have been informed that Ministry of 

35 
 
External Affairs alongwith Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship launched the same as the need was felt to orient 
potential migrant workers with regards to language, culture, do's 
and don'ts in the destination  country. The one day PDOT 
programme was piloted in 2 locations of Bombay and Delhi each and 
since its inception on 10th January, 2018, training has been 
imparted to over 8,000 candidates. However, one glaring omission 
which came to the notice of the Commi ttee was that the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment was not made a party to PDOT by the 
Ministry of External Affairs. Expressing their surprise at this 
omission, they desire that Ministry of External Affairs also in volve 
Ministry of Labour & Employment for i mparting training on the 
labour laws of the 18 ECR countries especially with regard to 
Minimum wages, social security and hours of work , etc. , at the 
earliest. 
2.34 The Committee also recommend that the duration of training 
imparted under PDOT be increased  to atleast 3 days so that the less 
educated blue collar workers are able to fully comprehend and grasp 
the contents of this training in a phased manner, as well as they do 
not suffer from information overload as is the present case scenario 
in one day PDOT. 

36 
 
2.35 The Committee desire that PDOT be imparted to all Indian 
migrant workers who have been given Emigration Clearance to work 
in ECR countries. Further, the contents of the training should be 
imparted in a verna cular medium, so as to facilitate easy 
comprehension and maximum information absorption by the 
candidates of the PDOT.  

37 
 
Chapter-III 
OVERSEAS EMPLOYMENT OF WOMEN WORKERS INCLUDING 
NURSES AND MAIDS - ISSUES AND REGUATORY FRAMEWORK 
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 
 Responding to a query regarding detail of total number of women 
migrants working in different countries alongwith details of job categories, MEA 
in their written replies submitted as under: 
"Presently this Ministry captures data in respect of ECR passport holding 
Indians, including women, going to 18 ECR countries for employment through 
the e-Migrate portal. Data in respect of emigrants going to other countries is not 
maintained by the Ministry of External Affairs. However, all the Indian 
Missions/Posts were requested to provide information in respect of total number 
of women emigrants in their respective countries. Information from more than 
100 Missions/Posts has been received, most of them have submitted „NIL‟ 
information as they do not have any mechanism to collect or maintain such data 
and the local authorities also do not share data due to privacy issues of the 
emigrants. Moreover, the Indian emigrants are not required to register 
themselves in the Mission/Posts on arrival in the destination countries. 
However, the information received, so far, is given in Annexure-I. In this 
context, the Hon‟ble Committee is informed that recently the Ministry has 
started mandatory registration of Non - ECR passport holding Indian emigrants 
going to 18 ECR countries for employment purposes, on pilot basis. During the 
pilot phase no off -loading will be undertaken, but after the pilot phase such 
emigrants going to the notified countries on employment visa, without 
registration, will be off -loaded. In future this initiative may be replicated for all 
the countries." 
 
3.2 The Committee were informed by the Ministry of External Affairs that it 
has been reported by our Missions/Posts abroad that complaints have been 
received from Indian emigrant women workers regarding non -payment/delayed 
payment of salaries, excess working hours, inadequate living and working 
conditions, non -payment of over time allowance for extra working hours, 
weekly holidays, working for longer hours, refusal to grant exit/entry permits 
for visit to India, incidences of confinement, refusal to allow the worker on final 
exit visa after completion of their contracts and non -providing medical and 
insurance facilities etc. 
 

38 
 
3.3 When queried on the total number of complaints received by the 
concerned government aut hority from emigrant workers worldwide alongwith 
details of follow up action, the Ministry stated as under: 
"The Indian Mission/Posts particularly in the Emigration Check Required (ECR) 
countries including Gulf Countries have reported that complaints have been 
received from Indian workers, including women workers, regarding non -payment 
of salaries and denial of legitimate labour rights and benefits such as non -
issuance/renewal of residence permits, non payment of overtime Allowance, 
weekly holidays, longer working hours, refusal to grant exit/re -entry permits for 
visit to India, refusal to allow the worker on final exit visa after completion of 
their contracts and non -provision of medical and insurance facilities etc. 
Incidents of confinement, abandoning of housemaids by their sponsors have 
also been reported. All the Indian Missions/Posts were requested to provide 
information, involving women, in this regard. Information from more than 100 
Missions/Posts have been received and most of them have submitted „NI L‟ 
information. The same is tabulated in Annexure-I." 
3.4 On the above -mentioned issue, during the course of a briefing meeting, 
the representative of the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under: 
"A large number of Indians go abroad for employment which include both blue 
collared, unskilled or skilled workers as well as highly qualified profession als. In 
the Gulf alone we have 8.5 million. They are primarily blue collared workers. 
These blue collared workers go to the Gulf region where most of the c ountries 
still do not have defined labour laws. As you know, these are not democracies 
where people can easily exercise their rights. It is in these countries that the 
illiterate Indian workers are vulnerable to exploitation and harassment." 
3.5 He further stated that there are 18 countries mainly in the Gulf region 
and Malaysia which have been categorised as „Emigration Check Required‟ or 
ECR countries.  Having regard to the immigrant protection of welfare in various 
countries, the Government regulates emi gration of ECR category passport 
holders going for employment in any of these 18 ECR countries. The female 
workers going to the ECR countries are all the more vulnerable to harassment, 
exploitation and abuse. Therefore, welfare and protection of Indian fem ale 
workers in ECR countries is one of the focus areas of the Ministry of External 
Affairs. 

39 
 
3.6 Clarifying further, he stated that for ensuring protection of migrant 
workers, we have initiated what is called, „Go safe, go trained, and go with 
confidence‟. 
3.7 On being queried about complaints regarding human trafficking 
particularly women, Ministry of External Affairs submitted that as complaints 
are coming about human trafficking and women trafficking to us, we are 
regularly referring them to CBI. Under th e CBI Manual, it is the CBI which has 
to check human trafficking. Anyone emigrating illegally is being trafficked. We 
are regularly taking up such matters. In the last one year till date, 58 cases 
have been referred to CBI and another two have gone just la st week. So, we are 
checking it regularly. 
3.8 During the course of his oral deposition before the Committee, the 
representative of the Ministry of External Affairs informed the Committee about 
the prevalence of a dual visa system. The Ministry of External  Affairs further 
clarified the issue of use of double visa by stating that "it  is not actually as if 
the same country issues two different visas to the same person i.e. "Tourist" 
and "Employment" visas. The fact is that the maid/emigrant travels on 
"Tourist" visa to one country and has an "Employment" visa of another 
neighbouring country in his/her bag and it is this "Employment" visa, which 
the maid/emigrant affixes on her/his passport after boarding the flight to the 
country  of her/his final destination for employment. Another way to by pass 
the system is to travel on "tourist" visa to a country and then get it converted to 
an "Employment" visa there in the destination country."  
"Ever since we have tightened the grip on agents sending, they are now going  on 
tourist visa.  They are having two visas.  One is in their pocket or in their bag 
and one is affixed on the passport.  On the passport, they are traveling in tourist 
visa saying we are going to visit my brother, my relative or somebody and they 
go.  So the emigration officers are allowing them to go; whereas on suspicion the 
Bureau of Immigration officers are empowered to check the hand baggage.  
When the hand baggage is checked, they are having employment visa for 
housemaid in a neighbouring country , which is not correct.  They cannot have 
an employment visa.  So, we have written to these countries, their missions not 

40 
 
to issue two visas for one person.  But, because visa grant is a sovereign issue 
for those countries, we are not able to get a positive r esponse that for the same 
person two visas are available." 
3.9 He further stated that the ladies who are going as housemaids, they are 
having ECR passports, that is, their education is 10th class and below.  So, 
they are issued ECR passport.  But, even on ECR passport, if they travel on a 
tourist visa, then they are permitted to travel, whereas in their bag is the 
employment visa and inside the flight they are pasting it on the passport and 
when they exit out of the airport in Saudi Arabia or wherever they reach, they 
show that visa and go in.  In addition, the ladies who are 50 and above, they 
are automatically treated as ECNR passport category.  If the y are income tax 
payees also, they are holding ECNR.  These two routes, one is tourist visa route 
and one is ECNR route, have been going on. 
3.10 When Committee asked to furnish instance/s of emigrant worker being 
issued dual Visas by any of the ECR countries, if any, measures being taken to 
tackle the issue of double Visa holders before their departure from t he territory 
of India during the last five years. The Ministry submitted as under: 
"The Ministry does not come across any such cases directly. However, 
some cases are reported by the Bureau of Immigration (BoI) where 
unscrupulous agents manage to obtain tourist visas of one country and 
employment visas for another neighbouring country. Th e emigrant 
departs on tourist/visit visa and affixes employment/work visas before 
reaching destination country, thus bypassing the safety net of 
Emigration Clearance of Ministry of External Affairs and also not taking 
benefit of the Insurance Scheme (PBBY)  available to ECR workers. The 
illegal agents use this modus operandi to send gullible Indian workers to 
ECR countries via some third country or also directly on tourist visa, 
only to circumvent the need for emigration clearance. The Ministry also 
takes up  the issue of conversion of tourist visa to work visa in the 
various Joint Working Group (JWG) meetings held with the ECR 
countries regularly. Besides, the Ministry in its Media Campaign 
programme advises the intending emigrants to take up overseas 
employment only through registered RAs and that too only on 
employment visa. Through Videsh Sampark programme the State 
Governments are also sensitised to act against the illegal recruiting 
agents in the State.  In the Pre -Departure Orientation Training given to 

41 
 
the migrant workers, these facts are emphasised, that they should not 
travel in „Tourist Visa‟ for employment purposes." 
3.11 The Committee note that Indian women are primarily employed in 
the ECR countries either in the capacity of Domestic Service Worker s 
(DSW) or as Nurses. They are also aware that women domestic workers are 
particularly vulnerable to exploitation in these countries w here welfare 
and security of migrant workers is generally weak. In particular, women 
travelling to 18 ECR countries on a non ECNR visa are the most prone to 
exploitation. However, the Committee are concerned to note  that while 
the Ministry of External Affairs agree that exploitation of Indian migrant 
workers takes place, data furnished by their hundred odd Missions/Post 
largely points to a 'Nil' figure on this aspect. The Committee express their 
serious concern over the  cause of safety and security of migrant Indian 
women workers, especially the ones seeking employment as domestic 
helps and housemaids and recommend that Ministry of External Affairs in 
conjunction with other agencies work towards a system which  sensitises 
the Missions/Posts  on the matter concerning safety and security of 
Indian women workers working abroad. 
3.12 The Committee note that of late there have been many instances of 
complaints regarding human trafficking, particularly women. In the last 
one year 58 such cases have been referred to the Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI), as it is the mandated agency to check human 
trafficking. Deeply concerned at this inhumane practice, the Committee 

42 
 
desire that stringent measures be put into place for putting an early end 
to this malaise. They, further desire that Ministry of External Affairs 
obtain the details of the progress achieved by the CBI in the 58 reported 
cases of human trafficking and furnish the same to the Committee. 
3.13 Another issue which is a cause of concern to the Committee  is the 
flouting of norms by unscrupulous agents who in order to make a quick 
buck are circumventing the rules governing employment of housemaids in 
the 18 ECR countries. Having realised that strict norms have been put in 
place in form of ECR column in the passport of such potential candidates, 
these agents are using the route of tourist Visa/ECNR thereby 
jeopardizing the safety  and security of these vulnerable women  workers. 
In their endeavour, they have also been successful in gaining tacit help 
from the consular section of these 18 ECR nations. This has lead to the 
strange use of dual visas. While departing India, the  emigrant workers get 
their tourist visa stamped by emigration officials and on arrival at their 
destination, they paste their employment visa  of a neighbouring country 
before reaching there for employment purpose . However, when they 
encounter any exploitation or i ll-treatment/harassment at the hands of 
their employers, they have  nowhere to go and no-one to seek help from. 
However, the Committee, laud the Ministry of External Affairs for their 
pro-active measure, wherein they have started mandatory registration of 
non-ECR passport holding Indian emigrants going to 18 ECR countries for 
employment pur poses, on a pilot basis. The Committee desired to be 

43 
 
apprised of the progress achieved herein and desire that it be made fully 
operational at the earliest. The Committee are sanguine, that if correct ly 
executed, this would help to contain the menace of dua l visa system and 
thereby ensure the safety and security of India n women working as 
housemaids in these countries. 
II. REMEDIAL ACTION 
3.14 Responding to a specific query on action initiated by Ministry of External 
Affairs on detection of an instance of dual visa at an airport, it was informed as 
follows:  
"The Bureau of Immigration' check is there. The moment they come there and 
they are having a suspicion, th ey are offloaded. In fact, my Po E, Mumbai will 
bear me out. He travels more to the airport to check this thing which happens 
mostly in the night flights going to the Gulf countries. We are offloading such 
people." 
3.15 On being queried by the Committee as to how the Ministry of External 
Affairs was able to rescue Indian maids who emigrated under du al visa and 
then subsequently encountered problems, it was stated as follows:  
"Those who have gone after taking emigration clearance, there is no 
problem with them.  We are able to immediately rescue them, repatriate 
them and bring them back and also pena lize those people who are 
engaged in sending them.  But in these two categories, firstly our 
missions do not know who is their employer. We have no data.  Secondly, 
we do not know where they are located.  In many of embassies in the 
GCC countries, we are h aving shelter homes for women in distress.  So, 
they are somehow able to find their way to the embassy, housed in the 
shelter home, repatriated back using the funds of the Indian Community 
Welfare Fund (ICWF), plus the embassy is also issuing them a white 
passport which is called the emergency certificate.  These are the 
measures in place to rescue them.  More than 100 have come in and we 
find that they never went through the EC route; they went on tourist visa 
route.  This is also testified by our missions  there because the moment 
we get a reference from any emigrant or their relative that I am in 
distress, my mobile number is this, we have 24x7 call centres which 

44 
 
operate in five to seven Indian languages in Sharjah, Jeddah, Riyadh and 
Dubai and also one in  Malaysia in Kuala Lampur.  So the emigrant can 
also talk to them 24x7 and tell that this is the problem.  Many of the 
emigrants are conveying this through their relatives who are back in 
India.  Similarly, in New Delhi, in Akbar Bhawan, we have another 24 x7 
call centre where in eight different languages calls are received round the 
clock". 
3.16 The Committee were assured by the representative of Ministry of 
External Affairs that the Government will make every effort to bring those 
people back or give them necessary protection including shelter, food and 
medical assistance in those countries on a need basis. To safeguard the 
interest of Indian workers, particularly female workers, MEA reviews the 
processes from time to time including at the level of the Mini ster of External 
Affairs. 
3.17 Elaborating on the role of Ministry of External Affairs the unfortunate 
cases of death of an Indian citizen abroad, the Committee were informed as 
under: 
""BÉEÉä<Ç £ÉÉÒ BªÉÉÎBÉDiÉ SÉÉcä ´Éc ãÉÉÒMÉãÉ ªÉÉ <ããÉÉÒMÉãÉ iÉ®ÉÒBÉEä º Éä VÉÉA, +ÉMÉ® =ºÉBÉEÉÒ àÉßiªÉÖ cÉä VÉÉiÉÉÒ cè iÉÉä 
VÉèºÉä cÉÒ JÉ¤É® Aà¤ÉèºÉÉÒ BÉEÉä ÉÊàÉãÉiÉÉÒ cè, +ÉMÉ® =xÉBÉEÉ {ÉDªÉÖxÉ®ãÉ cÉä SÉÖBÉEÉ cè iÉÉä =xÉBÉEÉÒ àÉÉì]ÇãÉ ÉÊ®àÉäxºÉ 
£ÉÉ®iÉ àÉå ãÉÉxÉä BÉEä ÉÊãÉA ÉÊ´Énä¶É àÉÆjÉÉãÉªÉ àÉnn BÉE®iÉÉ cè +ÉÉè® {ÉèºÉÉ £ÉÉÒ  näiÉÉ cè* +ÉMÉ® bèb ¤ÉÉìbÉÒ cè iÉÉä 
Aà¤ÉèºÉÉÒ BÉEä JÉSÉæ {É® +Éº{ÉiÉÉãÉ àÉå càÉÉ®ä +ÉÉÊvÉBÉEÉ®ÉÒ uÉ®É xÉäMÉÉäÉÊ¶ÉA¶ÉxÉ BÉE®BÉEä, {ÉEÉàÉæã]ÉÒWÉ {ÉÚ®ÉÒ BÉE®BÉEä 
´ÉÉÉÊ{ÉºÉ ãÉÉxÉä BÉEÉ |ÉÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ cè* ªÉc VÉ°ô® näJÉÉ VÉÉiÉÉ cè ÉÊBÉE ´Éc BªÉÉÎBÉDiÉ xÉÉÒbÉÒ cè ª ÉÉ xÉcÉÓ, xÉÉÒbÉÒ cè iÉÉä 
¶ÉiÉ|ÉÉÊiÉ¶ÉiÉ àÉnn BÉEÉÒ VÉÉiÉÉÒ cè, +ÉMÉ® xÉÉÒbÉÒ xÉcÉÓ cè iÉÉä +ÉÉÉÌlÉBÉE àÉnn UÉä½BÉE® ºÉ¤É iÉ®c BÉEÉÒ +ÉxªÉ 
àÉnn BÉEÉÒ VÉÉiÉÉÒ cè VÉèºÉä BÉEÉMÉVÉÉiÉÉå BÉEÉÒ {ÉÚÉÌiÉ BÉE®xÉÉÒ cÉäiÉÉÒ cè, AªÉ®{ÉÉä]Ç àÉå ¤ÉiÉÉxÉÉ cÉäiÉÉ cè, ºÉÚS ÉxÉÉ nÉÒ 
VÉÉiÉÉÒ cè* VÉ¤É ºÉä àÉÉxÉxÉÉÒªÉ ºÉÖ­ÉàÉÉ VÉÉÒ xÉä BÉEÉªÉÇ£ÉÉ® ºÉÆ£ÉÉãÉÉ cè, ´Éä <xÉ àÉÉàÉãÉÉå àÉå BªÉÉÎBÉDiÉMÉiÉ °ô{É ºÉä 
âóÉÊSÉ ãÉäiÉÉÒ cé +ÉÉè® ºÉàÉÉvÉÉxÉ BÉE®iÉÉÒ cé* <ºÉÉÒ iÉ®c ºÉä Aà¤ÉèÉÊºÉªÉÉå BÉEÉä ÉÊxÉnæ¶É SÉãÉä MÉA cé ÉÊBÉE BÉEÉä<Ç £ÉÉÒ 
£ÉÉ®iÉÉÒªÉ BªÉÉÎBÉDiÉ ÉÊBÉEºÉÉÒ £ÉÉÒ nÖÉÊ´ÉvÉÉ BÉEÉä ãÉäBÉE® +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEä {ÉÉºÉ {ÉcÖÆSÉä iÉÉä =ºÉBÉEÉÒ àÉnn BÉE®xÉÉ +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÉ 
BÉEiÉÇBªÉ cè* nÚiÉÉ´ÉÉºÉ àÉå £ÉÉÒ ¤ÉcÖiÉ +ÉSUÉÒ iÉ®c ºÉä BÉEÉàÉ cÉä ®cÉ cè* 
 àÉé +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÉä ¤ÉiÉÉxÉÉ SÉÉciÉÉ cÚÆ ÉÊBÉE +ÉãÉMÉ ºBÉEÉÒàÉÉå BÉEä iÉciÉ BÉE®ÉÒ¤É 90,000 ºÉä VªÉÉnÉ ãÉÉäMÉÉå 
BÉEÉä ®ÉciÉ {ÉcÖÆSÉÉ<Ç cè +ÉÉè® yxHkx 1,90,000 ãÉÉäMÉÉå BÉEÉä àÉÆjÉÉãÉªÉ xÉä ºÉcÉªÉiÉÉ +ÉãÉMÉ -+ÉãÉMÉ iÉ®ÉÒBÉEä ºÉä 
nÉÒ cè, <ºÉàÉå ¶Éèã]®, àÉäÉÊbBÉEãÉ +ÉÉÊºÉº]åºÉ, àÉÉÊcãÉÉ+ÉÉäÆ BÉEÉä BÉEÉxÉÚxÉÉÒ ºÉcÉªÉiÉÉ +ÉÉÉÊn BÉEÉ |ÉÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ cè*'' 

45 
 
3.18 When asked by the Committee to furnish the prescribed a lower and 
upper age limit for overseas employment, the Ministry of External Affairs stated 
as under: 
"While there  is no general stipulation of lower or upper age limit for 
overseas employment, age restriction of 30 years has been made 
mandatory in respect of all women emigrants (Except Nurses) emigrating 
on ECR passports to ECR countries irrespective of nature/categor y of 
employment. Since t he actual selection/deployment of emigrants for 
overseas employment is subject to successful clearance of different 
health/medical checks prescribed by different countries, this Ministry 
did not consider it proper to stop any fit and eligible aspiring person from 
seeking overseas employment on the basis of any age criteria". 
 
3.19 On being asked to furnish the number of Recruiting Agents (RAs) as on 
date and as to how many RAs have been issued Registration Certificate during 
the last 3 years alongwith Protector of Emigration wise details wit h effect from 
1st January, 2018,  the Ministry of External Affairs furnished the following 
information: 
Sl.No. Name of States Numbers RAs as on 
21.5.2018 
1 Andhra Pradesh 13 
2 Bihar 2 
3 Chandigarh 15 
4 Delhi 222 
5 Goa 9 
6 Gujarat 13 
7 Haryana 11 
8 Jammu & Kashmir 3 
9 Jharkhand 1 
10 Karnataka 16 
11 Kerala 210 
12 Maharashtra 739 
13 Orissa 2 
14 Punjab 55 
15 Rajasthan 36 
16 Tamil Nadu 167 
17 Telengana 45 
18 Uttar Pradesh 25 
19 Uttarakhand 1 
20 West Bengal 26 
TOTAL 1611 
 

46 
 
 During the year 2015, 2016 and 2017, 91, 174 and 66 online 
Registration Certificates have been issued respectively. Registration 
Certificates are not granted by the Protectors of Emigrants (PoEs), but 
are processed online and granted centrally by the Protector General of 
Emigrants (PGE)." 
3.20 When the Committee asked to furnish the criteria laid down by the 
Ministry of External Affairs for inspection of R ecruitment Agencies. The 
Ministry submitted as under: 
As per Section 10 of the Emigration Act (Terms and conditions of the 
Certificate), certain records are prescribed for maintenance by the RAs 
for inspection by the Protectors of Emigrants (PoEs) and Protector 
General of Emigrants (PGE). The PoEs or any ot her officer authorized by 
the PGE, i.e. the Registering Authority, inspects the office premises of the 
RAs, alongwith the records of  emigration/emigrants, generally at the 
time of renewal of RCs only. Detailed guidelines for PoEs for such 
inspections and the formats for inspection reports have been prescribed 
by the Ministry with a view to maintain uniformity and minimize the 
scope of arbitrariness on part of the inspecting officers. The detailed 
criteria laid down for inspection of RAs are given at Annexure-II. 
3.21 The Committee desired to know whether any monitoring mechanism has 
been put in place by the Ministry of External Affairs to check the functioning of 
selected RAs. The Ministry stated as under: 
e-Migrate provides MEA, a comprehensive and online database of 
emigrants, Recruiting Agents, Foreign Employers to make the whole 
emigration cycle faster and authentication of credentials of above 
mentioned stakeholders quick er.  Comprehensive database also detects 
any RA/foreign employers with complaint cases pending against them 
and alerts POE officials at the time of granting clearances of new 
recruitment by/for them. Every grievance logged into the e -Migrate 
system is allo cated in the name of the concerned jurisdictional 
PoE/Indian Mission for  taking it up with the concerned RA/FE for 
immediate resolution.  All pending grievances are regularly monitored, 
including escalation to higher levels, till finally resolved. As part  of this 
process, Show Cause Notices (SCNs) are issued to the RAs who fail to 
respond in time to the grievances pending against them. In case of non -
redressal of grievances, RA is suspended from the system and not 
permitted to recruit any fresh candidate t ill he resolves pending 
grievance. Performances of RAs are also monitored through analysis of 
online monthly reports filed by them. With a view to monitor the overall 

47 
 
performance of all registered RAs on a number of parameters including 
number of Emigratio n Clearances obtained, fulfilment of demand, 
grievance received & resolved, number of suspensions (if any), updation 
of the website, Monthly Return submission, Foreign Exchange earned   
etc., and to facilitate the aspiring emigrants to take an informed dec ision 
while selection an RA, the Ministry has also started rating of RAs. This 
rating system is also likely to promote good and ethical business 
practices amongst the registered RAs. About 600 RAs have been 
assessed so far on these criteria and have been g iven ratings based on 
percentage scores. 
3.22 When queried about any instance/s of RAs found indulging in the 
business of illegal migration , the Ministry of External Affairs vide their written 
submission stated as under: 
"The Ministry has not come across any instance/s of registered 
Recruiting Agents (RAs) indulging in the business of illegal migration. 
Any recruiting activities without a valid certificate from PGE tantamount 
to illegal migration as also human trafficking.  Such cases of illegal 
agents fall within the jurisdiction of State Governments. As and when a 
complaint relating to human trafficking reported to the Ministry, the 
same is referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation for taking action 
in the matter and  the State Law enforcing authorities from where illegal 
recruitment/human trafficking has taken place are also sensitized and 
details of such agents sent to all State Governments.  Since the registered 
Recruiting Agents are mandated to function within the laid down 
framework as per the Emigration Act 1983, and the rules framed 
thereunder, their recruitment related activities do not fall within the 
definition of illegal migration. No specific instances of involvement of RAs 
in illegal migration have come to the notice of this Ministry in the recent 
years." 
3.23 On the issue of action taken against Recruitment Agencies (RAs) who are 
involved in the racket of facilitating illegal emigration, it was stated as under: 
àÉcÉänªÉ, +ÉMÉ® AVÉå] ®ÉÊVÉº]bÇ cè, ÉÊVÉºÉä +ÉÉ®A ¤ÉÉäãÉiÉä cé ªÉÉxÉÉÒ ÉÊ®µÉEÚÉË]MÉ AVÉå] cè iÉÉä iÉÖ®ÆiÉ 50 ãÉÉJÉ 
BÉEÉÒ ¤ÉéBÉE MÉÉ®Æ]ÉÒ JÉÉÉÊ®VÉ BÉE® näiÉä cé* ABÉDºÉ{ÉãÉäxÉä¶ÉxÉ àÉÉÆMÉiÉä cé +ÉÉè® +ÉMÉ® ABÉDºÉ{ÉãÉäxÉä¶ÉxÉ +ÉvÉÚ®É cè iÉÉä 
ãÉÉ<ºÉåºÉ ÉÊ®xªÉÖ xÉcÉÓ BÉE®iÉä cé* +ÉMÉ® AVÉå] ÉÊ®BÉEÉäMxÉÉ <VÉ xÉcÉÓ cè, <ããÉÉÒMÉãÉ cè iÉÉä iÉÖ®ÆiÉ ®ÉVªÉ ºÉ®BÉEÉ® 
BÉEÉä ÉÊSÉ]Â~ÉÒ ÉÊãÉJÉiÉä cé ÉÊBÉE <ºÉä |ÉÉäºÉÉÒBÉDªÉÚ] BÉEÉÒÉÊVÉA* ®ÉÊVÉº]bÇ cè iÉÉä £ÉÉÒ +ÉMÉ® MÉãÉiÉ ºÉÉÉÊ¤ÉiÉ cÉäiÉÉ cè 
iÉÉä {ÉÚ®ä ºÉ¤ÉÚiÉ BÉEä ºÉÉlÉ {ÉÚ®ÉÒ ÉÊb]äãÉ ®ÉVªÉ ºÉ®BÉEÉ® BÉEÉä £ÉäVÉiÉä c é* ªÉcÉÆ lÉÉä½ÉÒ ÉÊnBÉDBÉEiÉ +ÉÉiÉÉÒ cè BÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉE 
BÉEÉÎx´ÉBÉD¶ÉxÉ ®ä] BÉEàÉ cÉäiÉÉ cè, A{ÉE+ÉÉ<Ç+ÉÉ® ®ÉÊVÉº]® ®ÉVªÉ ºÉ®BÉEÉ® BÉEÉä ¤ÉiÉÉxÉä BÉEä ¤ÉÉn £ÉÉÒ xÉcÉÓ cÉäiÉÉÒ 
cè* nÚºÉ®ÉÒ ¤ÉÉiÉ cè ÉÊBÉE iÉäãÉÆMÉÉxÉÉ +ÉÉè® +ÉÉÆwÉ |Énä¶É àÉå BÉEÉ{ÉEÉÒ iÉäVÉÉÒ ºÉ ä BÉEÉàÉ cÉä ®cÉ cè, ªÉcÉÆ BÉEÉÎx´ÉBÉD¶ÉxÉ 

48 
 
®ä] lÉÉä½É ¤ÉfÃ ®cÉ cè ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ +ÉxªÉ ®ÉVªÉÉå àÉå BÉEÉìàãÉÉÒBÉEäÉÊ]b cè* ®ÉVªÉ BÉEä ºÉÉlÉ càÉxÉä ºÉÆ{ÉBÉEÇ ¤ÉxÉÉªÉÉ cè 
+ÉÉè® {ÉÖÉÊãÉºÉ BÉEÉä <ºÉàÉå AÆMÉäVÉ BÉE® ®cä cé* 
3.24 During the course of tendering oral e vidence before the Committee on 
this issue, the representatives further stated that the Ministry of External 
Affairs have been , time and again, sensitizing the State Governments. Two 
meetings have been held and another one is planned shortly at the Ministe r 
level with all the 29 State NRI Ministers here in Delhi with a purpose of 
sensitizing them. Since law and order is a State subject, they need to capture 
the illegal agents. We are able to discipline and take action against the legal 
agents. This has resu lted in some action in some States. States, which did not 
hitherto have a Department for migrant workers, have started it. 
3.25 He further submitted that "the Ministry were also sharing the details of 
the persons who are indulging in this kind of illegal migration. We are regularly 
writing to the State Governments and sensitising them on how to catch hold of 
illegal agents. We are sensitising them about who is a legal agent and who is an 
illegal agent. We have had four such sessions in Kerala, Maharashtra a nd 
Telangana and one is going to take place in Rajasthan followed by UP". 
3.26 Continuing further, it was informed that "Ministry of External Affairs has 
referred complaints about illegal agents working in the State Governments, 
seeking help of the State P olice to catch hold of them. They are in various 
Stages of prosecution. We do need the help of the State Government, without 
which we cannot curb the menace of illegal migration because these are the 
people who are not within our control or domain directly . We have to move to 
them only with the help of the State Government Police.  Basically, we are 
sensitizing the policemen.  We are saying that you please go, catch hold of 
them and arrest them. There are people who have been arrested and 
investigations are going on and it is done on a continuous basis". 
3.27 On being queried as to whether the issue of dual/double visas were being 
taken up with the respective countries, it was submitted by the Ministry of 

49 
 
External Affairs that in the pa st too, this was taken  up and will be taken up 
most promptly so that these countries, which are issuing double visas, can be 
prevented from doing so, especially where visas to women are concerned. 
3.28 The Committee were further informed as follows: 
"Ministry of External Affair s has written to those countries requesting 
their missions not to issue two visas for one person. But, because visa 
grant is a sovereign issue for those countries, we are not able to get a 
positive response that for the same person two visas are available.  
Secondly, we have already in position a Memorandum of Understanding 
with many of the Gulf countries and the 18 ECR countries where we 
have provided for safeguards which the Government must extend.  The 
Government of that country should be in a position to  report the 
violation of any of the employment terms of contract". 
3.29 The Committee have been informed by the Ministry of External 
Affairs that those women workers who have taken the ECR route for 
employment as domestic maids and had the misfortune of en countering 
problems on job were located, rescued and repatriated by the Ministry of 
External Affairs, as their details were readily available. However, in the 
case of women who emigrated under dual visa and subsequently 
encountered problems, the Ministry o f External Affairs could not come to 
their rescue speedily, due to lack of details, as they were not registered 
on the e -Migrate portal. In some cases, by the time Ministry of External 
Affairs was finally able to trace those women in distress, they were beyond 
help. While empathizing with these victims, the Committee are of the 
firm opinion that this issue needs a two pronged strategy i.e. at domestic 
and international level. At the domestic level, a foolproof mechanism 
needs to be put in place urgently, which would take stringent action 

50 
 
against recruiting agencies including in the practice of illegal emigration 
of women. Secondly, before departure a thorough check of the documents 
must be carried out to bring out cases of dual  visas and lastly, Ministry of 
Labour & Employment  and Ministry of External Affairs must create 
awareness amongst all potential emigrant workers that for their own 
safety and security, they must go through proper channel, i.e. the ECR 
route, so as to go to their chosen nation of work with confidence and a 
sense of security. In this regard, the Committee would like to draw 
attention to the campaign iniated by the Ministry of External Affairs in 
the  State of Telangana for educating the potential overseas workers 
about taking necessary p recautions before leaving India and contacting 
Indian Missions/Embassies in the countries where they are employed.   
They, therefore, desire that such efforts must be replicated in the States 
of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Tamil Nadu and all other States from whe re 
women workers emigrate in large numbers.  On the diplomatic front, the  
Committee desire that the  Ministry of External Affairs must engage in a 
serious and continuous  dialogue with the concerned 18 ECR countries 
and impress upon them the need to do away w ith the alleged malpractice 
of issuance of double visas . The sooner this malpractice is put to an end, 
it would be mutually beneficial for all the concerned parties. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry of External Affairs initiate a prompt 
and affirmati ve action on the ir suggestion and apprise them of the 
progress achieved herein. 

51 
 
3.30 Keeping in view the vulnerability of Indian women employed as 
domestic help in the 18 ECR countries, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry of External Affairs  in consultation with the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment fix an upper age limit for women who wish to seek 
employment as Domestic Service worker in the ECR countries. This so, as 
the Committee have noted that at present only a lower age limit of 30 
years has been prescribed and in the absence of a prescribed up per age 
limit, the same is liable for exploitation by unscrupulous agents. 
3.31 The Committee note that as informed by the Ministry of External 
Affairs that it has not come across any instance/s of Registered 
Recruiting Agents (RAs) indulging in the busine ss of illegal emigration. 
However, the Committee opine that the role played by unregistered 
agents cannot be  afforded to be overlooked. These unregistered agents 
are the ones who are indulging in the malpractice of illegal immigration. 
Expressing serious concern at the prevalent state of affairs, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs along -with 
the concerned State Governments/UT Administrations take speedy and 
cogent measures to control this malaise at the earliest. They further 
desire that the law enforcement agencies at Central and State level play a 
proactive role herein, so as to catch the culprits and ensure that stringent 
provisions of Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Code of Criminal Procedure 
(CRPC) are slapped on them. In this regard, the setting up of Nodal Agency 
at State/UT level as earlier recommended by the Committee assumes 

52 
 
significance as it would be an important link between the Centre/ State 
agencies. 
3.32 The Committee express satisfaction on being informed that 
MEA has now proposed of easing of norms for Recruiting Agencies in 
rural areas by lowering the amount  of Bank Guarantee to Rs. 8 lakh  
from Rs.  50 lakh, for urban areas. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that this is a welcome step in the right 
direction, which would firstly encourage people to go for legally 
approved channel for seeking employment in ECR nations and 
would also go a long wa y in effectively tackling the issue of illegal 
migration through unregistered/ illegal recruiting agents. 
III. REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR NURSES 
3.33 A regulatory framework for Indian Nurses seeking employment 
opportunities in foreign countries has been put in place since the year 2015. It 
is as follows: 
(i) In view of large scale malpractices and corruption in recruitment of 
nurses for overseas employment in Emigration Check Required (ECR) 
countries, Emigration Clearance (EC) of Nurses has been made 
mandatory with effect from 31st May, 2015.   
(ii) To facilitate Nurses to emigrate safely, Government has also provided 
that EC for Nurses, shall be procured only through 6 State Government 
Recruitment Agencies, namely, Norka Roots, Kerala, Overseas 
Development and Employment Promotion Consultants (ODEPC), Kerala, 
Overseas Manpower Corporation Ltd. (OMCL), Tamil Nadu, Overseas 
Manpower Company Andhra Pradesh Limited (OMCAP), Telangana 
Overseas Manpower Company Limited (TOMCOM) and Uttar Pradesh 
Financial Corporation (UPFC).   
(iii) Due to large number of litigations across the country and with a vision to 
provide a level playing field for private registered Recruitment Agencies 

53 
 
(RA), several private RAs have also been permitted to recruit nurses for 
Public as well a s private Hospitals in Bahrain, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 
Oman, Jordan, Qatar, etc. through issue of “Country Specific Order” 
subject to acceptance of some additional Terms and Conditions 
stipulated by the Ministry, to ensure greater safety/welfare of India n 
Nurses.  With these measures already put in place, it is expected that 
more and more Indian Nurses would be able to obtain Overseas 
Employment in future and their safety and welfare will not be 
compromised in any manner. The data of the Nurses granted Em igration 
Clearance(EC) during 2015, 2016 and 2017 (Upto 31 st July, 2017) is as 
under: 
2015 (31.5.2015 to 
31.12.2015) 
2016 2017 (Upto 31 st July, 
2017) 
197 4858 2135 
 
3.34 When queried about the needs for coming up with a regulatory 
framework for nurses, the Ministry of External Affairs vide their written 
submission stated as under:  
"Erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) had been receiving a 
number of referen ces/complaints about overcharging by agents for recruitment 
of nurses.  The amounts were in the value of Rs.15 -20 lakhs and they were 
being exploited.  The Embassy of India in Kuwait had also drawn attention of 
MOIA to the malpractices in the recruitment o f Indian nurses emigrating to 
Kuwait, their harassment in the hands of Foreign Employers by way of under 
payment of wages than the promised ones, being thrown out of employment 
abruptly by not honouring promised tenure of employment etc. The Government 
of Kerala also requested that nurses shall be allowed to take up overseas 
employment only through State run Recruiting Agencies to prevent overcharging 
and exploitation. The matter was examined in detail and with a view to prevent 
the exploitation /harassment of nurses, it was considered appropriate to enforce 
the requirement of emigration clearance, as per the Emigration Act, 1983, for 
„nurses‟ category before proceeding for overseas em ployment  in the ECR 
Countries. Consequently, vide Order No. OI -11012/10/2013-EP, dated 
12/3/2015 and 08.04.2015, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs made it 
compulsory for nurses seeking employment in the 18 ECR countries 
(Afghanistan, Bahrain, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, 
Malaysia, Oman, Qatar, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Sudan, South Sudan, Syria, 
Thailand, United Arab emirates, Yemen) to take emigration clearance from the 
office of the 10 Protector of Emigrants in Delhi, Kolkata, Chandigarh, Mumbai, 
Hyderabad, Chennai, Trivandrum, Cochin, Jaipur, Rae Bare li.  The Order 
further restricted the recruitment of nurses for overseas Employment initially 
through 3 State -run recruiting agencies namely NORKA -ROOTS, ODEPC of 
Kerala and Overseas Manpower Corporation Ltd., Tamil Nadu. Later on, State 
Government recruit ing agencies from Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Uttar 

54 
 
Pradesh have also been permitted to recruit nurses for overseas employment in 
the ECR countries. The Order mentioned above was to be effective from 
30.4.2015.  After receipt of number of representations , the date of applicability 
of this orde r was extended upto 30.5.2015. In the Government Order dated 
12.3.2015, there is a provision in para (iv) which provides as under:- 
 “Recruitment of Indian Nurses through any other Indian Recruiting 
Agents (RA) would be allowed for a specific country whenever such a 
proposal is received from that country, subject to the issue of a country 
specific order from the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs”.  
In pursuance of this para, after the issue of the Order dated 12.3.2016 
making emigration clearance for nurses mandatory,  around 3500 Indian nurses 
have taken up employment in the gulf countries through both the channels i.e. 
State Governme nt RAs and Private RAs - permitted by way of country specific 
order. 
  It is submitted that t he aforesaid order inter -alia, sought to regulate 
emigration of nurses with a view to safeguard and protect the Indian Nurses 
from any kind of exploitation and als o for ensuring the welfare of the emigrating 
nurses. The Government never denied or barred overseas employment to nurses 
but only sought to regulate their employment in ECR countries in view of huge 
malpractices in the system." 
3.35 Detailing additional me asures taken by the Government to control 
private recruitment agencies for ensuring safety and welfare of emigrant 
workers, the Ministry informed that t o facilitate Nurses to emigrate safely, 
Government had, initially, also provided that EC for Nurses, sha ll be procured 
only through 6 State Government Recruitment Agencies, namely, Norka Roots, 
Kerala, Overseas Development and Employment Promotion Consultants 
(ODEPC), Kerala, Overseas Manpower Corporation Ltd. (OMCL), Tamil Nadu, 
Overseas Manpower Company An dhra Pradesh Limited (OMCAP), Telangana 
Overseas Manpower Company Limited (TOMCOM) and Uttar Pradesh Financial 
Corporation (UPFC).  Due to large number of litigations across the country and 
with a vision to provide a level playing field for private registered Recruitment 
Agencies (RA), several private RAs have also been permitted to recruit nurses 
for Public as well as private Hospitals in Bahrain, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 
Oman, Jordan, Qatar, etc. through issue of “Country Specific Order” subject to 
acceptance of some additional Terms and Conditions stipulated by the 
Ministry, to ensure grea ter safety/welfare of Indian Nurses.  With these 

55 
 
measures already put in place, it is expected that more and more Indian 
Nurses would be able to obtain Overseas Employment in future and their safety 
and welfare will not be compromised in any manner. A tota l of 8549 nurses 
travelled to the ECR countries as on 31.10.2017 for employment after EC was 
introduced for Nurses. The Foreign Employer who seeks to recruit Nurses has 
to register in the e -Migrate system which will be vetted by the Indian 
Mission/Post in the concerned country. Thereafter the Foreign Employer can 
raise the demand for Indian Nurses on e -Migrate system with terms and 
conditions of their employment. No further attestation of demand would be 
required from the Indian Missions/Posts abroad.  All Foreign Employers who 
wish to recruit Nurses can, at present, send/raise their demand for recruiting 
Nurses to any of the Indian Recruiting Agents approved by the Ministry, but 
the permission for recruitment is subject to acceptance of additional 
safeguards by the FE and the RA concerned.  Ever since introduction of the 
present EC system for Nurses, no major complaints have been received in this 
Ministry about instances of corruption or exploitation of Indian nurses in any 
of the 18 countries so far. 
3.36 The Ministry of External Affairs also clarified that the idea is not to 
restrict Indian workers from e migrating abroad but to safeguard their interests 
in foreign countries which sometimes even require certain restrictions. But the 
sole objective for any suc h action is to prevent our workers from any 
unforeseen situations where they become easy targets of exploitation. Even 
though the nurses do not fall under the ECR category, the Indian nurses 
recruitment to ECR countries was specifically brought under immig ration 
clearance as a large number of complaints of malpractices and corruption in 
recruitment were brought to the notice of the  Government. The Government, 
therefore, initially restricted recruitment of Indian nurses to ECR countries 
only through the Stat e Government agencies. Private recruitment agents are 
now permitted to recruit Indian nurses through countries specific order about 
which we will further explain to you which stipulate additional safeguards for 
them in the destination countries. The PGE of MEA is responsible for taking all 

56 
 
measures in the overall interest of Indians going on ECR passports to any ECR 
country for employment. It is the endeavour of the MEA to ensure that all 
Indian workers, particularly women workers, have a hassle free and tr ouble 
free working environment in the destination countries. MEA‟s digital portal e -
migrate is a step in that direction which provides a common platform to foreign 
employer, recruiting agents, the embassies and the aspiring immigrants. It is a 
single portal which includes data from the time the labour or the agent ask for 
permission till he reaches and we are able to monitor the employee and the 
employer at the destination countries and in case of problems we are able to 
help them out. Lastly, with the launch of the e-migrate system, the PGE has an 
online tool to monitor the activities of foreign employers as well recruitment 
agents in India and take immediate remedial measures in cases of exploitation 
of Indian workers abroad. 
3.37 The Committee have been informed by the MEA that owing to 
rampant corruption and large scale malpractices in recruitment of nurses 
for overseas employment in ECR countries, the Government has 
undertaken a slew of measures to effectively handle this issue. These are 
as follows: 
 (i) w.e.f 31st May, 2015 Emigration Clearance of nurses has been  
  made mandatory; 
(ii) Emigration Clearance for Nurses shall be procured only 
through six State Government Agencies; 
 (iii) Private Recruitment Agencies have also been permitted to 
 recruit n urses for Public and Private Hospitals in Bahrain, 
 Saudi Arabia, Oman, Jordan, Qatar etc. through issue of 

57 
 
 'Country Specific Order' subject to acceptance of some 
 additional terms and conditions stipulated by MEA. 
 The Committee express their satisfaction on noting that consequent 
to the above measures taken by MEA the number of nurses seeking 
employment in ECR nations had risen to 8459 as on 31.10.2017. They 
however, would advise the MEA to be every vigilant on this vital and 
sensitive issue to ensure th at our nurses travel legally to these ECR 
countries and does not encounter any harassment/ exploitation at the 
hands of their foreign employers. However, in rare cases of such 
instances, the MEA should be able to locate and repatriate them at the 
earliest. 
 While appr eciating the decision of MEA permitting Registered 
Agents to recruit nurses for Public and Private hospitals in the ECR 
countries against 'Country Specific Order', the Committee desire the 
Government to increase the number of State Government R As since 
potential women candidates , desirous of overseas employment need to 
undertake long journey to these six Government Recruitment Agencies 
for completion of all necessary formalities. 
IV. PROVISIONS FOR REDRESSAL OF GRIEVANCES 
3.38 The Ministry of External Affairs in their background note on the subject 
furnished to the Committee submitted that on receipt of complaints from 
Indian women workers, the same are immediately referred to the Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad for taking up by th em with the concerned foreign 

58 
 
governments. Complaints pertaining to employment related issues are taken up 
by the Indian Missions/Posts abroad with the concerned Foreign Employer / 
Labour Department officials in that country for prompt redressal. In additi on, 
the Ministry has taken several steps and initiatives to safeguard the interests of 
the Indian nationals, particularly workers in ECR countries which, inter -alia, 
are as under: 
(i)  The Government of India has signed Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoUs) w ith 6 Gulf countries and Jordan and Malaysia, which provide the 
institutional framework to comprehensively discuss and review bilateral 
cooperation in protection and welfare of workers.  These MOUs are renewed/ 
signed afresh from time to time and during th is process any modifications are 
duly considered for inclusion. 
(ii) The institutional framework for support and welfare of overseas Indians 
has been considerably strengthened over the last few years. The Indian 
Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), the MADAD Portal, e-Migrate system, shelter 
homes etc. are some of the important mechanisms to expeditiously assist 
Indian nationals abroad.  Shelter Home for distressed Indian nationals have 
been set up in Bahrain, Kuwait, Malaysia, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and United 
Arab Emirates.  Missions in Gulf countries also conduct Open Houses on 
regular basis where workers can convey their grievances.  There is a mandatory 
insurance and medical cover under Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojna for all Indian 
workers holding Emigration Check Required (ECR) Passport having Emigration 
Clearance for going to 18 notified ECR countries for overseas employment.  The 
Yojana has been strengthened for the benefit of such workers. 
(iii) Several Missions/Posts abroad are conducting Open House on work ing 
days, to provide direct access to workers to convey their grievances. Some 
Missions/Posts abroad have established 24x7 Helplines and Toll Free 
Helplines. They have also launched Mobile Applications to enable Indian 

59 
 
workers in Gulf countries to contact respective Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
when in distress or in emergency situation.  
3.39 Elaborating further on the issue, it was informed that normally, 
grievances in the nature of non -payment of salaries and denial of legitimate 
labour rights and benefits such as non-issuance/renewal of residence permits, 
Overtime Allowance, weekly holidays, working for longer hours, refusal to grant 
exit/recruitment –entry permits for visit to India, refusal to allow the worker on 
final exit visa after completion of their contracts and not providing medical and 
insurance facilities etc are reported. Incidents of confinement, abandoning of 
housemaids by their sponsors have also been reported. Immediately on receipt 
of a complaint, the Mission/Post takes up the matter with the foreign employer, 
Indian emigrants as well as local Authorities to settle the matter amicably. In 
deserving situations, they try to get the workers repatriated by coordinating 
with concerned Recruiting Agent and the Protector General of Emigrant s.  
Indian Missions and Posts also recommend inclusion of such Foreign 
Employers in the Prior Approval Category (Black list) based on complaints of 
maltreatment of Indian emigrants.  On the basis of such recommendation, the 
Ministry places the concerned fo reign company in the Prior Approval Category.  
A foreign company – when included in the Prior Approval Category list – is no 
longer allowed to recruit workers from India. 
The Government of India has set up Indian Community Welfare Fund 
(ICWF) in all the In dian Missions/consulates abroad to meet contingency 
expenditure incurred by them for carrying out various welfare activities for 
overseas Indian citizens who are in distress. The objectives of the ICWF 
include:- 
 (i) Boarding and lodging for distressed Overseas Indians in need; 
 (ii) Extending emergency medical care to the Overseas Indians in 
need; 

60 
 
 (iii) Providing air passage to stranded Overseas Indians in need; 
 (iv) Providing initial legal assistance to the Overseas Indians in 
deserving cases; 
 (v) Expenditure on incidentals and for airlifting the mortal remains to 
India or local cremation/burial of the deceased Overseas Indians in such 
cases where the sponsor is unable or unwilling to do so as per the 
contract and the family is unable to meet the cost; 
 (vi) Providing the payment of penalties in respect of Indian nationals 
for illegal stay in the host country where prima facie the worker is not at 
fault; 
 (vii) Providing the payment of small fines/penalties for the release of 
Indian nationals in jail/detention centre; 
 There is a 24x 7 Helpline „Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC)‟ in 
Akbar Bhawan, New Delhi which provides information and guidance on all 
matters and problems pertaining to overseas employment of Indian nationals, 
registering grievances from the emigrants and escalates further for priority 
redressing.  Indian Workers Resource Centre (IWRC) set up in Dubai by 
Embassy of India, in UAE, provides guidance and counseling on all matters 
pertaining to overseas Indian workers in UAE. Shelter home s for distressed 
Indian nationals, have been set up in Malaysia, UAE, Qatar, Kuwait, Bahrain, 
and Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  These shelter homes provide free boarding and 
lodging to overseas Indians in distress pending their repatriation.   
Government of In dia have also started 24x7 Helpline -„Madad‟- for lodging the 
grievances of the emigrants, which are attended to on priority basis. 
3.40 On the efforts of the Ministry of External Affairs a t diplomatic level to 
ensure safety and well being of emigrant women  workers, the Ministry's 
response was as under: 

61 
 
 "The situation of domestic female domestic workers is the most 
vulnerable as the domestic workers are not covered by the extant labour laws in 
the GCC countries. The problem is acute w.r.t.  women travelling  on tourist 
visas and subsequently, getting these visas converted to housemaid / 
employment  visas on arrival at the destination country.   They are also 
susceptible to face violation of contractual conditions since the employer is not 
registered on e-Migrate and cannot be held accountable. 
2. Taking this into account, the Ministry has made emigration clearance of 
all  ECR female workers for overseas employment in 18 ECR countries 
mandatory through six State run recruiting agencies, viz. NORKA Roots &  
ODEPC of Kerala, OMCL of Tamil Nadu, UPFC of Uttar Pradesh, OMCAP of 
Andhra Pradesh and TOMCOM of Telangana. Provision of Bank Guarantee of US 
$ 2500 is also compulsory when female workers with ECR Passports are directly 
recruited by any foreign employer.  In its latest instructions of 1 st September, 
2017 by the Ministry,  Bank Guarantee of US  $2500 is not required if the 
recruitment of the domestic workers is done through the six state designated 
agencies. 
3.   Indian women workers, specifically female dom estic workers approach 
the Embassy complaining against non -payment of salary, ill -treatment, 
harassment, withholding of passports, long working hours, non-renewal of visas, 
non-cancellation of visas etc.  Housemaids who had entered the country without 
following the process of eMigrate and emigration clearance are more vulnerable 
to such exploitation." 
3.41 The Committee enquired about the Country-wise details of complaints 
been received from migrant workers especially women workers for the last 3 
years and also the steps being taken for timely resolution of such problems and 
whether any Grievance Redressal Mechanism be en put in place by the 
Ministry, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"The Indian Missions receive complaints from women workers, particularly 
female domestic sector workers, on account of poor working conditions, non -
payment or delay in payment of salaries and denial of other benefits such as 
medical facilities, refusal of leave or denial of exit/re -entry permits for visits to 
India, denial of f inal exit visas to the workers to return to India after completion 
of the contract, maltreatment by the employers etc. Incidents of confinement, 
physical abuse, abandoning of housemaids by their sponsors have also been 
reported. Most of the complaints pert ain to female workers, who do not have 
proper employment contracts and have migrated illegally, in violation of 
Government norms for recruitment of ECR workers from India.  The table 
showing number of complaints received by the Indian Missions in Gulf count ries 
from female domestic workers, during the last three years, is as under: 

62 
 
No. Name of Mission Number of Complaints received from 
female Domestic Workers 
2015 2016 2017 
1 Bahrain 11 12 10 
2 Kuwait 983 1194 950 
3 Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia 
341 409 527 
4 Oman 128 174 235 
5 Qatar 372 614 397 
6 UAE 136 209 351 
 The Government has taken several steps to safeguard the interests of 
Indian female emigrants to the Gulf countries, these are: 
(i) Age restriction of 30 years has been made mandatory in respect of all 
women emigrants (Except Nurses) emigrating on ECR passports to 
ECR countries irrespective of nature/category of employment; 
(ii) Since August, 2016, emigration clearance of all female workers 
having ECR passports, for overseas employment in 18 ECR countries  
has been made mandatory through six State -run recruiting agencies 
only. These are NORKA Roots and Overseas Development and 
Employment Promotion Consultants (ODEPC) of Kerala, Overseas 
Manpower Corporation Ltd. (OMCL) of Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh 
Financial Corporation (UPFC) of Uttar Pradesh, Overseas Manpower 
Company Andhra Pradesh Limited (OMCAP) of Andhra Pradesh and 
Telangana Overseas Manpower Company Limited (TOMCOM) of 
Telangana. 
(iii) Every Foreign Employer desirous of directly recruiting a female ECR 
worker is required to deposit a Bank Guarantee equivalent to US 
$2500 in the respective Indian Missions. 
(iv) Embassy attestation has been made mandatory in respect of direct 
recruitment of all ECR passport holder women workers in respect of 
all ECR countries; 
(v) For the safety, security and welfare of Indian Domestic Service 
Workers (DSWs), the Government of India has signed Domestic 
Service Workers (DSWs) Agreement with Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 
January 2014, on Labour Cooperation for Domestic Workers 
Recruitment.  
(vi) The on -line MADAD portal enables the emigrant workers and their 
family members to register their consular grievances online and track 
their redressal. 
(vii) Grievances related  to Overseas Employment in notified Emigration 
Check Required (ECR) countries including gulf countries, can also be 
logged in directly by emigrants/relatives or through the Overseas 
Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) on e -Migrate portal. A multi -

63 
 
lingual 24X7 Helpline of Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) 
in New Delhi provides information, gu idance and grievance redressal 
on all issues and problems pertaining to overseas employment of 
Indian nationals. 
(viii) Missions in Gulf countries also conduct Open Houses on a regular 
basis where workers can seek redressal of their grievances. 
(ix) Missions in Gulf c ountries have also established 24x7 helplines and 
Toll Free help lines for the benefit of Indian workers to seek help. 
(x) Indian Workers Resource Centres (IWRC) have been set up at Dubai 
(UAE), Sharjah (UAE), Riyadh, Jeddah (Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) and 
Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia), to provide guidance and counselling on all 
matters pertaining to overseas Indian workers. 
(xi) Shelter Homes for distressed Indian nationals including women 
workers have been set up in Bahrain, Kuwait, Malaysia, Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia and United Arab Emirates. 
(xii) Labour and Manpower Cooperation MoUs/Agreements are already in 
place with the six Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries that 
provide the institutional framework to comprehensively discuss and 
review labour related issues. 
 
3.42 The Committee were also furnished details of official mechanism for 
redressal of grievances of women workers. These are as follows: 
Joint Working Groups.: 
 The Joint Working Groups setup under the labour and manpower 
cooperation MoUs/ Agreements provides a me chanism to review labour welfare 
and employment related issues.  There is a separate Agreement with Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia on Domestic Service category workers signed in 2016. In addition,  
there is regular cooperation between Indian Missions/ Psosts  wit h the labour 
and manpower authorities. 
 In addition, several administrative and operative measures have been put 
in place to enhance the protection and welfare of emigrant workers and avoid 
their exploitation by unscrupulous agents.  These include: 
MADAD Portal 
 The Ministry has launched an online Consular Grievances Monitoring 
System, named MADAD, on 21 February 2015, to extend a helping hand to 
Indians abroad requiring consular assistance.  MADAD seeks to address 
grievances on issues  related to  workers abuse, recruiting agents, sponsorship 
and contract issues, repatriation of Indian nationals, tracing whereabouts of 
Indian nationals, death/injury compensation, transportation of mortal remains 
of deceased Indian nationals and martial dispute issues. MADAD  portal enables 
online forwarding, filing, tracking and escalation of grievances until their 
eventual resolution.  It allows direct registration of grievances by members of the 

64 
 
public and effective tracking of the entire grievance handling process all the way 
until the redressal of the grievance. All Indian Missions and Posts abroad have 
been linked to this portal for consular grievance tracking and follow -up. In 
addition, the names and contract details of all officers in Missions and Posts 
abroad are available on their respective websites.   
e-Migrate 
 The e -Migrate project has been rolled out in all Protector of Emigrants 
(PoE) offices with effect from 25 th September, 2014. The project is designed for 
facilitating emigration of ECR category emigrants going to notified countries for 
employment purpose. The project helps in making the recruitment of workers a 
smooth process and mitigates the scope for malpract ices. E-Migrate provides the 
Ministry, a comprehensive and online database of emigrants, Missions, 
Recruiting Agents, Foreign Employers, Insurance Agencies to make the whole 
emigration cycle faster, transparent and allows authentication/verification of  
credentials of all the stakeholders.  
Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) 
 Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) scheme has been set up in 
Indian Missions to enable Missions to meet contingency expenditure incurred by 
them for carrying out various on -site we lfare activities for Overseas Indian 
Citizens in distress on a means-tested basis.  The Fund has been extended to all 
Missions abroad. The services provided under the Scheme to the distressed 
Indians, in deserving cases include boarding & lodging for distr essed Overseas 
Indian workers in household/domestic sectors & unskilled labourers, emergency 
medical care, initial legal help, air passage to stranded Overseas Indians (OI), 
incidentals & airlifting of mortal remains to India or local cremation/burial of 
deceased OIs, penalties for illegal stay of OIs in host country where worker is not 
a fault, small fines/penalties for release of OIs in jail/detention centre etc.  
 Presently, the scope of activities and arrangements for strengthening the 
welfare of the ov erseas Indian community has been revised from 1 September, 
2017. 
Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC)  
 The Centre has been operational since 2008 and provides  information to 
intending migrants and overseas workers on all aspects of overseas employment 
including requirements to obtain a legitimate work permit/visa for employment 
abroad.  A multi -lingual 24 × 7 toll -free helpline is operational by the Centre to 
disseminate information and provide counseling on issues related to overseas 
employment. 
 
 
Migrant Resource Centres (MRCs)  

65 
 
 Five Migrant Resource Centres have been set up in Kochi , Hyderabad, 
Gurgaon, Chennai and Lucknow to provide information and counseling for 
intending migrants on all aspects related to overseas employment. Functions of 
MRCs include informing walk -ins about procedure for legal migration and 
precautions to be taken while migrating; dissemination of status of Recruiting 
Agents and other service providers; kinds of difficulties that can be faced abroad 
by potential migrants etc.  OWRC is linked to the Migrant Resource Centres 
(MRCs). 
Indian Workers Resource Centre (IWRC)  
 
 IWRC have been established and are functional in Jeddah and Riyadh in 
Saudi Arabia, Sharjah, Dubai and Kuala Lumpur. IWRC are run and managed 
by professional service provider and provides the following facilities to Indian 
workers: 
 
(1)       A 24 x 7 helpline number 80046342 (800 -INDIA) with 
multilingual staffs.  
(2) To receive, register and monitor the grievance petitions received 
through various channels.  
(3) To arrange legal, financial and psychological counselling session 
for deserving cases.  
(4) To make persuasive calls to sponsors or Individual for specific 
cases.  
(5) To refer serious issues to Indian Embassy or Consulate.  
(6) To conduct awareness campaigns on a weekly basis across UAE 
 
PravasiBharatiyaBimaYojana (PBBY)  
 The PBBY is a mandatory scheme for all ECR category workers going to 
ECR countries. It covers personal accident covering death and permanent 
disability. The maximum sum insured under  the Policy is Rs. 10 lakhs and also 
provide limited coverage towards hospitalization, transportation cost of mortal 
remains based on actuals, repatriation cover for medically unfit, family 
hospitalization in India, Maternity, attendants and Legal expenses.  
 The Scheme has revised with additional benefits from 1 September, 
2017. 
Shelter for Female Workers: 
 In some Missions, Shelter Homes have been established for welfare 
issues through providing shelter (boarding and lodging), informally, to runaway 
housemaids in distress, medical treatment, arranging for their 
repatriation.  Female workers who are stranded and in distress can approach 
the Embassy at any time, 24x7, and they are accommodated in the shelter and 
provided all facilities till they are repatriated to India. 

66 
 
3.43 The Committee note that the MEA has put in place an elaborate 
mechanism for redressal of grievances faced by emigrant workers in the 
ECR nations, with special emphasis being made for the women workers 
these include signing of Memora ndum of Understanding with six Gulf 
Countries, Jordan and Malaysia, creations of Indian Community Welfare 
Fund, MADA Portal, e -Migrate System, shelter homes, 24x7 H elplines and 
toll free, Helpline etc. Being of the firm opinion that MEA still needs to do 
a lot more for grievances redressal of the vulnerable workers especially in 
the ECR nations, the Committee therefore recommend the following: 
 (i) Augmenting and strengthening of infrastructure as well as 
 manpower of Indian Missions across the globe, espec ially in 
 the ECR nations, so as to speedily respond to any crisis faced 
 by Indian citizens outside India; 
(ii) Make it mandatory for all Indians visiting abroad either on 
ECR or ECNR passport to register themselves with the Indian 
Mission on arrival in any foreign country; and  
(iii) In case the period of stay exceeds a month, to report to the 
Indian Mission atleast once in three months. 
 The Committee further desire that the MEA  take positive action on 
their above-mentioned recommendations and inform them of the progress 
achieved in this urgent matter at the earliest.   
 
 
 
New Delhi;                 DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA 
25th July, 2018                        CHAIRPERSON,  
3rd Shravana, 1940 (Saka)          STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

67 
 
Annexure - I 
S.No. Name of 
Mission 
Number of women workers Number of complaints 
  Finan
ce/ 
admn 
Software 
/business 
Acade
mic Medical 
DSW/la
bour Others Total Received 
Res
olv
ed 
Pe
nd
ing 
1 Consul General 
of India, San 
Francisco 
            Several 
thousands of 
women 
emigrants  
NIL 
    
2 Afghanistan 1   2 2   13 (11 
UN, 2 
govt.) 
18 NIL 
    
3 
Armenia, 
Gergia             NIL NIL     
4 Ashgabat             NIL NIL     
5 Australia                  
6 CGI Sydney           NIL NIL     
7 CGI Melborne           NIL NIL     
8 CGI Perth             not shared by 
local authority 
NIL 
    
9 Azerbaijan.      1 2     3 NIL     
10 Bangladesh                  
11 
Dhaka      2 nurses    2 not 
reported     
12 Chitagong             NIL NIL     
13 Brazil   
Not 
mentione
d        NIL     
14 Sao Paulo 
  
            a few women in 
small busines 
NIL 
    
15 Belgium             485 NIL     
16 Bhutan             no specific data 
available as it is 
visa free 
NIL 
    
17 Bulgaria   4 2 4     12 NIL     
18 Barbados, St. 
Lucia and St. 
Vincent & 
Grenadines 
            NIL NIL 
    
19 
Brunei 
Darussalam       49 nurses     49 NIL     
20 Canada                  
21 CGI Vancouver             NIL NIL     
22 EOI Beijing, 
China 
          no specific data 
available 
1 1 
  
23 Consulate 
General of 
India, 
Guagnzhou 
            2 NIL   
  
24 Chile 1 3 1       5 NIL     
25 
Congendia 
Hambantota             NIL NIL     
26 Croatia             NIL NIL     
27 Cuba             NIL NA     
28 Cyprus         2217 
(mostly 
women
) 
  
        
29 CGI Dubai             Not available 967 662   
30 Israel, Tel Aviv             Estimated to 2 1 1 

68 
 
12500 
caregiver, 
mostly women. 
31 Democratic 
Republic of 
Congo, 
Republic of 
Congo, Gabon 
and Central 
African 
Republic 
            NIL NIL   
  
32 
Denmark, 
copenhegen             NA NIL     
33 Egypt             Not available 2 2   
34 Ethiopia             very few but no 
data available 
NIL 
    
35 
Gaborone 
Batswana             NIL NIL     
36 Cook Islands, 
Kiribati, Fiji, 
Nauru, Tonga, 
Tuvalu 
and Vanuatu 
            NIL NIL 
    
37 Finland             NIL NIL     
38 EoI, Berlin             not available. NIL     
39 CGI munich           NIL NIL     
40 CGI Humburg             NIL NIL     
41 Guatemala, El 
Salvado and 
Honduras 
            NIL NIL 
    
42 Greece, Athens   
30 
business     220   250 NIL     
43 Iceland             NIL NIL     
44 Iran             NIL NIL     
45 Iraq       23 nurses     23 2     
46 Ireland       4600 Nurses     4600 NIL     
47 CGOI istanbul 1 
2 
Journali
sts 1       4 NIL     
48 CGI Milan             NIL NIL     
49 Jordan 
36 
office     88 nurses 
02 
domes
tic   126 2 2   
50 Kampala             NIL NIL     
51 
Kuwait 1619
2( 
govt 
secto
r) 
  
    
69858 24232 
(Pvt 
Sector
) 
mostly 
nurses 
and a 
small 
numb
er are 
teache
r, 
doctor 
etc. 
0 946 
    
52 Kazakhastan             NIL NIL     
53 
Kenia and 
Somalia             NIL NIL     
54 Lebanon             19 NIL     
55 Libya, Tripoli 
3 
admn   
10 
teachi
ng 
155 
nurses/3doct
ors     171 6     

69 
 
56                       
57 Malawi             30-35 NIL     
58 
maldives             No reliable data 
available 
8 8 
  
59 
Mozambiqu/S
waziland 
            No reliable data 
available 
1 
    
60 Mongolia     2       2 NIL     
61 
Malaysia             Not available 1210 
(malre+fem
ale)     
62 Morocco             NIL NIL     
63 Namibia             NIL NIL     
64 
Oman             45402 3666 (male+ 
female)     
65 New Zealand             NIL NIL     
66 Norway             NA NIL     
67 CGI Jalabad             NIL NIL     
68 
Prague             Local 
authorities do 
not share 
informaton 
NIL   
  
69 Russia             NIL NIL     
70 EOI Dakar             NIL NIL     
71 Seychelles             NIL NIL     
72 
Singapore             NIL very few but 
sorted out     
73 St Peteberg             NIL NIL     
74 
Qatar             120778 women 
(workers/reside
nts) 
2716 207
7 
63
9 
75 Spain             No information NIL     
76 Slovenia       6     6 NIL     
77 South Africa                     
78 Johannesburg             NIL 1 1 0 
79 South Sudan             NIL NIL     
80 Serbia 1           1 NIL     
81 Syria       1 nurse 
10 
nuns   11 NIL     
82 
Saudi Arabia             273440 
(working+non-
working) 
131   
  
83 Tajakastan     8       8 NIL     
84 Tunisia             NIL NIL     
85 Turkey             NIL NIL     
86 
Switzerland, 
berne             NIL NIL     
87 Uzbekistan             NIL NA     
88 
CGI 
Briminghum 
UK 
            No authentic 
data 
NIL 
    
89 
Zambia             300-500 (health 
and teaching) 
NIL 
    
90 
Peru and 
Bolivia 
            Data not 
available 
2 2   
91 
EOI Rome             60491 
(working+non-
working) 
NIL 
    
92 
Ploand and 
Lithuania             
Data not readily 
available NIL     
93 Mayanmar             NIL NIL     
94 Tanzania             NIL NIL     
 

70 
 
Annexure - II 
Report on Inspection 
 


71 
 
 
  


72 
 
Appendix-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
Minutes of the Twenty-Seventh Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 31st August, 2017 from 1100 hrs. to 
1300 hrs. in Committee Room  'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Kirit Somaiya    –    CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar, MP 
2. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey, MP 
3. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey, MP 
4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam, MP 
5. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, MP 
6. Shri C.N. Jayadevan, MP 
7. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli, MP 
8. Dr. Arun Kumar, MP 
9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar, MP 
10. Shri Hari Manjhi, MP 
11. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori, MP 
    RAJYA SABHA 
12. Shri Ram Narain Dudi, MP 
13. Shri P.L. Punia, MP 
14. Shri Rajaram, MP 
15. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma, MP 
16. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan, MP 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K.C. Pandey           - Deputy Secretary 
3.   Smt Archana Srivastva   -       Under Secretary 
 
 

73 
 
Witnesses 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Smt. M. Sathiyavathy Secretary, Labour & Employment 
2. Sh. Manish Kumar Gupta Joint Secretary 
3. Ms. Shikha Anand Director, O/o DGE 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Sh. Dnyaneshwar M. Muley Secretary (CPV&OIA) 
2. Sh. M. C. Luther Joint Secretary (OE) & PGE 
3. Sh. Manish Gupta Joint Secretary (OIA-I) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and the representatives of Ministries of Labour &  Employment and External 
Affairs to the sitting, convened to have a briefing  on the subject 'Overseas 
Employment of Women Workers including Nurses and Maids, issues and 
Regulatory Framework'.  The Chairperson then drew attention of the 
representatives to D irection 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee during deposition before the 
Parliamentary Committees. He then asked the representatives of the Ministries 
to give an overview of the subject matte r special focus on Overseas 
Employment of Women Workers. 
3. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of 
Labour & Employment accordingly briefed the Committee on various aspects of 
the subject matter like number of Indians go abr oad, process for Emigration 
clearance required, Enforcement of Emigrant Act, 1983, Age restriction for 
women emigrant workers emigrating on ECR, Requirement of foreign employer 

74 
 
to deposit bank guarantee in respective Indian Mission for recruiting women 
workers, Registration of foreign employers in the e -migrate system, State run 
recruiting agencies, Domestic service workers (DSW) and their details for last 
three years, Regulatory framework for Nurses, Provisions for redressal of 
grievances, Insurance and me dical care under Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana 
(PBBY) for all Indian workers holding ECR passports, Establishment of 
missions/ posts abroad to provide direct access to workers to convey their 
grievances etc. 
4. Thereafter, the Members raised queries on var ious issues which, inter-
alia, included non -payment/ delayed payment of salaries, incidences of 
confinement, coverage of all workers under Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana 
(PBBY), action taken against the agencies who send workers illegally, every 
State to ha ve separate agency to facilitate the workers, mechanism to bring 
back bodies or mortal remains, details of beneficiaries and amount claimed 
under PBBY, details of female domestic workers, check on surrogacy. 
5. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for app earing before the 
Committee and briefing them on the subject as well as responding to the 
queries raised. The Chairperson directed the Secretaries of Ministries of  
Labour & Employment and External Affairs to furnish written replies within 10 
days in respect of those queries, for which information was not readily available 
with them during the meeting as well as which required detailed and statistical 
information. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

75 
 
Appendix - II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 30 th November, 2017 from 1130 hrs. 
to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room  No.2, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Tapan Kumar Sen, MP    –    In Chair 
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar, MP 
2. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey, MP 
3. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey, MP 
4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam, MP 
5. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, MP 
6. Shri C.N. Jayadevan, MP 
7. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli, MP 
8. Dr. Arun Kumar, MP 
9. Shri Hari Manjhi, MP 
10. Shri Hari Om Singh Rathore, MP 
11. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, MP 
12. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori, MP 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Ram Narain Dudi, MP 
14. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway, MP 
15. Shri Rajaram, MP 
16. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan, MP 
17. Ms. Dola Sen, MP 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Ms. Rhimjim Prasad  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita B Panda - Director 
3. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  - Additional Director 
4. Smt Archana Srivastva   -       Under Secretary 

76 
 
WITNESSES 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sl. No Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Manish Kumar Gupta Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mitter Sain Deputy Director General 
3. Shri Rajan Verma Addl. CLC 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Sl. No Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri M.C. Luther Joint secretary and PGE 
2. Shri Manish Gupta Joint Secretary 
 
2. In the absence of Chairperson, Shri Tapan Kumar Sen, MP chaired the 
sitting of the Committee under Rule 258 (3) of „Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha‟. 
3. At the outset, t he acting Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and the representatives of Ministries of Labour & Employment 
(MoLE) and External Affairs  to the sitting, convened t o take evidence on the 
subject 'Overseas Employment of Women Workers including Nurses and 
Maids- Issues and Regulatory Framework '. The acting Chairperson then drew 
attention of the  representatives to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the 
Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee during 
deposition before the Parliamentary Committees. He then asked the 
representatives of the Ministries to give an overview of the subject matter. 
3. The representative of the Ministry of External Affairs accordingly briefed 
the Committee on various aspects of the subject matter, particularly of 
recruitment measures to regulate emigration of Indian Women workers holding 
ECR passports for overseas employment in Gulf Countries; duties of Protector 
General of Emigrants (PGE); details of female Domestic workers granted EC for 
the last 3 years; regulatory framework for nurses; details of Nurses granted 
Emigration Clearance (EC) for last 3 years; irregularities of holding dual visas 

77 
 
by workers, provisions for redressal of grievances; process of Emigration 
checking; reasons and measures to reduce the private recruiting agencies for 
Domestic maids in abroad; etc. The representative of t he Ministry of Labour 
and Employment present in the meeting stated that he had nothing to add on 
the matter since most of the queries of the hon‟ble Members pertained to the 
Ministry of External Affairs. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Members raised queries on variou s issues which, inter-
alia, included  upper age restriction for domestic maids working in foreign c 
ountries; details of grievance redressal; measures to control the increase in 
private agencies for instance  increase in the amount to be  deposited in 
respective Indian embassies ; reason for less number of Government agencies 
in the Country; details of Indian women workers across the world; measures to 
encourage workers to follow due procedures to go for working in foreign 
counties ; details of pending compl aints; details of workers going for work on 
tourist visa; monitoring by the Ministry on  number of working hours, working 
conditions of different jobs  abroad etc.; Labour Laws of various Countries and 
their social security schemes and educating workers on the same etc.   
5. The Chairperson  then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and briefing them on the subject as well as respon ding to the 
queries raised. He directed the representatives of Ministries of Labour & 
Employment and Externa l Affairs to furnish written replies within 14  days in 
respect of those queries, for which information was not readily available with 
them during the meeting. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

78 
 
Appendix - III 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
 
Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 24 th May, 2018 from 1130 hrs. to 
1300 hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Parliament House Annexe - Extension 
Building,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya, MP –  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ashok Dohare, MP 
3. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara, MP 
4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam, MP 
5. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli, MP 
6. Dr. Arun Kumar, MP 
7. Shri Hari Manjhi, MP 
8. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore, MP 
   RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Ram Narayan Dudi, MP 
10. Shri P.L. Punia, MP 
11. Shri Rajaram, MP 
12. Ms. Dola Sen, MP 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad - Joint Secretary (RP) 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata - Additional Director 
 
  

79 
 
WITNESSES 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Shri K.P. Krishnan Secretary, MSDE 
2. Shri Rajesh Agrawal Joint Secretary, MSDE 
3. Shri Asheesh Sharma Joint Secretary, MSDE 
4. Shri Anant Mohan Jha Head, IISC 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Shri M.C. Luther Joint Secretary (OE) & PGE 
2. Shri Manish Gupta Joint Secretary (OIA-1) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the r epresentatives of the 
Ministries of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship and External Affairs  to the 
sitting of the Committee convened to take evidence  on the Subject  'Overseas 
Employment of women Workers including Nurses and Maids, Issues and 
Regulatory Framework' . The Chairperson then drew attention of the 
representatives to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee during deposition before the 
Parliamentary Committees. 
3. The representative of the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship, accordingly, briefed the Committee  which, inter-alia, 
included international skilling landscape; difficulties faced by organisa tions 
while on-boarding human resources globally due to skill gaps; study of global 
skill gap; objectives of NSDC in providing overseas opportunities for skilled 
manpower from India; framework for identification of countries for study; list of 
Countries ba sed on India Migrant Attractiveness Index (IMAI); steps towards 
proving skilled workforce to the World; India International Skill Centre (IISC); 

80 
 
progress of one day Pre -Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) Programme; 
MoUs with UK, Sweden and UAE; proposed  IISC Policy and its features; etc. 
Further, the representative of the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that 
persons visit overseas on different types of visas and they have requested the 
Ministry of Home Affairs to provide details of persons visitin g on tourist visas 
for overseas employment purpose and they have started received data from last 
year. 
4. The representatives of the Ministry  of External Affairs  also responded to 
various queries raised by the Members which, inter-alia, included safety, 
security and protection of workers in those overseas Countries where 
Emigration Certification not required; distinctive work by both Ministries and 
individual Ministerial accountability for their duties; data regarding the 
persons working in ECR and non -ECR Countries; registration of workers going 
overseas for employment; details of persons visiting foreign Countries category -
wise like employment, studies, tourism, etc; monitoring of workers going to 
overseas; details of persons going to overseas on tourist  visas and working 
there illegally; making registration of agents for overseas employment 
mandatory; details of workers visiting overseas for employment on 
monthly/annual basis; list of overseas employment agencies in the Country; 
details of one day Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) Programme; etc. 
5. The Committee enquired about the number of Indians proceeding daily 
for overseas employment in 8 ECR Countries, they also desired to know 
whether Indian embassies in 8 ECR Countries were well equipped in terms of 
infrastructure and man power; additional steps being taken by the Ministry for 
safety and security of female workers in these ECR Countries and measures 
being taken by the Ministries to rein in illegal recruitment agencies. The 
Committee also s ought information on awareness generation programmes 
conducted by Ministries of External Affairs and Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship on PDOT, PKVY and IISC. 

81 
 
5. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and briefing them on the subject as well as responding to the 
queries raised. The Chairperson directed the representatives of Ministries of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship and Ex ternal Affairs to furnish written 
replies within 7 days in respect of those queries, for which information was not 
readily available with them during the meeting as well as which required 
detailed and statistical information. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

82 
 
Appendix - IV 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2017-18) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-fifth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18 th July, 2018 from 1500 hrs. to 
1650 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya, MP –  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
1. Dr. Kirit Somaiya, Chairperson 
2. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam, MP 
3. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, MP 
4. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah, MP 
5. Shri C.N. Jayadevan, MP 
6. Dr. Arun Kumar, MP 
7. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore, MP 
8. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori, MP 
   RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Ram Narain Dudi, MP 
10. Shri P.L. Punia, MP 
11. Shri Amar Shankar Sable, MP 
12. Ms. Dola Sen, MP 
13. Dr. Banda Prakash, MP 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata - Additional Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Under Secretary 
 
  

83 
 
2. The Committee first took up draft Report 'Overseas Employment of 
Women Work ers including Nurses and Maids I ssues and Regulatory 
Framework' for consideration. 
3. After some deliberation, the Committee adopted draft Report without any 
modification and authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Report  in the light 
of consequential changes that might arise out of factual verification of the draft 
Report and to present the same to both the Houses. 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX 
5. XX  XX  XX  XX 
6. XX  XX  XX  XX 
7. XX  XX  XX  XX 
8. XX  XX  XX  XX 
9. XX  XX  XX  XX 
10. XX  XX  XX  XX 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
XX Do not pertain to this Report. 
 