 
 
1 
 
14 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action T aken by the Government on the O bservations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee  contained in the ir 
Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for 
Grants (2015-16)' of the Ministry of Labour and  
Employment] 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) 
   
      


 
 
2 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT   
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2015-16) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
[Action T aken by the Government on the O bservations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee  contained in the ir 
Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for 
Grants (2015-16)' of the Ministry of Labour and  
Employment] 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.03.2016  
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.03.2016 
 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
                    March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) 
                     
  


 
 
3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE             (4) 
INTRODUCTION        (5) 
        
CHAPTER I Report…………    
 
CHAPTER II Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government ………… 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations w hich the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply........... 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been  accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration........… 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which  replies 
of the Government  are interim in nature........... 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on  11.03.2016.    
 
  II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 
 DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR-CHAIRPERSON   
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
17. Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
18. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
19. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
23. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
24. Shri P.L. Punia 
25. Shri Rajaram 
26. Haji Abdul Salam 
27. Ms. Dola Sen 
28. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
29. Shri R.K. Sinha 
30. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
31. Shri N. Gokulkrishnan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  -  Additional Secretary 
 2.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Director  
 3.    Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Additional Director 
 4.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Under Secretary 

 
 
5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
           I,  the  Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2015 -16), having 
been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this Fourteenth 
Report on Action T aken by the Government on the O bservations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in  their Seventh Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants  (2015-16)' of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment. 
2. The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 23rd April, 2015.  The Ministry of Labour and Employment  furnished their 
replies indicating A ction Taken on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report on 2 nd March, 201 6.  The Committee  
considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 11th March, 
2016.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by  the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
 11 March, 2016                                             CHAIRPERSON 
 21 Phalguna,1937 (Saka)                STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

 
 
6 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with  action taken by the Gov ernment on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  contained in the ir Seventh 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  (2015-16) of the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment. 
 
2 The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 2 3rd April, 201 5. It contained 14  Observations/Recommendations. 
Replies of the Government in respect of all the R ecommendations have been 
received and are categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government –                                                                                            
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8,  9, 10, 11, 12 and 14   
 Total: 10 
 
percentage:71.5 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government‟s reply – 
NIL 
  
NIL 
 
   
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Para No. 4, 5, 6 and 13 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature- 
NIL 
 
 
 
Total:04 
 
Percentage:28.5 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
  

 
 
7 
 
I. Issuance of U-WIN Cards 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 4,5 and 6) 
3. In their Seventh Report, the Committee had observed that the Ministry 
had initiated action in 2014 for issuance of  identity cards namely U-WIN cards 
within three years  to the unorganised sector workers under the Unorganised 
Workers' Social Security Act, 2008 . However, expressing  concern that  
modalities such as identification of workers, funding pattern, card issuing 
agency a nd the awareness campaign had not yet been com pleted, the 
Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to initiate urgent requisite 
measures to complete the formalities for issuance of I-Cards to the unorganised 
workforce within the stipulated timeline. The Committee had also exhorted the 
Ministry to take requisite measures to have seamless coordination with the 
State Governments so that the Implementing Agencies could be identified and 
the project of issu ance of  U-WIN cards be smoothly executed. Concerned with 
the possibility of dupl ication of cards in case of migrant workers , who might 
not ha ve obtained/applied for UI number,  the Committee had further 
recommended that an alternate fool -proof mechanism be put in place until 
such time all the migrant workers g ot UI numbers so as to prevent duplication 
of U-WIN cards.  
4. In their A ction Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have submitted as under: 
"As per the UWSSA 2008 the onus of registration and identification of 
Unorganized Workers and issuance of cards to workers is with the State 
Government/District Administration (Sub -section (3) of Section 10). 
Central Government envisages providing an IT pla tform to all states to 
facilitate portability of such cards. The software for IT platform and 
management of smart cards has already been developed by the Ministry. 
Further Central Government is re-examining the need to issue a separate 
smart Card in the li ght of the near universal coverage of Aadhaar.  Now 
Central Government is considering the delivery of the most public welfare 
benefits through Aadhaar enabled platforms and DietY has been asked to 
prepare a policy on the delivery of various public services  and social 

 
 
8 
 
security schemes using Aadhaar, Jan Dhan Policy(JDY) account and 
existing platforms without the issuance of new smart card." 
5. The Ministry have further stated as under: 
"The role of  the Central Government is to develop standards, and a 
common IT platform to enable portability of cards issued by State 
Government/ District Administration. The Ministry had prepared 
necessary guidelines/Standards as IT application for identification and 
registration of Unorganised Workers.It has been decided by th e 
Government that a new policy may be developed by Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology for delivery of various public 
services and social security schemes using Aadhaar, Jan Dhan 
Policy(JDY) account and existing platforms without the issua nce of new 
smart card." 
6. The Ministry have also submitted as follows: 
"Aadhaar numbers to migrant workers and uncovered population are 
being issued by Department of Electronics and Information Technology. 
Aadhaar Number and existing individual Departmental access and 
validation systems will be used to deliver various social safety services to 
unorganized sector workers. It has been noted that the Aadhaar number 
was created as a universal unique identifier for each citizen and adding a 
UWIN number would not only duplicate the work but may also introduce 
further problems in linking up with other databases which have already 
been linked with Aadhaar.  In view of the above, Central Go vernment is 
preparing IT based A adhaar linked platform for the deli very of various 
public services without the issuance of UWIN number or a new smart 
card." 
 
7. The Committee note that the work relating to issuance of U -WIN 
cards has been withheld by the Ministry as  the Union Government is 
preparing an IT based A adhaar linked platform for  delivery of various 
public services without the issuance of U -WIN card or a new smart card.  
The Committee further note that the Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology has been asked to develop a new policy for 
delivery of various Social Security Schemes using Aadhar, Jan Dhan 
Policy Account and the existing platforms.  Since the Mini stry of Labour 
and Employment are  responsible for the welfare of workers  who  are 
mostly from th e under -privileged section of s ociety, the onus lies with 

 
 
9 
 
them to correctly inform beneficiaries with the means through which they 
can avail various services and Social Security Schemes. Needless to say, 
the Committee are concerned with the welfare of the unorganised sector 
workers, regardless of the na me or number of cards. What matters is the 
timely provision of such cards through which the poor workers would be 
able to avail the benefits intended for them.  The Committee , therefore, 
desire that once it is finally decided that all the benefits would be  
extended to the unorganised workers through Aadhaar Card , Jan Dhan 
Account, etc., t he Ministry should undertake an awareness campaign  
amongst the beneficiaries through the print and electronic media as well 
as all the implementing agencies involved  right from the Panchayat level 
so as to educate  them abo ut the new means for availing of  various 
services and Social Security Schemes. The Committee specifically 
emphasize that since th e Ministry are already having a  data base of the 
identified beneficiaries for each of the Schemes run by them, they  should 
make concerted efforts and coordinate w ith other a gencies concerned to 
ensure speedy provision of issuance of Aa dhaar Cards to the unorganised 
sector workers and facilitating Aadhaar linked platform for  prompt 
delivery of various public services and Social Security Schemes to such 
workers. 
 
  II. Enhancement of Skill Development Infrastructure in Seven North 
Eastern States and Sikkim 
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
8. In their earlier Report, t he Committee had n oted that the Scheme of 
enhancing skill development infrastructure in  the seven North Eastern States 
and Sikkim was formulated in 2011 at a cost of Rs.57.39 crore for upgradation 
of 20 ITIs and augmenting infrastructural facilities in 28 ITIs . The Scheme was 
revised on 5th January, 2015  with an enhanced outlay of Rs.298.13 crore and 

 
 
10 
 
increasing the number of proposed new ITIs to 22 in the North Eastern States.  
The cost of establishment of new ITIs was also  revised to Rs.9.5 crore from the 
initial estimate of Rs.6.22 crore, without  furnishing any justification to the 
Committee. Opining that the delay in completing the formalities of any project 
undertaken invariably leads to cost escalation , the Committee had  impressed 
upon the Ministry to take requisite measures , including provision of penalty 
clauses, so as to avoid further  cost escalation and ensure completion of  the 
new IITs in the North Eastern States within the stipulated time frame.  
10. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have inter-alia stated that the Scheme “Enhancing Skill 
Development Infrastructure in Seven North Eastern States and Sikkim” has 
been transferred to the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
w.e.f 21.04.2015, and th at Ministry have been requested to furnish Action 
Taken Notes to the Committee. The reply of the Ministry of Skill Development 
and Entrepreneurship is as under: 
 "Cost of establishment of new ITI has been revised from Rs. 6.22 crore to 
 Rs. 9.5 crore with the approval of EFC. The revision is mainly due to: 
a) Increase of plinth area rate in CPWD SOR. 
b) Inclusion of retaining wall at hilly areas. 
c) Increase in the cost of t ools and equipment due to revision of 
approved list of tools and equipment. 
Regarding delay in implementation of project, various measures were 
taken including review meetings with Sr . Officers of the State 
Governments. For completion of project as envisag ed as well as provision 
of penalty clause will be taken up with the State Governments. 
 
9. The Committee , in their earlier recommendation , had  impressed 
upon the Ministry to take requisite measures , including provision of 
penalty clauses, so as to avoid fu rther cost escalation setting up the ITIs.  
The Committee appreciate the assurance given by  the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship that they will be taking up the issue 

 
 
11 
 
of incorporation of the penalty clause with the State Governments . As the 
cost of these projects has increased manifold since their 
conceptualisation, the Committee call upon the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship to expedite the provision of penalty 
clause in the agreements/tender documents so as to prevent further time 
overrun and the consequential cost escalation in the upgradation  of the 
existing ITIs and setting up of new ITIs in the North-Eastern Region. 
III. Proposed Trade Related Courses in the new ITIs. 
(Recommendation at Para No. 12) 
10. In their earlier Report, taking into consideration the fact that  the 
proposed trade related courses to be introduced in the new ITIs were mostly 
relating to hospital house -keeping, Data Entry Operator, Hair & Skin Care, 
Stenography, etc. without any emphasis on the rich heritage of Handlooms and 
Handicrafts in the North-Eastern States, the Committee had recommended the 
introduction of advance courses in Handlooms and Handicrafts in the proposed 
new ITIs there.  
11. In their A ction Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment , while reiterating that  the Scheme “Enhancing Skill 
Development Infrastructure in Seven North Eastern States and Sikkim” has 
been transferred to the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepr eneurship 
w.e.f 21.04.2015,  have forwarded the reply as received from the Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship which is as under: 
 "Short-term courses are being run in the North -Eastern States under 
 Skill  Development Initiative Scheme in th e Handicraft and Handloom 
 sectors. 
 States will be requested to identify more such courses including advance 
 level courses in the said sectors as per the requirement of the region for 
 introducing in the new ITIs  as well as existing ITIs. 
 Presently, ITI in Tripura is conducting one year courses on „Cane -Willow 
 and Bamboo Workers‟." 

 
 
12 
 
 
12. While taking note of  the response of the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship , the Committee desire that apart 
from conducting short -term courses in the Handicraft and Handloom 
Sectors, the Ministry should also prevail upon and encourage the North -
Eastern States to identify more such courses with special emphasis on 
introduction of advance level courses in the said sectors in the existing 
and proposed ITIs  in the region, which  will not only help in developing 
variety of designs  in the Handloom and Handicraft products  but will also 
boost export of these items from the North-Eastern region.   
 
IV. Revival/filling up of vacancies in CBWE as per the Evaluation Study. 
(Recommendation para No.13) 
13. In their Seventh Report, the Committee had observed that the V.V. Giri 
National Labour Institute, Noida , had  conducted an evaluation study of 
performance of CBWE and had submitted their report w ith 18  
recommendations which were under consideration of the Ministry. Taking note 
of the considerable delay in the implementation of the said recommendations , 
the Committee had desired that at least revival/filling up of vacancies in the 
CBWE be considered on priority so as to enable the Board to function smoothly 
and effectively. 
14. In their A ction Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as under: 
 "As on date the position of Education Officers in CBWE is as follows:- 
Designation 
of Posts 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Person in 
Position 
No. of 
Vacant 
posts 
Proposed to 
be Revived 

 
 
13 
 
Education 
Officer  
181 107 74 74 
  
The 74 posts of Education Officers could not be filled up since 2005 as the 
matter regarding the pay scale of the Education Officers is subjudice w.e.f. 
2010. Thus, recruitment rules could not be changed and the revival of posts 
could not be carried out . 
Against the revival of 54 posts (Non Education Officers) given by the Ministry in 
December, 2013, it is to state that CBWE had filled up 15 posts. The remaining 
posts could not be filled up due to non -availability of required level Officers for 
conducting DPC, Selection etc. However, these remaining 39 posts shall now be 
filled up if revived again by MoF as the required officers are now available." 
 
15. The Committee do not subscribe to the reasoning offered by the 
Ministry for the delay in filling up of 74 vacant posts of Education Officer,  
as these posts have been  lying vacant since the year 2005 whereas the 
matter became sub -judice w.e.f.  2010. The Ministry owe a cogent 
explanation regarding the concrete initiatives taken by them  during the 
period between 2005 and 2010 for filling up of the  said vacancies.  It is a 
matter of serious concern that  nearly 11 years have elapsed in between 
during which period there might have been further shortage in the 
number of Education Officers due to retirement, resignation, attrition , 
etc. It is also incomprehensible that on the plea of the matter of pay scale 
of Education Officer being sub -judice, recruitment rules could not be 
changed and the much needed revival process could not be carried out. 
The Committee are of the firm view that there would be no 
difficulties/disputes in appointing  the Education Officers and granting 
them interim pay scales, which could be suitably amended based on the 
outcome of the Court verdict.  The Committee, therefore, stress that  the 
revival process of  these 74 posts may be taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance with a sense of urgency and commitment  so that these vacant 
posts of Education Officer s are filled up at an early date in the best 
interest of the CBWE. 

 
 
14 
 
16. The Committee are further anguished to note that 39 posts of N on-
Education Officers could not be filled up due to non -availability of 
required level of officers for conducting DPC , Selection etc. What is more 
worrisome is the fact that  even though the  required level of officers for 
conducting DPC, etc. is now available, the 39 posts can be filled up only if 
the Ministry of Finance again revive the posts .  The Committee are of the 
considered opinion  that deserving and eligible persons have been  
suffering for no fault of theirs, but  due to the inability of the Ministry to 
conduct DPC.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the revival aspect of 
these posts be taken up urgently with the M/o Finance and the 39 vacant 
posts of Non -Education Officer be filled up at an early date. The 
Committee woul d also like to urge the Ministry to guard against 
recurrence of such unacceptable situations which are detrimental to the 
career prospects of the employees of CBWE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
15 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the total budgetary 
allocations for plan expenditure of the Ministry for the 12 th Plan period is 
Rs.13,223 crore against a projection of Rs.34,914 crore whereas during the 
first three years of the Plan period, the Ministry have been able to spend 
Rs.4582.86 crore only which constitutes less than forty per cent of the total 
plan allocations, leaving thereby more than 60 per cent of the funds to be 
utilized in the last two years of the plan period.  The Committee are dissatisfied 
with the gross mismatches and variations between the Ministry's projections 
and actual sanction of funds by the Ministry of Finance.  On the hindsight, it 
appears that the Ministry of Finance are justif ied in drastically reducing the 
12th Plan proposal of the Ministry of Labour and Employment, because had the 
entire projected amount of Rs.34,914 crore been sanctioned, the overall 
scenario would have been more dismal in view of the expenditure trend of th e 
Ministry in the last three years.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
make their planning more realistic and projections more accurate so that they 
are able to maximize the utilization of funds allocated for Plan expenditure. The 
Committee also desire that the causes of consistent under utilization of funds 
be seriously looked into and appropriate remedial measures taken so as to 
ensure optimal utilization of the remaining amount of Rs.8640.14 crore in the 
last two years of the 12th Plan period. 
Reply of the Government 
The total budgetary allocations for plan expenditure of the Ministry for the 12th 
Plan period is Rs.13,223crore. Out of this amount Rs. 7316.00 Crore was 
allocated for the scheme    „Social security for Unorganised Workers including 
RSBY‟ which has been tr ansferred to the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare. An amount of Rs. 4541.19 Crore was allocated to Training Directorate 
which has been transferred to the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship. Allocation for other Schemes during Twelfth F ive Year Plan 
now remaining with the Ministry is Rs. 1365.81 Crore. Accordingly, „National 
Child Labour Project‟ is the Major Scheme accounting for 50% of plan 
allocations.The Ministry has intensified the monitoring. Five Regional 
conferences were held und er chairmanship of Hon‟bleMoS L&E (I/C) covering 
the entire country to engage with States regarding implementation of schemes. 

 
 
16 
 
Regular meetings are being held with States, to sensitize them on effective 
implementation of the schemes. In case of National Ch ild Labour Project 
various communication are issued from time to time to Project Societies at 
District level who are implementing the Project and also reviewed through video 
conferencing periodically. To intensify the aspect of monitoring, officials are 
being deputed to inspect the project in the district. Expenditure is monitored 
on monthly basis. All the concerned officers have been instructed to 
continuously follow up and monitor the implementation of Schemes/Project, 
pace of expenditure and utilization of funds.  
 
(File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 
  
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 According to the Ministry, one of the major Schemes i.e. Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojna (RSBY) which accounts for almost 60 per cent of the plan 
allocations was being revamped and its immi nent transfer to the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare impacted the expenditure pattern during 2014 -15.  
For shortfalls in expenditure in other Schemes, the Ministry have reasoned 
that it was due to receipt of less number of proposals from the State 
Governments.  The Committee desire that the matter be taken up with the 
State Governments so that adequate and timely proposals are received 
enabling the Ministry to utilize the earmarked funds and achieve the physical 
targets set during 2015-16. 
Reply of the Government 
Response of  Ministry of Labour and Employment 
RSBY has been transferred to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. As 
advised by the committee, the Ministry has started engaging with the State 
Governments to improve implementation of remaining schemes. Five Regional 
conferences were held under chairman ship of Hon‟bleMoS L&E (I/C) covering 
the entire country to engage with states regarding implementation of schemes. 
Regular meetings are being held with States, to sensitize them on effective 
implementation of the schemes. In case of National Child Labour Project 
various communication are issued from time to time to Project Societies at 
District level who are implementing the Project and also reviewed through video 
conferencing periodically.  To intensify the aspect of monitoring, officials are 
being deputed to inspect the project in the district. Expenditure is monitored 
on monthly basis. All the concerned officers have been instructed to 

 
 
17 
 
continuously follow up and monitor the implementation of Schemes/Project, 
pace of expenditure and utilization of funds.  
Response of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
MoHFW have no comments to offer on shortfall in expenditure for FY 2014 -15. 
However, MoHFW has taken up the matter with State Governments to submit 
proposals for release of Central Share. They are being followed up. 
(As received from MOHFW vide communication No. S.12012/189/2015 -RSBY 
dated 16.12.2015) 
(File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 The Ministry have deposed that in specific cases wherever the Finance 
Ministry's stipulations of the cei ling of 33 per cent expenditure in the last 
quarter and 15 per cent in the last month of a Financial year could not be 
adhered to, specific exemption from the Ministry of Finance was obtained.  The 
Committee recommend that seeking such exemptions should no t be a 
recurring phenomena and the Ministry should strive to maintain a balanced 
expenditure throughout the year so that their projections are not further 
curtailed at the 2015-16 RE stage and in the coming years too. 
Reply of the Government 
Response of  Ministry of Labour and Employment 
All the Divisions of this Ministry have been sensitized to maintain an 
even pace of expenditure throughout the yearand to adhere to the instructions 
issued by the Ministry of Finance regarding Cash Management System. 
Response of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
Noted for compliance. 
(As received from MOHFW vide communication No. S.12012/189/2015 -RSBY 
dated 16.12.2015) 
(File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 
 
 
 

 
 
18 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 The Committee note that a new Scheme namely Recognition of Prior 
Learning (RPL) which would provide training at the construction site  has been 
launched in October, 2014 to evaluate the skills of the construction workers. 
The Committee observe that the Scheme at present concentrates on the big 
sites where there are more than 200 unskilled and semi -skilled workers across 
the six trades viz. masonry, bar -bending, shuttering, carpentry, plumb ing, 
painting and scaffolding. The Committee opine that the owners/contractors of 
big construction sites mostly engage semi-skilled/skilled workers for executing 
their work in today's mechanized work environment.  In such a scenario, RPL 
Scheme may be more beneficial to the unskilled construction workers in the 
smaller sites to improve/upgrade their skills.  The Com mittee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should explore the feasibility of extending the 
RPL Scheme to the smaller sites too so that the very essence of the training 
programme is truly realized. The Committee also desire that while selecting the 
workers from the smaller sites they may be told in clear terms that they will not 
lose their wages for the duration of the training, as the wage compensation for 
the selected workers would be paid by Welfare Board from the Cess Fund. 
Reply of the Government 
Response of  Ministry of Labour and Employment 
As the Scheme “Recognition of Prior Learning” has been transferred to 
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship w.e.f 21.04.2015, they 
were requested to send Action Taken to LokSabha Secretariat vid e this 
Ministry‟s letter No. G -20021/2/2015-B&A(pt) dated 26.05.2015.Copy of the 
communication was also endorsed to LokSabha Secretariat. 
Response of  Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
The RPL scheme for Construction Workers was started as a  pilot 
programme in the year 2014 and six trades namely masonary, bar bending, 
shuttering carpentary, plumbing, painting and scaffolding covering the 
majority of the workforce involved in construction were taken at the big 
construction sites as per the rec ommendations of the Working Group 
Committee under the scheme. Since the scheme has been well received by the 
target group, action is being taken to extend the activities of RPL scheme for 
implementation to smaller construction sites too,. In regard to the information 
to the construction workers that they will not lose their wages during 
assessment and training, training providers will inform the construction 
workers at the beginning of the training programme at their 
construction/training sites 

 
 
19 
 
 (As receive d from MSDE‟s communication NO. DGET -4/1/2014-
PCTdated 10.02.2016) 
(File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 The Committee note that presently the RPL Scheme has been launched 
in five States/UTs viz. Haryana, Telengana, Delhi, Odisha and Chhattisgarh.  
507 workers were pre-assessed in these States, out of which 316 workers were 
recommended for training whereas 181 workers appeared for final assessment 
and out of them 174 workers passed.  The reasons offered by the Ministry for 
non-appearance of all the trainees in final assessment were that the 
construction workers leave the site to another site for better wages or due to 
their other personal problems and also that it is not mandatory for the selected 
workers to appear for the final assessm ent.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that the whole exercise right from selection of workers to 
providing training and organising final assessment go futile in case the workers 
leave the training midway besides causing financial loss to the Cess Fund. The 
Committee feel that one of the reasons might be that the workers who are 
selected for such training might have acquired the skill   while performing their 
job for which they do not find it attractive enough to continue with their 
present job. The  Committee, therefore, recommend that utmost care be taken 
while selecting the construction workers for the training programme besides 
making it mandatory for them to complete the training and appear for final 
assessment so that the intent and object of the RPL Scheme come to fruition. 
Reply of the Government 
Response of  Ministry of Labour and Employment 
As the Scheme “Recognition of Prior Learning” has been transferred to 
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship w.e.f 21.04.2015, they 
were r equested to send Action Taken to LokSabha Secretariat vide this 
Ministry‟s letter No. G -20021/2/2015-B&A(pt) dated 26.05.2015.Copy of the 
communication was also endorsed to LokSabha Secretariat. 
Response of  Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
The training is provided at the Construction site and Training Providers 
set up training infrastructure at the construction site. The workers are pre -
assessed at the pre -determined criteria and based on the outcome of the pre -
assessment workers are provide d skill gap training. The construction workers 

 
 
20 
 
who are recommended for skill gap training during pre -assessment are 
provided training and again undergo final assessment. 
The workers are well informed at the beginning of training programme 
that they have to  complete the training programme and appear for final 
assessment for certification. However, the guidelines of RPL scheme for 
Construction Workers are being revised to make it mandatory for construction 
worker to complete the training and appear for final assessment to fulfill the 
intent and object of the scheme. 
(As received from MSDE‟s communication NO. DGET -4/1/2014-
PCTdated 10.02.2016)  
(File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 The Committee note that the Apprentice Protsahan Yojana was 
commenced in the month of October, 2014 to support manufacturing units and 
other establishments covered under the Apprentices Act, 1961 by reimbursing 
50% of the stipend paid to the Apprentices during the first two years of their 
training.  Initially the t arget is to cover one lakh Apprentices.  However, the 
Committee find that during the six months since the Scheme was commenced 
only 758 apprentices have been engaged  by the manufacturing units and other 
establishments covered under the Apprentices Act. Th e Committee desire that 
the manufacturing units and other establishments be asked to give wide 
publicity for the existing vacancies of Apprentices through print and electronic 
media so that these vacancies are filled up to the maximum extent to meet the 
requirement of the Industry.  The Committee also recommend that possibility 
of engaging the CBWE to generate awareness amongst the un -employed youth 
be explored so that more and more people are engaged as Apprentices enabling 
the Ministry to meet the target of one lakh Apprentices sooner. 
Reply of the Government 
Response of  Ministry of Labour and Employment 
As the Scheme “Apprentice ProtsahanYojna” has been transferred to the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship w.e.f 21.04.2015, they 
were requ ested to send Action Taken to LokSabha Secretariat vide this 
Ministry‟s letter No. G -20021/2/2015-B&A(pt) dated 26.05.2015.Copy of the 
communication was also endorsed to LokSabha Secretariat. 

 
 
21 
 
Response of  Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
 There are a large number of establishments including MSMEs where 
training facilities are available but could not be utilized because such, 
establishments express their inability to come under the Act indicating 
lack of support from Government. 
 In order to utilize facilities available in MSMEs and other establishments 
and also to support them financially in terms of stipend to apprentices, 
Apprentice ProstsahanYojana (APY) was introduced. 
 To popularize the Scheme amongst the MSMEs, workshops with MSMEs 
associations/representatives were convened. 
 A web portal has been launched on Apprenticeship Training Accordingly, 
all the establishments including manufacturing units have been 
requested to register on the portal and declare the apprenticeship 
vacancies. 
 Six RDA Ts are also conducting workshops with MSMEs in industrial 
clusters. 
 All the RDATs are publishing advertisements on APY in leading 
newspapers in their respective regions quarterly requesting 
establishments to apply on the portal for availing the benefits of APY. 
 As per the Scheme, initially two apprentices per industry were allowed to 
avail the benefits of the Scheme & in order to attract more and more 
MSMEs/private establishments; the ceiling has been raised to ten 
apprentices subject to ceiling of maximum of 50% of total number of 
apprentices in an organization. 
 Possibility of engaging the CBWE to generate awareness amongst the 
unemployed youth is being explored. 
(As received from MSDE‟s communication NO. DGET -4/1/2014-PCTdated 
10.02.2016) 
(File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 The Committee note that at present there is no established procedure for 
survey of establishments/manufacturing units to find out the exact training 
needs for the Apprentices. The Committee desire that the Regio nal Directorates 
of Apprenticeship Training should play a pro -active role in conducting surveys 
for locating the establishments/ manufacturing units who are covered under 
the Apprentices Act but are not engaging the requisite Apprentices. The 

 
 
22 
 
Committee als o desire that besides routine inspections, surprise checks be 
conducted to gauge the quality of training provided to the Apprentices by these 
establishments so as to take timely corrective action to produce well trained 
and skilled workers. 
Reply of the Government 
Response of  Ministry of Labour and Employment 
As the Scheme “Apprentice ProtsahanYojna” have been transferred to the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship w.e.f 21.04.2015, they 
were requested to send Action Taken to LokSabha Secre tariat vide this 
Ministry‟s letter No. G -20021/2/2015-B&A(pt) dated 26.05.2015. Copy of the 
communication was also endorsed to LokSabha Secretariat. 
Response of  Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
 Earlier the Apprenticeship seats were located  by the Apprenticeship 
Advisers on the basis of number of workers other than un -skilled, trade 
and infrastructure available in the establishments. The Apprentices Act, 
1961 has been amended with effect from 22nd December 2014 to make it 
more responsive to industry and youth. As per the Act, it has been 
mandatory that within a financial year, each establishment shall engage 
apprentices in a band of 2.5% to 10% of the total strength of the 
establishment including contractual staff. 
 All the six Regional Direct orates of Apprenticeship Training (RDATs) and 
all the State Apprenticeship Advisers have been advised to request all the 
establishments under their control to adhere to engage apprentices 
minimum 2.5% of the total manpower strength of establishment and also 
make them aware to avail the benefits of APY. 
 Awareness campaign/workshops in industrial clusters of the country 
have been planned in phased manner. 17 awareness 
campaigns/workshops were conducted in first phase in different 
industry clusters of the country in coordination with CII and FICCI. 
 Similar Workshops/Meetings are being held regularly by all State 
Apprenticeship Advisers and six Regional Directorates of Apprenticeship 
Training (RDATs) in their respective State/Regions. 
 Apprenticeship Advisers hav e been advised to conduct progressive trade 
tests of apprentices to check the quality of training.  
 
(As received from MSDE‟s communication NO. DGET -4/1/2014-PCTdated 
10.02.2016) 
(File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 

 
 
23 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
 The Committee note that the Scheme of enhancing skill development 
infrastructure in seven North Eastern States and Sikkim was formulated in 
2011 at a cost of Rs.57.39 crore for upgradation of 20 ITIs and augmenting 
infrastructural facilities in 28 ITIs.  The Scheme has been extended upto 
31.03.2017 at a revised cost of Rs.149.80 crore with a new component for 
"Establishment of 14 ITIs" in seven North -Eastern States.  The Scheme was 
further revised on 05.01.2015 with an enhanced outlay of Rs.298.13 crore and 
increasing the num ber of new ITIs to be established to 22 in 8 North Eastern 
States.  The Committee further note that the cost of establishment of each new 
ITI has been revised to Rs.9.5 crore from the initial estimate of Rs.6.22 crore, 
without any justifications furnished.   The Committee are of the opinion that 
delay in completing the formalities of any projects undertaken invariably leads 
to cost escalation.  They, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to take requisite 
measures including provision of penalty clauses so as to avoid further 
escalation and ensure completion of new IITs in the North Eastern States 
within the stipulated time frame. 
Reply of the Government 
Response of  Ministry of Labour and Employment 
As the Scheme “Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure in Seven 
North Eastern States and Sikkim” has been transferred to the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship w.e.f 21.04.2015, they were requested to 
send Action Taken to LokSabha Secretariat vide this Ministry‟s letter No. G -
20021/2/2015-B&A(pt) dated 26.05.2015. Copy of the communication was 
also endorsed to LokSabha Secretariat. 
Response of  Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
 Cost of establishment of new ITI has been revised from Rs. 6.22 crore to 
Rs. 9.5 crore with the approval of EFC. The revision is mainly due to: 
a) Increase of plinth area rate in CPWD SOR. 
b) Inclusion of retaining wall at hilly areas. 
c) Increase in the cost of tools and equipment due to revision of 
approved list of tools and equipment. 
Regarding delay in implementati on of project, various measures were 
taken including review meetings with Sr Officers of the State Governments. For 
completion of project as envisaged as well as provision of penalty clause will be 
taken up with the State Governments.   

 
 
24 
 
(As received from M SDE‟s communication NO. DGET -4/1/2014-PCTdated 
10.02.2016) 
(File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 The Committee note that the proposed trades to be introduced in the new 
ITIs are mostly relating to hospital housekeeping, Data Entry Operator, Hair & 
Skin Care, Stenography etc.  However, the rich heritage in the field of 
Handlooms and Handicrafts in the North Eastern States has hardly been taken 
care of while proposing the trades in the new ITIs.  The Committee are of the 
firm opinion that introducing trades for enhancing skills and market driven 
designing will not only help the workers engaged in this industry but also 
promote export oriented needs specific to the North Eastern Region.  They, 
therefore, recommend that advance courses i n Handlooms and Handicrafts 
should be introduced in the new ITIs  proposed for the North Eastern States. 
Reply of the Government 
Response of  Ministry of Labour and Employment 
As the Scheme “Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure in Seven 
North Eastern States and Sikkim” has been transferred to the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship w.e.f 21.04.2015, they were requested to 
send Action Taken to LokSabha Secretariat vide this Ministry‟s letter No. G -
20021/2/2015-B&A(pt) dated 26.05.2015.  Copy of the communication was 
also endorsed to LokSabha Secretariat. 
Response of  Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
 Short-term courses are being run in the North -Eastern States 
under Skill Development Initiative Scheme in the Handicraft and  Handloom 
sectors. 
 States will be requested to identify more such courses including 
advance level courses in the said sectors as per the requirement of the region 
for introducing in the new ITIs  as well as existing ITIs. 
 Presently, ITI in Tripura is con ducting one year courses on „Cane -
Willow and Bamboo Workers‟. 
(As received from MSDE‟s communication NO. DGET -4/1/2014-
PCTdated 10.02.2016) 
(File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 

 
 
25 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 The Committee are aware that the V.V. Giri National Labour Institute has 
been engaged in multifarious activities and is committed to promote a better 
under-standing of labour problems and to find the avenues and means to 
tackle them.  The Committee find that this Institute is the only one of its kind 
in India provi ding training to grass -root level workers in the trade union 
movement both in urban and rural areas.  Since the Institute is also engaged 
in research-oriented jobs, the Committee desire, that it may  be supported in 
terms of greater resource allocation and  requisite manpower so that the 
multifarious activities undertaken by the premier Institute are facilitated and 
encouraged in the interest of millions of labourers. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Institute, an Autonomous Body of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment, Government of India set up in July 1974, is a premier Institute of 
Labour Research, Training and Education. Since its inception the institute has 
endeavored through research, training and publications to reach all those who 
are concerned with v arious aspects of labour, both in the organized and 
unorganized sectors. The focus of such endeavors has been the transfer of 
academic insight and understanding related to all the aspects of labour for 
application to policy formulation, legislation and act ion to ensure a just and 
proper place for labourin an egalitarian and democratic society. The 
Government reviews regularly the performance of the institute and takes 
necessary steps to strengthen it. Budget is released to VVGNLI based on 
demands projected by them. Ministry also has anMoU with them on annual 
basis. 
(File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 
  

 
 
26 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

 
 
27 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry have taken initiative to issue 
identity card namely U -WIN cards to the unorganised sector workers which 
would ensure that the unorganised workers get benefit from all social security 
schemes covered under the Unorganised Workers' Social Security Act, 2008.  
As per the NSSO data, there are approximate ly 48.37 crore unorganised 
workers who would be issued these cards within a period of three years.  The 
Committee appreciate that the Ministry have initiated some steps to issue U -
WIN cards to the unorganised workers albeit after six years of the promulgation 
of the Act. The Committee are, however, concerned to find that the modalities, 
such as, identification of workers, funding pattern, card issuing agency and the 
awareness campaign,  have not yet been completed.  With a view to meeting the 
deadline of th ree years, it is imperative that all the groundwork leading to the 
issuance of U -WIN Cards are completed within a definite timeframe so as to 
avoid time and cost overrun.  The Committee, therefore, impress upon the 
Ministry to initiate urgent requisite mea sures in that direction so as to ensure 
the issuance of the cards to the unorganised workforce within the stipulated 
deadline. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the UWSSA 2008 the onus of registration and identification of 
UnorganizedWorkers and issuance of c ards to workers is with the State 
Government/DistrictAdministration (Sub -section (3) of Section 10). Central 
Government envisages providing an IT platform to all states to facilitate 
portability of such cards. The software for IT platform and management of  
smart cards has already been developed by the Ministry. Further Central 
Government is re -examining the need to issue a separate smart Card in the 
light of the near universal coverage of Aadhaar. Now Central Government is 
considering the delivery of the mo st public welfare benefits through Aadhaar 
enabled platforms and DietY has been asked to prepare a policy on the delivery 
of various public services and social security schemes using Aadhaar, Jan 
DhanPolicy(JDY) account and existing platforms without the i ssuance of new 
smart card. (File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 
 

 
 
28 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 The Committee note that according to the Act, U -WIN cards are to be 
issued by the district administration to each unorganised worker within its 
jurisdiction.  The role of the Ministry of Labour and Employment in issuance of 
U-WIN cards is to look after the financial aspects and to coordinate with the 
Departments identified by the State Governments to execute the job.  Being 
aware of the various constraints/impediments in pr oper coordination between 
the Central and State Governments, as experienced umpteen times in many 
areas, the Committee exhort the Ministry to take requisite measures to have a 
seamless coordination with the State Governments so that the Implementing 
Agencies are timely identified and the project of issuing U -WIN cards is 
smoothly executed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The role or the Central Government is to develop standards, and a  
common IT platform to enable portability of cards issued by State Government/ 
District Administration. The Ministry had prepared necessary  
guidelines/Standards as IT application for identification and registration of  
Unorganised Workers. It has been decided by the Government that a new 
policy may be developed by Department of Electr onics and Information 
Technology for delivery of various public services and social security schemes 
using Aadhaar, Jan Dhan  Policy(JDY) account and existing platforms without 
the issuance of new smart card. 
 (File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 
  

 
 
29 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that the migrant workers occupy the major 
percentage of unorganised workers and there is every possibility of duplication 
of cards as the migrant workers move from State to State.  Though the Ministry 
have intimated that the card will be portable and seeded with Aadhar number 
and biometric de -duplication software is in -built in UIDAI database, there 
would be no possibility of duplication.  The Committee feel that there would be 
a number of such workers amongst the  unorganised workers who might not 
have obtained/applied for UI number.  In such a scenario, the Committee 
recommend that an alternate fool -proof mechanism be put in place until such 
time all the migrant workers get UI numbers to prevent duplication of U -WIN 
cards.  The Committee also desire that periodical awareness campaign be 
organised to educate the migrant workers about the advantage and benefit of 
registering for and obtaining the Unique Identification Number and the U -WIN 
cards. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Aadhaar numbers to migrant workers and uncovered population are 
being issued by Department of Electronics and Information Technology. 
Aadhaar Number and existing individual Departmental access and validation 
systems will be used to deliver various social safety services to unorganized 
sector workers. It has been noted that the Aadhaar number was created as a 
universal unique identifier for each citizen and adding a UWIN number would 
not only duplicate the work but may also introduce further problems  in linking 
up with other databases which have already been linked with Aadhaar.  In view 
of the above, Central Government is preparing IT based aadhaar linked 
platform for the delivery of various public services without the issuance of 
UWIN number or a new smart card. 
 (File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
 While examining the Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry, the 
Committee had noted that V.V. Giri National Labour Institute, Noida conducted 
an evaluation study of performance of CBWE and had submitted their report 
with 18 recommendations.  The reco mmendations of the Institute were under 
consideration of the Ministry.  Since, there is already considerable delay on the 

 
 
30 
 
part of the Ministry in implementing  the recommendations of the Institute, the 
Committee desire that atleast revival/filling up of va cancies in the CBWE 
should be considered on priority so that the Board is able to function smoothly 
and effectively. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As on date the position of Education Officers in CBWE is as follows:- 
Designation of 
Posts 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Person in 
Position 
No. of Vacant 
posts 
Proposed to 
be Revived 
Education 
Officer  
181 107 74 74 
The 74 posts of Education Officers could not be filled up since 2005 as 
the matter regarding the pay scale of the Education Officers is sub -judice w.e.f. 
2010. Thus, recruitment rules could not be changed and the revival of posts 
could not be carried out . 
Against the revival of 54 posts (Non Education Officers) given by the 
Ministry in December, 2013, it is to state that CBWE had filled up 15 posts. 
The remaining posts could not be filled up due to non -availability of required 
level Officers for conducting DPC, Selection etc. However, these remaining 39 
posts shall now be filled up if revived again by MoF as the required officers are 
now available. 
 (File No. G -25015/1/2015-B&A) 
  

 
 
31 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
 11 March, 2016                                             CHAIRPERSON 
 21 Phalguna,1937 (Saka)                STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

 
 
32 
 
                APPENDIX-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 
Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on 11 th March, 2016 from 103 0 hrs. to 1 100 hrs. in  
Room No. `131‟ (Chairperson's Chamber),   Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  - Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
     
  2. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
  3. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  4. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  5. Shri R. Parthipan 
  6. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  7. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
       
   RAJYA SABHA 
  8. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  9. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
  10. Shri P.L. Punia 
  11. Shri Rajaram 
  12. Haji Abdul Salam 
  13. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
  14. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan   - Addl. Secretary 
           2. Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
  3. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Addl. Director 
  4. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 
 

 
 
33 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee,  convened for consideration and adoption of two Draft Action 
Taken Reports. Giving an overview of the Recommendations made/reiterated in 
both the Draft Action Taken Reports,  the Chairperson requested the Members 
to give their suggestions on them, if any. 
3. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the following Draft Action 
Taken Reports and adopted them after some discussions: 
 
(i)  Draft Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contai ned in their Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands For Grants (2015 -16) of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment; and 
 
(ii)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Reports to both 
the Houses. 
 
   
The Committee then adjourned. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX  Do not pertain to this report 
  

 
 
34 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations          14 
  
II. Observations/Recommendations which have     10           71.5%   
 been accepted by Government 
 (Recommendation Para. Nos., 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9,  
 10, 11, 12 and 14,  
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the     00                00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government‟s replies-  
     NIL 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
 which Government‟s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration –              04        28.5% 
  (Recommendation Para. Nos. 4, 5, 6 and 13) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of       00        00 
 which replies of Government are of interim  
 in nature   
     NIL      
                         ----------- 
               100% 
                                    ------------ 
 