i 
 
21 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their  
Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for 
Grants (2016-17)'] 
 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 


ii 
 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their  
Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for 
Grants (2016-17)' of the Ministry of Textiles] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   15.12.2016 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on     15.12.2016 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 


iii 
 
                                                 CONTENTS 
       
                   PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION        (iv) 
        
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………..  
  
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been   
   accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the   
   Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the  
   Government’s reply…………………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which replies of Government have not been   
   accepted by the Committee and which require   
   reiteration………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which  replies of the Government  are interim  
   in nature   ………………………………………………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on   14.12.2016.    
   
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First 
 Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
   

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 
  DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA - CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
17. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
18. Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
19. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
20. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
21. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
23. Shri N. Gokulkrishnan 
24. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
25. Shri P.L. Punia 
26. Shri Rajaram 
27. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
28. Haji Abdul Salam 
29. Ms. Dola Sen 
30. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
31. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         2.    Shri N.C.Gupta             - Joint Secretary 
 3.    Shri Anita B.Panda   - Director  
 4.    Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Additional Director 
 5.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Under Secretary 
 

v 
 
                                              INTRODUCTION 
 
           I,  the  Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2016 -17) having 
been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this Twenty First 
Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained  in their 
Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of 
Ministry of Textiles. 
2. The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2016.  The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies  
indicating action taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Eighteenth Report on 7 th September, 2016.  The Committee considered and 
adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 14th December, 2016  
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For the ease of  reference Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                           DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA 
14th December, 2016                                    CHAIRPERSON                      
23rd Agrahayana,1938 (Saka)             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
 
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report deals with action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of 
the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2 The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok S abha  and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 3 rd May, 2016. It contained 27 Observations/ 
Recommendations. Replies of the Government in respect of all these 
Recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government –                                                                                            
Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26  and 27 
 
 Total:24 
Percentage:88.89 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – 
NIL 
NIL 
   
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Rec. Para No.13, 20and 23 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature- 
NIL 
 
 
 
Total:03 
Percentage:11.11 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report be 
furnished to them at the earliest.  

2 
 
 
I. Utilisation of Budgetary Allocations 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
4. In their Eighteenth  Report, t he Committee had noted that against the 
Ministry's proposed outlay of ₹ 3829.53 crore for the year 2016-17, the Ministry 
of Finance had approved ₹ 3,500 crore only. ₹150 crore more were reduced in 
the last minute allocations, finally making the a llocations at ₹ 3,350 crore. 
While rejecting the reasoning given by the Financial Advisor that the cut was a 
unilateral move and holistic exercise done by the Department of Expenditure, 
the Committee viewed that the reduction in allocations might have done  
keeping in view the trend of expenditure and utilisation of funds over the years 
by the Ministry of Textiles.  The Committee had, therefore, opined that instead 
of drawing solace from similar fate being meted out to other Ministries too, the 
Ministry of T extiles, having tremendous potential for additional employment 
generation, should seriously endeavour in improving their own performance in 
the utilisation of Plan Outlays so as to stop recurrence of repeated reductions 
in their Budgetary proposals in future. 
5. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows:  
" All Administrative Divisions have been to requested to note the above 
observation/recommendation of the Hon’ble Standing Committee for 
strict compliance and have also been requested that they   should 
seriously endeavour for improving the performance in th e utilization of 
Plan Outlays so as to stop recurrence of repeated reductions in the 
Budgetary proposals in future.  
During 2015-16, an amount of Rs.76.01 crore was re -appropriated from 
TUFs(Plan ) to subsidy to Jute Corporation  of India towards  Price 
Support as advised by M/o Textiles.." 
 
6. The Committee appreciate that pursuant to their recommendations, 
all Administrative Divisions have been requested by the Ministry to 
seriously endeavour for improving their performance in the utilisation of 
their Pla n outlays.  The Committee trust that the Ministry will 

3 
 
periodically monitor the performance of the Administrative Division to 
ensure compliance with the instructions issued for maximum utilisation 
of plan outlays. 
II. Provision of Healthcare Facilities to Weavers and Artisans 
(Recommendation Para No. 13) 
7. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that the Textiles 
Ministry's Health Insurance Scheme was merged with the Labour Ministry's 
Rastriya Swasthya Bima Yojna (RSBY) which had subsequently been  
transferred to the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare w.e.f 1st April, 2015. A 
restructured RSBY which was being formulated by the Health Ministry would 
be implemented w.e.f 1st April, 2017. As the restructured scheme would be 
implemented from 2017 -18 on wards by the Health Ministry, the Committee 
had desired that the weavers be covered under the existing pattern of the RSBY 
during 2016 -17. The  Committee had also desired that as assured by the 
Secretary, the feasibility of empanelling the ESI Hospitals be  explored for 
provision of healthcare facilities to the weavers and artisans covered under 
Health Insurance Schemes.  
8. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows: 
"The Office of Development Comm issioner for Handlooms is in constant 
touch with Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoH&FW) to enroll the 
weavers for the year 2016 -17. In this connection a Workshop was held 
on 6th May, 2016 under the Chairmanship of DC (Handlooms) to discuss 
the implementation modalities of RSBY. In this workshop all the RSBY 
implementing State Directors of Handlooms, State Nodal Agency (SNA) 
and Officers from MoH&FW participated.   Currently the Rastriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojna (RSBY) is being implemented through State Nod al 
Agencies (SNA) of the RSBY implementing States. SNA are selecting 

4 
 
Implementing Agency through tender process and this Ministry has 
informed Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of approval for the year 
2016-17. Re -structured Health Insurance Scheme (HI S) will be 
implemented by MoH&FW w.e.f. 1 st April, 2017.  The issue of 
empanelling ESI Hospitals for provision of healthcare facilities is being 
referred to MoH&FW." 
 
9. The Committee note that the issue of empanelling the ESI Hospitals 
for provision of he althcare facilities to the weavers and artisans is being 
referred directly to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  The 
Committee desire that the Ministry of Textiles in their endeavour for 
empanelling ESI Hospitals should  involve the nodal Ministry  i.e. the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment in the process. 
III. Powerloom Mega Cluster Scheme 
(Recommendation Para No.20) 
10. The Committee in their 18th Report had noted with concern that under 
the Powerloom Mega Cluster Schemes, where subsidy upto Rs.50 crore per 
cluster was provided, setting up of five mega clusters at Bhiwandi, Bhilwara, 
Ichalkaranji, Erode and Surat had been  adversely affected due to non -
availability of land, resource constraints of the stake holders etc. While the 
projects at Bhilwara and Bhiwandi have been shifted to other places, projects 
at Erode and Surat were at the initial stages. The Committee were no t satisfied 
with the state-of-affairs and had impressed upon the Ministry to take corrective 
measures and effectively coordinate with the State Governments and other 
stakeholders concerned so that the five mega clusters were established  within 
a definite time line and the intended objective of benefitting the powerloom 
weavers achieved.  

5 
 
11. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows: 
"The  Powerloom Mega Clusters at Erode and Bhiwandi were announ ced 
by the Hon’ble Finance Minister during the Budget Speech in the year 
2008-09.  The Powerloom Mega Clusters at Bhilwara, Ichalkaranji and 
Surat were also announced during the year 2009-10, 2012-13 and 2014-
15 respectively. Initially the scheme was monit ored by the  Ministry of 
Textiles directly. At present, Ministry of Textiles has been monitoring the 
implementation of all the Powerloom Mega Clusters through O/o the 
Textile Commissioner and its regional offices since last one year.   In 
order to ensure a n effective coordination amongst various stakeholders 
and the State Governments at cluster level, a Cluster Coordination 
Group (CCG) would be set up under the Chairmanship of the respective 
District Collector. This CCG would be responsible to examine the 
DCR/DPRs submitted by CMTA and will make its recommendations to 
Ministry. CCG will also be responsible for local coordination and regular 
review of implementation of the Scheme at cluster level. The member of 
CCG consists of, the Chairperson of Industry Ass ociations related to 
cluster, representatives of concerned sector of State Govt. Deptt. 
representatives of related Central Govt. Organisations and representative 
of CMTA, Chairperson of SPV(s) as a representative and an officer 
nominated by the Textile Com missioner shall be the Convener of CCG. 
For smooth implementation of these projects, Ministry of Textiles has 
been regularly following up with the State Government concerned 
whenever it is required, for taking necessary action and providing 
necessary cooperation for setting up of these projects. The office of the 
Textile Commissioner has been making concerted  effort at expediting the 
projects despite constraints such as non-availability of land and low level 
of stakeholder interest. As a result, the projec ts at Ichalkaranji and 
Bhilwara are now making headway. 

6 
 
 
12. While appreciating the various measures initiated by the Ministry 
including delegation of monitoring to the Office of the Textile 
Commissioners and their regional offices to expedite setting up o f 
Powerloom Mega Clusters for the benefit of the Powerloom Weavers, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the shifting of the 
clusters earlier intended to be set up at Erode and Bhiwandi. 
IV. R&D and Institutional Development Programme 
(Recommendation Para No.21) 
13. In their earlier Report t he Committee had noted that the R&D and 
Institutional Development Programme which was launched in 2014 -15 for a 
period of five years was still at the initial stage for want of adequate response 
from the Research Institutions. The Ministry's expectations that in the coming 
years the expenditure in that direction would increase substantially were not 
convincing in view of the slow progress of the Programme. The Committee had, 
therefore, impressed upon t he Ministry to take recourse to urgent punitive 
measures to intensify the publicity campaigns for obtaining adequate proposals 
from the Research Institutions so that R&D and Institutional Development 
were carried out in the Textile sector, as envisaged.  
14. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows: 
"To promote Research & Development Scheme necessary efforts have 
been taken on behalf of Ministry. The Scheme has been revised and two 
new components have been added. The Textile Commissioner and Jute 
Commissioner have already invited proposals under the scheme. Review 
meetings have been taken with TRAs, prompt action been taken to hold 

7 
 
the PAMC and PAC meeting to approve the project proposals. In orde r to 
achieve the objectives of the revised schemes, all Joint Secretaries have 
been requested to indentify the specific felt needs for R&D under their 
domain so that the same can be taken up with various research agencies 
including TRAs, IITs etc. under va rious schemes.  Besides, Ministry of 
Textiles is also participating in the “IMPRINT” scheme of Ministry of 
Science and Technology and “Uchhatar Avishkar Yojana” of Ministry of 
Human Resource Development. 
15. The Committee note that the R&D and Institutiona l Development 
Programme was launched in 2014 -15 for a period of five years which as 
per the reply of the Ministry has been revised and two new components 
have been added.  Since, the Scheme was for a period of five years and out 
of which three years have a lmost elapsed, the Committee desire that the 
efforts be further intensified so that in the remaining two years the goal is 
achieved. 
V. Functioning of Jute Mills 
(Recommendation Para No.23) 
16. In their earlier Report, the Committee had found that most of the jute 
mills were not operating throughout the year and to their full capacity. Further, 
workers in jute mills were not getting their statutory dues even after 
retirement.  The Committee had opined that it was the moral obligation of the 
Ministry to prot ect the jute workers and their families from exploitation by 
unscrupulous elements besides ensuring their socio -economic up-liftment. The 
Committee had, therefore, exhorted the Ministry for taking serious and urgent 
measures, in unison with the State Governments concerned, to ensure that the 
jute mills functioned to their full potential throughout the year and the workers 

8 
 
get their rightful dues. They had also recommended for taking stringent action 
against those who violated the statutory provisions of var ious Acts governing 
the Jute Sector. 
17. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows: 
"The  Ministry of Textiles has taken following action :-  
1.       As per the available record, total dues of j ute mill workers of 47 
jute mills on account of Provident Fund is Rs.12063.20 lakh.  In all cases 
the jute mills have filed cases in different courts/judicial bodies 
including Lower Courts, Higher Courts, BIFR.   The issues of non -
payment of statutory dues of workers fall within the purview of Labour 
Department of the concerned State, Regional Provident Commissioner 
and Chief Labour Commissioner (Central).  
2.       The Ministry of Textiles has been supporting jute sector through 
Jute Packaging Material Act,  1987 which has made use of jute sacking 
mandatory for packaging of food grains.  At present a minimum of 90% of 
food grains and a minimum of 20% of sugar are to be mandatorily 
packed in jute sacking.  During 2015-16, the share of B.Twill production 
in total production of jute goods was more than 65% which is 8% higher 
than that of the previous year.   Because of this assured market, the jute 
mills have stopped exploring private market and have become over 
dependent on Government order.  They do not feel the need to modernise 
their units and keep on operating below their actual production 
capacity." 
18. The Committee take note of the reply of the Ministry in regard to 
non-payment of PF dues to the Jute Mill workers.  The Committee are 
fully aware that the Lab our Department of the State concerned is legally 
responsible for the issues of non -payment of statutory dues of workers, 

9 
 
but it is the moral obligation of the Textile Ministry/National Jute 
Board/Jute Corporation of India to take care of welfare of the wor kers in 
jute producing/manufacturing units.  Moreover, being the principal 
employer it is the responsibility of the Ministry/NJB/JCI to pursue the 
statutory requirements and protect the interest of the Jute Mill workers. 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER-II  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 The Committee are deeply anguished to note the abysmally low cumulative 
utilisation of funds by the Ministry of Textiles during the last four years, especially the 
first two years of the XII Plan period. To illustrate, against the Ministry's proposed 
outlay was Rs.40,203.19 crore for the XII Plan the approved outlay of Rs.25,931 crore 
and the final allocation was Rs.15,215.37 crore at the RE stages. Even after s uch 
drastic reductions in the Plan outlay, the Ministry have not been able to fully utilise 
the reduced allocations as is corroborated from the fact that the cumulative 
expenditure from 2012 -13 to 2015 -16 (as on 19th March, 2016) was Rs.12,933.80 
crore. Needless to mention that it is most unlikely that the Ministry would be able to 
utilise the remaining amount of around Rs.2,200 crore in the last 12 days of the 2015-
16 fiscal. The Ministry's explanation that the cumulative expenditure percentage 
during the first four years of the XII Plan period has been 85 percent vis -a-vis the RE 
allocations does not hold good in view of the disconnect observed in the Ministry's 
Plan proposals, the approved outlay and finally the expenditure incurred. Equally 
unconvincing is the reasoning that the low utilisation of funds during the initial years 
of the Plan period was due to the erstwhile system of getting clearance from the 
Department of Expenditure for expenditure beyond a certain amount on Plan 
Schemes. The fact of the matter is that the main reasons for shortfalls in the 
utilization of Plan outlay have been non -receipt of viable proposals, delay in receipt of 
utilisation certificates, procedural delays etc., as als o admitted by the Ministry. The  
Committee in their earli er Reports, have time and again impressed upon the Ministry 
to resort to effective measures to overcome these recurrent impediments which 
adversely impacting the utilisation of funds. The Committee are, therefore, of the firm 
view that it is high time the Ministry ironed out the deficiencies / anomalies and 
embarked upon the concrete measures so as to ensure optimal utilisation of the Plan 
outlays in the coming years. 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. Due care is 
being taken so as to ensure optimal  utilisation of approved annual & Five Year Plan 
outlay.   
The year wise budget provision under Plan Head and expenditure under the  Ministry 
of Textile during first four years of 12th Five Year Plan i.e 2012-13 to 2015-16 and the 
BE for 2016-17 and the expenditure upto 7th July, 2016 are  given below: 
 
 

11 
 
S.No.  Year BE RE Actual 
Expenditure % over BE % over RE 
1 2012 – 13 7000.00 4500.00 3627.39 51.82 80.60 
2 2013 – 14 4631.00 3900.00 3167.57 68.39 81.22 
3 2014 – 15 4831.00 3500.00 3320.51 68.73 94.87 
4 2015-16 3523.32 
3239.36** 
(as on 
31.03.16) 
3111.76 88.32 96.06 
5 Total of 4 yrs. 19985.3
2 15139.36 13227.23 66.18 87.37 
6 2016-17 3350.00   1149.86  34.32 (upt7.7.20
16)  
** while the RE for Plan funds in 2015 -16 was Rs.3315.37 crore, Rs.76.01 crore was 
re-appointed from Plan to the Non -Plan side to subsidize JCI for price support 
reducing the defacto RE to Rs. 3239.36 
The expenditure under various schemes is reviewed by the Secretary in weekly 
meetings with Divisional heads and AS&FA. This has fine tuned  releases to a great 
extent. It may be noted that the Ministry has already spent more than 34% funds in 
the first quarter of 2016 -17. Further release position has improved significantly both 
w.r.t. the BE and RE over the years. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 The Committee note that the BE 2015-16 for plan expenditure was Rs.3,523.31 
crore which was reduced to Rs.3,315.31 crore at the RE stage and the final allocation 
was Rs.3,208 crore. The Plan expenditure as on 28th March, 2016 has been Rs.2976 
crore (89.6 percent) and the Ministry were expecting to cross 96 percent expenditure 
by 31st March, 2016. In this context, the Committee find that the likely surrender of 
funds in the Plan expenditure would be to the tune of Rs.252.74 crore and most of the 
savings are anticipated under the Scheduled Caste Sub Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub 
Plan (TSP) components as very few proposals/ applications have been received under 
these components of the Plan Scheme. The Ministry are reportedly taking specific 
steps to design interventions in Handicrafts, Sericulture and Powerloom sectors in 
order to increase expenditure under the SCSP and TSP components. While expressing 
their serious concern over the likely savings under important components like SCSP 

12 
 
and TSP, the Committee would like the Ministry to firmly intervene in the matter and 
intensify their efforts  for ensuring increased take off of the Schemes intended for the 
benefit and upliftment of SCs and STs leading to maximum utilisation of Plan outlays. 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. Out of  the 
budget provision of Rs 3315.37 crore at the RE stage in 2015 -16 an amount of 
Rs.76.01 crore was re-appropriated from TUFs (Plan) to subsidy to Jute Corporation of 
India towards price support, thereby   reducing the final grant to Rs.3239.36 crore.  
An amount of   Rs.3111.76crore was spent as on 31.03.2016  i.e an expenditure of 
96.06% was incurred implying thereby a savings of Rs.127.60crore. A major 
component of this saving has been on account of savings under Scheduled Caste Sub 
Plan (SCSP) component of Rs 99.34 crore and 7.64 crore under Tribal Sub Plan (TSP). 
 The Ministry of Textiles have accordingly since announced special provisions for 
the SC & ST under the modified InsituUpgradation of Plain Powerlooms approved by 
the SFC on 1.4.2016 wherein as against 50% subsidy provided for General candidates, 
75% is being provided for SC candidates and 90% for ST candidates for in -situ 
Powerloom upgradation. With the receipt of proposals under the new scheme, it is 
hoped that fund utilization for SC/ST components will improve in the coming year.  
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 One disquieting aspect that has consistently engaged the attention of the 
Committee is the uneven pattern of expenditure by the Ministry,  despite the Ministry 
of Finance's clear cut guidelines/ instructions not to exceed the ceiling of 33 percent 
expenditure in the last quarter and 15 percent in the month of March every financial 
year. The Ministry have submitted that the necessity for obta ining relaxation from the 
Finance Ministry to exceed the prescribed ceilings arises only when the compliance 
from the beneficiaries and Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) is received late. In view of 
the fact that uneven and disjointed pattern of expenditure hampers the planned 
implementation of the Schemes envisaged besides violating the fiscal discipline 
imposed by the Finance Ministry, the Committee impress upon the Ministry of Textiles 
to take corrective and coordinated measures for timely receipt of compl iance from the 
beneficiaries and SPVs which would certainly put the Ministry on a strong footing. 
Reply of the Government 
 All Administrative Divisions have been  requested to note the above 
observation/recommendation of the Hon’ble Standing Committee and to take 
corrective and coordinated measures for timely receipt of compliance from the 
beneficiaries and SPVs to avoid uneven and disjointed pattern of expenditure. 

13 
 
 Ministry of Textiles has taken corrective steps during this year and achieved 
expenditure of 34.32% in the first quarter (Apri l-June, 2016) as against the target of 
33.19% of B.E. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 The Committee note that against the Ministry's proposed outlay of Rs.3829.53 
crore during the year 2016 -17, the Ministry of Finance have approved Rs.3,500 crore 
only. In the last minute Rs.150 crore more has been reduced in the 2016 -17 BE, 
finally making the allocations at Rs.3,350 crore. The Financial Advisor, Ministry of 
Textiles has deposed that such cut is a unilateral move and holistic exercise done by 
the Department of Expenditure and the Ministry of Textiles have a little role to play in 
it. The Financial Advisor has further reasoned that a similar fate is seen in other 
Ministries also because the overall holistic priority of the Government takes 
precedence over everything else. The Committee are inclined to reject the argument 
adduced by the Financial Advisor that it is just a unilateral move on the part of the 
Ministry of Finance and that the Ministry of Textiles have no role to play. In fact, it is 
the trend of expenditure and utilisation of funds over the years by the Ministry of 
Textiles that might have been taken into consideration by the Finance Ministry while 
imposing a cut in the 2016 -17 Budget proposals of the Textiles Ministry. Therefore, 
instead of drawing solace from similar fate being meted out to other Ministries too, the 
Ministry of Textiles, having tremendous potential for additional employment 
generation, should  seriously endeavour in improving their own performance in the 
utilisation of Plan Outlays so as to stop recurrence of repeated reductions in their 
Budgetary proposals in future. 
Reply of the Government 
 All Administrative Divisions have been to requested to note the above 
observation/recommendation of the Hon’ble Standing Committee for strict compliance 
and have also been requested that they  should seriously endeavour for improving the 
performance in the utilization of Plan Outlays so as to stop recurrenc e of repeated 
reductions in the Budgetary proposals in future. 
 During 2015 -16, an amount of Rs.76.01 crore was re -appropriated from 
TUFs(Plan ) to subsidy to Jute Corporation  of India towards  Price Support as advised 
by M/o Textiles. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 The Committee note the statement of the Secretary, Ministry of Textiles that the 
Ministry's efforts have gained significant momentum and action has already been 
initiated to ensure 100 p ercent utilisation of Plan outlay during 2016 -17. Her 

14 
 
assertion that with little efforts maximum employment could be generated if the 
Ministry get the right allocations also merits attention. The Committee believe that the 
statement of intent will be translated into concrete action and positive outcome during 
the 2016 -17 fiscal. Keeping that in mind and also in view of the fact that original 
plannings may go haywire due to sudden and sizeable reductions in the budgetary 
allocations, the Committee recommend that the Textiles Secretary should take up the 
matter at the appropriate fora so that at least the original BE proposal of the Ministry 
is restored and the intended objectives/ projections for 2016-17 are achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Text iles had taken up the matter for enhancement of the Plan 
Budget in 2016 -17. A letter had issued in this regard at the Minister’s level on 15th 
February, 2016. However the provision at the BE stage for M/o Textiles remain fixed 
at 3350.00 crore in 2016 -17 which is lower than the budget provision fixed for the 
Ministry in 2015 -16(BE) of Rs. 3523.32 crore.  The Ministry also wrote subsequently 
to the M/o Finance vide letter dated 12.4.2016 for provision of additional funds to the 
tune of Rs 3119 crore for ATUF S in 2016 -17 to meet the committed liabilities in line 
with the decision of the cabinet. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 The Committee deprecate to note that during 2015 -16, the Ministry have been 
unable to achieve the physical targets in a number of Schemes like National Handloom 
Development Programme, Handloom Weavers Comprehensive Welfare Scheme, 
Research & Development Programme, Ambedkar Hastshlip Vikas Yojna, Powerloom 
Group Insurance and Schem e etc. Non -receipt of adequate and viable proposals, 
receipt of less claims from the beneficiaries, non -completion of the Appraisal/ 
Approval processes, non -earmarking of funds for the SC Sub -Plan, severe winter 
condition in Leh/Ladakh etc. have been cited  as the primary reasons for non -
achievement of targets in the aforementioned Schemes. With a view to overcoming the 
impediments, the Ministry are reportedly focusing on effective implementation of the 
Plan Schemes through weekly review, periodical/ regular  interaction with the 
stakeholders, empirical feedbacks from the States and field Units, changes in 
Guidelines etc. The Committee are of the considered opinion that while severe climatic 
conditions or difficult topography can be considered as genuine setba cks in the 
smooth implementation of the Schemes, reasons like non -receipt of adequate and 
viable proposals, non -completion of Appraisal/Approval process and non -provision of 
funds for SCSP can no way be condoned as they are a sad commentary on the 
Ministry's requisite advance planning. The Committee, therefore, call upon the 
Ministry to singularly focus on removing the chronic malaise that have been impeding 
the implementation of the Plan Schemes, besides continuing with the measures 

15 
 
already initiated, so t hat the import of the Plan Schemes in furthering the growth of 
the Textile Sector in general and its potential for additional employment generation 
and increased exports in particular, is duly taken care of. 
Reply of the Government 
 The following steps hav e been initiated to ensure opti mal utilization of funds 
during 2016-17:  
(i) Implementation of the schemes/activities are being reviewed/ monitored every 
week by Secretary (Textiles) with Joint Secretaries and other senior officers in 
the finance divisions. 
(ii) Meeting of the Minister of Textiles with Textile Ministers of all the States is held 
periodically for explaining the objectives and funding pattern and impress upon 
to send the  adequate and viable proposals expeditiously  on various schemes. 
(iii) Secretary (Textiles) is chairing Regional meetings wherein the performance of 
various schemes of M/o Textiles are being reviewed with the State Government 
and fresh proposals are being  elicited. 
(iv) Separately Secretary (Textiles) write to the Chief Secr etaries/Principal 
Secretaries of the States  periodically flagging issues which are holding back 
the implementation of schemes 
(v) Field level visits and appraisal by JSs and Senior Officers from the Regional and 
Attached Offices.  
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 The Committee are dissatisfied to note that for some schemes no target has 
been fixed and for some other Schemes achievement has been stated to be 'not 
quantifiable', as is revealed from th e documents furnished. The Ministry have 
explained that setting of year -wise targets is a continuous process and is based on 
financial provisions. The Committee are of the view that leaving the respective 
columns blank, without reasonings, or saying some a chievements are not quantifiable 
reflect lack of due diligence on the part of the Ministry. The Committee would, 
therefore, like to caution the Ministry to guard against such inaccuracies so as to 
maintain the sanctity of the documents placed before Parliament and its organs. 
Reply of the Government 
 All Administrative Divisions have been  requested to note the above 
observation/recommendation of the Hon’ble Standing Committee for strict compliance 
and ensure that while furnishing the information for inclusion in  the Outcome Budget 

16 
 
the target fixed for the schemes and achievements are stated in clear and quantifiable 
terms and use of the words “not quantifiable” is avoided. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 The Committee note that under the Nationa l Handloom Development 
Programme, cooperative societies, handloom agencies and individual weavers are given 
a marketing platform, through exhibition -cum-sale events, to sell their products in 
domestic and international markets. The Committee are, however, concerned to 
observe that against a target of 400 domestic events during 2015-16, 339 events could 
be organised though the nine targetted international events could be successfully 
organised. The reasons for shortfall in domestic events are attributed to p oor past 
performance and inadequate results from some exhibitions. As the events are a solid 
platform for the weavers to directly showcase and market their products both inside 
and outside the Country, the Committee desire the Ministry to take requisite corrective 
measures so that the targetted 350 domestic and 22 international events during 2016-
17 are achieved and the weavers benefitted. 
Reply of the Government 
 Under Handloom Marketing Assistance -HMA (a component of National 
Handloom Development Programm e - NHDP) proposals are received from the State 
Governments for organisation of marketing evens (expos).  For financial year 2015 -16, 
a target of 400 expos was fixed.  Against the target, 358 expos have been sanctioned.   
Proposals from some of the states were not received and some proposals were not 
viable, therefore the shortfall arisen. 
       However, as advised the Committee’s concernhas been noted and all out efforts 
will be made to meet the targeted events. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 The Committee are pleased to note that the India Handloom Brand (IHB) which 
was launched on the occasion of the first National Handloom Day on 7th August, 2015 
aims at generating a special market space and incr eased earnings to the weavers and 
exclusively catering to the quality need of the socio -environmentally conscious 
consumers. The Committee would like the Ministry to have a special focus on the IHB 
scheme to endorse the quality of products in terms of raw material, processing, 
weaving etc. so that the exclusive needs of the consumers looking for niche in 
handmade products are catered to and the primary objective of benefitting the weavers 
is achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
 The above observation/ recommendation of the Hon’ble Standing Committee 
has been noted  for strict compliance. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 

17 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 The Committee appreciate to note that the weavers MUDRA Scheme under the 
Pradhan Mantri MUDRA Yojna (PMMY), for extending loans upto Rs.5 Lakh to the 
Handloom Weavers and Weavers' Entrepreneurs with interest subsidy margin money 
and credit guarantee has been formulated in association with the Punjab National 
Bank and IDBI. So far, a  total of 484 loans worth Rs.2.61 crore have been sanctioned 
under the Scheme. While encouraging the Ministry to extend the intended financial 
assistance to more weavers and their Entrepreneurs under the weavers MUDRA 
Scheme, the Committee would, however, desire the Ministry to remain vigilant and 
strengthen their coordination mechanism with the Banks so as to ensure that the 
much needed financial assistance with the concessional credit components are 
actually availed by the weavers. 
Reply of the Government 
 In Weavers MUDRA scheme, the facility for availing loan can be availed by 
Handloom Weavers & Weavers Entrepreneur for which Weavers’ Identity cards have 
been issued by the Office of Development Commissioner for Handlooms or State 
Government or the cases recommended by Weavers Service Centre so as to ensure 
that the financial assistance is actually availed by the genuine weavers. In addition, 
banks are also carrying out necessary due diligence while considering the loan 
applications. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 The Committee note that the Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojna (MGBBY) is 
under convergence with the Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojna (PMJJBY) and 
from 2016 -17 onwards with lesser amount of premium contribution i.e. Rs.80 per 
annum by the weavers and Rs.250 by the Ministry, the weavers will be getting better 
life coverage, both in the case of natural death and accidental death, which will be 
upto Rs.2 lakh. The merged Scheme will be  implemented by the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services). The Committee apprehend that, as also 
corroborated by the Secretary, Ministry of Textiles, things would not automatically fall 
in line with convergence of the MGBBY with the PMJJBY  unless there are proactive 
interventions and strict monitoring on the part of the Ministry of Textiles, in view of 
the abysmally low enrollment of weavers so far. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that instead of leaving things at the mercy of Banks/ Fi nancial Institutions, the 
Ministry should strictly that too at regular intervals monitor the progress, as assured 
by the Secretary, so that the purpose of convergence of the MGBBY with PMJBY is 
truly achieved. 
 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The above observati on/ recommendation of the Hon’ble Standing Committee 
has been noted  for compliance  and regular monitoring will be carried out for effective 
implementation of Scheme. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 The Committee are concerned to note that due to less awareness and lack of 
interest, the enrollment of weavers for life insurance schemes is very low. In this 
context, the Committee find that the data on the number of weavers in handloom as 
well as power loom sectors and the artisans in the handicraft sector is almost ready 
and will soon be put up on the Ministry's web portal. The Committee urge the Ministry 
to compile the data and expeditiously put them on the web portal subsequent to which 
concerted effo rts could be made to generate awareness and motivate the identified 
weavers and artisans to opt for the insurance schemes in their own interest. 
Reply of the Government 
 The above observation/ recommendation of the Hon’ble Standing Committee 
has been noted  and the Efforts are being made to generate awareness and motivate 
the identified weavers to opt for the insurance schemes in their own interest. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
The Committee are pleased to note that a Trade Facilitation Centre and Crafts 
Museum at Varanasi is proposed to be set up at a cost of Rs.281 crore, to be 
completed by August, 2017 with a view to developing and promoting the rich tradition 
of handloom products at Varanasi. The Committee desire that the possibility of setting 
up of similar Centres and Museums at other places in the Country, where there is rich 
tradition of handloom and handicraft products, be explored so that weavers or 
artisans residing in other parts of the Country are also benefitted. 
Reply of the Government 
 The above observation/ recommendation of the Hon’ble Standing Committee 
has been noted  for strict compliance. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
 
 

19 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 The Committee note that the various Handicraft Schemes have been subsumed 
into one umbrella scheme namely the National Handicraft Development Programme to 
emphasize an integrated approach for development of handicrafts in a holistic 
manner. As regards monitoring mechanism put in place to ensure better and effective 
implementation of various Handicraft Schemes/ Programmes, the Committee 
appreciate to note that the Textiles Secretary has instructed the senior Officers in the 
Ministry to undertake at least two field visits in a month to take stock of the situation, 
besides herself reviewing the position on a weekly basis. The Committee too are of the 
view that unless and until field visits are carried out to gauge the problems/ 
constraints of the artisans, the Schemes intended for their benefit would not yield the 
desired result. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to carry on with their 
regular field visits besides strengthening other aspects of the monitoring mechanism. 
Reply of the Government 
 As per the instruction of Secretary (Textiles), the senior officers are now 
personally visiting various projects and location where the schemes are being 
implemented for constantly monitoring the implementation of prgrammes/project and 
are regularly furnishing reports of their visits which are reviewed at the highest level.  
The remedial steps are immediately taken for any shortcoming in the implementation 
of programmes. 
       In addition to above recently some middle level officers from the field offices hav e 
been made in -charge and have been assigned duties of the respective Mega Cluster 
projects. 
       The above mentioned steps taken by the Government will not only strengthen the 
monitoring mechanism but will also help in assessing  the problems of artisans. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry are focusing to put in place 
an integrated marketing plan through which Handloom, Handicraft, Technical 
Textiles, Jute and other products would be showcased and sold at one place. Besides 
planning to establish marketing intelligence to explore new markets, products 
countries etc., the Ministry are also laying emphasis on selling the handicraft products 
through e -commerce and e -platform. In view of the fact that proper marketing of 
handicraft/ handloom products has always remained a weak link, the Committee 
commend the innovative measures devised but at the same time urge the Ministry to 
ensure that the market ing plannings are drawn to their logical conclusion and the 
artisans/ weavers are immensely benefitted in the process. 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. The Ministry 
has developed a comprehensive and i ntegrated Annual Marketing Plan 2016 -17 in 
association with 11 sector Textile Export Promotion Councils to promote India textiles 
in the world. Since segments of Handlooms and Handicrafts represent our country’s 
heritage and also are demanded overseas, the  Marketing Plan has paid special 
attention to tap the opportunity in these sectors. Export Promotion Councils for 
Handicrafts (EPCH) is participating in all the major international fairs such as 
Heimtextil 2017, Domotex and Ambiente to promote the handicra ft sector. Under 
Market Access Initiative (MAI) Scheme, 8 fairs of EPCH and Handloom Export 
Promotion Council (HEPC) have been approved and under Market Development 
Assistance (MDA Scheme 11 fairs of EPCH and HEPC have been approved.  
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 The Committee appreciate to note that the Ministry are embarking upon a 
number of measures under the 'Integrated Scheme for Development of Silk Industry' 
with the main objective to increa se quality, production and productivity of silk in the 
Country through R&D intervention. Such measures include establishment of 172 
biovltine sericulture clusters in different States, development of 15 mulberry varieties 
and 25 silkworm breeds, introduction of high end automatic reeling machines etc. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to persist with the measures initiated for the 
development of silk textiles so as to reduce the dependency on importing silk besides 
meeting the cumulative target of nine m illion rural employment generation through 
sericulture and silk industry by the end of 2016-17. 
Reply of the Government 
 The following measures have been taken by Ministry through Central Silk 
Board for the development of import substitute Bivoltine silk in the country, so as to 
reduce the silk imports: 
Implementation of Cluster Promotion Programme for Bivoltine silk: 
During XII Plan, the foremost thrust is to augment production of import 
substitute silk in the country and to increase the production of Biv oltine silk to 5,260 
MTs by end of 2016 -17 from the production level of 1,985 MTs(2012 -13). The Central 
Silk Board in association with State Sericulture Departments has organized 172 
exclusive Bivoltine Clusters.  With the joint concentrated efforts, 3870 MTs of Bivoltine 
raw silk has been produced against a target of 3500 MTs during 2014-15(110.58%) i.e. 
1311 MT (51.23%) in excess against 2559 MT produced during the year 2013-14. 
During the year 2015 -16, 4,532 MTs of bivoltine raw silk production has been 
recorded against the total bivoltinerawsilk target of 4,500 MTs. 

21 
 
Bivoltine Sericulture Technology Development Project:  
Central Silk Board in coordination with JICA is implementing a Follow up -
Cooperation Programme on JICA projects since 2012. The out come  of the programme 
are: 
 • One way multiplication system as recommended by JICA for maintenance of 
silkworm seed is followed meticulously for quality maintenance.  
•   10 end Automatic Reeling machine has been developed indigenously. The same is 
under replication to manufacture 40 ends  
•  Rotary Mountages with Nylon net collection system has reduced labour cost upto 
50% and found very economical with quality Bv cocoon production. The same is 
under popularization under CSS. 
Japan Overseas Co-operation Volunteers (JOCV) assisted by JICA  
To support in the field of extension methodology, JICA has dispatched 5 JOCVs 
for a period of 3 years from January, 2015 to 2017 to work in the identified Bivoltine 
clusters to support CSB in organizing Self Help Groups/CBOs involving sericulturists, 
for effective technology transfer in the identified areas for the improvement in Bivoltine 
silk production. 
The CSB has been taking following measures to bring down the silk imports by 
enhancing the production of import substitute, superior quality bivoltine silk. 
 Bivoltine hybrids like CSR2 x CSR4, CSR16 x CSR17, FC1xFC2 & FC3xFC4 have 
been developed and are being used for production of better quality BV silk in 
Southern region through out the year.  Two new bivoltine hybrids viz., G11xG19 
and B.con1xB.con4 with better yield and adaptation are under popularisation. 
 Automatic reeling units are set up in the country for production of 3A -4A grade 
raw silk from bivoltine hybrid cocoons.  
 State Seric ulture Departments in certain states like Karnataka and Andhra 
Pradesh have been providing price incentives for BV cocoon growers. 
 The State governments in major silk producing states have established 
institutions like Karnataka Silk Marketing Board (KSMB) in Karnataka, SERIFED 
in Andhra Pradesh and TANSILK in Tamil Nadu to ensure stabilization of raw silk 
prices through market interventions. 
Vision for next 10 years: 
In order to meet the domestic demand and export requirements, it is targeted to 
increase t he raw silk production to 55,000 MT (Bivoltine: 17,000 MT; Improved 
crossbreed: 12,800 MT; Crossbreed:9000 MT, Tasar: 5400 MT; Eri: 10400 MT and 
Muga 400 MT) in 10 years’ period i.e., at the end of 2026-27. 
 

22 
 
Employment in Silk Sector: 
The silk Industry env isages to increase employment from 8.2 million persons to 
9.2 million persons by end of XII Plan and to produce around 32,000 MT of raw silk by 
the end of the XII Plan, which would generate an additional employment of around 10 
lakh man days in the process . Thus the employment generation would reach 9.20 
million persons by the end of XII Plan ( i.e. by 2016-17). 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
The Committee also appreciate to note that under the 'Deve lopment of Woolen 
Textiles Scheme', the Ministry are implementing Pashmina Promotion Programme in 
Ladakh region through financial assistance under different components, the primary 
being establishment of latest technology Pashmina Dehairing Plant at Leh. T he 
Committee desire the Ministry to accord serious attention towards implementation of 
the Scheme within the prescribed timeframe so that the quality and quantity of 
Pashmina wool are improved and the living standard of the poor Nomads (wool 
growers) of Ladakh region is leveraged. 
Reply of the Government 
 This Ministry is seized of the living and economic conditions of the Nomads of 
the Leh&Kargil Regions. For further  improving quality and quantity of pashmina wool 
as well as living standard of poor Noma ds (wool growers) of Ladakh region , MOT is 
providing financial assistance under different components like Creation of Common 
Pashmina Facilitation Centre for Wool testing, Disease Surveillance Centre, 
Geographic Information System (GIS) Lab, Shelter for Nomads, distribution of portable 
Electric Units for Handloom Spinning/Weaving,  Solarized Community Centres, 
development of Fodder grounds for grazing of Pashmina goats, Distribution for 
Foundation Stock (male & female goats)  to farmers and construction of  Shelter for 
Housing of Pashmina animals. Five solarized community centres and 100 shelters for 
the benefit of the Pashmina Nomads have since been completed and dedicated by the 
Hon’ble Minister of State during his visit to Leh on 16 -18th June, 2016. The f acilities 
under the various components of the scheme are in nearly completion stage. Under 
Pashmina Promotion Programme, major provision has been made for establishment of 
latest technology i.e. Pashmina Dehairing Plant at Leh with other machineries for 
Scouring, Drying, and boiler along with construction of building for installation of 
these machineries at Leh. The tenders have been invited for setting up Pashmina 
Dehairing Plant at Leh and same is under process.  
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
  

23 
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
The Committee observe that in order to enhance the competitive strength of the 
decentralised Powerloom sector, the Ministry have launched an Integrated Scheme for 
Powerloom Sector Development (ISPSD) through  technical service support, buyer -
seller meet, exposure visits, awareness programmes etc. However, what concerns the 
Committee is the obsolete powerloom technology that the weavers are having, though 
around 60 per cent fabric comes from the powerloom secto r. The Ministry are 
reportedly making efforts to upgrade the technology through provision of bank loans 
and other supports to the weavers. As obsolete technology is a dampner in producing 
quality fabrics, the Committee urge the Ministry to ensure provision s of upgraded and 
modernised equipments to the powerloom weavers so as to increase productivity and 
quality of the fabrics. 
Reply of the Government 
 To upgrade the technology in whole textile section including decentralized 
Powerloom Sector. Ministry of Te xtiles has been implementing the Scheme for in -situ 
upgradation of Plain Powerloom since September, 2013.The prime objective of the 
scheme is to provide financial assistance to economically weaker low -end powerloom 
units, for upgrading existing plain looms to semi-automatic/automatic looms, to improve 
quality and productivity of the fabric being produced by way of fixing certain additional 
attachments/kits and enable them to face the competition in domestic and international 
markets. the Benefits under the scheme was  that the Govt. of India shall provide 
financial assistance to the extent of 50% of the cost of the upgradation attachments / 
kits, dobby and jacquard, subject to maximum subsidy of Rs.15,000/ - per powerloom 
and the maximum subsidy to a powerloo m unit holding eight powerlooms would be 
Rs.1,20,000/-.  The subsidy will be extended for both credits linked or otherwise. So as 
to ensure further provisions of upgraded and modernized equipment to the powerloom 
weavers to increase productivity and qualit y of the fabrics, this office has further 
modified the in-situ upgradation of Plain Powerlooms w.e.f.1.4.2016 as under: 
 
Modified Scheme of In-situ Up-gradation of Plain Powerloom for SSI Powerloom Sector is 
in operation from 01.04.2016 to 31.03.2017, or any extended period, thereafter. 
The existing plain loom to be upgraded with following attachment(s)/kit(s) as additional 
features: 
 
(a) In-situ Up-gradation of Plain Looms to semi-automatic looms: 
(i) Weft stop motion (Optical Weft Feeler) 
(ii) Warp stop motion (Elect ro mechanical warp stop motion for spun yarn or 
photocell type for filament yarn with loom stopping mechanism). 
(iii) Semi-positive let off motion 
(iv) Efficient braking device (electro-mechanical). 
(v) Anti Crack device. 
(vi) Replacement of metallic parts by self-lubricating nylon parts   (like shedding 
roller, picking cams, picking bowl, crank bushes etc. having life more than 2 
years) 
(vii) Mechanical Dobby (cast iron). 
(viii)  Jacquard (cast iron). 

24 
 
(ix) Pirn winding machine 
 
(b) In-situ Up-gradation of semi-automatic looms to Automatic Rapier looms: 
(i) Rapier kit 
The applicant will be eligible for: 
(a) For in-situ up-gradation the existing plain power looms to Semi automatic shuttle 
looms 
(b) For in -situ up -gradation  of existing upgraded semi automatic shuttle looms to 
shuttleless rapier looms and 
(c) For in-situ up-gradation of existing plain power looms directly to shuttleless rapier 
looms 
 
In each of these in -situ up -gradation, Government of India shall provide financial 
assistance to the extent of 50%, 75% and 90% of the cost of up -gradation to a maximum 
subsidy of Rs. 40,000/ -, 60,000/ - and 72,000/ - per loom for General, SC and ST 
category applicants respectively, as shown below:- 
 
Category Percentage of 
subsidy 
Maximum subsidy Amount per loom  (in Rupees) 
Plain powerloom to 
semiautomatic 
Semi automatic loom to 
Shuttless Rapier 
Plain powerloom to 
Shuttless Rapier  
General 50 % 15,000 25,000 40,000/- 
SC 75 % 22,500 37,500 60,000/- 
ST 90 % 27,000 45,000 72,000/- 
 
As of now, 27 powerloom clusters viz. Nagari&Hindupur (AP), Bhagalpur & Gaya 
(Bihar), Surat, Ahmadabad &Dholka (Guj), Bengaluru &Belgavi (KA), Burhanpur (MP), 
Malegaon, Nagpur, Ichalkaranji, Bhiwandi, Solapur& Vita (MH), Ludhiana (PB), 
Kishangarh (Raj), Somanur, Erode & Salem (TN), Sircilla (TG), Mau, Tanda& Varanasi 
(UP), Ranaghat&Nabadwip (WB) are covered under the scheme. 
 
In addition to GOI eligible subsidy, the following State Govts.are providing 
financial assistance under In-situ for upgradation of plain powerlooms:- 
 
S.No. State Clusters covered Subsidy 
(in Rs.) 
 Maharashtra Malegaon, Nagpur, Ichalkaranji, Bhiwandi, 
Solapur& Vita 
Rs.10,000 
 Telangana Sircilla Rs.10,000 
 Bihar Bagalpur Rs.12,000 
 
O/o The Textile Commissioner is organizing various seminars/Buyer Seller Meets 
/Exposure Visits in various parts of the country to create awareness about the 
Government of India Schemes , to create knowledge about higher technology prevalent 
in technologically developed powerloom clusters , and producing diversified textile 
products or value added fabrics and to sell their products  in the market and hence it 
is expected to modernize the equipments of the Powerloom weavers and increase 
productivity  and quality of the fabrics. So, far 65000 looms have been upgraded 
under the scheme and a subsidy of Rs. 80.36 crore has been released since the launch 
of the scheme. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 

25 
 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
The Committee are displeased to note that the R&D and Institutional 
Development Programme which was launched in 2014 - 15 for a period of five years is 
still at the initial stage for want of adequate response from the Research Institutions. 
The Ministry's expectations that in the coming years the expenditure in that direction 
would increase substantially are not convincing in view of the slow progress of the 
Programme. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to take recourse to 
urgent punitive measures to intensify the publicity campaigns for obtaining adequate 
proposals from the Research Institutions so that R&D and Institutio nal Development 
are carried out in the Textile sector, as envisaged. 
Reply of the Government 
 To promote Research & Development Scheme necessary efforts have been taken 
on behalf of Ministry. The Scheme has been revised and two new components have 
been added. The Textile Commissioner and Jute Commissioner have already invited 
proposals under the scheme. Review meetings have been taken with TRAs, prompt 
action been taken to hold the PAMC and PAC meeting to approve the project 
proposals. In order to achiev e the objectives of the revised schemes, all Joint 
Secretaries have been requested to indentify the specific felt needs for R&D under 
their domain so that the same can be taken up with various research agencies 
including TRAs, IITs etc. under various schem es.  Besides, Ministry of Textiles is also 
participating in the “IMPRINT” scheme of Ministry of Science and Technology and 
“UchhatarAvishkarYojana” of Ministry of Human Resource Development. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
The Committee note that there has been approximately 70 percent growth in the 
export of jute and jute products besides noticeable growth in the export of diversified 
jute products. The Ministry are, therefore, focusing on new and di versified jute 
products for which three Centres to impart training and marketing skills have already 
been opened and two more Centres will be established soon. In view of the significant 
role played by the jute sector in the Textile Industry in terms of pe ople earning their 
livelihood and as well as export earnings through this sector, the Committee desire the 
Ministry to continue to focus on production of new and diversified jute products and 
set up two more Centres as planned, at the earliest so as to inc rease the export 
potential of such products besides creating additional employment. 
Reply of the Government 
The following steps has been taken :- 
(1)     National Jute Board [NJB] has been established under National Jute Board Act, 
2008 [No. 12 of 2009] subsuming the two erstwhile organizations, viz. Jute 
Manufactures Development Council [JMDC] and National Centre for Jute 

26 
 
Diversification [NCJD] for the dev elopment of the cultivation, manufacture and 
marketing of jute and jute products and for matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto. 
(2)     JDP sector is also main focus area for NJB on development, promotion and 
marketing of Jute Diversified Prod ucts (JDPs), as is evident from the following on -
going Non-plan initiatives: 
(a)     Incentive scheme for acquisition of plants & machinery (ISAPM) of NJB 
facilitates modernisation in existing and new jute mills and upgradation 
of technology in existing ju te mills and  provides assistance to a large 
number of entrepreneurs to manufacture value added biodegradable 
JDPs as well as for modernization and upgradation of technology. 
Incentive is provided @ 20% of the cost of machinery acquired by the 
Jute Mills and units in the decentralized sector. Over all ceiling for each 
unit is Rs. 2.50 crores in 4 years. 
(b)    NJB runs an Export Market Development Assistance (EMDA) Scheme for 
JDPs. The scheme aims at facilitating registered manufacturer exporters 
of jute pro ducts to participate in international fairs and business 
delegation abroad for export promotion of lifestyle and other JDPs.  The 
support is limited to Rs. 3.75 lakhs being 50% of maximum cost of such 
participation i.e space rent, decoration, air travel and  boarding expenses 
[Rs. 7.50 lakh]. 
(c)     NJB runs a Retail Outlet scheme which supports supply chain and bulk 
supply of JDPs for selective and mass consumption. The scheme aims at  
providing assistance to jute entrepreneurs for opening of outlets of jute  
lifestyle jute products in Metro Cities, State capitals, District HQs and 
Tourist spots.  The support is limited to 50% of initial decoration, 
monthly running expenditure for a period of three years. 
(d)    In order to empower the rural women and promote JDPs, NJB planned to 
establish 5 Common Facility Centres (CFCs); 3 in West Bengal and 1each 
in Assam and Bihar through Women Self -Help Groups (WSHGs). 
Estimated Government grant is to the tune of Rs.200.00 lakhs in 3 years 
for each of the proposed CFC. Sett ing up of office, godown, etc., 
assistance to produces will be provided online to their bank account. 
Training programme will be organised in each CFC and services of 
entrepreneur dealing with production, export will be availed for a market 
study, design d evelopment, training and marketing. Out of five, 4 CFCs 
have already been established with active involvement of women of 
WSHGs for production of quality diversified jute products.  
(3) The 5th CFC is at final stage of implementation at Katihar in Bihar. 
(4) Ministry has also approved the establishment of two more CFCs, one at 
Sunderbans in South 24 -Paragans district and one at New Jalpaiguri in Jalpaiguri 
district of West Bengal. 
(5)     In order to accelerate the pace of JDP activities in the country, NJB  has 
launched schemes viz. Jute Raw Material Bank (JRMB) and Jute Integrated 
Development Scheme (JIDS). The focus of these schemes are exclusively to cater to the 
jute unorganised sector and the production units so that jute raw material is supplied 
to the m regularly at mill gate price plus actual transportation cost, to help them 

27 
 
manufacture high value products, both for domestic and international markets. JIDS 
focuses on setting up local units and agencies throughout the country to promote and 
propagate j ute diversification across the country. The Jute Development Centres 
under JIDS will provide training & skill development efforts in their respective regions 
to develop new WSHGs, artisans & entrepreneurs. 
(6)     Further, a Jute  Design Cell for development of Jute Shopping Bags and 
Lifestyle Accessories has also been set up at the Innovative Centre for Natural Fibres 
(ICNF) of NID (National Institute of Design), Ahmedabad. The prime objective of the 
Cell is to develop newer and innovative Product s through design and technology 
intervention for value addition and better market at home and abroad. Industry 
houses engaged in manufacturing and export of diversified jute products would be 
benefitted from this project. 
 NID has already developed 89 woven, dyed, finished samples for jute lifestyle 
accessories and disseminated amongst manufacturers and exporters in the country. 
Further NJB – NID have showcased low cost jute carry bags as an alternative against 
plastic bags in Chandigarh and Shimla; the proposal is being finalized. 
(7)     NJB carries out activities as planned/projected in its Annual Action Plan 2016 -
17 approved by the Board. Further, a new scheme is being worked out to incentivize 
the producers of JDPs, as Production linked Incentive Scheme. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
 The Committee note that the Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS), 
which was introduced in 1999 to catalyse capital investments for technology 
upgradation a nd modernisation of the Textiles Industry, has gone through many 
incarnations viz. Modified TUFS (M -TUFS), Restructured TUFS (R -TUFS), Revised 
Restructured TUFS(RR -TUFS) and finally culminating in Amended TUFS (A -TUFS) 
w.e.f 13th January, 2016 and to be continued till 31st March, 2022. As the focus of A-
TUFS is on value addition and employment generation in garmenting, technical 
textiles, weaving and processing segments, the Committee urge the Ministry to tie up 
the loose ends and accelerate their preparedn ess to effectively implement the A - TUFS 
so as to attract the projected investment of Rs. One Lakh crore and employment 
generation of about 30 lakh people. 
Reply of the Government 
For effective implementation of ATUFS, following measures have been taken:- 
(a)  The detailed guidelines of the ATUFS have been issued on 29.02.2016. 
(b) List of eligible machinery has been issued on 01.04.2016 as approved by 
Technical Advsiory-cum-Monitoring Committee (TAMC) 
(c) As per guidelines of ATUFS, the Textile Commissione r will constitute a Joint 
Inspection Team (JIT) comprising of officers of the Office of the Textile Commissioner, 
representatives of respective lending agency, Textiles Committee, Textile Research 
Association and industry association to verify the technolo gy level of the machines 

28 
 
installed under the scheme and certify the eligibility and eligible subsidy amount as 
per the guidelines of the scheme.  
(d) A web based claims monitoring and tracking mechanism,  “i -ATUFS” has been 
started since 21 st April, 2016 w hich provides a transparent MIS platform to all the 
stakeholders, the beneficiaries, banks, Office of Textile Commissioner and the Ministry 
of Textiles for smooth implementation of the scheme and eliminate scope for the 
irregularities. 
(e) A proposal has a lready been initiated to reorganize the Office of Textile 
Commissioner for setting up office in each state.  The state level official of the Textile 
Commissioner’s Office, in liaison with the State Government, shall guide and assist 
the entrepreneur for se tting up of unit including implementation of the proposed 
scheme.  The state level officer will also inspect the units seeking subsidy and certify 
the assets created. Based on this, the subsidy claims shall be processed under the 
scheme. Further, he shall upload report regularly on the i-ATUFS platform. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
The Committee note that the Budget allocation approved by the CCEA for A -
TUFS is Rs.17,822 crore which includes Rs.12, 671 crore for committed liabilities and 
Rs.5,151 crore for new schemes under A-TUFS. The Secretary, Ministry of Textiles has 
pleaded that at least Rs.4,500 crore more should be allocated to the Ministry for A -
TUFS during 2016 -17 as the Ministry's proposed allocations for ATUFS has been 
substantially reduced by the Finance Ministry. The Committee are of the considered 
opinion that since A-TUFs has been launched with a view to supporting the 'Make -in-
India' initiative of the Union Government, there is no plau sible reason to reduce the 
requirement of the Ministry. The assurance of the Secretary that if they get the 
required amount, the Ministry would be able to generate large scale employment also 
merits attention. The Committee, therefore, desire that the fund  requirements of the 
Ministry for effective implementation of A-TUFS be suitably catered to and the Textiles 
Secretary should accordingly take up the matter at the appropriate fora for getting the 
needful done to bring in the much needed vibrancy in the Textiles sector. 
Reply of the Government 
To meet the committed liabilities, this Ministry has sent a proposal to the 
Ministry of Finance for additional fund requirement of Rs. 3119 crore under ATUFS for 
the year 2016-17. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 26) 
The Committee are perturbed to note that there have been persistent shortfalls in 
utilisation of Plan Outlays in the North Eastern Region during the last four years 

29 
 
reportedly due to delay in identi fication of key areas and lack of adequate block level 
data. To address the issue, the Ministry are proposing to set up a dedicated Project 
Management Unit (PMU) at Guwahati. While expressing their serious displeasure over 
the negligence in putting in plac e the basic  requirements which are critical to the 
proper implementation of schemes meant for the North Eastern Region, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to embark upon urgent punitive measures to ensure effective 
fruition of the programmes envisaged for the  North East Region and consequential 
utilisation of the Plan Outlay of Rs.255.98 crore earmarked for the year 2016 -17. The 
Committee would also like the Ministry to pay specific attention towards promotion 
and development of Agro Textiles and Geo Textiles in the North-Eastern Region. 
Reply of the Government 
With a view to effectively utlise the budget allocated under NE region, Ministry is 
implementing an umbrella scheme viz. North East Region Textile Promotion Scheme 
(NERTPS) for the development of various  segments of textiles in North East Region. 
The scheme has an outlay of Rs. 1038.10 crore in 12th FYP. The Scheme was approved 
in November 2013. The financial year wise budget allocation and expenditure under 
NERTPS is given below:   
FY BE RE AE % of expenditure 
2013-14 115.00 115.00 2.86 2.48 
2014-15 157.00 126.00 120.69 95.78 
2015-16 157.00 225.50 225.46 99.98 
2016-17* 220.98 - 99.94 45 
 *  As on 13.07.2016 
2. It could be seen that considerable progress has been made over the period and 
about 100% utilization of fund has been accorded during 2015 -16. In fact, during 
2015-16, additional fund of Rs. 68.5 crore sought under Revise Expenditure as 
against the budget allocation of Rs. 157 crore. During the current financial year, more 
than 45% of BE has been utilized in the first quarter of current financial year.  
The following steps have been taken by Ministry of Textiles for Promotion & 
development of Agrotextiles and Geotextiles in NER : 
I. Scheme for Promoting Usage of Agrotextiles in NER : 
 The Ministry of Textiles, Government of India has approved the scheme for a 
period of five years i.e. 2012 -13 to 2016 -17. The aim of the scheme is to encourage 
utilization of Agro textiles in improving the agriculture, horticulture, floricultural & 
sericulture produce of the N-E states through awareness programmes, development of 
Agrotextile products suitably customized for use in the North -Eastern region, creating 

30 
 
demonstration set-up depicting the benefit of usage of Agrotextile products suitable for 
the region, distribution of Agrotextile kits to farmers in the local communities etc.  
 Under the Scheme, a total of 44 Demonstration Centers have been approved 
and out of that 23 are operational and rest are at different stages of completion. 
Further 442 Agrotextile kits have been distributed to the farmers. The benefits which 
have accrued have been shared with Ministry of Agriculture.  
II.   Scheme for Promoting Usage of Geotechnical textiles in NER: The Ministry 
of Textiles, Government of India has approved the Scheme for promoting usage of 
Geotechnical textiles on 3 rd December 2014 with a total outlay of Rs. 427 crore for a 
period of five years i.e. 2014 -15 to 2018-19. The objective of the scheme is to promote 
and utilize Geo textiles in development of the infrastructure in the NE states by 
providing technological and financial support for meeting additional costs, if any, due 
to the usage of Geo textiles in existing/ new projects in road, hill/ slope protection & 
water reservoirs.  
 Under the Scheme, Geotechnical textile solution will be applied for 300 km 
Road construction, 118 km Slope/hill protection & for lining of 217 water reservoirs.  
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
The Committee are pleased to note that the National Textile Corporation's networth 
has turned positive and as on 30th June, 2015 it stood at Rs.1,219.80 crore. It is also 
heartening to note that after upgradation and modernisation, the NTC mills are 
performing quite well as is corroborated from the fact that during 2015 -16, the 
production of yarn  and fabrics was 560 lakh kg and 200 lakh meters respectively, 
showing an increase in the production vis -a-vis 2014 -15 when the corresponding 
figure was 518 lakh kg of yarn and 171 lakh meters of fabrics. However, what 
concerns the Committee is the fact th at the mills, including those in Mumbai are yet 
to become fully viable and self -sustainable, for which there has been a proposal to 
shift some mills in Mumbai to elsewhere. The Ministry are also undertaking a study 
and find out ways to make the mills viabl e and profitable. As the Company intends to 
transform itself into an integrated textile Company besides diversifying into technical 
textiles which have tremendous potential for improving the turnover and profitability 
of the Company, the Committee desire the Ministry to extend wholehearted support to 
the Company in its endeavour. The Committee further desire that whatever decisions 
are taken regarding the shifting of some mills, the overall interest of the Company and 
the welfare of its employees must be taken care of and adequately protected. 
Reply of the Government 
The  following steps has been  taken by NTC to make profitable are as under:- 
i)    Modernization 
ii)   Improvement in utilization%; 

31 
 
iii)  Improvement in Productivity; 
iv)  Implementation of work load agreements; 
v) Purchasing power under access to reduce the power cost and improve utilization 
vi) Energy conservation by way of energy audit. 
vii) Manufacture of value added products; 
viii) Improvement in quality of the products being manufactured; 
ix) To reduce the cost of production by using resources optimally. 
x) A new marketing strategy including proposed diversification into technical Textile, 
processing and garmenting, Revamping of showrooms. 
xi) Order booking of Cloth & Yarn on e -platform in order to achieve more 
transparency.  
xii) Consolidation of lower capacity mills into a higher capacity mills wherever feasible. 
xiii) Recruiting staff on vacant lying positions. 
 
   NTC in assistance of NITRA has prepared NTC -Future Plan-2015, which will be 
implemented in 2 phases. To start with NTC Boa rd has considered for implementation 
of 1st Phase of the said plan along with small interventions in four mills covered in the 
2nd phase. 
  Despite giving substantial dose of modernization, the three Mumbai mills are 
incurring heavy losses due to higher input cost like power, wages, transportation, local 
govt. taxes and duties and stringent environment norms. As such, the running of mills 
in metropolitan city like Mumbai has become unviable. During the year 2015 -16 the 
three Mumbai Mills incurred a cash loss of Rs. 45.22 crores. It was decided for setting 
up a new project of integrated composite unit at Amravati by relocation and 
consolidation of three Mumbai mills and Barshi mills, Barshi with an investment of Rs 
1031 crores (including VRS provision for Rs 268.52 crores) with a projected net profit 
of Rs 61.49 crores after implementation. The welfare of the employees was adequately 
taken care of by having provision of VRS to be given to willing employees of these Mills 
  NTC prepared the alternate plan of se tting up Amravati Project by considering 
all new machinery in place of shifted machinery from 3 Mumbai based mills and 
Barshi mills at an investment of Rs. 959.68 crores with a projected profit of Rs 63.17 
crores and the same was put up to the Board in its meeting No. 362 dated 22.12.2015. 
Board has given “in principle approval to go ahead for setting up a project at Amravati 
and approved to appoint consultant for preparation of DPR after following standard 
applicable procedure.” NTC is in process of finali zation of tender for appointment of 
consultant for preparation of DPR. NTC already having 40 acres of land in MDC 
Amravati has also acquired additional 50 acres of Land from MIDC for the project.  
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
The Committee note that the Textiles Ministry's Health Insurance Scheme was 
merged with the Labour Ministry's Rastriya Swasthya Bima Yojna (RSBY) which has 
subsequently been tr ansferred to the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare w.e.f 1st 
April, 2015. A restructured RSBY which is being formulated by the Health Ministry 
will be implemented w.e.f 1st April, 2017. In this context, the Committee find that the 
Ministry of Textiles, a fter a series of discussions and deliberations, have written a 
letter on 23rd February, 2016 to the Health Ministry for coverage of Handloom 
Weavers in RSBY for the year 2016 -17 in the existing pattern of the Scheme. As the 
restructured scheme will be impl emented from 2017 -18 onwards by the Health 
Ministry, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Textiles, in accordance with their 
communication to the Health Ministry, should earnestly pursue the matter to get the 
weavers covered under the existing pattern  of the RSBY during 2016 -17. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the position as soon as the response of the 
Health Ministry is obtained by the Ministry of Textiles. As assured by the Secretary, 
Ministry of Textiles, the Committee desire the Ministr y to tie up with the Labour 
Ministry and explore the feasibility of empanelling the ESI Hospitals for provision of 
healthcare facilities to the weavers and artisans covered under Health Insurance 
Schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
The Office of Development Commissioner for Handlooms is in constant touch 
with Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoH&FW) to enroll the weavers for the year 
2016-17. In this connection a Workshop was held on 6th May, 2016 under the 
Chairmanship of DC (Handlooms) to discuss the im plementation modalities of RSBY. 
In this workshop all the RSBY implementing State Directors of Handlooms, State 
Nodal Agency (SNA) and Officers from MoH&FW participated. 
 Currently the RastriyaSwasthyaBimaYojna (RSBY) is being implemented 
through State Nod al Agencies (SNA) of the RSBY implementing States. SNA are 
selecting Implementing Agency through tender process and this Ministry has informed 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of approval for the year 2016 -17. Re-structured 
Health Insurance Scheme (HIS) will be implemented by MoH&FWw.e.f. 1st April, 2017. 
The issue of empanelling ESI Hospitals for provision of healthcare facilities is being 
referred to MoH&FW.  
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
  

34 
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
The Committee are concerned to note that under the Powerloom Mega Cluster 
Schemes, where subsidy is provided upto Rs.50 crore per cluster, setting up of five 
mega clusters at Bhiwandi, Bhilwara, Ichalkaranji, Erode and Surat has been 
adversely affected due to non -availability of land, resource constraints of the stake 
holders etc. While the projects at Bhilwara and Bhiwandi have been shifted to other 
places, projects at Erode and Surat are at the initial stages. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the state -of-affairs and impress upon the Ministry to take corrective 
measures and effectively coordinate with the State Governments and other stakeholder 
concerned so that the five mega clusters are established within a definite time line and 
the intended objective of benefitting the powerloom weavers is achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
The  Powerloom Mega Clusters at Erode and Bhiwandi were announced by the 
Hon’ble Finance Minister during the Budget Speech in the year 2008 -09.  The 
Powerloom Mega Clusters at Bhil wara, Ichalkaranji and Surat were also announced 
during the year 2009 -10, 2012-13 and 2014-15 respectively. Initially the scheme was 
monitored by the  Ministry of Textiles directly. At present, Ministry of Textiles has 
been monitoring the implementation of  all the Powerloom Mega Clusters through O/o 
the Textile Commissioner and its regional offices since last one year.   
 In order to ensure an effective coordination amongst various stakeholders and 
the State Governments at cluster level, a Cluster Coordinat ion Group (CCG) would be 
set up under the Chairmanship of the respective District Collector. This CCG would be 
responsible to examine the DCR/DPRs submitted by CMTA and will make its 
recommendations to Ministry. CCG will also be responsible for local coord ination and 
regular review of implementation of the Scheme at cluster level. The member of CCG 
consists of, the Chairperson of Industry Associations related to cluster, 
representatives of concerned sector of State Govt. Deptt, representatives of related 
Central Govt. Organisations and representative of CMTA, Chairperson of SPV(s) as a 
representative and an officer nominated by the Textile Commissioner shall be the 
Convener of CCG. 
 For smooth implementation of these projects, Ministry of Textiles has been 
regularly following up with the State Government concerned whenever it is required, 
for taking necessary action and providing necessary cooperation for setting up of these 
projects. The office of the Textile Commissioner has been making concerted  effort a t 
expediting the projects despite constraints such as non -availability of land and low 
level of stakeholder interest. As a result, the projects at Ichalkaranji and Bhilwara are 
now making headway. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
  

35 
 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
The Committee are given to understand that most of the jute mills are not 
operating throughout the year and to their full capacity. Further, workers in jute mills 
are not getting their statutory dues even after retirement wh ich is a matter of serious 
concern to the Committee. In view of the huge number of people engaged in and 
earning their livelihood from the jute sector, the Committee are of the firm opinion 
that it is the moral obligation of the Ministry to protect the jut e workers and their 
families from exploitation by unscrupulous elements besides ensuring their 
socioeconomic upliftment. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to take 
serious and urgent measures, in unison with the State Governments concerned, so a s 
to ensure that the jute mills function to their full potential throughout the year and 
the workers get their rightful dues. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry 
must take stringent action against those individuals/ bodies/ agencies who violate the 
statutory provisions of various Acts governing the jute sector. 
Reply of the Government 
The  Ministry of Textiles has taken following action :-  
1.       As per the available record, total dues of jute mill workers of 47 jute mills on 
account of Provident Fund is Rs.12063.20 lakh.   In all cases the jute mills have filed 
cases in different courts/judicial bodies including Lower Courts, Higher Courts, BIFR.  
The issues of non -payment of statutory dues of workers fall within the purview of 
Labour Dep artment of the concerned State, Regional Provident Commissioner and 
Chief Labour Commissioner (Central).  
2.       The Ministry of Textiles has been supporting jute sector through Jute Packaging 
Material Act, 1987 which has made use of jute sacking mandato ry for packaging of 
foodgrains.  At present a minimum of 90% of foodgrains and a minimum of 20% of 
sugar are to be mandatorily packed in jute sacking.   During 2015 -16, the share of 
B.Twill production in total production of jute goods was more than 65% whic h is 8% 
higher than that of the previous year.   Because of this assured market, the jute mills 
have stopped exploring private market and have become over dependent on 
Government order.  They do not feel the need to modernise their units and keep on 
operating below their actual production capacity. 
Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/9/2016-Parl., dated 12/08/2016. 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                           DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA     
14th December, 2016                                  CHAIRPERSON                      
23rd Agrahayana,1938 (Saka)             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

37 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 
 
Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on  Wednesday, the 14th December, 2016 from 170 0 
hrs. to 1900 hrs. in Committee Room No. '63', Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Kirit Somaiya    –    CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  3. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
  4. Dr. Arun Kumar 
  5. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  6. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
  7. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
    
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  8. Shri Ram Narayan Dudi 
  9. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  10. Haji Abdul Salam 
  11. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
  12. Ms. Dola Sen 
  13. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
    
        
   SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Shri N.C. Gupta  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Additional Director  
  3. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 

38 
 
PART - I 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee,  convened for consideration and adoption of a Draft Action 
Taken Report. Giving an overview of the Recommendations made/reiterated in 
the Draft Action Taken Report,  the Chairperson requested the Members to give 
their suggestions on them, if any. 
3. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the Draft Action Taken 
Report on the Observations/Recommendations of the C ommittee contained in 
their Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016 -
17) of the Ministry of Textiles and adopted the same after some discussions. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Report to 
both the Houses. 
 
PART-II 
 
XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XX Do not pertain to this Report. 
 
  

39 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations          27 
  
II. Observations/Recommendations which have     24           88.89%   
 been accepted by Government 
 (Recommendation Para. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,  
 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21,  
 22, 24, 25, 26  and 27)  
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the     00                  00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
 Government’s replies- NIL 
      
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of     03       11.11% 
 which Government’s replies have not been 
 accepted by the Committee and which requires 
 reiteration –                       
  (Recommendation Para. Nos. 13, 20 and 23) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of       00         00 
 which replies of Government are of interim  
 in nature- NIL 
   
                         ----------- 
               100% 
                                    ------------ 
 