1 
 
13 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-2016) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
[DEPLOYMENT OF CONTRACT/CASUAL/SANITATION 
WORKERS FOR PERENNIAL NATURE OF JOBS IN NDMC] 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
December, 2015/Pausha, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 


2 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-2016) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
[DEPLOYMENT OF CONTRACT/CASUAL/SANITATION 
WORKERS FOR PERENNIAL NATURE OF JOBS IN NDMC] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  22.12.2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2015 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December,  2015 /Pausha , 1937 (Saka) 
 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                               PAGE(S) 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE              (iv) 
INTRODUCTION         (vi)  
PART-I (I) Introductory       1-7 
 
  (II) Services Outsourced      7-9 
 
  (III) Coverage under EPF      9-11 
 
  (IV) Coverage under ESI      11-13 
 
  (V) Minimum and Equal Wages     13-14 
   
  (VI) Gratuity        15-16 
 
  (VII) Muster Roll Workers      16-19 
 
  (VIII) Monitoring        19-20 
 
  (IX) Availability of Information on Website   20-21 
 
  (X) Fatal/Non-fatal Accidents     21-22 
 
PART-II OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS    23-37 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
Annexure-I   Details of Inspection of the Establishment of Contractors of 
NDMC. 
Annexure-II  Details of fatal accidents. 
APPENDIX 
Appendix Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 03.03.2015, 
27.05.2015, 15.07.2015 and 17.12.2015. 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 
 DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR-CHAIRPERSON   
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
17. Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
18. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
19. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
23. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
24. Shri P.L. Punia 
25. Shri Rajaram 
26. Haji Abdul Salam 
27. Ms. Dola Sen 
28. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
29. Shri R.K. Sinha 
30. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
31. Vacant* 
 
* Shri P.Kannan retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 06.10.2015 
 

5 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  -  Additional Secretary 
 2.    Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 3.    Shri Ashok Sajwan   - Director  
 4.    Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Additional Director 
 5.    Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Under Secretary 
 
 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
           I,  the  Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2015 -16), having 
been authorized by the Commi ttee do present on their behalf this Thirteenth 
Report on 'Deployment of contract/casual/sanitation workers for perennial 
nature of jobs in the NDMC' relating to the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs and NDMC on the subject on 3 rd March, 27th May and 15 th July, 
2015. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs and NDMC for appearing before the Committee and 
placing before th em their views and also for providing detailed written 
information on the subject, as desired by the Committee. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting 
held on 17th December, 2015. 
4. For ease of reference, the Observation s/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
18 December, 2015                                          CHAIRPERSON 
27 Pausha,1937 (Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
REPORT 
 PART-I 
 
I.  INTRODUCTORY  
 
 During the last ninety years of its existence, the New Delhi Municipal 
Council (NDMC)  has grown into an Organization with the responsibility of 
providing civic services  and beautifying the city .  The obligatory and 
discretionary functions and responsibilities of the Council under Section 11 
and 12 of the NDMC Act, 1994 are as follows :- 
Obligatory functions of the Council 
a) the construction, maintenance and cleansing of drains and drainage 
works and of public latrines, urinals and similar conveniences; 
b) the construction and maintenance of work and means for providing 
supply of water for public and private purposes; 
c) the scavenging, removal and disposal of filth, rubbish and other 
obnoxious or polluted matters; 
d) the construction or purchase, maintenance, extension, management for- 
i. supply and distribution of electricity to the public; 
ii. providing a sufficient supply of pure and wholesome water; 
e) the reclamation of unhealthy localities, the removal of noxious vegetation 
and generally the abatement of all nuisances; 
f) the regulation of places for the disposal of the dead and the provision 
and maintenance of places for the said purpose; 

8 
 
g) the registration of births and deaths; 
h) public vaccination and inoculation; 
i) measures for preventing and checking the spread of dangerous diseases; 
j) the establishment and maintenance of dispensaries and maternity and 
child welfare centers and the carrying out of other measures necessary 
for public medical relief; 
k) the construction and maintenance of municipal markets and regulation 
of all the markets; 
l) the regulation and abatement of offensive or dangerous trade or 
practices; 
m) the securing or removal of dangerous buildings and places; 
n) the construction, maintenance, al teration and improvements of public 
streets, bridges, culverts, causeways and the like; 
o) the lighting, watering and cleansing of public streets and other public 
places; 
p) the removal of obstructions and projections in or upon streets , bridges 
and other public places; 
q) the naming and numbering of streets and premises; 
r) the establishment, maintenance of, and aid to, schools for primary 
education subject to such grants as may be determined by the Central 
Government from time to time; 
s) the maintenance of municipal offices; 
t) the laying out or the maintenance of public parks, gardens or recreation 
grounds. 

9 
 
u) the maintenance of monuments and memorials vested in any local 
authority in New Delhi immediately before the commencement of this Act 
or which may be vested in the Council after such commencement; 
v) the maintenance and development of the value of all properties vested in 
or entrusted to the management of the Council; 
w) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;  
x) the maintenance, including the expa nsion and upgradation of facilities , 
of the hospitals existing on the date of the commencement of this Act; 
y) sanction or refuse erection or re-erection of building; and  
z) the fulfillment of any other obligation imposed by or under this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force. 
Discretionary functions of the Council 
a) the furtherance of education , including cultural and physical education, 
by measures other than the establishment and maintenance of, and  
provision of  aid to the schools for primary education. 
b) the establishment and maintenance of, and  provision of  aid to the  
libraries, museums, art galleries, botanical or zoological collections; 
c) the establishment and maintenance of, and aid to, stadia, gymnasia, 
akharas and places for sports and games; 
d) the planting and care of trees on roadsides and elsewhere; 
e) the surveys of buildings and lands; 
f) the registration of marriages; 
g) the taking of a census of population; 
h) the provision of housing accommodation for the inhabitants of any ar ea 
or for any class of inhabitants; 

10 
 
i) the providing of music or other entertainments in public places or places 
of public resort and the establishment of theatres and cinemas; 
j) the organization and management of fairs and exhibitions; 
k) the acquisition of movable or immovable property for any of the purposes 
before mentioned, including payment of the cost of investigations, 
surveys or examinations in relation thereto for the construction or 
adaptation of buildings necessary for such purposes; 
l) the construction and maintenance of- 
i. rest-houses, 
ii. poor-houses, 
iii. infirmaries, 
iv. children's home 
v. houses for the deaf and dumb and for disabled and 
handicapped children 
vi. shelters for destitute and disabled persons, 
vii. asylums for persons of unsound mind; 
m) the construction and maintenance of cattle pounds; 
n) the building or purchase and maintenance of the dwelling-houses for 
municipal officers and other municipal employees; 
o) to take any measures for the welfare of the municipal officers and other 
municipal employees or any class of them including the sanctioning of 
loans to such officers and employees or any class of them for 
construction of houses and purchase of vehicles; 
p) the organization or management of chemical or bacteriological 
laboratories for the examination or analysis of water,  food and drugs for 

11 
 
the detection of diseases or research connected with the public health of 
medical relief; 
q) the provision for relief to destitute and disabled persons; 
r) the establishment and maintenance of veterinary hospitals; 
s) the organisation, construction, maintenance and management of 
swimming pools, public wash houses, bathing places and other 
institutions designed for the improvement of public health; 
t) the organisation and management of farms and dairies within or without 
New Delhi for the su pply, distribution and processing of milk and milk 
products for the benefit of the residents of New Delhi; 
u) the organisation and management of cottage industries, handicraft 
centres and sales emporia; 
v) the construction and maintenance of warehouses and godowns; 
w) the construction and maintenance of garages, sheds and stands for 
vehicles and cattle biers; 
x) the provision for unfiltered water supply; 
y) the improvement of New Delhi in accordance with improvement schemes 
approved by the Council; 
z) any measure not hereinb efore specifically mentioned, likely to promote 
public safety, health, convenience or general welfare. 
2. In the discharge of its obligatory and discretionary functions and 
responsibilities and due to administrative exigencies, NDMC is permitted to 
employ contract labour ers under the provisions of 'The Contract Labour 
(Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970'. Such contractual employees are 
appointed in a few categories like Junior Engineer, Data Entry Operator, 

12 
 
Clerical Assistants, Sub Station Apprentice ( SSA), Teachers, Horticulture, 
Personnel, Health personnel and other Assistants  apart from cleaning, 
sweeping, security and other related works . The nature of jobs/ duties of a 
particular post is according to the requirement/ job specifications. 
3. With a view to gauging  the working conditions, health, safety, welfare 
and social security of the casual/contract/temporary workers deployed in 
NDMC, the Committee took up the subject for detailed examination and report.  
4. In the process, the Committee obtained background notes , written 
replies and other relevant documents from the NDMC. Finding the written 
replies of the NDMC deficient in many aspects, the Committee, while 
expressing their displeasure  over that,  adjourned the sitting  - which was 
convened to take evi dence of the officials of  the Ministry of Home Affairs  and 
the NDMC. The Chairperson asked the witnesses to furnish revised replies 
within a month 's time .  However,  the revised replies furnish ed to the 
Secretariat were again found to be wanting and despite several  reminders to 
this effect, the replies could not be improved upon.  The Committee , in their 
sitting convened a second time to take evidence , took a serious view of the 
matter and caution ed the NDMC to revisit and furnish the requisite replies 
within 15 days after obtaining proper information.  The Committee finally took 
oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the 
NDMC on 15th July, 2015.  Based on the written and final oral deposition of the 
Ministry, NDMC and the Regional Labour Commissioner, Employees' Provident 

13 
 
Fund Commissioner and the Employees State Insurance Commissioner (ESIC), 
the Committee deliberated upon the subject as enumerated in the succeedi ng 
paragraphs. 
 
II. SERVICES OUTSOURCED 
5. The Committee desired to know the nature of jobs/works/services 
outsourced and the kind of outsourcing. In reply, the NDMC  stated that the 
works were only partially outsourced for cleaning, sweeping, security and other 
related works due to administrative exigencies.  They further stated that apart 
from these services, contractual employees in  a few other categories were also 
engaged, viz. Junior Engineer, Data Entry Operator, Clerical Assistants, SSA, 
Teachers, Hor ticulture Personnel, Health Personnel and other Assistants, as 
mentioned earlier.  These services were being obtained through 428 
registered/unregistered contractors whose details were furnished to the 
Committee. 
6. On being specifically asked by the Commi ttee as to whether any 
contractual appointments were made against the permanent posts and the 
rationale therefor, the NDMC submitted that some contractual appointments 
against the permanent posts ha d been made as the process of filling up the 
permanent vacancies, i.e. sending requisitions to the recruitment agencies like 
Employment Exchange/Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board (DSSSB) to 
fill up the vacancies took a considerably longer time. The  NDMC reasoned that 

14 
 
it being the pioneering municipality  in India, it had to maintain the prime 
locations in the National Capital Territory for which vacancies were filled up 
temporarily on contract basis after adopting due process. 
7. In the meantime, the list of Contractors as provided by the NDMC was 
forwarded to Employees Provident Fund Organisation ( EPFO)/Employees State 
Insurance Corporation ( ESIC)/Chief Labour Commissioner ( CLC) for cross 
verification and carrying out inspections regarding the coverage of workers in 
EPF/ESI under each contractor, wherever  applicable and issuance of labour 
license, etc.   
8. During evidence of the Ministry/ NDMC, the Committee asked the 
representative of the Chief Labour Commissioner about the inspections 
conducted by them as per the directions of the Committee.  The repres entative 
of the CLC submitted that they had carried out the inspections and forwarded 
a copy of the inspections report  (Annexure-I). A scrutiny of the said report 
revealed that most of the Contractors were working without valid labour license 
even though the minimum number of workers prescribed under law were 
deployed by them which entailed mandatory labour license. 
9. In this context, when the Committee desired to have the comments of the 
NDMC on the anomalies pointed out in the inspection report, the 
representative of the NDMC, stated during evidence as follows :- 
 "As regards inspection report of Dy. CLC, we are aware about that, but 
 we have not received the report.  Informally we came to know about non -
 registration.  In some places, certificates are t here and somewhere they 

15 
 
 are missing.  If we get a report formally, then we will look into each and 
 every case and will try to rectify it." 
 
 Subsequent to the meeting of the Committee, the NDMC intimated that 
directions have been issued to all HODs for c ompliance of the provisions of the 
Contract Labour Act, 1970, the ESI Act, 1948 and the EPF&MP Act, 1952.  
They have been directed to submit the requisite information pertaining to all 
the contractors, the services being provided by them, details of the 
contract/casual labour engaged by them, along with their PF and ESI account 
numbers and number of days for which the workers were engaged. 
10. When asked whether any inspections were conducted by the Central 
Industrial Relations Machinery (CIRM), the NDMC submitted that so far, no 
inspection had been conducted by the CIRM. 
 
III. COVERAGE UNDER EPF  
11. The Committee desired to be informed about the mechanism put in place 
by the NDMC to ensure the provision of the prescribed amenities under the 
Contract Labo ur Act to the workers. In reply, the NDMC stated that it was 
ensured that all the prescribed amenities which formed part of the agreement 
were checked by the field staff regularly.  Further, payment to the agencies was 
released only after they gave proof o f all payments, made including payment of 
wages to their workers through A/C payee cheques.  The Divisional Officers of 

16 
 
the NDMC conducted inspections and ensured that wages were being paid as 
per rules, pay slips and EPF & ESIC statements were given to th e labourers 
and wages were transferred to their bank account. 
12. However, during evidence, when asked by the Committee about the 
coverage of the NDMC workers under the EPF, the representative of the EPFO 
apprised that the NDMC was brought under Schedule o n 8th January, 2011 
and from that date  the NDMC was supposed to extend the EPF facility to the 
workers, including the casual and muster roll workers. But, as the NDMC was 
not complying with the provision, show cause notices were served a number of 
times  to them by the EPFO, but even then the NDMC was not co -operating.  
The representative of  the EPFO further stated that an inspection was 
conducted in May 2015 where all the Divisional Heads of the NDMC were 
present.  In the said meeting , the NDMC provided a  list of 126 registered 
contractors with details which was being verified and for the rest of the 
contractors numbering  208, there were no details.   
13. In another evidence, the representatives of  the EPFO further apprised 
that subsequent to the last meeting of the Committee, the EPFO held a meeting 
with the NDMC to sort out the anomalie s.  Total liability of Rs.1,22,32 ,000/- 
towards deposit in the EPF was calculated and all the Divisions were issued 
directions for uploading the Challan.  As on13th July, 2015 only one Challan 
amounting to Rs.21,359/ - was uploaded by one Division though 12 to 14 
Divisions were supposed to deposit the Challans.   

17 
 
14. In this context, when the Committee asked in evidence the reasons for 
not uploading the Challans by all the D ivisions, the Chairman, NDMC , 
submitted: 
"Sir, I assure this august House that we will act as a model employer, 
this is also an admitted fact that because we have released the Provident 
Fund contribution for the month of June only recently and being the first 
time we are not in a position to upload all the challans.  I assure this 
august House that we will definitely do it within a week's time." 
 
 Asked to clarify the anomalies in the deposit of EPF in favour of the 
workers since 8th January, 2011, the repr esentative of the NDMC responded 
as under: 
"The question comes from 8th January, 2011 onward till May, 2015 for 
which we have not paid them.  As far as NDMC is concerned, my request 
to the Committee will be to give us some reasonable time and within that 
reasonable time we will calculate how much is the contribution from our 
end and we will definitely try to deposit it.  You also know sir, that the 
criterion has also been changed in between the year 2015.  So we will 
have to work out the calculation as to w ho are the eligible people from 
8th January, 2011 to October, 2014 and then from 2014 to the present 
day.  We will work that out and definitely comply with that." 
 
IV. COVERAGE UNDER ESI 
 
15. Regarding the coverage of workers under the ESI, the Committee were 
informed that the Divisional Officers conduct ed inspections and ensure d that 
wages were paid as per rules, pay slips and EPF & ESIC statements were given 
to the labourers and wages were transferred to their bank account . In this 
context,  the Committee, during evidence, sought clarification from the ESIC, 

18 
 
as to whether workers in the NDMC were covered under ESI. In reply , the 
representative of ESIC stated that after the meeting of the Committee on 27th 
May, 2015, they had a meeting with the NDMC wherein the applicability of the 
ESI Act was discussed/ clarified and it was concluded that  the NDMC was not 
a principal employer covered under the ESI Act. It required Notification, 
without which they could not cover the m directly.  The represent ative of  the 
ESIC further submitted that it was, however, for the NDMC to see that its 
contractors were covered under the ESI and have registration number. 
16. NDMC also clarified that it did not fall under the purview of Factory or 
Establishment and as such provisions of the ESI Act were not applicable to the 
NDMC.   However, in case of workers engaged through contractors , 
instructions have been issued by the NDMC to the HODs concerned to ensure 
that all the workers engaged by them got their ESI Smart Cards. 
17. During evidence, the Committee pointed out that contractors were 
definitely covered the ESI Act. If they did not register with the ESI, they should 
be penalised because under the law of the land, if any agency employed above 
10 persons, they had the  obligation to get themselves enrolled under the ESI. 
The Committee further, pointed out that when  the NDMC was awarding 
contracts, the responsibility rested with them to ensure that the contractors 
were registered with ESI. 
 
 

19 
 
18. In response, the Chairman, NDMC submitted as under: 
"You have given a very progressive suggestion also, like, as far as the ESI 
is concerned with the contractors, we will definitely work out certain 
timelines depending on the nature and the magnitude of the contract, 
and within that timeline he should ensure the compliance of the ESI".  
 
V. MINIMUM AND EQUAL WAGES 
 
19. The Committee desired to know about the mechanism put in place to 
ensure proper/timely/full disbursement of equal wages to the contract 
labourers by the contractors for same or similar type of works. In reply, the 
NDMC stated that the payment of the labour  was regulated as per terms and 
conditions of the agreement and proper documentation was carried out during 
disbursement of payment.   
20. The Committee, then, asked whether  the NDMC had nominated a 
representative to be present at the time of disbursement of wages by the 
contractor as per the provisions of the Contract Labour Act. In reply, the 
NDMC submitted that disbursement of wages by the contractor was made in 
the presence of Assistant Engineer/Junior Engineer. The Divisional Officers 
conducted inspections to ensure that wages were paid as per rules. 
21. The Committee , then, queried as to  whether checks/ surprise checks 
were also made out to deter any malpractices on the part of the contractor and 
the officers of the NDMC so nominated to be present dur ing disbursement of 
wages. In reply, the NDMC stated that checks/ surprise checks were regularly 

20 
 
made by the Head of the Department and the Branch   concerned as well as by 
the Vigilance Department. 
22. Asked to state whether any cases of under -payment of wages to the 
contract workers had come to the notice of the Council, the NDMC responded 
that no cases of under-payment of wages had been reported. 
23. When asked to specify the measures taken to ensure that there was no 
exploitation of contract labour on a ccount of under -payment and working 
beyond the prescribed working hours, the NDMC submitted that during the 
execution of work, the provisions under the Contract Labour Act , 1970  were 
being followed by the Departments concerned and all desired labour welfar e 
measures were being taken.  In case of any complaint of exploitation, the 
Welfare Department intervenes and resolves the issues. 
24. On the issue of continuous engagement of contract workers for longer 
contract duration and stability of wages, the Committee pointed out during 
evidence that in any contract agreement, variable provisions were kept for raw 
materials but surprisingly there have been no provision for variable wages.  The 
Committee further pointed out that the NDMC, being an Autonomous entity, 
could very well take care of the variables, including minimum wages, in the 
tender document itself. In response, the Chairman, NDMC, submitted that they 
had already started working on the line of the suggestions of the Committee.  
 

21 
 
VI. GRATUITY 
25. As regards provision of gratuity, the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home 
Affairs, apprised the Committee during evidence that tenders floated by the 
NDMC were normally for a period of two years whereas to be entitled for 
gratuity, a minimum of four years of service had to be rendered by the 
employee. If an employee worked for two years with one contractor and 
subsequent two years with another contractor, he/she did not get gratuity. 
26. When the Committee sought clarification in the matter from the Regional 
Labour Commissioner (RLC), he informed that as per the provisions in the 
Payment of Gratuity Act,  1972 a worker became entitled to Gratuity as and 
when he/she completes five years.  The RLC further clarified that it was not 
necessary that he/she should have  worked under a single employer to become 
eligible for gratuity. 
27. The RLC further stated that it did not matter, if the contractor changed 
or if the employee worked with some other contractors but if his/her service 
was continued for five years, then he /she is entitled to gratuity. If the 
employer, due to any reason did not give gratuity, then the worker could file a 
case with the Labour Authorities. 
28. The Committee during evidence pointed out that as per the extant 
provisions of the Gratuity Act,  the NDMC could ensure gratuity facilities to 
those workers deployed for continuous and regular nature of jobs, irrespective 
of the number of contractors they had worked under. The Committee further 

22 
 
pointed out that a number of PSUs were deducting gratuity from  the 
contractor's final payment bill and putting it in a dedicated fund or handing it 
over to the next contractor who was deploying the same people. The Committee 
asked the constraints NDMC faced in following the same procedure. 
29. In response, the Chairman, NDMC, submitted: 
“You have given a very pragmatic and progressive suggestion to us as to 
how to take care of the gratuity arrangement.  We will sit with our 
counterparts in the Ministry of Labour and we will work out a 
mechanism how this whole system is to be put in place for future.” 
 
VII MUSTER ROLL WORKERS 
30. As regards the number of casual workers directly appointed by the 
Council and under muster roll workers, the Committee were informed that 
around 600 0 such workers were there in  the NDMC. Asked to state the 
duration of their deployment, the NDMC stated that a large chunk of them had 
been working for a long period. 
31. When asked about the reasons and justifications f or employment of 
casual labour directly by the Council in addition to the contrac t workers hired 
through the contractors,  the NDMC submitted that engagement of muster roll 
workers was need -based and for proper maintenance of the roads, buildings, 
parks and gardens of  the NDMC area.  The NDMC further submitted that as a 
progressive employer, those muster roll workers, who had completed 500 days 
or more on a particular date, have been given the status of Regular Muster Roll 

23 
 
Worker.  Further, permanent absorption of the casual workers against regular 
vacancies, as and when they arose consequent upon the retirement of the 
regular employees or otherwise, was also being done. 
32. During evidence, the Committee desired to know the sanctity of 500 days 
when there were orders for regularization of workers after completion of 240 
days of service. In response, the Chairman, NDMC, deposed as follows:- 
“You are absolutely right but the fact was that because a large number of 
employees were working on a muster roll in the NDMC over a period of 
time, the Council in its own wisdom in the year 2014 had ta ken a 
decision to at least try to bring some sort of a progressive employer 
concept.  So they said that we should have a regular muster roll.  That is 
one step towards the model employer…the point that after 240 days they 
should be made as a regular employ ee.  The question before the Council 
was that we were not having adequate number of sanctioned posts.   
That put us in some limitations.  Therefore, what we said was have a 
regular muster roll and slowly and steadily these people shall be 
regularized.  In fact, we have taken details about their qualification and 
age and we are trying to impart special skill training where the NDMC is 
proposing to bear the cost for six to twelve months so that they can be 
deployed on constructive base.  For example, we need a large number of 
people on our sub -stations because we have a Discom for the NDMC 
area.  We need a large number of meter linemen, meter readers.  We have 
already decided in principle in the Council that we will give them 6 -12 
months training so that their  skills can be improved and they can be 
deployed.  We assure this House that as we will move in future, as and 
when the vacancy will arise, they will definitely be regularized." 
 
33. Asked to state the exact number of such workers regularized so far, the 
NDMC submitted that during the last five years, 710 Regular Muster Roll 
workers have been regularized. 
34. When asked by the Committee to clarify the distinction between the 
temporary muster roll workers and the regular muster roll workers and the 

24 
 
need for placing a large number of workers on muster roll, the Chairman, 
NDMC, submitted as under :- 
“the basic difference between the regular and temporary muster roll is 
that the regular muster roll will always be with us.  The temporary 
muster roll is need -based.  As and when the need arises, we are hiring 
some additional manpower.  That is the only difference between the 
two…it should not be linked with the sanctioned post.  Taking a cue from 
your observation, we will try to have a study as to the need of t he post 
required in the Council.  We have a large number of muster roll 
employees.  Based upon the finding of that study we will definitely work 
out some scheme for the creation of posts also.” 
 
35. As regards the coverage of muster roll workers under EPF, the Chairman, 
NDMC, apprised that it started from May, 2015.  When asked about the deposit 
of PF contribution along  with prescribed penalty being imposed by  the EPFO, 
the NDMC stated that  the EPF had been deducted from all the eligible Muster 
Roll Workers from the wages/salary of June paid in July, 2015 with matching 
contribution by the NDMC. The amount along  with the  administrative charges 
would be deposited by 15 th July, 2015 with the EPFO , i.e. within the Statutory 
period.  The NDMC further stated that  summons had been received from  the 
EPFO, Wazirpur Industrial Area for the period January, 2011 to May, 2015 for 
appearance along with the relevant records.   
36. When the Committee desired to be apprised of the mechanism developed 
to check the muster roll , wage register, deduction register and overtime 
register, the NDMC stated that the registers were being maintained at sub -
division level and checked by Divisional In -charge.  Officer -in-charge also 
checked the same on random basis.   

25 
 
37. When the Committe e enquired about the difference in wages of regular 
vis-à-vis contractual employees,  the NDMC apprised that 5997 numbers of 
Muster Roll workers were drawing wages as per the minimum wages notified by 
the Government of NCT of Delhi which were lesser than th e wages , i.e. 
minimum Rs.15000/- per month drawn by regular staff. 
38. In order to have a first hand knowledge at the ground level as well as to  
check the veracity of the written and oral submissions of the representatives of 
NDMC, the Chairperson, Standi ng Committee on Labour , met some of the 
Regular Muster Roll (RMR) workers and enquired whether they were getting  
wage slips, bonus, EPF Statement , etc. The RMR workers apprised the 
Chairperson that right from their engagement as muster roll workers they ha ve 
never received any wage slip.  Though the subscription towards EPF has been 
deducted from the month of June, 2015, no EPF Statement or Account Number 
had been issued/ communicated to them.  They also informed that during the 
current year, they have not been given bonus ; instead, they were given one 
LED Bulb. 
VIII. MONITORING 
39. When the Committee desired to know the mechanism put in place to 
conduct checks/super-checks or surprise checks on the contractor as well as 
the nominated representatives of the Council to avoid any exploitation of the 
contract/ casual workers, the NDMC submitted that checks/super -checks or 

26 
 
surprise checks were regularly made by the HOD concerned and the respective 
HOD/Branch In-charge and by the Vigilance Department too. 
40. In regard to the mechanism developed to deal with the disputes between 
a contractor and the contract labour,  the NDMC apprised that as per the 
contractual agreements, appointment of arbitrator was envisaged in the 
agreement signed by the contractor and the NDMC. 
41. When asked whether registers were being maintained by the contractors, 
the NDMC informed that all register s such as wages registers, leave register, 
register of workman, etc. were maintained by the contractors which were being 
checked and verified by the field staff on a regular basis. 
42. During evidence, in this context the Chairman, NDMC, submitted:- 
“When there is an appraisal system, whatever needs to be given, those 
are checked by our supervisory officers.  In case they do not maintain 
that, w e can blacklist them and we can cancel their license. Whatever 
EPF, Maintenance, Bonus , etc. is given is being checked by the 
supervisory staff.” 
  
IX. AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION ON WEBSITE 
43. During the evidence held on 3 rd March, 2015, the Committee de sired to 
have the details of all the Contractors , viz. their names and addresses, License 
Number, work site details, nature of work, number of workers under each 
contractor, EPF and ESI code number and payment details uploaded on the 
Website of the NDMC so  that the observations in respect of implementation of 
the labour laws could be easily detected and corrective measures taken.  

27 
 
44. The NDMC, in their post-evidence reply, submitted that the contract had 
been assigned through e -Procurement and other details of the work awarded 
were available on NDMC website , i.e. www.ndmc.gov.in,  where details showing 
name, address, license number of wo rk along  with payment details were 
uploaded and details could be accessed by the general public.  
 
X. FATAL/NON-FATAL ACCIDENTS 
45. In response to a specific query of the Committee regarding fatal/non -
fatal accidents which occurred during execution of work s during the last five 
years and the policy put in place to cater to the medical needs and 
compensation, etc., of accident victims,  the NDMC stated that three cases of 
fatal accident of contractual labour had occurred in the last five years. They 
have also provided details of those cases which are placed at Annexure-II. The 
NDMC further submitted that medical measures/compensation w ere ensured 
to all the contractual labours/ workers engaged by the NDMC through the 
contractors as per provisions of the  Worksman Compensation Act, 1923.  This 
was ensured through insertion of the General Conditions of Contract signed by 
the NDMC with the contractors. 
46. Elaborating over the issue, the Chairman, NDMC , submitted in evidence 
that during the last thre e years there was no data of fatal accidents.  He 
further stated that the primary responsibility to prevent accidents and to pay 

28 
 
compensation to the accident victims was that of the contractor.  Cases were 
registered under IPC and CPC with the Police in the event of any accident.  
  

29 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
In the process of examination of the subject  "Deployment 
of Contract/Casual/Sanitation Workers for perennial nature of 
jobs in NDMC" , which was taken up by the Committee in the 
year 2014, a List of Points was sent to NDMC for obtaining 
written replies thereto. A perusal of the replies received from 
NDMC for the first time, and that too  after much persuasion, 
revealed that they were not only grossly deficient and 
incomplete in many respects but the pertinent queries made by 
the Committee were also responded to in a casual manner. The 
written replies obtained for the second time were also found to 
be a mere repetition of what was replied t o earlier by the 
NDMC.  Due to this, two sittings of the Committee slated for 
taking evidence of the representatives of the MHA/NDMC had 
to be adjourned. The Committee, while taking a serious view of 
the demeanor of the NDMC, bordering on a taken -for-granted 
attitude and its casual approach in dealing with matters 

30 
 
concerning Parliament and its Committee, would at the outset, 
strongly condemn the  conduct of the  NDMC therefor e and 
accordingly expect the Ministry to prevail upon the Council to 
exercise due dil igence and display utmost seriousness while 
dealing with Parliamentary matters in future.  
 
2. The Committee note that in the course of discharging its 
obligatory and discretionary functions and responsibilities, 
NDMC is permitted to deploy contract labour  under the 
provisions of 'The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) 
Act, 1970'. According to the NDMC, such contract labour s are 
partially appointed in cleaning, sweeping, security and other 
related works and also in some other  few categories like Junior 
Engineer, Dat a Entry Operator, Clerical Assistants, Teachers , 
etc., on the ground of administrative exigencies. The 
Committee are not inclined to accept the reasoning adduced by 
the Council for the deployment of contract labour in the 
aforesaid categories of post s as all the above listed works 
performed by the outsourced workers apparently seem to be 

31 
 
perennial in nature and belong to core functions of the Council. 
While expressing reservations over the deployment of contract 
labour for jobs of a perennial nature, the Committee desire the 
NDMC to desist from this practice  act and in case any such 
outsourcing is genuinely found to be unavoidable and exigent, 
the contract labour so appointed should be permanently 
absorbed in the Council, once they have rendered the required 
length of service. 
 
3. The Committee are deeply concerned to observe that until 
the subject was taken up for examination by them,  the NDMC 
was either ignorant or deliberately ignoring compliance of the 
Labour Laws prevalent in the Country as a result of which, the 
contractors appointed by the NDMC neither followed nor were 
inclined to follow the prescribed procedures and provisions of 
the Labour Laws. As per the report submitted by the Labour 
authorities under the Ministry of Labo ur and Employment, 
most of the contractors were working without obtaining valid 
labour licenses and were also not extending the EPF and ESI  

32 
 
facilities to the contract labour.  The Committee, however, 
draw some solace from the fact  that after  the Committee's 
deliberations with MHA/NDMC,  held on 27 th May 2015, the 
Council had issued directions to all c ontractors for obta ining 
necessary labour licenses and  EPF and ESI codes , wherever 
applicable.  As per the instructions of the Committee, a list of 
contractors has also been provided to the Labour, EPF and ESI  
Departments and subsequently special ca mps have also been 
organized by the  three Organisations for the 
registration/awareness of the contract workers.  The 
Committee, while taking note of the efforts made by the NDMC, 
albeit late,  desire that a definite timeline be given to all the 
contractors for completing the formalities leading to 
compliance with EPF and ESI coverage of the workers deployed 
by them. The Committee also impress upon the NDMC to insert 
suitable clauses in future contractual agreements so as to make 
sure that the contractors honour the prescribed provisions 
towards wages, gratuity and social security for the contract 
workers. 

33 
 
 
4. As per information submitted to t he Committee, there are 
428 contractors enlisted with the NDMC.  However, when the 
Committee desired the details of all the 428 contractors , i.e. 
their addresses, EPF & ESI code numbers, number of workers 
engaged by them, wages given , etc. to be provided to 
EPF/ESI/CLC Authorities for verification, the NDMC furnished 
the details of 126 contractors only.  On cross checking by the 
abovesaid authorities, it was found that out of  the 126 
contractors, only 60 contractors have complied with  the EPF 
requirement and 58 with the ESI provisions  as yet .  The 
Committee deplore th is state of affairs and desire that details 
of the rest of the contractors be provided forthwith to the 
Authorities for verification and a  time-bound ultimatum be 
issued to all th e contractors engaged by the NDMC to 
unfailingly extend all the social security benefits, as prescribed 
under the relevant labour laws, to the workers deployed by 
them.   
 

34 
 
5. The Committee note that the coverage of muster roll 
workers under the EPF in the NDMC  started from May, 2015 
and EPF has bee n deducted from all the eligible workers from 
the wages/salary of June, 2015 with matching contribution by 
the C ouncil. In this context, the Committee find that as the 
NDMC came under the EPF Act w.e.f. January, 2011, summons 
have been issued by the EPFO t o the NDMC for appearance 
along with the relevant records to calculate the EPF deposit 
with retrospective effect , i.e. January, 2011. The Committee 
take a serious view of the statement made by the 
representatives of EPFO that they are not getting the requi red 
cooperation from the NDMC to sort out the matter. The 
Committee desire the Council to extend full cooperation to the 
EPFO, initiate prompt action and produce all the relevant 
records before the PF Authorities so that the workers who are 
entitled to be covered under  the EPF retrospectively are 
brought under its ambit starting January, 2011 and their 
subscription from January, 2011 till May 2015 be calculated 
and deposited in their respective accounts , along with the 
penalty, if any, imposed by the EPFO. 

35 
 
6. The Committee note that the contract workers receive 
minimum wages as prescribed by the Government of NCT of 
Delhi which remain static for the whole duration of the 
contract.  The Committee are given to understand that while 
entering into contractual ag reements, there is  generally an 
automatic variable provision for the prices of cement, steel and 
other raw material s, whereas no such variable provision is 
prescribed for the revision of  wages.  As per law, the minimum 
wages are  to be  revised after every s ix months, but in the 
absence of any variable provisions for upward revision of wages 
in the contract agreement itself, the workers are bound to work 
on the fixed wages during the entire tender period and thus 
subject to exploitation by the contractors.  The Committee are 
of the considered opinion that the basic concept in any tender 
document is to take care of the variables during the contract 
period and revision of wages is one such most important 
variable which ought to be taken into consideration  in order to 
take a better case of the interests of labour . The Committee 
feel that the NDMC, having the functional autonomy, should 
find no difficulty in doing the needful  in the matter . They, 

36 
 
therefore, exhort the NDMC that henceforth tender documents 
should clearly stipulate that along with other variables,  
revision of minimum wages also has to be appropriately taken 
care of till the contract remains in vogue. 
 
7. According to the NDMC, disbursement of wages by the 
contractors is being made in the presen ce of Assistant 
Engineer/Junior Engineer and the Divisional Heads conduct 
periodic inspections to ensure payment of wages to the 
contract workers as per rules. The Committee feel that these 
are steps in the right direction and ought to be continued so as 
to deter under -payment to , and exploitation of , the contract 
labour. The Committee also recommend that when the contract 
workers are made to perform same/similar kind of works, as 
being performed by the regular employees, the principle of 
equal pay for equal work should invariably be invoked. 
 

37 
 
8. The Committee note that there are around 6000 muster 
roll workers who are directly employed by the NDMC for proper 
maintenance  of roads, buildings, parks and gardens in the 
NDMC area. The Committee further note tha t during the last 
five years, 710 Regular Muster Roll (RMR) workers have been 
regularised.  What concerns the Committee is the fact that the 
muster roll workers who complete a minimum of 500 days of 
service on a particular date are given the status of RMR 
workers and only after that they are considered for 
regularisation, whereas as per  the extant  rules, workers who 
complete a minimum of 240 days of service are considered for 
regularisation. According to the NDMC, the Council is not 
having adequate number of sanctioned posts because of  which 
they are unable to regularise the workers after 240 days of 
service. In order to overcome the constraints in the matter, the 
NDMC is reportedly planning to conduct a study to gauge the 
actual requirement of additional manpower, besides imparting 
skill development training programme for six to twelve months 
to the muster roll workers. While taking note of the statement 
of intent by the NDMC, the Committee recommend to  the 

38 
 
Council to expeditiously come out with concrete action in 
terms of conducting the proposed study and imparting skill 
development training so as to ensure progressive regularisation 
of the large number of muster roll workers who have completed 
240 days of service and the resultant removal of wage disparity 
between the muster roll workers and the regular staff. 
 
9. The Committee note that in order to become eligible for 
gratuity, a minimum of five years of service is to be rendered 
by an employee ; further, as  clarified by the Regional Labour 
Commissioner in evidence  it is not necessary that he/she 
should have worked under a single employer.  The problem in 
the NDMC is that the tenders floated by it are of shorter 
durations, viz. two years , after which , if the contractor 
changes, the next contractor either deploys his own people or 
refuses to acknowledge the services rendered by the workers 
deployed by the previous contractor. In such a scenario, the 
sufferers are the hapless contract workers. Taking into 
consideration the fact that if any agency employs above 10 

39 
 
persons, it has the obligation to get the workers enrolled under 
ESI, the Committee are of the firm opinion that it is as much 
the responsibility of  the NDMC as that of the contractor to 
adhere to the provisions enshrined in the ESI Act and cover all 
the workers under the ESI. The Committee, therefore, want the 
NDMC to ensure that whenever a contract is awarded, the 
contractors are enrolled under the ESI.  Besides, with a view to 
avoiding litigations,  the NDMC should deduct the gratuity 
amount  from the previous contractor's final bill and put it in a 
dedicated fund or hand it over to the next contractor for the 
purpose. Since the NDMC executes jobs of continuous or 
regular nature, the Committee further de sire the Council to 
ensure that the contract workers continue, the change of 
contractors notwithstanding. 
 
10. The Committee are deeply concerned to note the 
submission of some RMR workers that they have never been 
issued any wage slips since the time of their engagement in the 
NDMC nor any EPF statement/ Account Number has been 

40 
 
issued to them. Worse still, they have not been given any bonus 
during the current year. Though the NDMC repeatedly claimed 
that all the workers are regularly being issued wage slip s, the 
Committee feel that there are some loopholes which need to be 
identified and plugged as such . Therefore, the NDMC should 
urgently initiate corrective measures and ensure that all the 
workers are invariably issued the wage slips every month in 
addition to the PF statement and Account Number, failing 
which stern action be taken against the delinquent supervisory 
staff. The Committee further desire that the NDMC should 
earnestly consider giving bonus to all its eligible employees 
during the current year. 
 
11.  Though the NDMC have claimed that checks/super 
checks or surprise checks are regularly made by the HOD  
concerned, by the respective Branch In-charge as also  by the 
Vigilance Department, the discrepancies/anomalies in the 
coverage of workers u nder ESI, EPF, Gratuity, issue of wage 
slips and EPF statements and overall implementation of labour 

41 
 
laws, as pointed out in the preceding paragraphs, reinforce the 
Committee's apprehensions over the inadequate monitoring 
mechanism in the NDMC .  Further, a  scrutiny of the wage 
register/muster roll revealed that the register ha d been signed 
by the JE/AE concerned without date, stamp and the 
certificate contrary to as has been prescribed under the 
Contract Labour Act, 1970.  The Committee, therefore, impress 
upon the NDMC to strengthen the extant monitoring system 
and intensify checks/inspections so as to ensure that the 
contract and muster roll workers get their legitimate rights and 
that the labour laws are honoured  in letter and spirit . The 
Committee further desire that the supervisory staff must 
invariably certify on each page of the wage register/muster roll 
as prescribed in the Contract Labour Act , besides putting 
signature with the date and stamp.   
 
12. The Committee were informed that details showing name, 
address and  license number  of the contractors  along with 
payment details are uploaded on the NDMC website , i.e. 

42 
 
www.ndmc.gov.in and such details are accessible to the general 
public.  However, the Committee find that as of now the NDMC 
have not displayed the details of the contractual works in 
progress, the list of contractors, working /construction sites, 
number of workers under each contractor, labour license 
number, ESI and EPF code of the contra ctors, etc.  The 
Committee strongly recommend that all these details must be 
put on the NDMC website  which could  be accessible to any 
interested party /stakeholder. T he Committee further desire 
that the details of the officials responsible for the updatin g of 
the site may also be notified at the end of the home page so as 
to fix responsibility and ensure regular updating of the website. 
 
13. The Committee are concerned to note that during the last 
five years, there were reportedly three cases of fatal accid ents 
of contract labour. According to the NDMC, medical treatment 
and compensation to the accident victims and their family 
members are ensured through insertion of the General 
Conditions of Contract signed by the NDMC with the contactors  

43 
 
and as per the provisions of the Workmen Compensation Act, 
1923.  B ut, a scrutiny of the documents furnished by NDMC  
revealed that only in one case compensation of Rs 50,000/- has 
been paid to the heir of the deceased labour despite an 
agreement to provide Rs.3,00,000/- as compensation ; the 
matter is sub -judice at present.  Even more disturbing is the 
fact that in the other two cases, though the accidents occurred 
in 2013 and 2015, not even a single rupee has been given to 
their heirs as compensation.  Such instances negate the claims 
of the NDMC that compensations to the accident victims are 
ensured. The Committee, therefore, desire that the NDMC 
should make concrete efforts and ensure that the accident 
victims get timely treatment and compensations under the 
General Conditions of Contract; failing which stringent action 
be taken against the contractor concerned. The Committee 
further urge the NDMC to prevail upon the contractors to 
adhere to adequate and requisite safety measures so as to 
prevent fatal accidents and grave mishaps in future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR 
December, 2015                                                   CHAIRPERSON 
Pausha,1937 (Saka)                     STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
 

44 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
  


45 
 
 


46 
 


47 
 
  
ANNEXURE-II 
 
  


48 
 
 
  


49 
 
 
  


50 
 
      APPENDIX         Confidential 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2014-15) 
 
Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 3rd March, 2015 from 1540 hrs. to 1620 hrs. in 
Committee Room `C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  – Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  4. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  5. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  7. Shri R. Parthipan 
  8. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  9. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
   
   
     
   SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional  Secretary 
   2.  Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
  3. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

51 
 
Witnesses 
Representatives of NDMC 
 1. Smt. Shakuntala D. Gamlin, Principal Secretary, Delhi   
  Government 
 2. Shri Nikhil Kumar, Secretary 
 3. Shri Anant Kumar, Chief Engineer (Civil) 
 4. Shri A.K. Joshi, Chief Engineer (Elect.) 
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 1. Shri R.K. Sharma, Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of the NDMC and Ministry of Home Affairs to the sitting of the 
Committee, convened to have a briefing by the Ministry on the subject 
`Deployment of contract/casual workers/sanitation workers for perennial 
nature of jobs in NDMC ’. Impressing upon the witnesses to keep the 
proceedings of the Committee `Confidential', the Chairperson asked the 
Principal Secretary, NDMC to give an overview of the subject matter. The 
Principal Secretary accordingly gave a power -point presentation on the subject 
matter.  
3. As the written replies furnished by the NDMC were incomplete, casual 
and full  of errors, the Committee, while cautioning the NDMC, decided to 
adjourn the meeting and asked NDMC to furnish the requisite replies with due 
care within one month after which the Committee would decide further course 
of action. 
The witnesses then withdrew 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

52 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2014-15) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-second Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 27 th May, 2015 from 1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in 
Committee Room `D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  – Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Ashok Dohare 
  4. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara 
  5. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  6. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  7. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  8. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
  9. Dr. Arun Kumar 
    
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  10. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
  11. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
  12. Shri Rajaram 
  13. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
  14. Shri P.L. Punia 
  15. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  16. Ms. Dola Sen 
     
   SECRETARIAT 
           1.  Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
  2. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

53 
 
Witnesses 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
1. Shri Rakesh Singh Joint Secretary (UT) 
Representatives of NDMC 
1. Shri Dharam Pal Chairman 
2. Shri Anant Kumar Chief Engineer (Civil) 
3. Shri Hamvir Singh Chief Engineer (Civil-II) 
4. Shri A.K. Joshi Chief Engineer (Elect-II) 
5. Shri P.K. Sharma MOH 
6. Smt. Geetika Sharma Director (Personnel) 
   
  Representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
1. Shri P.K. Udgata Additional Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner 
2. Shri M.K. Choudhary Dy.CLC (C), HQ 
3. Shri S.S. Cheema Dy.CLC (C), Delhi Region 
4. Shri S.K. Das RLC (C), Delhi Region 
5. Shri Niranjan Kumar ALC (C), Delhi Region 
6. Shri Arun Kumar Additional Commissioner, ESIC 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs and Labour & Employment 
and the Officials of NDMC to the sitting of the Committee, convened to take 
evidence of the Ministry of Home Affairs and NDMC on the subject `Deployment 
of Contract/Casual/Sanitation workers for perennial nature of jobs in NDMC ’. 
Impressing upon the witnesses to keep the proceedings of the Committee 
`Confidential', the Chairperson asked the Chairman, NDMC to give an overview 

54 
 
of the main poi nts concerning the subject matter. The Chairman, NDMC 
accordingly gave a power-point presentation on the subject matter.  
3. The Dy. CLC(C) Headquarter apprised the Committee regarding 
inspection carried out by his office on the various establishments and 
contractors of NDMC and violation of Labour laws found therein the Committee 
expressed their annoyance and directed the NDMC to look into the matter and 
set the things right within a month. 
4. Expressing displeasure over the casual manner in which the writ ten 
replies were prepared and submitted by NDMC as well as their unpreparedness 
in properly responding to the queries of the Members in evidence, the 
Committee, while cautioning the NDMC, decided to adjourn the meeting.  The 
Chairperson asked NDMC to furni sh the requisite replies with due care within 
fifteen days after which the Committee would decide further course of action.  
The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs expressed his apology and 
assured that the revised written reply would be furnished t o the Committee 
within the given time frame. The Joint Secretary also informed the Committee 
that within a week he would hold a meeting of the representatives of NDMC, 
CLC office, EPFO and ESIC to sort out all the Labour and social security 
related issues of the contract Labourers. 
5. The Chairperson then asked the representatives of the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment to take stock of the compliance of NMDC to various statutory 
provisions of the Labour Laws and report back to the Committee within one 
month.  They assured to comply. 
The witnesses then withdrew 
 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

55 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2014-15) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty Seventh Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 15th July, 2015 from 1 100 hrs. to 1245 hrs. in   
Room No. 'G-074',  Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  - Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
  4. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  5. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  7. Shri Hari Manjhi 
  8. Dr. Arun Kumar 
     
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  9. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
  10. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
  11. Shri Rajaram 
  12. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
  13. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri Shiv Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
  3. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 

56 
 
 
Witnesses 
Representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
 Shri Rakesh Singh Joint Secretary (UT) 
   
Representatives of NDMC 
1. Shri Naresh Kumar Chairman 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Secretary 
3. Shri Kr. Hrishikesh Financial Advisor 
   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and NDMC to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take evidence of the Ministry and NDMC on the subject 
'Deployment of Contract/ Casual/ Sanitation workers for pere nnial nature of 
jobs in NDMC'. Impressing upon the witnesses to keep the proceedings of the 
Committee 'Confidential' and appreciating the measures taken by NDMC 
subsequent to the suggestions made by the Committee at their sitting held on 
27th May, 2015,  f or bringing in improvements in the working conditions of 
labour as per the statutory requirements to this effect under the Labour Laws, 
the Chairperson asked the Chairman, NDMC, to give an overview on further 
improvements contemplated for the overall benefit of contract/casual labour.  
 
3. The Secretary, NDMC, gave a power-point presentation highlighting inter-
alia further measures taken/proposed in this regard which included 
withholding the payments due to contractors -pending compliance of various 
statutory requirements by them, issuance of instructions to the field officers to 
ensure strict compliance of the provi sions of the Contract Labour Act, 
organising training workshops to clarify legal position of different issues, 
holding regular interaction with the Labour, EPFO & ESIC Departments, etc. 

57 
 
 
4. As some queries made by the Committee during evidence required 
detailed reply, the Chairperson asked the Chairman, NDMC, to submit written 
replies within 10 days to the queries which remained unanswered as well as to 
the questionnaire which was then handed over to them. The Chairman, NDMC, 
assured to comply therewith. 
 
5. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs and NDMC for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the 
information desired by the Committee. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew 
 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

58 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2015-16) 
 
Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on 17 th December, 2015 from 15 00 hrs. to 1515 hrs. 
in Committee Room 'A',  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Virendra Kumar  - Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
     
  1. Shri Ashok Dohare 
  2. Shri Devjibhai Fatepara 
  3. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
  4. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  5. Shri R. Parthipan 
  6. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
         
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  7. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  8. Shri P.L. Punia 
  9. Haji Abdul Salam 
  10. Smt. Dola Sen 
  11. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan - Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri Ashok Sajwan - Director 
  3. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Additional Director 
  4. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 

59 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the draft Report on 
the subject 'Deployment of contract/casual/sanitation workers for perennial 
nature of jobs in NDMC'. Giving an overview of the main/important 
Recommendations contained in the Draft Report,  the Chairperson requested 
the Members to give their suggestions on them, if any. 
 
3. The C ommittee, then, took up  the draft Report for consideration and 
adopted the same after some discussion. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Report  in the light 
of consequential changes that might ar ise out of the factual verificatio n of the 
draft Report and present/lay the same to both the Houses. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 