i 
 
28 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
[CESS FUNDS AND THEIR UTILISATION FOR WORKERS' 
WELFARE] 
TWENTY EIGHTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2017/Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 
 
 
 
  


ii 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH  REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
[CESS FUNDS AND THEIR UTILISATION FOR WORKERS' 
WELFARE] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   10th August, 2017 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   10th August, 2017 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2017/Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 
 
 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE No.  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (iv) 
     
INTRODUCTION            (v)   
      REPORT 
 
GIST OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  1 
CHAPTER - I  
I. INTRODUCTORY 5 
CHAPTER - II  
I. CONSTITUTION OF CENTRAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
AND STATE ADVISORY COMMITTEE/BOARD 
10 
II. REGISTRATION OF WORKERS 11 
III. BOCW SCHEMES 16 
CHAPTER - III  
I. COLLECTION OF CESS 19 
II. UTILISATION OF CESS 25 
CHAPTER - IV  
I. APPEALS 31 
II. PENALTY 32 
III. ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 34 
ANNEXURES  
Annexure I-State-wise position of number of workers registered, Cess 
collected and spent under BOCW Acts, 1996 
37 
APPENDICES  
Appendix I- Minutes  of  the Sixteenth Sitting  of   the Committee held on 
20th April, 2016. 
39 
Appendix II-Minutes  of  the Eighteenth Sitting  of   the  Committee held  
on 23rd May, 2017. 
42 
Appendix III-Minutes  of  the Twenty -fifth Sitting  of   the  Committee held  
on 3rd August, 2017. 
46 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA - CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle 
3. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
6. Shri Devajibhai Govindbhai Fatepara 
7. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Hansdah 
10. Shri C. N. Jayadevan 
11. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar 
13. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
14. Shri Hari Manjhi 
15. Shri R. Parthipan 
16. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori 
17. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
18. Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
19. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania (Hira) 
20. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
21. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
23. Shri N. Gokulkrishnan 
24. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
25. Shri P.L. Punia 
26. Shri Rajaram 
27. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
28. Ms. Dola Sen 
29. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
30. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
31. * Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         1.    Ms. Rhimjhim Prasad  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.    Smt. Anita Panda  - Director 
 2.    Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
*vacancy occurred vice Haji Abdul Salam passed away on 28.2.2017. 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour (2016 -17) 
having been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this 
Twenty Eighth Report on 'Cess funds and the ir utilisation for workers' 
welfare' pertaining to the Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
 
2.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment on  20th April and  23rd May, 2017. The 
Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held 
on 3rd August, 2017. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
officers of the Ministry of Labour & Employment for tendering oral 
evidence and placing before th em the detailed written notes and post 
evidence information as desired by the Committee. 
 
3.  For ease of reference, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                  DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA      
3rd August, 2017                         CHAIRPERSON,  
12th Shravana, 1939 (Saka)      STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

1 
 
GIST OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AS CONTAINED 
IN THIS REPORT 
 The Buil ding a nd Other Construction Workers (Regulation Of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 and The Building and Other 
Construction Workers‟ Welfare Cess, Act, 1996  came into existence in 1996. 
However, the actual/practical implementation started in 2007. 
 Concerned with the gross under utilisation of cess funds viz. -a-viz. 
disproportionate collection of cess, by the Cess Collecting Authorities, the 
Standing Committe e on Labour decided to examine the subject 'Cess Funds 
and their Utilisation For Workers' Welfare' on priority and accordingly took 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment and 
DGLW on 20th April, 2017 and 23rd May, 2017. 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN BRIEF 
1. According to the Ministry, till 31.03.2017 ₹ 32,632.96 crore had 
been collected as Cess against which an amount of ₹ 7516.52 crore had 
been spent for the purpose and objective of the Act. As per the Act, 1% 
Cess is to be levied and collected on all types of construction activities. 
The total construction activities including that of Government of India, 
State Governments, PSUs and private entities etc. could run into crores of 
rupees and the Committee feel that the reported figure of Cess collected 
reflects poorly on the system of collection of Cess. 
2.  The Committee had noted that during the past years, the utilisation 
of cess is very poor as there was no fool proof system of collection and 
utilisation developed by the States.  Rs. 32,632 crore total Cess collected 

2 
 
in more than 10 years, of this only Rs. 7,516 crore spent till 31.03.2017.  
They had noted with concern that the basic objective of the Act has also 
been defeated as the construction workers have not been benefitted by 
the Cess Fund. 
3. The Committee had noted that the present system of assessment, 
collection of cess and its transfer to the BOCW Boards,  is weak which 
could result into non -transparency and also leakages. The Committee are 
astonished to note that no efforts have been made to compare the 
collected Cess figure with the total construction activities carried out in 
respective State . Also  the Departments/State Governments or BOCW 
Board have not  made any efforts to reconcile those figures.  The 
Committee had desire d thorough checking of the collection from each 
source and the difference, if any, to be collected and deposited with the 
State Welfare Boards. 
4. The Hon’ble Supreme Court has also taken serious cognizance of the 
lack of commitment in implementation, asse ssment, collection and 
utilization of the Cess Fund. The Hon’ble Supreme Court had also asked 
the CAG to undertake an audit. The report is still awaited. The Hon’ble 
Supreme Court had also passed instructions for healthy execution and 
implementation of the Act. 
5.  The Committee had recommended for proper integration by the 
State Welfare Boards with the ESI/EPF and with Labour 

3 
 
Commissioners/Labour Offices to have a realistic data about the number 
of workers. 
6. Noting that the cess assessing and collecting authorities were not 
under the direct control of BOCW Boards and  there was no proper system 
of assessment and collection of cess, the Committee had desired to 
develop a foolproof system of assessment, collection and deposition of 
cess. 
7. The Committee had  recommended for wide publicity to the welfare 
Schemes and benefits thereof for the registered construction workers so 
that they may be encouraged to come forward for registration. They had 
also desired that the contractors of big construction sites be enc ouraged 
to spread the benefits of registration and also to set up information 
centres at the district level. 
8. The Committee had apprehended that the cess collected by the 
designated authorities might not have  been transferred to the BOCW 
Boards fully and  the State Governments had utilized or diverted the 
collection in other heads/accounts. They had, therefore, desired for 
auditing of accounts during at least last 2-5 years. 
9. The Committee had felt that the whole process of collection of cess 
and its uti lisation must be studied as the system varies from State to 
State. The Committee had opined that a healthy, user friendly and 
uniform system of assessment, collection, utilisation, etc. be developed 

4 
 
with an inbuilt provision of internal check. They had fel t that the 
Ministry may take initiative to co -ordinate with all the 
States/Departments and State Welfare Boards for implementation of 
uniform system throughout the Country. Noting that the welfare schemes 
run under the BOCW Welfare Cess Act differ from Sta te to State, the 
Committee had desired that the Ministry of Labour & Employment may 
structure the welfare schemes in such a manner so that a Pan Indian 
uniformity may be maintained. 
 
  

5 
 
REPORT 
Chapter-I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 The con struction workers constitute one of the largest categories of 
workers in the unorganized sector. As per the Fifth Employment 
Unemployment Survey (2015 -16) there are five crore nineteen thousand four 
hundred and nineteen workers engaged throughout the count ry i n building 
and other construction works. These workers are one of the most vulnerable 
segments of the unorganised Labour in India. Their work is of temporary 
nature, the relationship between employer and the employee is temporary, 
working hours are unc ertain. Basic amenities and welfare facilities provided to 
these workers are inadequate. Risk to life and limb is also inherent. In the 
absence of adequate statutory provisions to get the requisite information 
regarding the number and nature of accidents w as quite difficult and due to 
this, to fix responsibility or to take corrective measures is not an easy job. 
Although the provisions of certain Central Acts were applicable to the building 
and other construction workers yet a need was felt for a comprehensive Central 
Legislation for regulating the safety, welfare and other conditions of service of 
these workers. In pursuant to the decision of the 41st  Labour Ministers 
Conference held on 18th May, 1995, the Committee of State Labour Ministers 
had e xpressed its consensus for the Central Legislation on this subject. In 
order to regulate the employment and conditions of service of building and 
other construction workers and to provide for their safety, health and welfare 
measures the Building and Other  Construction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 1995 (Ord. 14 of 1995) was 
promulgated by the President on 3rd Novemb er, 1995 as the Parliament was 
not in session. To replace this Ordinance a Bill was introduced in the  Lok 
Sabha on 1st December, 1995. Since the Bill could not be taken up for 
consideration it lapsed. On 5th  January, 1996 the President promulgated the 

6 
 
Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 1 996 (Ord. 3 of 1996). To replace this 
Ordinance a Bill was introduced in the Parliament which could not be passed 
and the President promulgated the Building and Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Second Ordinanc e, 1996 
(Ord. 15 of 1996) on 27th March, 1996. As this Ordinance could not be 
replaced by an Act of Parliament the President promulgated the Building and 
Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of 
Service) Third Ordinance, 1990 (Ord. 25 of 1996) on 20th June, 1996. In order 
to replace this Ordinance the Building and Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Bill was introduced in 
the Parliament.  
1.2 The Building and Other Construction Worker s (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Bill having been passed by both the 
Houses of Parliament received the assent of the President on 19th  August, 
1996. It came on the Statute Book as THE BUILDING AND OTHER 
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATIO N OF EMPLOYMENT AND 
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1996 (27 of 1996),  an Act to regulate the 
employment and conditions of service of building and other construction 
workers and to provide for their safety, health and welfare measure and for 
other matter connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
The Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess, Act, 1996 
1.3 To provide for the levy and collection of a cess on the cost of construction 
incurred by employers with a view to augmenting the resources of the  Building 
and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Boards which were to be constituted 
under the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 1995, an Ordinance, 
namely the Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Ordinance, 
1995 (Ord 15 of 1995), was promulgated by the President on 3rd November, 

7 
 
1995. In order to replace this Ordinance by an Act of Parliament, a Bill was 
introduced in the Lok Sabha. Since the Bill could not be taken up for 
consideration and passing in the Winter Session, 1995 and the Budget 
Session, 1996 of Lok Sabha, the Building and Other Construction Workers' 
Welfare Cess Ordinance, 1996 and the Building and Other Construction 
Workers' Welfare Cess Second Ordinance, 1 996 respectively w ere promulgated 
on 5th  January, 1996 and 27th  March, 1996 with a view to give continued 
effect to the legislative protection. On the dissolution of the Tenth Lok Sabha, 
the Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Bill, 1995 stood 
lapsed On 20th June, 1996 another Ordinance namely the Building and Other 
Construction Workers' Cess Third Ordinance was promulgated by the 
President. To replace this Ordinance by an Act of Parliament , the Building and 
Other Construction Workers' Wel fare Cess Bill was introduced in the 
Parliament. 
1.4 The Bill wa s complementary to the Building and Other Construction 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Bill, 1996 
proposed to be introduced and considered simultaneously. With a view to 
provide for the levy and collection of a cess on the cost of construction incurred 
by the employers for augmenting the resources of the Building and Other 
Construction Workers' Welfare Boards constituted by the State Governments 
under the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Condi tions of Service) Ordinance, 199 5 (Ordinance 14 of 
1995), an Ordinance, namely, the Building and Other Construction Workers' 
Welfare Cess Ordinance, 1995 (Ordinance 15 of 1995), was promulga ted by the 
President on the 3rd  November. 1995. The intention was to make over, after 
due appropriation by Parliament by law, the proceeds of the cess, to the State 
Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Boards and the cost of 
collection not exce eding one per cent  of the cess collected to the  State 
Governments to whom it proposed to delegate the authority to collect the cess. 
A Bill, namely, the Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Bill, 

8 
 
1995 was introduced in Lok Sabha on the 1st December, 1995 to replace the 
said Ordinance by an Act of Parliament. Since the said Bill could not be taken 
up for consideration and passing in the Winter Session, 1995 and the Budget 
Session, 1996 of Lok Sabha, the Building and Other Construction Workers ' 
Welfare Cess Ordinance, 1996 and the Building and Other Construction 
Workers' Welfare Cess Second Ordinance, 1996 respec tively were promulgated 
on the 5th January, 1996 and the 27th  March, 1996 with a view to give 
continued effect to the legislative prot ection. On the dissolution of the Tenth 
Lok Sabha, the Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Bill, 
1995 stood lapsed. By virtue of Article 123(2)(a) of the Constitution the 
Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Second Ordina nce, 
1996 promulgated on the 27th  March, 1996 would have also ceased to operate 
With effect from the 4th  July, 1996. In view of the urgency felt and as the 
Parliament was not in session, the President was pleased to promulgate the 
Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Third Ordinance, 1996 
on 20th June, 1996 in order to give continued effect to the legislative protection 
envisaged in the earlier Ordinance. 
1.5 Further, the Building and Other Construction Workers (RECS) Central 
Rules, 1998 were notified on 19.11.1998. 
 
1.6 The Act is applicable to every establishment which employs 10 or more 
workers in any building or other construction work. There is also provision of 
constitution of Central and the State Advisory Committee to advise the 
appropriate Governments on matters arising out of administration of the law 
besides constitution of Welfare Boards by the State Governments and 
registration of beneficiaries under the Act and provision for their identity cards 
etc. 
 
1.7 These legislations provide for regulating the employment and conditions 
of service, safety and health and welfare measures for the construction workers 

9 
 
by setting up a Welfare Fund at the State level for crediting thereto 
contribution made by beneficiaries and collection made out from levy of cess of 
1% of the construction cost incurred by an employer on construction works.  
The Fund is to be used for providing  financial assistance to the families of 
beneficiaries in case of accident, old age pension, housing loans, paymen t of 
insurance premia, children‟s education, medical and maternity benefits etc. 
 
1.8 All State Governments and Union Territories have co nstituted State 
Welfare Boards. 
 
1.9 Till 31st March, 2017, an amount of approx. ₹ 32,632.96 crore has been 
collected as Cess by the State Governments and Union Territories and an 
amount of ₹ 7516.52 crore has been spent  by the State Welfare Boards  on 
welfare schemes formulated by them and administrative expenses. 
 
1.10 Central Government has been issuing directions, under Section 60 of the 
Building and Other Construction Workers‟ (Regulation  of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996, to all the State Governments and UT 
Administrations from time to time for proper implementation of the Ac t. To 
monitor the implementation of these directions, specifically with reference to 
utilization of Cess fund of Welfare Schemes enumerated under Section 22 of 
the Act, by State Building and Other Construction Workers‟ Welfare Boards, a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Labour and Employment) has 
been constituted. The Monitoring Committee holds its meeting from time to 
time. In 2016 -17, the Monitoring Committee has held meetings on 6 th April, 
2016, 21st July, 2016  and 20 th December, 2016 and in  2017-18 on 9 th May, 
2017 (till date)  with the Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of Labour 
departments of the State/UTs. 
  

10 
 
Chapter-II 
I. CONSTITUTION OF CENTRAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND STATE 
ADVISORY COMMITTEE/BOARD 
 
2.1 The Building and Other Construction  Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996  provides for constitution of 
Central Advisory Committee/  State Advisory Committee/  Expert Committees/ 
State Advisory Board . As per the Act the Central Advisory Committee shall 
meet atleast once in six months, however , there is no frequency prescribed in 
the Central Rules in respect of the State Advisory Committees. 
2.2 As per the information furnished by the Ministry the State -wise 
information in respect of the meetings of State Advisory Committee held by the 
respective States so far is awaited from the States. 
2.3 As regards constitution of State Advisory Committees /Boards, the 
Ministry have informed that  the State Advisory Committees have been 
constituted except the State of Karnataka and Telangana. 
2.4 During evidence also the representatives of the Ministry stated as under: 
"Out of the 26 States including the Union Territories, all the States have 
notified the rules. they are supposed to notify the rules and all the States 
have also constituted the boards. The Cess Collection Authority 
notification has been done by all the States except Manipu r. The 
Advisory Committee has been constituted by all the States except 
Karnataka and Telangana." 
 
2.5 The Committee note that after the promulgation of the 
Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 , the 
implementation of the Act  was started after the year 2000  in some 
States and others followed suit late, i.e.  around 2007. The 

11 
 
Committee further note that there is no frequency prescribed under 
the Rules so formulated for meeting  of the State Advisory 
Committees. They feel that in the absence of any set timeline for 
meeting, the purpose of constitution of State Advisory Committees 
got defeated . They, therefore, recommend that as prescribed for 
Central Advisory Committee to meet twice a year , the same should 
be made mandatory for the State Advisory Committees also so that 
the agenda before them should be cleared atleast within six months. 
II. REGISTRATION OF WORKERS 
2.6 As per Section 10 of BOCW Act, 1996 every building worker who has 
completed eighteen years of age, but has not completed sixty years of age, and 
who has been engaged in any building or other construction work for not  less 
that ninety days during the preceding twelve months shall be eligible for 
registration as a beneficiary under this Act. 
2.7 During evidence the representatives of the Ministry informed as under: 
"In all, the country has around 4.6 crore building and construction workers. 
Each of the State is supposed to register these workers  and then utilize the 
money for the welfare of registered these workers  and their families. As on date, 
the State have registered 2.5 crore building and construction workers." 
2.8 The Committee while examining the subject , for exemplification , had 
randomly selected and  called the representatives from three States i.e. 
Haryana, Rajasthan and Maharashtra for assessing progress/implementation 
of the Act. In the State of Haryana total number of 6,71,276 workers have been 
registered upto the year 2016 -17, in Rajasthan 15,22,659 workers have been 

12 
 
registered upto 31st March, 2017 and in Maharashtra 5,93,413 workers have 
been registered upto the year 2016-17. 
2.9 The Ministry of Labour & Em ployment while furnishing the State -wise 
number of workers enrolled under the BOCW Act (Annexure-I) informed that 
the estimation of construction workers made by the NSSO is not based on the 
eligibility conditions prescribed under Section 12 of the BOCW Act. Under 
Section 12 of the Act every building worker who is between the age of 18 and 
60 years and who has been engaged in any building or other construction work 
for not less than 90 days during the last 12 months , is eligible for registration 
as a beneficiary. 
2.10 The Committee note that the primary work relating to 
registration of workers has not been given the desired 
priority/seriousness by the Ministry and the BOCW Boards . While 
tendering evidence before the Committee, Secretary, Labour had 
also admitted that there are around 4.6 crore construction workers 
whereas only 2.5 crore workers have been registered . The 
Committee also opine that the estimated figures are based on th e 
survey conducted by NSSO and not on the eligibility conditions 
prescribed under Section 12 of the BOCW Act.  They, therefore, 
opine that the number of workers would be much more than the 
estimated ones. They are not happy with the pace of registration of 
construction workers  by the implementing agencies of the Act. 
They, therefore, desire that the States may be persuaded to 

13 
 
cover/register the estimat ed number of construction workers in 
their respective States. 
2.11 The Committee note that the Ministry are relying upon the 
figure of estimated number of workers in construction industry 
based on Fifth Employment-Unemployment Survey (EUS) conducted 
in the year 2015 -16, which shows decline in the number of workers 
registered in fourth EUS  conducted in 2013 -14. The Committee are 
of the view that the construction activities all over the Country 
have increased consi derably during the given period, hence the 
decline in number of workers could be erroneous . They, therefore, 
desire that the implementing agencies may be directed to provide 
realistic figures so that the intended benefits may reach the 
ultimate beneficiary. 
2.12 The Committee find that there is no separate mention about 
the n aka workers. As per the provisions of the Act  the eligibility 
criteria to be registered as construction worker is a person who  is 
18-60 years of age and has been engaged in any building or other 
construction work for not less tha n ninety days during the 
preceding twelve months and he shall be eligible for registration as a 
beneficiary under this Act . The Committee note that regarding 
certification of construction workers, guidelines have been issued by 

14 
 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment according to which the 
States shall authorize  all Gram Panchayats and Municipalities also 
to register construction workers under the Act. In addition, 
Assistant/Junior Engineers of the various Engineering Departments 
like PWD, Irrigation , Water Supply, Power etc. shall also be given 
power to registe r workers under BOCW (RECS) Act.  The Committee 
opine that the naka workers who are not able to prove their days of 
working and are ignorant of the guidelines issued by the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment in this regard may be guided by 
print/electronic m edia/CBWE to register themselves as 
construction workers and benefits thereof may also be publicized. 
2.13 The Committee note that majority of workers engaged in 
Building and Other Construction activities are migrant s. As such 
they do not possess necessary  documents required for registration, 
leading to less number of regist rations. Moreover, either the 
contractors or the workers do not come forward for their 
registration. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the BOCW 
Board may initiate action to contac t the State Labour Authorities , 
who usually visit  the construction sites for  implementation of 
labour laws, to have information about the registration of workers at 
those sites. The Committee also recommend that the Labour I-Cards 

15 
 
be seeded with Adhaar Cards to avoid duplication of registration of 
those workers.  The Committee further desire that wherever found 
necessary, Adhaar camps may also be organised for facilitation of 
issuance of Adhaar Cards for th e workers who do not posses s the 
same.  
2.14 The Committee find that as of now there is no proper 
mechanism available for giving publicity to the ongoing  welfare 
schemes meant  for the construction workers by the BOCW Board. 
They attribute this as one of the reasons for low registration of 
workers as most of the workers are migrant, illiterate and ignorant 
about the benefits of the schemes available for them. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that wide publicity be given to 
the welfare schemes and the benefits of registering as a 
construction worker so that workers may come forward on their own 
for registration. They also  desire that the contractors of big 
construction sites be encouraged to publicise the benefits of 
registration amongst the workers and also try to get each and every 
construction worker engaged by him/her  registered. The Committee 
further desire that information centers be set up at the district level 
also. 

16 
 
2.15 The Committee note that the registration of construction 
workers is being done manually which is time -consuming and   
results in low registration.  Thus a strong IT platform needs to be 
developed by the Ministry.  Besides these workers are required for 
renewal of registration after every  one or three years as per the 
requirement of BOCW Board. Hence, doing the work of 
registration/renewal increases many fold.  The Committee found  
that the system of registration of construction workers followed by 
Rajasthan was more practical , where the dual system of online and 
offline registration is available.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
that other States  may also follow this system to reduce  the 
dependence on manual registration . A lso the registration /renewal  
should be done for three years. 
 III. BOCW SCHEMES 
2.16 As per Section 22 of BOCW Act, the functions of the Board is as under: 
"(1) The Board may— (a) provide immediate assistance to a beneficiary in case of 
accident;  
(b) make payment of pension to the beneficiaries who have completed the age of 
sixty years;  
(c) sanction loans and advances to a beneficiary for construction of a house not 
exceeding such amount and on such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed;  

17 
 
(d) pay such amount in connection with premia for Group Insurance Scheme of 
the beneficiaries as may be prescribed;  
(e) give such financial assistance for the education of children of the 
beneficiaries as may be prescribed;  
(f) meet such medical expenses for  treatment of major ailments of a beneficiary 
or, such dependant, as may be prescribed;  
(g) make payment of maternity benefit to the female beneficiaries; and  
(h) make provision and improvement of such other welfare measures and 
facilities as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Board may grant loan or subsidy to a local authority or an employer in 
aid of any scheme approved by the State Government for the purpose connected 
with the welfare of building workers in any establishment.  
(3) The Board may pay annually grants-in-aid to a local authority or to an 
employer who provides to the satisfaction of the Board welfare measures and 
facilities of the standard specified by the Board for the benefit of the building 
workers and the members of their family, so, however t hat the amount payable 
as grants -inaid to any local authority or employer shall not exceed — (a) the 
amount spent in providing welfare measures and facilities as determined by the 
State Government or any person specified by it in this behalf, or (b) such 
amount as may be prescribed. whichever is less: Provided that no grant -in-aid 
shall be payable in respect of any such welfare measures and facilities where the 
amount spent thereon determined as aforesaid is less than the amount 
prescribed in this behalf. 
2.17 Further the Act provides that "Nothing contained in this Act shall affect 
the operation of any corresponding law in a State providing welfare schemes 
which are more beneficial to the building and other construction workers than 
those provided for them by or under this Act." 
2.18 The Committee note that the welfare Schemes to be run under 
the BOCW Welfare Cess Act, 1996, differ from State to State . The 
Committee desire that the welfare schemes under the Act should be 

18 
 
structured by the Central Gove rnment/Ministry of Labour & 
Employment who is the custodian of the Act so that  a Pan -India 
uniformity may be maintained.  
2.19 The Committee note that as per the Act , State Governments 
are free to adopt the best of the schemes run under the BOCW Act 
or by the St ate Government in general. The Committee opine that 
this kind of arrangement would result in the inclusion of  
construction workers with other unorganised workers and the 
dedicated fund could be utilised by the State Governments for 
running the Schemes for all unorganised workers . The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Schemes meant for construction workers 
may be separated from the  other Schemes run by the State 
Governments. 
 
 
  

19 
 
Chapter-III 
COLLECTION OF CESS 
3.1 For the purposes of the Building and Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996, a cess has to 
be levied and collected at rate not exceeding two per cent but not less than one 
per cent of the cost  of construction incurred by an employer . The cess levied 
under sub-sec. (1) shall be collected from every employer including deduction 
at source in relation to a building or other construction work of a Government 
or of a public sector undertaking or adva nce collection through a local 
authority where an approval of such building or other construction work by 
such local authority is required, as may be prescribed. The proceeds of the cess 
collected under sub -sec. (2) shall be paid by the local authority or the State 
Government collecting the cess to the Board after deducting the cost of 
collection of such cess not exceeding one per cent of the amount collected. 
3.2 Time and manner of collection - The cess levied under Sub -sec. (1) of 
Sec. 3 of the Act shall b e paid by an employer, within thirty days of completion 
of the construction project or within thirty days of the date on which 
assessment of cess payable is finalized, whichever is earlier, to the cess 
collector. 
3.3 Transfer of the proceeds of the cess to the Board:-The proceeds of the 
cess collected under Rule 4 shall be transferred by such Government office, 
Public Sector Undertaking, local authority, or cess collector, to the Board 
alongwith the form of challan prescribed (and in the head of account of the 
Board) under the accounting procedures of the State, by whatever name they 
are known. Such government office of Public Sector Undertaking may deduct 
from the cess collected, or claim from the Board, as the case may be, actual 
collection of expenses not exceeding one per cent of the total amount collected. 

20 
 
The amount collected shall be transferred to the Board within thirty days of its 
collection. 
3.4 As per the definition of 'Building or Other Construction Work' the 
following areas are covered: 
"'building or other construction work ' means the construction, alteration, 
repairs, maintenance or demolition, of or, in relation to, buildings, streets, 
roads, railways, tramways, airfields, irrigation, drainage, embankment and 
navigation works, flood contr ol works (including storm water drainage works), 
generation, transmission and distribution of power, water works (including 
channels for distribution of water), oil and gas installations, electric lines, 
wireless, radio, television, telephone, telegraph an d overseas communications, 
dams, canals, reservoirs, watercourses, tunnels, bridges, viaducts, aquaducts, 
pipelines, towers, cooling towers, transmission towers and such other work as 
may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate Government, by notifi cation 
but does not include any building or other construction work to which the 
provisions of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), or the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 
1952), apply;" 
3.5 Further in regard to establishment the Act provides as under: 
"'establishment' means any establishment belonging to, or under the control of, 
Government, any  body corporate or firm, an individual or association or other 
body of individuals which or who employs building workers in any building or 
other construction work; and incl udes an establishment belonging to a 
contractor, but does not include an individual who employs such workers in any 
building or construction work in relation to his own residence the total cost of 
such construction not being more than rupees ten lakhs;" 
3.6 During evidence the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment informed the Committee as under: 
 "As on date, the State have registered 2.5 8 crore building and 
construction workers. they have collected Rs. 32, 632.96 and the amount that 
has been spent is only Rs. 7,516.52 crore. This figure is as on 31.03.2017." 
 

21 
 
 
3.7 The Committee note that except State of Manipur all the 
States/UTs have notified the Cess Collecting Authorities dating 
back to the year 1999 . However, in some States like Andhra 
Pradesh, Goa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Punjab, etc., the State 
Welfare Boards were constituted as late as 7 -8 yea rs after the 
notification of Cess  Collecting Bodies. The Committee further note 
that as per the provisions of the BOCW Act the proceeds o f cess 
collected under sub -section (2) shall be paid by the State Cess 
Collecting Authority to the Board within 30 days of its collection. 
The Committee apprehend that in the States , where the Welfare 
Boards were constituted on later dates, the amount of cess collected 
would not have  either been spent for welfare of construction 
workers or set aside for the specific purpose by the respective State 
Governments. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
may identify such States where the Welfare Boar ds were constituted 
after notification of Cess Collecting Authority. They further desire 
that each of such States may also be directed to provide details of 
the cess collected and deposited with them between the period of 
notification of cess collecting bo dies and constitution of the State 
Welfare Board. 

22 
 
3.8 The Committee note from the figures provided by the Ministry 
that till 31.03.2017 an amount of ₹ 32,632.96 crore  had been 
collected by the States on account of cess from the  works as defined 
in Para 3.4 . The Committee are of the opinion that during the 20 
years of promulgation of the Act , the figures of the  amount 
collected as  given by the Ministry does not match with the 
construction activities carried out. They also opine that the given  
amount could al one be of Railways /NHAI/PWD/CPWD. The 
Committee are of the view that had the cess been 
collected/deposited fairly, it could run into crores of rupees. They, 
therefore, desire that collection from each of the above source may 
thoroughly be checked and difference, if any, be collected and 
deposited with the State Welfare Boards. 
3.9 The Committee are concerned to note t hat there is no proper 
system of collection of Cess and its transfer to the State Welfare 
Boards.  They further note that all the States are having their own 
system for assessment/collection of Cess and transferring it to the 
State Welfare Boards.  The Com mittee opine that in the absence of 
any proper/fool proof system, there are chances of leakages.  They 
therefore, desire that a fool-proof and uniform system of assessment 
and collection of Cess and its transfer to State Welfare Boards may 

23 
 
be developed at the Central Level for implementation by the States.  
They also recommend that , if need be , a professional agency  be 
consulted for developing a software with an inbuilt provision of 
internal check at the earliest. 
3.10 The Committee note that as per the provisions of the Act all 
such construction activities incurring cost of above ₹ 10 lakh are 
bound to deposit cess @ 1% of the total construction cost. However, 
going through the collection, the Committee feel that fair c ollection 
of cess from private bodies is not properly done. They opine that 
due to some reason, collection from small builders/private owners is 
being ignored. They, therefore, desire that the construction 
activities be properly monitored so that the proportionate collection 
of cess may be enhanced. 
3.11 The Committee further recommend that the State Welfare 
Boards may have proper integration with the ESI C/EPFO for 
extracting the details of contractors engaged in construction 
activities for organised constr uction workers , and for unorganised 
construction workers , they should integrate with Labour 
Commissioners/Labour Offices to get the realistic data about the 
number of construction activities/construction workers under their 
jurisdiction.  

24 
 
3.12 The Committe e, while examining the subject , had noted that 
the model followed by Government of Rajasthan  appeared to be  
effective in implementation of the BOCW (RECS) A ct, 1996 and 
BOCW Welfare Cess, Act, 1996 . They, therefore, desire that the 
Rajasthan model may be taken as an example and the State Welfare 
Boards be advised to devise their own models based on the same . 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should tabulate the 
best practices from all the States and circulate it to all the 
States/UTs. 
3.13 The Committee note that there are several agencies 
responsible for assessment, collection and deposition of cess with 
the BOCW Board. In the given scenario , the Committee opine that  
there is a wider scope for more collection and less deposition of cess 
with the  BOCW Boards as there is no mechanism to monitor the 
collecting authorities. The Committee, therefore, desire that  a few 
States may be taken up for auditing the ir assessment of cess viz-a-
viz collection and deposition during atleast the last 2 to 5 years. 
3.14 The Committee note that there are no proper guidelines for 
keeping the collected cess by the BOCW Boards. The collected cess 
is either being kept in the form of fixed deposits or securities . The 
Committee recommend that  uniform guidelines fr om the Ministry 

25 
 
may be issued for management of cess fund so that every BOCW 
Board may keep the money according to the guidelines. 
II. UTILIZATION OF CESS 
3.15 As per Section 24(2)(a) of the Building and Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 mandates the 
Welfare Board to utilize the BOCW fund for discharging  the functions under 
Section 22, which reads as under: 
"(1) The Board may- 
 
(a)      provide immediate assistance to a beneficiary in case of accident; 
  
(b)      make payment of pension to the beneficiaries who have completed the 
age of sixty years; 
  
(c)     sanction loans and advances to a beneficiary for construction of a house 
not exceeding such amount and on such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed; 
  
(d)      pay such amount in connection with premia   for Group Insurance 
Scheme of the beneficiaries as it may deem fit; 
  
(e)      give such financial assistance for the education of children of the 
beneficiaries as may be prescribed; 
  
(f)       meet such medical expenses for treatment of major ailments of a 
beneficiary or, such dependant, as may be prescribed; 
  
(g)      make payment of maternity benefit to the female beneficiaries; and 
  
(h)      make provision and improvement of such other welfare measures and 
facilities as may be prescribed." 
 
 

26 
 
3.16 As per Section 24 of BOCW Act  
"(1) There shall be constituted by a Board a fund to be called the Building and other 
Construction Workers' Welfare Fund and there shall be credited thereto- 
  
(a)     any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government 
under section 23; 
  
(b)     all contributions made by the beneficiaries; 
  
(c)      all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be 
decided by the Central Government, 
  
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting- 
  
(a)      expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under section 22; 
and 
  
(b)      salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and 
other employees for the Board; 
  
(c)      expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act. 
  
(3) No Board shall, in any financial year, incur expenses towards salaries, allowances 
and other remuneration to its members, officers and other employees and for meeting 
the other admini strative expenses exceeding five percent of its total expenses during 
that financial year." 
 
3.17 Ministry in their Background Note furnished to the Committee have 
submitted that the implementation of BoCW Act, especially utilization of the 
cess fund collected under the BOCW Welfare Cess Act, 1996 has been under 
constant scrutiny of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in a PIL {W.P. (Civil) No. 
318/2006} filed before it by National Campaign Committee.  The Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court in its order dated 04.09.2015 observed that the expenditure 

27 
 
incurred by some of the State governments/ Union Territories is on 
advertisements and the Hon‟ble Supreme Court directed that amount so spent 
should be returned to the accounts BOCW Cess Fund. 
3.18 The Ministry have also submitted  that the directions issued under 
Section 60 of the Act, have not yielded the desired outcome which is reflected 
by accumulation of huge amount of cess fund with the Welfare Boards and  
inadequate provisions for safety, health, welfare and other conditions of service 
of the BOC workers. 
3.19 Considering the above, the Ministry of Labour and Employment issue d 
comprehensive sets of directions, superseding all the directions issued in the 
past, for utilization of the cess fund. Accordingly directions under Section 60 
were issued on 09.09.2015. In order to ensure proper utilization of BOCW Cess 
fund strictly in terms of the provisions of the Act, directions were given to the 
State governments / UT administrations vide para 5 of the order dated 
09.09.2015, as reproduced below:  
“………Any welfare scheme not in conformity with the provisions of the Act and 
being undertaken by any State/UT Govt./Welfare Board by way of utilizing 
BoCW Cess Fund would cease to exist with immediate effect. If any Welfare 
Board proposes to continue such scheme beyond the date of this Executive 
order, then the expenditure on the same have to be borne by the State/UT Govt. 
through its own resources…:" 
 
3.20 In addition to t he above directions under section 60, further directions 
were issued to the State Governments /UTs concerned on 23.9.15  by the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment . The relevant para 1(i) of the Order under 
section 60 dated 23.09.2015 reads as under:  
“….In ca se any amount of cess fund collected under BOCW Welfare Cess Act, 
1996 has been utilized forany purpose other than mandated under Section 22 of 
the BOCW (RECS) Act, 1996, it shall be the responsibility of the State 

28 
 
Government /UT Administration concerned to recoup such amount into the cess 
fund on immediate basis and furnish compliance report to this Ministry..”. 
3.21 State-wise position of number of workers registered, cess collected and 
amount spent under the BOCW Act, as furnished by the Ministry is placed at 
Annexure-I. 
3.22 The Committee note that against the collection of ₹ 32,632.96 
crore an amount of ₹ 7,516.52 crore ha d been spent by the 
States/UTs on various welfare Schemes meant for the BOC Workers . 
The Committee desire to be apprised of the details of expenditure 
incurred Scheme-wise by the respective State Governments/UTs. 
3.23 The Committee note that the State Governments/UTs have 
been able to utilise only 23% of the total cess collection during the 
last 20 years . The Committee are of the view that if those  States 
whose performance is good in utilisation of cess fund , be segregated 
from others, the utilisation would be dismal. The Committee desire 
that the performance of each State/UT be judged independently so 
that the Ministry may help less performing  States/UTs in finding 
the reasons for abysmal performance and encourage  them to utilise 
the collected funds. 
3.24 The Committee opine that the amount of ₹ 7,516.52 crore 
spent so far include 5% expenditure incurred on salaries, allowances 
and other remuneration of the members, officers and other 

29 
 
employees for the Board . The Committee are of the view that after 
deducting 5%, an amount of ₹ 7140.70 crore has been spent actually 
on the welfare of BOC Workers.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that expenditure on salaries, allowances and other 
remuneration of the members, offic ers and other employees for the 
Board need not be mixed with the expenditure incurred on welfare 
Schemes so that a real picture of the utilisation of funds may come 
out. 
3.25 The Committee observe that  as per the Hon'ble Supreme Court 
Order dated 04.09.2015  some of the State Governments/UTs have 
incurred expenditure on advertisements from the BOCW Cess fund . 
The Committee desire that such States/UTs be identified and the 
amount incurred on advertisements be verified and deposited with 
respective State Welfare Boards . They also desire that suitable 
advisory cautioning the State Governments/UTs for such type of 
misuse of cess fund be issued by the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment. 
3.26 The Committee note that the Ministry ha d issued directions 
under Section 60 to the States/UTs for deposition of amount 
utilised for any other purpose than the mandated under Section 22 
of the BOCW Act to be recovered from the authorities concerned 

30 
 
and deposit the same into the cess f und on immediate basis.  The 
Ministry have also  reportedly requested for furnishing the 
compliance report in this regard.  The Committee desire to be 
furnished with the details of expenditure incurred by the States/UTs 
on this account alongwith the details o f amount recovered and 
deposited with the State Welfare Boards and also a copy of the 
compliance report as furnished to the Ministry. 
 
  

31 
 
Chapter-IV 
APPEALS 
4.1 As regards appeals the Ministry in their written reply submitted that 
Section 11 of the BOCW Welfare Cess Act and Rule 14 of the BOCW Welfare 
Cess Rules, provide for appeal to the Appellate Authority by an employer 
aggrieved by an order of the assessment made. As such, the respective State 
Governments have to appoint an Appellate Authority for the  purpose.  The 
details of the Appellate Authority appointed by the states and the cases 
pending with them are not available as the information is not centrally 
maintained.  The information has been sought from the states and will be 
furnished as soon as the same is received. 
4.2 In this regard, Section 11 of the BOCW Welfare Cess Act reads as under 
"Appeals:- (1) Any employer aggrieved by any order of assessment made under 
section 5 or by an order imposing penalty made under section 9 may, within 
such time as may be prescribed, appeal to such appellate authority in such form 
and in such manner as may be prescribed. (2) Every appeal preferred under 
sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed. (3) 
After the receipt of any appeal unde r sub -section (1), the appellate authority 
shall, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard in the matter 
dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible. (4) Every order passed in 
appeal under this section shall be final and shall not be  called in question in 
any court of law." 
 
4.3 The Committee note that as of now the Ministry do not have 
any data regarding the cases pending with the appellate authorities 
as the appellate authorities are being appointed by the State 
Governments. The Com mittee apprehend that there may be cases 

32 
 
where the appellate authority would not have been appointed by the 
respective State Governments. They, therefore, desire that all the 
State Governments be persuaded to appoint appellate authorities as 
early as possible. 
4.4 The Committee apprehend that there may be under 
assessment or over assessment of the cess for which cases might 
have been registered/pending with the various appellate authorities. 
The Committee desire that such cases with the appellate authoritie s 
may be enquired into so that the manipulations of various 
under/over assessments could be ascertained and the difference in 
the amount of cess collected may be deposited with the BOCW 
Board.  
II. PENALTY 
4.5 As per Section 8 of the Building And Other Construction Workers' 
Welfare Cess Act, 1996  "if any employer fails to pay any amount of cess 
payable under section 3 within the time specified in the order of assessment, 
such employer shall be liable to pay interest on the amount to be paid at the 
rate of two per cent, for every month or part of a month comprised in the period 
from the date on which such payment is due till such amount is actually paid." 
 
4.6 As regards penalty for non-payment of cess within the specified time, the 
Act reads "i f any amount of cess payable by any employer under section 3 is 
not paid within the date specified in the order of assessment made under 

33 
 
section 5, it shall be deemed to be in arrears and the authority prescribed in 
this behalf may, after making such inqui ry as it deems fit, impose on such 
employer a penalty n ot exceeding the amount of cess ,  provided that, before 
imposing any such penalty, such employer shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and if after such hearing the said authority is 
satisfied that the default was for any good and sufficient reason, no penalty 
shall be imposed under this section". 
 
4.7 When asked about the availability of penalty provision in the Act for the 
Cess Collecting Authority who do not deposit  the proceeds with the respective 
State Welfare Boards  within a period of 30 days as prescribed under the Act , 
the Ministry stated that "there is no penalty provision in the BOCW Welfare 
Cess Act, 1996 for delay caused in remittance of cess to the Welfare Cess Fund 
by the authority collecting the Cess". 
 
4.8 The Committee note that the cess collecting authorities have 
to transfer the cess collection to the State Welfare Boards within a 
period of 30 days. The Committee find that t hough there is a 
provision in the Act for penalty for non-payment of cess by the 
employer, h owever, the BOCW Act is silent about the penalty 
provision for th ose cess collecting authorities  who do not deposit 
the cess proceeds with the State Welfare Boards within 30 days. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that a penalty provision must be spelt 
out so that the cess proceeds may be deposited with the Welfare 
Boards within the prescribed time period. 

34 
 
III. ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
4.9 As per Section 20 of the BOCW Act " (1) The Board shall maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of 
accounts in such form as may be prescribed in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed 
by him in connection with the auditing of the accounts of the Board under this 
Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection 
with such audit as the Comptroller and the Auditor -General of India has in 
connection with the auditing of the Government accounts and in particular 
shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the Board under this Act.  
(3) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India annually and any expenditure incurred in connection with 
such audit shall be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India.  
(4) The Board shall furnish to the State Government before such date as may 
be prescribed its audited copy of accounts together with the auditor„s report.  
(5) The State Government shall cause the annual report and auditor„s report to 
be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before the State Legislature." 
4.10 The Ministry in their Background Note have stated that the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court vide Order dated 17.02.2017 has involved CAG to assist the 
Hon'ble court for the purpose of scrutiny of cess collection and expenditure. the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court vide the last Order dated 8.5.2017 has requested CAG 
to file a tabular chart containing the following details in respect of each State 
Government and Union Territory: 

35 
 
(i) The amount that has been col lected under the BOCW Welfare Cess Act, 
1996 since the enactment of the Act, i.e., 1996 until 31st March, 2017. 
(ii) The amount collected over the years and which has been transferred to 
the BOCW Welfare Board should also be indicated as on 31st March, 2017. 
(iii) If there is any amount which has been collected, but not yet transferred 
to the aforesaid Board shall be transferred within a period of six weeks from 
today. 
4.11 The Committee note that as per the mandate of the Act all the 
BOCW Welfare Boards sh all furnish an audited copy of acc ounts 
together with the auditor' s report to the State Government. 
However, taking note of the intervention of Hon'ble Supreme Court, 
the Committee cannot but believe that the State Welfare Boards had 
not adhered to the pro visions of the Act. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that each and every State/UT be directed to furnish its 
audited copy of accounts from the year the cess collection started , 
to the State Government as well as the Central Government for their 
consideration within three months. They also desire that from now 
onwards every State/UT be direct ed to furnish their audited report 
to the State/Central Government annually. 
4.12 The Committee note that Hon'ble Supreme Court had passed 
an order on 8.5.2017 requesting CAG to file a tabular chart, within a 
period of six weeks from the date of Order, containing (i) the 

36 
 
amount collected under BOCW Welfare Cess Act since the 
enactment o f the Act i.e., 1996 till 31st March, 2017, (ii) the 
amount collected and transferred to BOCW Board till 31st March, 
2017, and (iii) the amount which has been collected but not yet 
transferred to the Boards. The Committee desire to be apprised of 
the curre nt status in this regard. They also desire that the 
information furnished to the CAG may also be furnished to the 
Committee for their consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                  DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA      
3rd August, 2017                         CHAIRPERSON,  
12th Shravana, 1939 (Saka)      STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
  

37 
 
Annexure-I 
State-wise position of Number of Workers Registered,  Cess Collected and Amount Spent 
under the Building and Other Construction Workers Acts, 1996 
  As on  31.03.2017(Provisional) 
Sl. No. Name of the 
States/UTs. 
No. of workers 
registered with the 
Board 
Amount of cess 
collected               
(Rs. in Crore) 
Amount spent      
(Rs. in Crore) 
1 Andhra Pradesh  1,584,819 1153.61 205.46 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 18,443 65.36 51.60 
3 Assam  91,000 512.24 12.57 
4 Bihar  774,993 921.92 75.23 
5 Chhattisgarh  1,045,308 699.61 514.14 
6 Goa  1,881 85.68 0.83 
7 Gujarat 454,929 1564.64 35.00 
8 Haryana  671,276 1847.05 172.07 
9 Himachal Pradesh 108,642 335.39 44.49 
10 J&K 316,098 566.00 221.00 
11 Jharkhand 580,634 291.28 143.46 
12 Karnataka  1,074,000 3861.00 240.00 
13 Kerala  1,563,204 1474.73 1455.88 
14 Madhya Pradesh  2,653,163 1575.62 552.04 
15 Maharashtra  593,413 5074.16 255.50 
16 Manipur 48,000 21.00 10.99 
17 Meghalaya  6,234 94.83 1.09 
18 Mizoram 21,865 40.37 21.95 
19 Nagaland 4,418 20.06 3.34 
20 Odisha  1,783,757 1100.00 361.00 
21 Punjab  565,640 921.55 391.61 
22 Rajasthan  1,522,659 1600.00 620.00 
23 Sikkim  24,638 64.67 20.68 
24 Tamil Nadu  2,645,208 1706.00 600.00 
25 Telangana 892,991 443.12 98.69 
26 Tripura  73,668 129.28 12.36 
27 Uttar Pradesh  3,214,555 2943.80 598.90 
28 Uttarakhand 163,610 170.41 31.21 
29 West  Bengal 2,881,225 1149.12 531.42 

38 
 
30 Delhi  364,974 1930.00 174.71 
31 A & N Island  13,710 46.42 3.91 
32 Chandigarh  17,162 96.09 3.72 
33 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 472 3.08 0.00 
34 Daman and Diu 919 37.17 0.54 
35 Lakshadweep  176 5.66 0.00 
36 Puducherry 40,755 82.04 51.13 
Total 25,817,780 32632.96 7516.52 
 
 
 
 
   
  

39 
 
    Appendix-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on  Thursday, the 20th April, 2017 from 1500 hrs. to 
1620 hrs. in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Kirit Somaiya    –    CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Ashok Dohare 
  4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
  5. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  6. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  7. Dr. Arun Kumar 
  8. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  9. Shri Hari Manjhi 
  10. Shri R. Parthipan 
  11. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
      
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  12. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  13. Shri P.L. Punia 
  14. Shri Rajaram 
  15. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
  16. Ms Dola Sen 
  17. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
         
   
   SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad - Joint Secretary 
  2. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director 
  3. Shri K.C. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary 
   
  

40 
 
 
Witnesses 
Representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
 
1. Shri Heera Lal Samariya Additional Secretary 
 
2. Shri Arun Goel Additional Secretary & Financial 
Advisor 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Nayak CLC(C) 
 
4. Shri Rajit Punhani Joint Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, t he Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labour &  Employment (MoLE) to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to have briefing by the representatives of the Ministry on 'Cess Funds 
and their utilisation for workers' welfare' . The Chairperson then drew attention 
of the representatives to Direction 5 8 of th e 'Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee during deposition 
before the Parliamentary Committees. He then asked the representative of  
Ministry of Labour Employment, to give an overview of subject. 
3. The representative of the Ministry,  accordingly, briefed the Committee  
inter-alia highlighting the Cess collection (BEEDI/CINE/IOMC/ 
LSDM/MICA/BOCW), rates of Cess that used to be imposed on various items, 
mechanism of cess collection & accounting before the introduction of the 
Finance Bill (2016 -17), Benefits under the scheme 'financial assistance for 
education', etc.  The  representatives of the Ministry also responded to various 
queries raised by the Members which inter-alia included status of Cess funds 
for Beedi workers after promulgation of GST Bill,  number of workers, large gap 
between the cess collected and expenditure incurred on building/construction 

41 
 
workers, number of workers registered on State Welfare Board, monitoring 
mechanism in the Ministry of Labour & Employment etc.  
4. As some points required detailed reply, the Chairperson asked the  
representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment  to furnish written 
replies thereon and Committee decided to take another meeting on same 
subject on 23rd M ay, 2017 with appropriate figures to be supplied by the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
PART-II 
XX   XX   XX   XX   XX  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
________________________________________________________________________ 
XX Does not pertain to this Report. 
  

42 
 
Appendix-II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on  Tuesday, the 23rd May, 2017 from 1130 hrs. to 
1330 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Kirit Somaiya    –    CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Diwakar 
  3. Shri Ashok Kumar Dohrey 
  4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
  5. Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud 
  6. Shri C.N. Jayadevan 
  7. Shri Bahadur Singh Koli 
  8. Dr. Arun Kumar 
  9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
  10. Shri Hari Manjhi 
  11. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  12. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
  13. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
      
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
  14. Shri Rama Narayan Dudi 
  15. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  16. Shri P.L. Punia 
  17. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
  18. Ms. Dola Sen 
  19. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
  20. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
  21. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan 
        
   SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad - Joint Secretary 
  2. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director 
  3. Smt. Archana Srivastva - Under Secretary 
 

43 
 
WITNESSES 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Smt. M. Sathiyavathy Secretary 
2. Shri Arun Goel Addl. Secretary & Fin. Advisor 
3. Shri Rajit Punhani Joint Secretary 
4. Shri A Alexander Additional Labour Commissioner 
5. Shri S.C. Goyal Addl. CPFC 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVT. OF MAHARASHTRA 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Y.E. Kerure Labour Commissioner 
2. Shri A.P. Vidhale Joint Secretary 
3. Shri S.C. Shrirangam CEO 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVT. OF HARYANA 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Vijai Vardhan Add. Chief Secretary 
2. Shri Pankaj Agarwal Labour Commissioner cum Secy. 
3. Shri Rohit Beri Assistant Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVT. OF RAJASTHAN 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Dr. Prithvi Raj Labour Commissioner 
 
2. At the outset, t he Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and the representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment and 
representatives of State Governments of Haryana, Rajasthan and Maharashtra 

44 
 
to the sitting of the Committee , convened to take evidence on the subject on 
'Cess Funds and their utilisation for workers' welfare'. The Chairperson then 
drew attention of the representatives to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the 
Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee during 
deposition before the Parliamentary Committees. He then as ked Secretary, 
MoLE and the representatives of the State Governments of Haryana, Rajasthan 
and Maharashtra to give an overview of the Subject matter. 
3. The Secretary, MoLE accordingly briefed the Committee on various 
aspects of the subject and Director General, Labour Welfare gave a PowerPoint 
Presentation which inter-alia included provisions of Building and Other 
Construction Workers' Welfare Cess (BOCW) Ac t, 1996; Hon'ble Supreme 
Court's  directions dated 16.10.2015 regarding compliance of BOCW Act; State-
wise position of number of workers registered, cess collected and amount spent 
under BOCW Act. The Addl. Chief Secretary, Govt. of Haryana and Labour 
Commissioner, Govt. of Maharashtra also gave PowerPoint Presentation. 
Representatives of all the three States briefed the Committee on various 
aspects which inter-alia included constitution of BOCW Welfare Boards in their 
States; year -wise details of workers r egistered; year -wise details of cess 
collection and details of expenditure; systems in place for collection and 
assessment of cess funds, etc. Thereafter, the Members raised queries on 
various issues which, inter-alia, included reasons for slow pace of uti lisation in 
Haryana; Aadhar linking system for registration of those labours who 
frequently migrate from Haryana; reasons for low registration in Maharashtra; 
coverage of unorganised building and construction workers; reasons for low 
expenditure in Maharas htra; online and offline registration in Rajasthan; 
status of bank accounts of registered beneficiaries in Rajasthan; etc. On the 
matter regarding assistance being given for the marriage of daughters of Beedi 
Workers, which was enhanced to Rs. 25000/ - on the recommendation of the 
Committee, again been shown as Rs. 5000/-, the representative of the Ministry 
assured to check the same and revert. The representatives of the Ministry of 

45 
 
Labour & Employment and the State Governments responded to other queries 
of the Members. 
4. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and  briefing them on the subject as well as responding to the 
queries raised.  The Chairperson  directed the Secretary, MoLE and the 
representatives of the State Governm ents to furnish written replies within 10  
days in respect of those queries, for which information was not readily available 
with them during the meeting as well as which required detailed and statistical 
information. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

46 
 
Appendix-III 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2016-17) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-Fifth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3rd August, 2017 from 1700 hrs. to 
1730 hrs. in Committee Room  'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Dr. Kirit Somaiya    –    CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
  3. Shri Hariom Singh Rathore 
  4. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania  
               
   RAJYA SABHA 
          
  5. Shri Ram Narayan Dudi 
  6. Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway 
  7. Shri P.L. Punia 
  8. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
  9. Ms. Dola Sen 
  10. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
  11. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
        
   SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Ms. Rimjhim Prasad - Joint Secretary 
  2. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director 
  3. Shri K.C. Pandey          - Deputy Secretary 
                   4.       Smt Archana Srivastva  -       Under Secretary 
   
 

47 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of Draft Report on the 
subject 'Cess Funds and their Utilisation for Workers' Welfare'. Giving an 
overview of the Recommendations made in the Draft Re port,  the Chairperson 
requested the Members to give their suggestions on them, if any. 
3. The Committee, then, took up the Draft Report on the subject 'Cess 
Funds and their Utilitstion for Workers' Welfare' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Labour and Employm ent for consideration and adopted the same with minor 
additions/modifications. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present t he Report to 
both the Houses. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 