 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
Action Taken by the Government 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
(2023-24) of the Ministry of Textiles
FORTY
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
July, 202
47 
i 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
Ministry of Textiles. 
 
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI   
, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  on the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Demands for Grants 
(Saka)  

 
FORTY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
Action Taken by the Government 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty
Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2023-24) of the Ministry of Textiles.
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
ii 
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty
Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Textiles. 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.07.202
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.07.2023
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL on the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants .2023 3 July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)  

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report  
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which  replies of the Government  are interim 
in nature    
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix- I* Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on           
17th July, 2023. 
 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Forty-Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
 
 * Not appended with this cyclostyled copy. 
  
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
5. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
6. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
7. Shri Bache Gowda B.N. 
8. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
9. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
10. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
11. Shri Pakauri Lal 
12. Prof. Sanjay Sadashivrao Mandlik 
13. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori  
14. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
15. Dr. D. Ravikumar 
16. Shri Naba (Hira) Kumar Sarania 
17. Shri Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Nayab Singh 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan 
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24.  Shri R. Dharmar 
25. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
26.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
27.  Ms. Dola Sen 
28.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
29. Shri Shibu Soren 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.     Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  -  Additional Secretary 
 2  Shri Sanjay Sethi   - Director 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2022-23) having been authorized by the Committee, present on 
their behalf this Forty-Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Forty-Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-
24) of the Ministry of Textiles. 
2. The Forty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 13th March, 2023. The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies on 
1st June, 2023 indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report. The Committee 
considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 17th July, 
2023.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
17 July, 2023                                   CHAIRPERSON 
26 Ashadha, 1944 (Saka )                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty–
Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of 
the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Forty–Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 13th March, 2023. It contained 25 Observations/ Recommendations. 
Replies of Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been 
received and are categorized as under:- 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government – Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
18, 19, 20, 23, 24 and 25 
 
Chapter-II 
Total:23 
Percentage: 
92.00 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply –  Nil 
 
Chapter-III 
Total:00 
Percentage: 00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Nil 
 
Chapter-IV 
Total:00 
Percentage: 00 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature - Rec. Para Nos. 21 and 22 
 
Chapter-V 
Total:02 
Percentage: 8.00 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action 
taken reply in respect of the Recommendation contained in Chapter V of 
this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the Government, be 
furnished to them at the earliest. 

2 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/ Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit 
further comments. 
I. OVERALL FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
5. In their Forty-Second Report, the Committee noted that in 2022-23, the 
allocation at the RE stage was reduced to Rs. 3,579.61 crore vis-à-vis the BE of 
Rs. 12,382.14 crore. The allocation was slashed down by a substantial extent 
owing to the lower requirement for Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) for 
carrying out market support operations by way of extending Minimum Support 
Price (MSP) to cotton farmers. Since the seed cotton prices were ruling above 
MSP levels and farmers were getting higher prices for their cotton in the 
market, the BE allocation for the year was cut down by more than Rs.8,400 
crore and surrendered at the stage of RE in 2022-23. The Committee noted 
that the total expenditure of the Ministry in 2022-23 as on 14 February, 2023 
was only Rs.2,919.63 crore as against the RE amount of Rs.3,579.61 crore. 
The Ministry, however, assured utilization of the entire allocated RE amount by 
the end of FY 2022-23. The Committee expected the Ministry to make 
concerted efforts and honour their commitment for optimal utilisation of the 
2022-23 RE allocation.  
6. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“Against the total allocation of Rs. 3579.61 crore in RE 2022-23, the 
Ministry of Textiles at the close of FY 2022-23, were able to utilize Rs. 3379.24 
crore or 94.40% of the revised estimates of the year. In line with the 
recommendations of the Committee, concerted efforts were made to utilize the 
entire funds made available in the revised estimates. Regular monitoring of 
expenditures and measures to remove bottlenecks in absorption of funds (by 
the implementing agencies) through monitoring of unspent balances etc. were 
constantly undertaken, particularly during the last quarter and month of the 
year. Finance Wing and the Secretary, Textiles also constantly monitored the 
progress through weekly senior officers’ meetings. However, the constraints of 
unspent balances at the field levels primarily led to a shortfall in full utilization 
of the revised budget. The issues and challenges arising in FY2022-23 shall be 
kept in view during FY2023-24, to enable optimal utilization of funds in terms 
of the Committee’s recommendations.” 
 
7. The Committee noted that at the end of the Financial Year, the unutilized 
amount of allocated funds under a scheme is diverted to other schemes with 
higher demands/absorptive capacities. Since the very purpose of the budgetary 
allocation for a particular scheme is defeated if funds are diverted to some 

3 
 
other Scheme, the Committee recommended that the Ministry should take 
cogent and prudent measures to stop the off-repeated phenomenon. 
8. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for avoiding savings 
under schemes, that primarily leads to re-appropriation to schemes with higher 
absorptive capacity. However, in terms of the existing budgetary procedures, in 
case of additional requirements under any scheme/project during a year, the 
Ministry of Finance needs to reallocate funds from within the Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry, to the extent possible, before providing additional funds 
through supplementary demands. The Committee’s recommendations for 
optimal utilization of the budget/funds available for specific schemes, are 
however, well noted for compliance.” 
 
9. The Committee are appreciative of the fact that the Ministry have 
leveraged their performance in utilizing the budgetary allocations by 
expending 94.40% of the revised estimates during 2022-23.  The 
Committee desire that the Ministry keep up the momentum in the 
coming years as well which would facilitate in getting the requisite 
allocations from the Ministry of Finance for modernization and 
development of textile sector. The Committee also desire that the 
constraints faced at the field level, which led to shortfall in utilization of 
the revised estimates under some schemes, be addressed expeditiously so 
as to optimally achieve the financial targets in future.    
10. The Committee also take note of the submission of the Ministry on 
the practice of shifting of unutilized funds from one scheme to another at 
the close of the Financial Year in case of additional requirements under 
any Scheme/Project. The Committee trust that the stipulations of the 
General Financial Rules, and the norms/guidelines/prescribed by the 
Ministry of Finance in regard to diversion of funds from one scheme to 
another that may have a better absorptive capacity are strictly adhered to 
in such cases. 
 
 
 

4 
 
II. COTTON SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
11. In their earlier Report, the Committee noted that for providing 
competitive advantage to the domestic textile industry in producing best quality 
cotton yarn in particular, a scheme was proposed in the Budget 2023-24 based 
on PPP model for enhancing the productivity of extra long staple cotton. The 
detailed scheme is to be framed by Ministry of Agriculture in consultation with 
Ministry of Textiles, ICAR-CICR, Research Institutions, industry, farmers and 
other stake holders.  For benefitting the cotton sector and the Textile industry 
as a whole by way of giving a boost to niche Textile products and exports, the 
Committee desired that the contours of the scheme be worked out and 
implemented in a time bound manner.  
12. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“For scaling up promising technologies and improving cotton productivity, a 
Cotton Pilot Project ‘Targeting technologies to agro-ecological zones- large scale 
demonstrations of best practices to enhance cotton productivity’ in PPP mode 
with focus on Extra Long Staple cotton and upland cotton is prepared by ICAR-
Central institute for Cotton Research, Nagpur in collaboration with Department 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW). The project is proposed to be 
implemented in 286 clusters & 57 districts of 8 states in an area of 15358 
Hectares with an amount of Rs. 4186.85 lakhs through public private 
partnership with Confederation of Indian Textile Industry -Cotton Development 
& Research Association (CITI-CDRA), Southern India Mills Association-Cotton 
Development & Research Association (SIMA-CDRA).”  
13. The Committee desire that the Ministry coordinate with all agencies 
concerned and seek their cooperation so as to ensure implementation of 
the Cotton Pilot Project in a time bound manner and thereby achieve the 
objectives of the Scheme. This is essential considering the fact that the 
Project is proposed to be implemented in as many as 8 States in an area 
covering 15358 Hectares and an expenditure of Rs. 4186.85 lakh through 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) route with CITI-CDRA & SIMA-CDRA; and 
the Ministry of Textiles is the nodal agency responsible for improving 
cotton productivity and other related issues of Cotton Sector. 
 
 
 

5 
 
III. CONCESSIONAL CREDIT/WEAVERS’ MUDRA LOAN SCHEME 
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
14. In their earlier Report, the Committee noted that under Concessional 
Credit/Wavers’ Mudra Loan Scheme which is a component of National 
Handloom Development Programme, the amount released was to the extent of 
Rs.10 crore in 2020-21 and Rs.15 crore in 2021-22. The physical target for 
both the years was 50,000 beneficiaries. There was an amount of Rs.8 crore 
sanctioned in 2022-23 under this Scheme and Rs.0.14 crore was sanctioned 
under Handloom Weaver’s Welfare Scheme in 2022-23. The Committee were 
constrained to find that the loan amount availed varied to a great extent from 
one State to another. While the number of loanees as well as the loan amount 
sanctioned was significantly high in States such as Tamil Nadu, Andhra 
Pradesh and Telangana, it was very meagre in States like Punjab, Rajasthan, 
West Bengal. The Committee, therefore, urged upon the Ministry to ascertain 
the reasons for this variation and desired the Ministry to make concerted 
efforts to create awareness about this Scheme in the rural and semi-rural parts 
of the Country where these handloom clusters are located by involving local 
village heads and self help groups. The Committee appreciated the efforts of the 
Ministry for proposing to run a special drive for MUDRA Loans and desired that 
the special drive in coordination with State Level Bankers' Committee (SLBC) 
and District Level Bankers’ Committee (DLBC) be carried out without any 
delay.  
15. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“An amount of Rs.8.00 crore was sanctioned during the FY 2022-2023 under 
Concessional Credit/Weaver MUDRA Scheme, a component of National 
Handloom Development Programme (NHDP).  
       As far as variation of loan amounts sanctioned to beneficiaries from one 
State to another is concerned, it is due to the Scheme being voluntary. 
Beneficiaries are required to approach participating banks concerned for 
availing the MUDRA loan along-with required documents as per banking 
norms. On receipt of viable application, banks are sanctioning loan to 
handloom beneficiaries. Due to inaction on the part of bank/ lack of awareness 
about the scheme at the branch level, weavers are not coming forward for 
getting MUDRA loan.  
       However, this office has written letters to all banks to take the following 
steps expeditiously, to extend the scheme benefits to higher number of 
handloom beneficiaries across the country: - 
• Bank branches should be sensitized about the scheme and asked to register 
on the portal. 

6 
 
• Once bank branches are registered on the portal, they should ensure to lodge 
the claims in respect of margin money assistance, interest subsidy and credit 
guarantee fee through the portal. 
• Timely sanction/disbursement of loan to the handloom weavers. 
• Make aware the participating banks to sanction fresh loan to the handloom 
weavers, who availed the loan in past and have re-paid. 
      In addition, this office is regularly approaching to States/UTs Govt. to 
conduct awareness camps/chaupals with close coordination with field offices of 
this office i.e. Weaver Service Centres to create awareness amongst the weavers 
and sensitize the scheme benefits across the country.” 
 
16. The Committee are concerned to note that owing to inaction on the 
part of Banks and lack of awareness about the “Concessional 
Credit/Wavers’ Mudra Loan Scheme”, weavers are not coming forward to 
avail MUDRA loans. Although the Ministry has taken up the matter with 
the Banks, the Committee desire the Ministry to also approach the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) for issuing 
appropriate instructions to the Banks sensitizing them about various 
provisions of the Scheme. The Committee also impress upon the Ministry 
to closely monitor the performance of the States/UTs through timely and 
regular interventions and ensure regular conduct of awareness 
campaigns/chaupals in the rural and semi-rural parts of the Country 
where handloom clusters are located and thereby contribute towards 
increased awareness amongst the weavers.  
17. The reply of the Ministry is silent on the issue of carrying out 
special drive for MUDRA Loans in coordination with State Level Bankers' 
Committee (SLBC) and District Level Bankers’ Committee (DLBC). This is 
despite the fact that an assurance to this effect was given by the 
representative of the Ministry while deposing before the Committee on 
20.02.2023 at the time of examination of Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry. The Committee desire that urgent action be taken by the 
Ministry in this regard.  
 
 

7 
 
IV. DEVELOPMENT OF SILK INDUSTRY IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION 
(Recommendation Para No. 15) 
18. In their earlier Report, the Committee noted that special focus had been 
given for development of sericulture in the North-Eastern Region. As informed 
by the Ministry, new sericulture projects are sanctioned in the North East with 
necessary budgetary provision. For development of silk industries in North-
Eastern Region, the actual expenditure incurred in 2020-21 was Rs. 54.25 
crore as compared to RE of Rs. 50.75 crore and BE of Rs. 63 crore; Rs. 61.54 
crore vis-à-vis RE amount of Rs. 68.12 crore in 2021-22 and Rs. 37.68 crore 
(as on 19.01.2023) as compared to RE amount of Rs. 75.36 crore in 2022-23. 
As per the Ministry’s submission, Rs. 20 crore of the BE amount of Rs. 67.99 
crore for 2023-24 was intended for ‘beneficiary oriented support component’. 
The Committee noted in this regard that in addition to the 38 projects for 
sericulture production that are continuing in the Region in 2022-23, and spill 
over of the projects from 2021-22, additional projects were in the pipeline for 
sanction for the North East in 2023-24. Further, for 2023-24, production target 
of 8,502 MT silk had been fixed for the North East. The Committee, therefore, 
desired that appropriate interventions be made for effective implementation of 
the schemes for promoting silk industry in the Region and achieving the targets 
set; and ensure that inadequacy of funds did not become a constraint in 
ensuring effective implementation of the scheme/projects in the Region. 
19. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“Adequate project proposals suiting the local requirements of NE States for 
sericulture development have been approved under Silk Samagra-2. Tentative 
fund requirement for these newly sanctioned projects in 2023-24 is pegged at 
Rs.70.27 crores. Besides, additional funds for the spillover activities of  projects 
under NERTPS, essentially for Eri Spun Silk Mills and large projects proposed 
by Assam, BTC and Manipur is estimated at Rs. 120 cr.  Subject to availability 
of funds, a total investment of around Rs.200 cr would be possible in NE states 
during 2023-24, for beneficiary oriented projects covering the entire 8 NE States 
and Autonomous Councils as well.   Ministry of Textiles on 20.03.2023  has 
referred CSB's proposal to MoDONER, for consideration of releasing additional 
fund amounting to Rs.116.14 crore to CSB(from 10% GBS of other Ministries to 
be re-appropriated by DoNER), beyond the Silk Samagra-2 budgetary 
allocation for 2022-23.” 
 
20. The Committee note that a total investment of around Rs.200 crore 
would be possible in NE States during 2023-24 for beneficiary oriented 
projects covering the entire 8 NE States and Autonomous Councils as 

8 
 
well. The Committee impress upon the Ministry to take up the matter 
with the Ministry of Finance with a sense of urgency and commitment so 
that additional funds could be made available at the stage of 
Supplementary Grants. The Committee further desire that the matter 
regarding release of additional funds of Rs.116.14 crore to Central Silk 
Board (CSB) from 10% Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) of other Ministries 
be pursued with the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region at 
the highest level so that the initiative taken by the Ministry/CSB to 
promote silk industry in NE region is drawn to its logical conclusion 
through timely completion of various ongoing/newly sanctioned projects 
during 2023-24. 
V. PM MEGA INTEGRATED TEXTILE REGION AND APPAREL (PM-
 MITRA) PARKS 
(Recommendation Para No. 17) 
21.    In their earlier Report, the Committee noted the PM-MITRA Scheme, 
announced in 2021-22 envisages in helping the country in achieving the 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 9 (Build resilient infrastructure, 
promote sustainable industrialization and foster innovation). To this end, the 
scheme aims to develop integrated large scale and modern industrial 
infrastructure facility for entire value-chain of the textile industry. No 
expenditure was booked under the scheme in the Financial Years 2021-22 and 
2022-23. For 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 200 crore had been allocated for the 
scheme. The Government had approved setting up 7 PM-MITRA Parks in 
partnership with the willing State Governments for which an outlay of Rs. 
4,445 crore was proposed. The Committee were apprised that 18 proposals for 
setting up PM MITRA Parks had been received from 13 State Governments and 
the process of finalisation of the sites for setting up the parks was in an 
advanced stage. The Committee were also apprised that the Government was in 
the process of doing ‘due diligence’ in regard to the proposals received from the 
State Governments and the process would be completed speedily. In view of the 
laudable objectives with which the scheme had been proposed, whereby the 
competitiveness of Indian textiles would be improved, logistic costs reduced, 
investment on large scale attracted, employment generated and the country 
facilitated in strongly positioning itself in the global textile market, the 
Committee once again urged upon the Ministry to diligently undertake the 
measures needed so that the scheme fructifies at an early date and the Mega 
Parks are set up. 

9 
 
22. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“MITRA Parks are being set up on the basis of proposals of state governments 
having ready availability of contiguous and encumbrance-free land parcel of 
1000+ acres.  The sites were selected by adopting a Challenge Method by 
including other key criteria of good connectivity to the nearest Port / Dedicated 
Freight Corridor / Industrial Corridor/Textiles Cluster, Reliable Power Supply 
and Water availability and Waste Water Disposal system; Willingness for 
relaxation in labour laws as per new Labour Code; Effective single window 
clearance, etc. A conducive and stable industrial/textile policy by State will also 
be a parameter for selection.State Government were requested to provide 
parameter wise details.  
  
Based on the information provided by the State, Project Approval Committee 
has taken a meeting on 07.03.2023 and discussed all the projects. The 
PAC  has finalized 7 sites viz. Tamil Nadu (Virudhnagar), Telangana (Warangal), 
Gujarat (Navsari), Karnataka (Kalaburagi), Madhya Pradesh (Dhar), Uttar 
Pradesh (Lucknow) and Maharastra (Amravati) for setting up PM MITRA Parks.” 
 
23. The Committee are happy to note that Project Approval Committee 
has finalised 7 sites viz. Tamil Nadu (Virudhnagar), Telangana (Warangal), 
Gujarat (Navsari), Karnataka (Kalaburagi), Madhya Pradesh (Dhar), Uttar 
Pradesh (Lucknow) and Maharashtra (Amravati) for setting up PM Mitra 
Parks.  The Committee urge the Ministry to maintain the momentum for 
setting up and making functional all 7 PM Mitra Parks in a time bound 
manner and thereby help in achieving the objectives that include inter-
alia employment generation, investment infusion and product 
diversification.  
VI. NATIONAL TEXTILE CORPORATION (NTC) 
(Recommendation Para No. 24) 
24.   The Committee had, in their 31st Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) 
of the Ministry inter-alia noted the fact that an amount of Rs. 1646.07 crore 
had been invested for the purpose of modernization of 23 existing mills under 
revival scheme for NTC. Further, the Committee had also taken note of the fact 
that the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) under Ministry of Finance 
formed a Sub-Committee comprising of Secretary, DPE; Secretary, Ministry of 
Textiles and an expert from NITI Aayog for assessing the feasibility of 
disinvestment of NTC mills.  As informed by the Ministry, the guidelines 
pertaining to the policy on Public Sector Enterprises (PSE) inter-alia propose 
discontinuation of operation of CPSEs in non-strategic areas, and the matter, 

10 
 
including the recommendations of the Sub-Committee are to be considered and 
decided upon by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs. In their Forty-
Second Report, the Committee also noted in this regard that the 23 mills, for 
revival of which a substantial amount was invested are no longer functional 
and had incurred a loss of about Rs. 210.18 crore in 2020-21 and the net loss 
incurred by NTC mills as a whole during the year, 2020-21, add up to Rs. 
329.32 crore. The Committee desired, in this regard, that issues concerning 
viability of the NTC mills be considered holistically keeping in view inter-alia the 
interest of the large work force of the NTC mills. Continued support of the 
Government for the livelihood of the work force of the mills by way of payment 
of pensionary benefits, salary dues, etc. will be a necessity. The Committee also 
highlighted the fact that as per the submission of the Ministry, the net worth of 
NTC is Rs. 920.10 crore and the corporation has a land bank of around 
3661.20 acres. The Committee wished to be apprised of the measures taken 
towards addressing issues pertaining to operation of NTC mills. 
25. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“The following action has been taken. The details are as under:- 
  
(i)      In accordance with the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction 
(BIFR) approval for revival scheme of National Textile Corporation Ltd. (NTC), till 
date Rs.1646.07 Crore has been invested in modernizing 23 existing Mills with 
different levels of modernizations. Despite such investment NTC continues to 
remain unviable entity.  The cash profit projected as per the scheme was in the 
range of Rs.300 crore per year, however, the company has sustained cash loss 
continuously from 2014-15 onwards, which increased from (-) Rs. 80.64 crore 
in 2015-16 to (-) Rs. 210.18 crore in the year 2020-21. 
  
(ii)      An analysis of the cost parameters, actually incurred by NTC during 
subsequent years vis-à-vis the BIFR projected parameters shows that, whereas 
the cost of raw materials as a percentage of turnover has remained nearby the 
BIFR projections, there have been large variations in respect of other cost 
parameters eg. Power, wages. Subsequently higher inputs costs, over that 
projected in BIFR Revival plan had resulted in the Company never been able to 
achieve operating profit even after substantial amount of investments during 
the past 10 years.  While the production cost had substantially increased in 
actual practice, over that of BIFR projection, the sale price of the products of 
NTC have not increased substantially in the market. This has led to continuous 
increase in losses. The average cost of production of yarn over last 3 years has 
substantially increased mainly due to high labour cost and high power cost in 
metro city like Mumbai & Kolkata, whereas average sale price of yarn in the 
market is much less. Similarly, the average cost price of cloth is higher against 
the sale price. The sales realisation as a percentage of cost price in NTC product 
is, thus 73-78 %, indicating a loss of Rs. 25 per every Rs.100 spent for 
production. This is not a viable commercial operational parameter for any 
business ventures, which has completely eroded the cash reserves of the 
company. 

11 
 
  
(iii)      In view of the above facts, matter is with Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) as per its new guidelines dated 13.12.2021 for 
implementation of New Public Sector Enterprises (PSE) policy for CPSEs in Non-
Strategic Sector.  The DPE has constituted a Committee of Group of Officers 
(CGO) under the Chairmanship of CEO, NITI Aayog for identification of CPSEs 
falling under non-strategic sector on privatization or closure.   
  
(iv)      In regard to NTC, the CGO in its meeting dated 27.01.2022 
recommended that a sub-committee comprising of Secretary, Department of 
Public Enterprises, Secretary, Ministry of Textiles and Sh. Ajit Pai, 
distinguished Expert, NITI Aayog shall first analyse the feasibility of 
disinvestment of 12 mills recommended by Ministry of Textiles, taking into 
consideration their location, availability of land and other assets and submit a 
report to CGO.  Based on the report of the said sub-committee, the CGO will 
take a view on the closure or disinvestment of 12 mills of NTC Ltd. 
  
(v)      The Sub-Committee made the following recommendation - NBCC has 
done evaluation of all assets of NTC recently.  The Committee while examining 
the feasibility of disinvestment used market value of land as derived by NBCC 
for examining economic viability of the enterprise post disinvestment. It was felt 
that even with a double-digit operating margin on five year peak revenue 
performance in past, the so called viable mills will not be able to return even 
cost of capital.  In this situation these mills may not find any buyer at reserve 
price. It was also felt that efforts to revive other mills in Joint Venture (JV) 
format by the Ministry have also failed in past.  In light of above, the Committee 
is of the opinion that there is no advantage in trying for disinvestment of 12 
mills once again. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that, it is prudent to 
close of all the 23 NTC mi1ls. 
  
(vi)      Report of the sub-committee has been forwarded to Department of Public 
Enterprises for placing before the CGO for its consideration.   
  
(vii)    The Committee of Group of Officers (CGO) in its meeting dated 4.4.2022 
recommended that after detailed deliberations and based on inputs received 
from Ministry of Textiles, CGO accepted the recommendations of the Sub-
Committee regarding closure of NTC Ltd. along-with its 23 mills.  
  
(viii)    In light of continued poor economic viability of NTC mills, Ministry of 
Textiles is preparing an action plan for way forward in this matter in 
consultation with NITI Aayog and Department of Public Enterprises under 
Ministry of Finance.” 
 
26. The Committee trust that in preparing the action plan in regard to 
NTC mills pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee of Group of 
Officers (CGO), as recommended in their earlier report, the interests of 
the large work force of the mills with regard to their livelihood along with 
other related aspects are given appropriate consideration. Aspects 
pertaining to salary dues, pensionary benefits etc. of the workforce of the 

12 
 
mills need to be adequately addressed in the action plan which is being 
formulated by the Ministry of Textiles in consultation with NITI Aayog, 
Department of Public Enterprises and the Ministry of Finance. 
 
 
New Delhi;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
17 July, 2023                                   CHAIRPERSON 
26 Ashadha, 1944 (Saka )                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
  

13 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
 
      Total Percentage 
   
I. Total number of Recommendations 25  
II. Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government – Rec. Para 
Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 24 and 25 
 
23 92.00% 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply –  Nil 
 
00 00% 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Nil 
00 00% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature - Rec. Para Nos. 21 and 22 
 
02 8.00% 
   100% 
 
 
 