 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
Action Taken by 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship
FORTY
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
July, 202
48 
i 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship
 
FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI   
, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP  Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Third Demands for Grants (2023-24) of Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship. (Saka)  

 
FORTY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
Action Taken by 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023
the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship.
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
ii 
FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023
the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship.
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.07.202
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.07.2023
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP  Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship. .2023 3 July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)  

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report  
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which  replies of the Government  are interim 
in nature    
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix- I* Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on           
17th July, 2023. 
 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Forty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
 
 * Not appended with this cyclostyled copy. 
  
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
5. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
6. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
7. Shri Bache Gowda B.N. 
8. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
9. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
10. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
11. Shri Pakauri Lal 
12. Prof. Sanjay Sadashivrao Mandlik 
13. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori  
14. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
15. Dr. D. Ravikumar 
16. Shri Naba (Hira) Kumar Sarania 
17. Shri Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Nayab Singh 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan 
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24.  Shri R. Dharmar 
25. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
26.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
27.  Ms. Dola Sen 
28.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
29. Shri Shibu Soren 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.     Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  -  Additional Secretary 
 2  Shri Sanjay Sethi   - Director 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2022-23) having been authorized by the Committee, present on 
their behalf this Forty-Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Forty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) 
of the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship. 
2. The Forty- Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 13th March, 2023. The Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship furnished their replies on 28th June, 2023 indicating Action 
Taken on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Forty-Third 
Report. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their 
sitting held on 17th July, 2023.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
17 July, 2023                                   CHAIRPERSON 
26 Ashadha, 1944 (Saka )                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-
Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of 
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. 
 
2. The Forty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 13th March, 2023. It contained 24 Observations/Recommendations. 
Replies of Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been 
received and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government – Rec. Para 
Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24 
 
Chapter II 
Total:22 
Percentage:91.67 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – Nil 
 
Chapter III 
Total:00 
Percentage:00.00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para Nos. 17 and 18 
 
Chapter IV 
Total:02 
Percentage:08.33 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature – Nil. 
Chapter  V 
Total:00 
Percentage:00.00 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I be furnished to 
them at the earliest. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/ Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit 
further comments. 
  

2 
 
I. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS/UTILISATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
5. In their Forty-Third Report, the Committee noted that the BE for 2022-
23 was Rs.2999 crore whereas the revised estimate for the year was reduced to 
Rs.1901.71 crore, out of which, the Ministry was able to spend only Rs. 607.72 
crore (as on 10.01.2023). The lower utilization of the budgeted funds was 
attributable to the fact that three major Schemes viz., PMKVY, JSS and NAPS 
which constitute around 69 % of their entire scheme allocations were in the 
pipeline for approval since these three schemes had ended on 31.03.2022. The 
Ministry also informed that their continuation as a Composite Central Sector 
Scheme “Skill India Program” was approved by the Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC), in its meeting held on 27.7.2022. The Draft Cabinet Note for 
‘Skill India Program’ from FY 2022-23 to 2025-26 was sent to Cabinet 
Secretariat on 23.08.2022, however, approval of the Cabinet was awaited. 
Opining that the Ministry should have initiated the process for the 
continuation of the Schemes at an earlier date which might have enabled them 
to prevent or minimize the shortfall in expenditure, the Committee 
recommended that the Ministry take up the matter in the right earnest for 
expediting the process of approval for the Skill India Programme, which would 
facilitate utilisation of the earmarked funds in a timely and even manner. 
6.       In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
"JSS: -The recommendation is well taken, and necessary follow-ups will 
be made in consultation with the PMKVY division. Further, necessary 
steps from the JSS division to prevent and minimize the shortfall in 
expenditure will be taken to facilitate the utilization of the earmarked 
funds for the scheme to support to JSSs. 
 
NAPS: Under National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme (NAPS) fund 
allocated during BE-2022-23 is Rs. 170 crore. The Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship in an effort to make the scheme  
more effective, Ministry has taken many steps, in consultation with 
various stakeholders, to simplify the portal and the processes, and to 
revise the NAPS guidelines to bring increase in the number of 
establishments and apprentices. Office Memorandums (OMs) have been 
issued between December 2021 and November 2022, to simplify 
portal/apprenticeship processes and to make the process of 
apprenticeship engagement easier.  Accordingly, the apprentices number 
has increased to 5.8 Lakhs in 2021-22. Further, establishments have 
been asked to submit the claims pertaining to NAPS (related to Optional 
Trades) through portal by October 2022. All this had resulted in 
additional fund requirement to the tune of Rs. 175 Crore and the same 
was allocated through Supplementary Demand for Grants. Accordingly 

3 
 
total fund utilised  in  FY 2022-23 was Rs. 335.44 crore which is around 
200% expenditure over BE allocation. 
 
PMKVY: The Observation/recommendation of the Committee is noted for 
compliance. 
Further, it is submitted that MSDE, after receiving the one-time 
permission from Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for 
release of funds under PMKVY 4.0 subject to the limit of RE 2022-23, 
has expedited the implementation of the PMKVY 4.0 based on the 
approved Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Memorandum. Targets 
have been allocated to the Skill Hubs comprising of all the Higher 
Education Institutes (HEIs), Schools, Government Institutes such as 
Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology (CIPET), 
National Institute of Electronics & Information Technology (NIELIT), Tool 
Rooms, etc., Sector Skill Councils (SSCs), Pradhan Mantri Kaushal 
Kendras (PMKKs). 
 
Further, Dept. of Expenditure (DoE), MoF vide OM no. 72(07)/PFC-
II/2015(Vol.I) dated 05.04.2023 has allowed to spend 1/4th (25%) of the 
BE 2023-24 amount (Rs. 1,558 crore) i.e. Rs. 389.5 crore under the Skill 
India Programme till the approval of the scheme from the Cabinet. 
Additionally, MSDE is making all the necessary efforts and pursuing with 
the Cabinet for the consideration and approval of the PMKVY 4.0 at the 
earliest." 
 
7.  The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that, as on 
10.01.2023, the Ministry had incurred an expenditure of Rs. 607.72 crore 
against RE of Rs. 1901.71 crore leaving an unspent balance of Rs. 
1293.99 crore to be utilized during the remaining part of FY 2022-23. The 
Committee, however, find that the reply does not indicate the 
expenditure incurred as on 31.03.2023. The Committee desire that, in 
future, while responding to the recommendations of the Committee on 
the Demands for Grants, the actual expenditure at the end of the financial 
year, in the last quarter as well as in the last month be invariably 
indicated. The Committee appreciate that the efforts made by the 
Ministry have resulted in Department of Expenditure allowing the 
Ministry to spend 25% of BE 2023-24(Rs 1558 crore) viz. Rs. 389.5 crore 
under the ‘Skill India Programme’ pending approval of the Cabinet. The 
Committee impress upon the Ministry to vigorously pursue the matter 
and continue their efforts to expedite the approval of the Programme so 

4 
 
that the physical and financial targets envisaged are not adversely 
affected due to inadequacy of funds. 
II. PRADHAN MANTRI KAUSHAL VIKAS YOJANA (PMKVY)    
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3 and 8) 
8. In their earlier Report, the Committee noted that the Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) had recommended the continuation of three 
components under the Composite Central Sector Scheme of Pradhan Mantri 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) for the period FY 2022-23 to 2025-26 with a 
total outlay of Rs. 8800 Crore. The EFC had also made important 
recommendations in this regard which inter-alia included creation of a single 
Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) at the Ministry level for monitoring/ 
evaluation/course curriculums; Inter-Ministerial consultation for identifying 
beneficiary as well as target group to avoid duplication; transparent 
mechanism to be developed for selection of training providers etc. The 
Committee recommended that the Ministry take accord and give due 
importance to the changes/modifications proposed by the EFC and act 
earnestly to ensure effective implementation of the EFC suggestions after 
consultations with key-stakeholders. 
9.   In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
"The observation/recommendation of the Committee is noted for 
compliance. Further, it is submitted that MSDE has accepted all the 
recommendations of the EFC on PMKVY 4.0 and accordingly, the draft 
Note for the Cabinet was prepared. MSDE is in the process of 
establishing the single Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) in the Ministry for 
effective implementation, monitoring, etc. Tracking of the certified 
candidates will be maintained through the Skill India Digital (SID) being 
maintained by NSDC. 
 
Additionally, it is submitted that MSDE is working with all the Central 
Ministries/ Departments to take convergence to the next level including 
field level convergence, common branding under Skill India, Aadhaar 
based candidate enrolment and linking with externalities including 
career guidance, employment, etc. for avoiding the duplication of efforts 
and resources." 
 
 
10. The Committee were unhappy to find that no evaluation study had been 
conducted for PMKVY 3.0 to evaluate the satisfaction level of employers with 
regard to the candidates placed with them. Observing that success in 
implementation of the Scheme can be ascertained from the level of satisfaction 

5 
 
of the employers on the skill training being imparted to the candidates, the 
Committee impressed upon the Ministry the critical need to undertake an 
evaluation study in partnership with the Sector Skill Councils to measure in 
quantifiable terms the satisfaction level of the employers which in turn would 
facilitate requisite systemic and policy improvements in the larger interest. 
 
11.   In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 
“The observations/recommendations of the Committee are noted for 
compliance.  
The last date of enrollment under PMKVY 3.0 was 31.03.2022. However, 
the financial closure of the scheme is still pending. Presently, under 
State component of PMKVY 3.0, few States/UTs still have committed 
liabilities to be fulfilled towards Training Providers and Ministry is 
disbursing funds for meeting out the same. Therefore, evaluation study 
of PMKVY 3.0 is yet to be conducted.  
The Terms of Reference (ToR) for concurrent impact evaluation of skill 
training programs evaluation is being prepared, which will cover the 
feedback from employers which in turn would facilitate requisite 
systemic and policy improvements in the larger interest.” 
 
12. The Committee note that after acceptance of all the 
recommendations of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on PMKVY 4.0, 
the Ministry is in the process of establishing a single Project Monitoring 
Committee (PMC) for effective implementation, monitoring, etc. of various 
Schemes run by the Ministry. The Committee further note that the 
Ministry is working with all the Central Ministries/Departments for 
enabling convergence and avoiding duplication of efforts and resources. In 
view of the imperatives and urgency involved, the Committee exhort the 
Ministry to expedite the measures/consultation process to iron out 
procedural bottlenecks so as to ensure smooth and timely implementation 
of various Schemes run by the Ministry. The Committee also desire that 
sincere efforts be made to ensure development of transparent mechanism 
for selection of training providers.  
13. The Committee appreciate that in pursuance of their 
recommendation for undertaking an evaluation study of PMKVY 3.0, the 
Ministry is in the process of preparation of Terms of Reference (ToR) for 
concurrent impact evaluation of skill training programmes covering inter-

6 
 
alia the feedback from the employers. The Committee impress upon the 
Ministry to intensify the measures already initiated and complete the 
exercise at an early date so as to gauge the satisfaction level of employers 
on the training imparted to the candidates, learn lessons from the 
deficiencies in PMKVY 3.0 and ensuring rectification of the deficiencies 
while implementing PMKVY 4.0. 
III. PRADHAN MANTRI KAUSHAL KENDRA (PMKK) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 
14.    In their earlier Report, the Committee found that all the PMKKs had been 
setup by private training partners. However, there is a provision in the 
guidelines which allows participation of Central/State Government/PSU/SPSU 
Institutions/organizations to set up PMKK. As per information provided by the 
Ministry, the applications for setting-up of PMKKs are invited via Expression of 
Interest (EoI)/ Request for Proposal (RFP) by National Skill Development 
Corporation (NSDC). All eligible institutions including Central/State 
Government/PSU/SPSU can participate in such EoI/RFP, but no applications 
were received from the institutions concerned. The Committee recommended 
that the Ministry take recourse to certain proactive measures and impress 
upon the State Governments/PSUs to support setting up of PMKKs in 
remote/under-served districts where setting up the Kendras may not be 
financially viable for private training partners. 
 
15.       In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 
“The observations/recommendations of the Committee are noted for 
compliance. 
It is humbly submitted that, the extant provision of the guidelines of 
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Kendra (PMKK) do not prohibit any Government 
entity / Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) / State PSU to set up PMKKs in 
the country. 
As a process, the applications for setting-up of PMKKs were invited via 
Expression of Interest (EoI)/ Request for Proposal (RFP) by National Skill 
Development Corporation (NSDC). All eligible institutions including 
Central/State Government/PSU/SPSU can participate in such EoI/RFP, 
but no applications have been received from the concerned institutions.  
Going forward, MSDE through NSDC will facilitate the setting up of 
PMKKs in remote/underserved districts, where setting up the Kendras 
may not be financially viable for private training partners." 
  

7 
 
16.    Government entities/Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs)/State PSUs 
being eligible to set up PMKKs in the country, the Committee desire that 
while inviting applications for setting up of PMKKs via Expression of 
Interest (EOI)/Request for Proposal (RFP), such entities/organizations 
may be encouraged to participate in the bidding process. The Committee 
also desire that as per assurance given by the Ministry, the National Skill 
Development Corporation (NSDC) take necessary measures to facilitate in 
setting up of PMKKs in remote/underserved districts. 
 
IV. JAN SHIKSHAN SANSTHANS (JSSs) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 12) 
 
17. In their earlier Report, the Committee were concerned to find that no 
financial incentives had been provided to JSSs which had obtained 4 star and 
5star rating.   As per the existing provisions, while JSSs obtaining 5 star rating 
will be given opportunity to participate in World Skills Competitions, the JSSs 
obtaining 3 star rating would be given Certificate of Excellence. The Committee 
opined that the grading system can be made more effective if the rewards of 
better performance are made more substantial which in turn would also boost 
the spirit of constructive competition amongst the JSSs. 
18.       In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
"The JSS scheme is conceptualised as a scheme which provides training 
at the doorsteps of beneficiaries through NGOs with minimum 
infrastructure and resources. Further, the total budgetary provisions 
available with the scheme are merely sufficient to provide Grants-in-Aid 
to the existing JSSs as well as proposed new JSSs as per the expansion 
plan of this Ministry. Therefore, providing any kind of cash 
rewards/benefits will not be feasible for running this scheme in the 
approved budget. However, the possibilities of providing tools & 
equipment, awards & recognitions etc., will be explored through 
SANKALP and other schemes of this Ministry." 
 
19. The Committee take cognizance of the reasons/justification given 
by the Ministry that due to financial constraints, it may not be feasible to 
provide any kind of cash rewards/benefits to the Jan Shikshan Sansthans 
(JSSs) obtaining 4 star and 5 star rating. The Committee, however, 
appreciate that pursuant to their recommendation, the Ministry is now 

8 
 
exploring the possibility of providing tools and equipment, awards and 
recognitions, etc. through SANKALP and other Schemes. The Committee 
are of the view that such type of assistance can also encourage JSSs to 
perform better, which in turn, would lead to healthy competition amongst 
them thereby resulting in improvement in their performance as well as 
quality of training of candidates. The Committee desire to be apprised of 
the measures taken in this regard. 
 
V. DISTRICT SKILL COMMITTEES (DSCs) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 17) 
 
20. In their earlier Report, the Committee desired that the District 
Collector/Magistrate concerned should ensure that the public representatives 
are regularly updated about the working of the District Skill Committees 
(DSCs) and their views/recommendations incorporated during the preparation 
of the District Skill Development Plans. 
21.   In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 
"Recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance.” 
 
22. The reply does not specifically mention about the action taken by 
the Ministry with regard to District Collectors/Magistrates ensuring that 
the public representatives are regularly updated about the working of 
District Skill Committees (DSCs). The Committee desire that appropriate 
action be taken by the Ministry in this regard so that the benefit of 
feedback and suggestions of the public representatives could be gainfully 
utilized for preparation of District Skill Development Plans. 
VI.     VACANCIES  IN ITIs 
(Recommendation Para No. 18) 
23.    In their earlier Report, the Committee noted that the Directorate General 
of Training (DGT) monitors the instructor data of each ITI through NCVT-MIS 
portal, where each ITI (Govt & Pvt) has to enter the instructor data as per the 
sanctioned units. The Committee were alarmed to find that as on 13.02.2023, 
NCVT-MIS portal instructors’ dashboard showed that 73,384 posts of 
instructors were filled out of 2,05,636 sanctioned posts. As per dashboard 

9 
 
1,32,252 instructor posts were shown to be vacant. The issue of large number 
of vacancies in the ITIs had been highlighted by the Committee in their earlier 
report as well. The absence of trainers/ instructors was a concern that had 
been highlighted at various fora. Displeased with the lack of any concrete 
follow-up action on the part of the Ministry, the Committee again emphasized 
the importance of having adequate number of instructors/trainers at each ITI 
in order to provide quality instructionswhich is essential for employability. The 
Committee expected the Ministry to take serious note of the alarming situation 
and deliver concrete and positive action at the earliest. 
24.   In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 
"The DGT, MSDE is committed to ensuring that all ITIs have enough 
instructors to provide high-quality training to students. In January 2023, 
the DGT, MSDE issued instructions to all State Directorates/UT 
Administrations, requiring all government and private ITIs to 
immediately appoint adequate numbers of instructors as per the 
trades/units available in the institutes and update the details of 
instructors on the MIS portal. 
In addition, regular follow-up is conducted through email and video 
conferences with all State Directorates and UTs to ensure that adequate 
numbers of instructors are appointed and their details are updated on 
the NCVT MIS portal. State Directorates have also been informed to 
appoint trade-specific guest faculties to fill vacancies until regular 
trainers are appointed. 
 
As of today, a total of 97,770 instructor posts in ITIs have been filled, 
according to the MIS portal. This is a positive development that ensures 
that there are enough qualified instructors available to train the next 
generation of skilled workers." 
 
 
25.    Although, the Ministry have contended that enough qualified 
instructors are available in ITIs for training the next generation of skilled 
workers, as per the data available on NCVT-MIS portal, out of sanctioned 
posts of 2,06,254 instructors, only 98,090 are in position and 1,08,164 
posts viz. 52% posts are still vacant, as on 12.07.2023. This, in the 
opinion of the Committee, will be having an adverse affect on the 
functioning of ITIs as well as training activities. Evidently, the 
instructions issued by the Ministry for filling up the vacancies have not 
been yielding the desired results. The Committee, therefore, impress upon 
the Ministry to intensify the measures already initiated and strengthen 

10 
 
the collaborative efforts with States/UTs besides strengthening the 
monitoring mechanism so as to ensure that maximum number of 
vacancies in ITIs are filled up in a time bound manner. Simultaneously, 
the details need to be regularly updated on NCVT-MIS portal. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the measures taken in this 
direction. 
VII. ONE DISTRICT ONE PRODUCT (ODOP) 
(Recommendation Para No. 24) 
26. In their earlier Report, the Committee noted that taking into account the 
One District One Product (ODOP) initiative of the Government, MSDE had 
aligned its skilling initiatives with opportunities arising with the association of 
one product with one district. National Skill Development Corporation through 
the Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) had mapped high impact government 
programs critical for ‘Vocal-For-Local’ such as PLI schemes, ODOP, Green 
Energy, Electric Mobility, Electronic and Semiconductor manufacturing, 5G 
telecom infrastructure and services, National Infrastructure Pipeline, etc. for 
understanding of skill intervention in their value chain. With a view to promote 
planning and implementation of skill development programmes in a 
decentralized manner, District Skill Committees (DSCs) had been set up and 
one of the mandate of DSCs is preparation of DSDP based on local needs of the 
District, including ODOP. Recognising the efforts of the Ministry in this regard, 
the Committee reiterated the need to ensure that every district has the training 
infrastructure and programme to cater to the Skilling requirements arising out 
of the development of the particular products of that district. Appreciatingthat 
the Ministry has mapped high impact government programs such as PLI 
Schemes and 5G Telecom Infrastructure and services etc. for understanding 
the skilling requirements in these areas,the Committee desired that the 
Ministry maintain the momentum of its efforts in this regard. 
 
27. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
“JSS: The JSS Division of MSDE is actively working towards the 
development/adoption of more courses/job roles suitable to the JSS 
clientele. Appropriate courses will be identified to promote the One 
District One Product (ODOP) initiative. 
SANKALP: Suggestions of the Committee has been noted. 
PMKVY: The Observation/recommendation of the Committee is noted for 
compliance. 

11 
 
The One District One Product (ODOP) initiative is aimed to foster 
balanced regional development across all districts of the country. MSDE 
has aligned its skilling initiatives with opportunities arising with the 
association of one product with one district. National Skill Development 
Corporation (NSDC) through the Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) has 
mapped high impact government programs critical for ‘Vocal-For-Local’ 
such as PLI schemes, ODOP, Green Energy, Electric Mobility, Electronic 
and Semiconductor manufacturing, 5G telecom infrastructure and 
services, National Infrastructure Pipeline, etc. for understanding of skill 
intervention in their value chain. 
In addition, Ministry is undertaking various steps to aligning and 
convergence with schemes of other Ministries/Departments/State 
Governments and national priorities like PM-Gati Shakti, One-District-
One-Product (ODOP). 
DGT:For high impact Government programmes/ schemes, DGT has 
developed following long term courses to cater the need of skill 
manpower in the Green sector: 
SI. 
No. 
Name of Course Entry 
Qualification 
Duration NSQF 
Level 
Introduced 
in Year 
1. Solar Technician 
(Electrical) 
10th Passed 
  
1 Year 3 2018 
2. Mechanic Electric 
Vehicle 
10th Passed 
  
2 Year 4 2021 
3. Wind Plant 
Technician 
10th Passed 2 Year 4 2023 
4. Small Hydro 
Power Plant 
Technician 
10th Passed 
  
2 Year 4 2023 
 
In addition, DGT is taking new initiatives to develop curricula in new 
emerging areas such as Data Annotation, 5G Technology, Artificial 
Intelligence etc. in view of knowledge and skills required to meet the 
demands of the evolving job market. It would also contribute to the 
development of a technically skilled workforce that can drive innovation 
and contribute to the growth of various industries.” 
 
28. The Committee note that appropriate courses, under JSS, are yet to 
be identified to promote the One District One Product (ODOP) initiative 
and impress upon the Ministry to accord utmost priority and pay focused 
attention to identify the courses so as to achieve the objective of ODOP 
and thereby foster balanced development across all districts of the 
country. The Committee also express concern to note that the reply of 

12 
 
the Ministry does not touch upon the steps taken/proposed for ensuring 
that every district has the training infrastructure and appropriate 
programmes to cater to the skilling requirements for local products. 
Needless to say, the Ministry ought to pay serious attention towards 
addressing the impediments in this regard so as to ensure that training 
infrastructure in every district adequately caters to the needs of local 
people and requirements of local products. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
17 July, 2023                                   CHAIRPERSON 
26 Ashadha, 1944 (Saka )                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
  

13 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-
THIRD REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
 
      Total Percentage 
   
I. Total number of Recommendations 24 
 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 
13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 
and  24) 
  
22 91.67% 
III. Recommendations/Observations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply –  
– Nil 
 
00 00% 
IV Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require 
reiteration – 
(Rec. Para Nos. 17 and 18) 
02 08.33% 
V Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature-  
– Nil 
   
00 00% 
   100% 
 
 