i 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2023-24) 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR 
FORTY–NINTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
‘FUNCTIONING OF DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF TRAINING)’ OF THE 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP. 
 
FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI   
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka)  
 
58 

ii 
 
 
FIFTY- EIGHTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2023-24) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR 
FORTY–NINTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
‘FUNCTIONING OF DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF TRAINING)’ OF THE 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP. 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.02.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2024 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
11 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply 
 
24 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
25 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which  replies of the Government  are interim 
in nature    
26 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix- I* Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on           
05 February, 2024. 
 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Forty Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
__________________________________________________________________  
 
 * Not appended with this cyclostyled copy. 
  
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2023-24) 
  
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
5. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
6. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
7. Shri Bache Gowda B.N. 
8. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
9. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
10. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
11. Shri Pakauri Lal 
12. Prof. Sanjay Sadashivrao Mandlik 
13. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori  
14. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
15. Dr. D. Ravikumar 
16. Shri Naba (Hira) Kumar Sarania 
17. Shri Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Nayab Singh 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan 
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24.  Shri R. Dharmar 
25. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
26.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
27. Ms. Dola Sen 
28.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
29.  Shri Shibu Soren 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31. Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.     Shri Jadumani Baisakh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.  Shri Sreekanth S.   - Deputy Secretary 
   
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2023-24) having been authorized by the Committee, present on 
their behalf this F ifth-Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Forty–Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Functioning of Directorate 
General of Training)’ of the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship. 
2. The Forty–Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and  laid in  Rajya 
Sabha on 4th August, 202 3. The Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship furnished their replies on 20th Dec, 2023 indicating Action 
Taken on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Forty–Ninth 
Report. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their 
sitting held on 05 February, 2024.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty–Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
05 February, 2024                                  CHAIRPERSON, 
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka )                    STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their  Forty–
Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ Functioning of Directorate General 
of Training)’ of the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship. 
 
2. The Forty–Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 4th August, 2023. It contained 14 Observations/ Recommendations. Replies 
of Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and 
are categorized as under:- 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government – Rec. Para Nos.1, 2, 
3, 4, 5,7, 12, 13, and 14 
Chapter-II 
Total: 09 
Percentage: 
64.29 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – Nil 
 
Chapter-III 
Total:00 
Percentage: 00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para No.6 
 
Chapter-IV 
Total:01 
Percentage: 7.14 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature - Rec. Para Nos. 8, 9, 10 and 11 
Chapter-V 
Total:04 
Percentage: 
28.57 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final action 
taken reply i n respect of the Recommendation  contained in Chapter V of 
this Report, for which the replies  given by the Government  has been 
considered as interim, be furnished to them at the earliest. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/ Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit 
further comments. 

2 
 
 
I. EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE OF ITIs 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
5. In their Forty-ninth Report, the Committee observed that the NITI Aayog 
had published a report called – “Transforming Industrial Training Institutes” in 
January, 2023. In the report, NITI Aayog had given recommendations towards 
transforming ITIs into aspirational vocational training insti tutes. According to 
the Report, the transformation of ITIs remains incomplete in view of three facts 
- ITIs remain underutilized, the quality of training, faculty, and infrastructure 
is in general not of global standards and most of the trainees are neithe r 
employable nor skilled enough to start their own enterprise. The Ministry and 
DGT had reportedly initiated action on many of the recommendations 
contained in the Report. However, DGT had also observed that there were some 
factual inaccuracies and incorre ct presumption(s) about ITIs which ha d been 
highlighted in the Report of the NITI Aayog. The Committee expected the 
Ministry to take appropriate measures to have the factual inaccuracies rectified 
at the earliest. At the same time, the Committee wanted the  Ministry to give 
serious consideration to the other issues that have been highlighted in the NITI 
Aayog report such as the need for establishing a placement and 
entrepreneurship cell in the ITIs and facilitating tie -ups with MSMEs. Such 
arrangement c an also inter-alia help in securing and maintaining data 
regarding placements secured by ITI passouts, which is of paramount 
importance. The Committee wish ed to be kept apprised of the action taken in 
this regard within two months of presenting this Report to Parliament. 
6. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows :- 
 ‘The National Institution for Transforming India (NITI Aayog) had 
presented a report titled “Transforming Industrial Training Institutes “. The 
report had analyzed the Vocational Education and Training (VET) ecosystem in 
India specifically the Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs).   Since the report had 
factual inaccuracies and inaccurate presump tions, the same were informed to 
NITI Aayog vide DO letter dated 20.02.2023.  

3 
 
 
The actions on most of the suggestions/recommendations presented by 
NITI Aayog have already been taken. Further, implementation of some of the 
suggestions is within the purview of the State governments/UT administration. 
States/UT have been requested to review the recommendations and take 
measures for implementing them in ITI ecosystem. 
As per the affiliation norms for ITIs, all the ITIs must have a functioning 
placement cell. IT I fills the infrastructure details while applying for affiliation 
and the same is verified during desktop assessment stage and joint inspection 
stage.. Accordingly, all the ITIs have established placement cell. ITIs are also 
tapping the industry connect (i ncluding MSMEs) through DST and industries 
are also providing training as per their specific requirements using Flexi MoU 
scheme. Also, a special Result Area in STRIVE project has focused on Industry 
clusters for apprenticeship promotion. The fund details state wise under RA -4 
component, focusing on apprenticeship is enclosed. 
As a part of STRIVE project, entrepreneurship training is being proposed 
through NIESBUD and IIE for ITIs as well as NSTIs. The employability skills 
component in the CTS syllabus has English literacy, communication skills, IT 
literacy, entrepreneurship skills etc.   These skills help the trainees to gain 
employment after training or start their own enterprises.’ 
7. The Committee are appreciative of the fact that the Ministry have 
already taken action on most of the recommendations presented by the 
NITI Ayog. Further, implementation of some of the suggestions is within 
the purview of the State Governments/UT Administration and they have 
been requested to review the recommendations a nd take measures for 
implementing them in ITI ecosystem. The Committee want the Ministry 
to keep a tab on the action taken by the State Governments/UT 
Administration in pursuance of the recommendations of the NITI Ayog. 
8. The Committee also note that though t he factual inaccuracies and 
inaccurate presumptions, were informed to NITI Aayog vide DO letter 
dated 20.02.2023, there is no mention of any corrective action by the 
NITI Ayog. The reply of the Government also does not refer to any follow-
up measures taken in this direction either. The Committee want  the 

4 
 
Ministry to pursue the matter with NITI Ayog as they are the formulators 
of the way ahead in the public arena.  
II. VACANCIES OF INSTRUCTORS 
(Recommendations Para No. 4 and 5) 
9. In their original Report, the Committee were particularly concerned to 
note the large number of vacant positions of instructors in ITIs in the country. 
The Committee had expressed their concern on this count in their Reports 
presented on earlier occasions too. As per the information available on the 
NCVT portal, in case of Government ITIs, out of the total of 71921 posts 
sanctioned, only 34663 posts (48.20%) have been filled, whereas in the case of 
private ITIs, out of the 133741 posts sanctioned only 56163  posts (41.99%) 
have been filled. The DGT had submitted in this regard that the Government 
ITI instructors are employees of the State Government and are recruited by the 
various State Governments by following their Recruitment Rules. Their 
promotion and ca reer progression policy is also the responsibility of the State 
Government concerned. Moreover, the DGT portal (the NCVT MIS portal) has a 
functionality where the details of the Instructors working are to be provided in 
respect of each ITI.  However, this functionality is not a mandatory one wherein 
the data is to be filled and updated. DGT on its part has directed all the State 
Governments to ensure that the Instructors’ vacancies are filled and also 
updated on the system (portal). As emphasized upon in th eir earlier reports, 
the Committee expected the DGT and the State Governments to work together 
to address the issue of vacant instructor positions in ITIs. In this regard, the 
Committee wanted that the DGTshould consider inter-alia holding meeting(s) 
with the Chief Secretaries of all the States and highlight the cascading impact 
vacancies of instructors is having on the quality of training, seek feedback 
regarding the ways to address the situation and ease the bottlenecks being 
faced by the State Governments in their recruitment process. Also, DGT was to 
consider developing a mechanism for incentivising States that successfully 
address the shortage of instructors/trainers and direct the RDSEs to make 
sure that the private ITIs comply with the norms concernin g the number of 
instructors/trainers. Also, the specific problems, if any, faced by the Private 

5 
 
ITIs in connection with filling up the posts of Instructors were to be objectively 
assessed and in case policy interventions are required, the same were to be 
effected. 
10. The Committee also highlight ed in this regard the aspect of a number of 
vacancies existing in instructor/trainer positions in case of Union Territory 
Governments as well. From the information made available to the Committee, it 
was seen that in Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and also 
Ladakh, more than 50% of the posts are lying vacant. The Committee, 
therefore, desired the DGT to take immediate steps to assess the reasons for 
the same and direct the administrations o f the Union Territories concerned to 
fill up the vacancies at the earliest. 
11. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship  have stated as follows  in reply to both 
the recommendations :- 
“The Craftsmen Training Scheme (CTS) is implemented through a 
network of Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) established all across the 
country. The quality of training provided by ITIs depends on the availability of 
qualified Instructors. The day-to-day administration of ITIs including 
recruitment, appointment, career progression of instructors is the responsibility 
of State governments/UT administration. To address the shortage of instructors 
in ITIs, DGT has written to States to fill the instructor vacancy. Meetings are 
also held with state governments and during visits to states, this issue is taken 
up. 
Further, DGT has revisited the essential qualifications of Instructors in 
ITIs and based on the recommendations of State/UTs & other stakeholders, 
CITS being an essential qualification for appointment of Instructors in 
Degree/Diploma category has been removed. These categories of instructors, if 
not CITS qualified will have to complete CITS through RPL/regular route within 
3 years of appointment. The revised qualification of Instructors is enclosed. It is 
expected that this policy decision will help the states to fill up the Instructor 
vacancy. 
            In order to incentivize States/UTs to reduce Instructor vacancy, 
reduction of Instructor vacancy is one of the Key Performance Indicator (KPI) 

6 
 
under STRIVE project. Under STRIVE, 14 states have successfully reduced their 
vacancies by more than 20%.” 
  
12. The Committee take on record the appreciable action taken by the 
Ministry in pursuance of the recommendation(s).  It is noted that to 
address the shortage of instructors in ITIs, DGT has written to States to 
fill up the vacancies of instructors. Meetings are also held with State 
Governments and during visits to States, this issue is taken up. 
 Further, the Committee take note of the reply of the Government 
which states that DGT has revisited the essential qualifications of 
Instructors in ITIs and based on the recommendations of State/UTs & 
other stakeholders, CITS being an essential qualification for appointment 
of Instructors in Degree/Diploma category has been removed. These 
categories of instructors, if not CITS qualified will have to complete C ITS 
through RPL/regular route within 3 years of appointment. It is expected 
that this policy decision will help the states to fill up the Instructor 
vacancy. 
 While the Committee are pleased to take into account the steps 
taken by the Government to address  the issue of large number of 
vacancies of trainers/instructors in the ITIs in the country, they are of 
the considered opinion that this should be a matter of high priority and 
needs continuous monitoring and sustained interventions as and when 
required. A ccordingly, the Committee would like to be kept updated on 
the developments in this regard.    
  

7 
 
III. CRAFT INSTRUCTORS TRAINING SCHEME (CITS) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
 
13. In their original Report, the Committee noted that the new age courses 
that have been introduced recently in ITIs will require certified instructors for 
imparting training under these courses. According to the Ministry, the 
curricula for the instructor training programmes under Craft Instructor 
Training Schemes (CITS) are being developed based on the feedback from the 
industry, academia, and States/UTs.  Keeping in view the demand for these 
new age courses, respective CITS curricula will be developed accordingly in due 
course of time. The Committee note tha t trainers play an important role in the 
uptake of new age courses. They are critical for the training ecosystem and as 
new age courses continue to evolve, the role of qualified trainers will become 
even more important. Since training of Craft Instructors is the mandated 
responsibility of DGT, the Committee would urge upon the DGT to take steps to 
expedite the development of curricula of the instructor training programmes 
under CITS. More importantly, comprehensive training, both in skills and 
training methodology is a necessity to make the instructor trainees conversant 
with techniques of transferring hands -on skills, and thereby enable in building 
adequately skilled manpower for the industry. Further, the Committee would 
also emphasise on ensuring that the  course curricula to be symbiotically 
connected to the industry and be responsive and pliable according to the 
requirements of employability as per market demands 
 
14. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows :- 
“DGT is offering CTS training through a network of about 15000 ITIs in 
more than 150 trades including 23 new age trades. Updation of course content 
and introduction of new age courses is a continuous process with changing 
technology and feedback from industry. With regular updation of course 
content/introduction of new courses, the availability of trained instructors is 
also essential to give maximum benefits to trainees. 

8 
 
In order to ensure quality training, D GT has prescribed essential 
qualifications for appointment of Instructors. Recently DGT has revisited the 
educational qualifications of Instructors and based on the feedback of the 
State/UT, the CITS being an essential qualification for new age trades has been 
removed. However, to ensure effective training is delivered pedagogy training has 
to be completed within one year. Further, DGT is conducting ToT programs for 
the newly introduced courses, to ensure trainers are being updated regularly.” 
15. The Commi ttee take note of the action taken by the Ministry 
regarding development of course curricula for training of ITI instructors 
of new age courses. It is understood that the process of Updation of 
course content and introduction of new age courses is a contin uous 
process with changing technology and feedback from industry.   Further, 
the Ministry have  submitted that w ith regular updation of course 
content/introduction of new courses, the availability of trained 
instructors is also essential to give maximum benefits to trainees. DGT is 
conducting ToT programs for the newly introduced courses, to ensure 
trainers are being updated regularly.  
16. However, the Committee find that the reply of the Government does 
not provide a specific and cogent picture of the status of development of 
course curricula for trainers/instructors of new age courses already 
introduced.  The Mini stry also agree  that this is a pivotal component 
necessary to give maximum benefits to trainees.  Without sufficiently 
equipped faculty available as per need, the uptake of the new age courses 
could take a hit. In view of this , the Committee would reiterat e their 
recommendation and want the Ministry to furnish a comprehensive reply 
after taking stock of  the current availability of cutting edge course 
curricula for instructors/trainers in ITI with special reference to new age 
courses. In the opinion of the Committee, DGT should also cons ider 
drawing up model guidelines  to be followed for the continued process of 
updation of curricula for instructors/trainers of it is.  
  

9 
 
IV. TRADE CERTIFICATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 14) 
 
17. In their original Report, the Committee noted that according to the DGT, 
MoUs have been signed with the Indian Armed Forces for providing the 
National Trade Certificate to the Agniveers on completion of their four year stint 
with the Armed Forces.  For the purpose, an extensive trade mapping exercise 
was d one individually with all the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces.  
Based on this, ‘on the job’ training would be imparted to the Agniveers during 
their stint with the Armed Forces and an exam would be conducted by the DGT 
for all the Agniveers.  On suc cessful passing of the exam, the National Trade 
Certificate in the relevant trade would be provided to the Agniveers by the DGT 
which would help them secure employment after they complete their time in 
the forces. The Committee appreciated the steps taken by the Ministry for the 
benefit of the Agniveers and would like to highlight the significance 
employment opportunities in ensuring the success of the new initiative. The 
Committee desired that the Ministry could work with industry partners to 
provide the Agniveers holding National Trade Certificates with job opportunities 
relevant to the skill they acquire during their service.  
Also, the Committee opined that appropriate measures needed to be 
taken for promoting and expanding the scheme of ‘Flexi MOU’ unde r which the 
training is imparted almost entirely in the work place(s), which include public 
enterprises such as SAIL. Also, it needed to be ensured that the training 
courses are designed to be effective in encouraging the trainees to work 
independently. 
18. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
 
‘Flexi-MoU scheme is designed to meet the very specific industry demand for 
which flexible course content is required. This allows industries to tr ain 
candidates as per their specific skill set requirements and provides training to 
the candidates which is aligned with the industry needs and latest technological 
know-how in industries. The scheme offers flexibility to Industry, for their 
tailored and customized courses, and has topical market relevant content.  
 
 DGT has signed MoUs with the armed forces under Flexi MoU scheme. The 
scheme will allow Agniveers to obtain National Trade Certificate after 

10 
 
completion of their training under Agniveer. MSDE i s in continuous touch with 
the employers to hire trained candidates including that of NTC/NAC 
candidates. DGT has also written to Ministry of Railways, Department of Public 
Enterprises and others requesting to revise their recruitment rules giving due 
recognition to NTC/NAC. 
 
 Flexi MoU scheme of DGT is available to all the Industrial Training Partners to 
train the candidates as per their specific requirements. Under this scheme 
prominent industry partners including public sector enterprises are actively 
engaged in training candidates. Some of the prominent industry partners are 
Maruti Suzuki India Limited, NMDC Steel Ltd., Suzuki Motors Private Limited, 
Gujarat, Toyota Kirloskar Motor Private Limited etc.’ 
 
 
19. The Committee note the reply of the Government that MSDE is in 
continuous touch with the employers to hire trained candidates including 
that of NTC/NAC candidates. DGT has also written to Ministry of 
Railways, Department of Public Enterprises and others requesting to 
revise their recruitment rules giving due recognition to NTC/NAC. These 
are welcome steps towards generating employment opportunities for 
Agniveers. Flexi MoU S cheme of DGT is available to all the Industrial 
Training Partners to train the candidates as per their specific 
requirements. The Committee are of the considered opinion that Flexi -
MoUs with the armed forces leading to Trade Certification for Agniveers 
should be an area of importance for the Ministry/DGT. Since the system 
is in the initial stage and would e volve over time, the Ministry/DGT has 
to keep track  of the developments and consider necessary interventions 
required in a proactive manner.    
 
 
 
 
 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE  GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para No.1) 
     The Committee observe that NITI Aayog had published a report called – 
“Transforming Industrial Training Institutes” in January, 2023. In the report, 
NITI Aayog had given recommendations towards transforming ITIs into 
aspirational vocational training instit utes. According to the Report, the 
transformation of ITIs remains incomplete in view of three facts - ITIs remain 
underutilized, the quality of training, faculty, and infrastructure is in general 
not of global standards and most of the trainees are neither  employable nor 
skilled enough to start their own enterprise. The Ministry and DGT have 
reportedly initiated action on many of the recommendations contained in the 
Report. However, DGT has also observed that there were some factual 
inaccuracies and incorre ct presumption(s) about ITIs which have been 
highlighted in the Report of the NITI Aayog. The Committee expect the Ministry 
to take appropriate measures to have the factual inaccuracies rectified at the 
earliest. At the same time, the Ministry should give serious consideration to the 
other issues that have been highlighted in the NITI Aayog report such as the 
need for establishing a placement and entrepreneurship cell in the ITIs and 
facilitating tie-ups with MSMEs. Such arrangement can also inter-alia help in 
securing and maintaining data regarding placements secured by ITI passouts, 
which is of paramount importance. The Committee wish to be kept apprised of 
the action taken in this regard within two months of presenting this Report to 
Parliament. 
Reply of the Government 
The National Institution for Transforming India (NITI Aayog) had 
presented a report titled “Transforming Industrial Training Institutes “. The 
report had analyzed the Vocational Education and Training (VET) ecosystem in 
India specifically the Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs).   Since the report had 
factual inaccuracies and inaccurate presumptions, the same were informed to 
NITI Aayog vide DO letter dated 20.02.2023. 
 
The actions on most of the suggestions/recommendations presented by 
NITI Aayog have already been taken. Further, implementation of some of the 
suggestions is within the purview of the State governments/UT administration. 
States/UT have been requested to review the recommendations and take 
measures for implementing them in ITI ecosystem. 
 
 

12 
 
As per the affiliation norms for ITIs, all the ITIs must have a functioning 
placement cell. ITI fills the infrastructure details while applying for affiliation 
and the same is verified during desktop assessment stage and joint inspection 
stage. Accordingly, all the ITIs have established placement cell. ITIs are also 
tapping the industry connect (including MSMEs) through DST and industries 
are also providing training as per their specific requirements using Flexi MoU 
scheme. Also, a special Resu lt Area in STRIVE project has focused on Industry 
clusters for apprenticeship promotion.  
As a part of STRIVE project, entrepreneurship training is being proposed 
through NIESBUD and IIE for ITIs as well as NSTIs. The employability skills 
component in the CTS syllabus has English literacy, communication skills, IT 
literacy, entrepreneurship skills etc.   These skills help the trainees to gain 
employment after training or start their own enterprises 
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship  OM No. DGT-
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para Nos. 7 and 8 of Chapter-I 
(Recommendation Para No.2) 
The Committee observe that the Directorate General of Training (DGT) 
has taken the initiative of introducing new age courses such as Information 
Communication Technology System Maintenance, Solar Technician (Electrical), 
Technician Mechatronics etc. in Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) across the 
country. However, from the submission  of DGT it is noticed that traditional 
courses like Electrician, Fitter, Welder, Machinist and Motor Mechanic (Diesel) 
are far more popular and there is less demand for the new age courses. 
Keeping in view the requirements of the industry and the potential  of the new 
age courses for providing employment in emerging fields, the Committee feel 
that the DGT needs to take urgent and effective steps to address the challenges 
posed and promote the new courses in ITIs. Measures need to be taken to 
increase awarene ss about the new courses through every available channel, 
including social media, on -line advertising, and outreach programmes. It is 
also important to strengthen the job prospects for candidates who pursue the 
new courses by working in tandem with employe rs to create adequate 
opportunities in the new and emerging sectors. DGT should ensure that ITIs 
get the necessary technical and financial support in their efforts towards 
introduction of the new age courses. The Committee would, therefore, 
emphasise that necessary measures be taken for giving an impetus to the new 
disciplines introduced in ITIs so as to be in tune with the changing industrial 
milieu. 
  

13 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Directorate General of Training (DGT) has introduced many new age 
courses and updated the curricula of many existing trades considering the 
changing technology and demand of the industry/employers. New age trades 
provide emerging or modern vocational s kills that cater to evolving industries 
or technological advancements. For the promotion of new age courses, DGT 
has mandated that for opening a new ITI, at least one new age course is 
essential in the proposed trades. Further, DGT vide circular dated 23rd  March 
2023 had notified new grading methodology for ITIs i.e. Data driven grading 
methodology (DDGM). Under DDGM weightage has been given for new age 
trades for grading an ITI and existing ITIs with a minimum grade of 4 are only 
eligible for addition of trades/units.  
To increase awareness of new age courses among trainers and trainees, a 
special new age category has been included for felicitation of trainees in 
Convocation ceremony and trainers in National Award for Excellence in 
Vocational Training and E ntrepreneurship development. Apart from above 
mentioned steps awareness for new age courses is being done through social 
media, media campaigns. 
For placement of trainees including new age trade trainees, DGT has 
requested Ministry of Railways and Departme nt of Public Enterprises  to 
include the CTS qualification in the recruitment rules under various posts.  
  
Under all the schemes of DGT having financial assistance, states/UTs 
are free to select the trades and accordingly procure machinery/equipment. In 
addition, States/UTs have been encouraged to opt for new age courses using 
the financial assistance under all schemes of DGT viz. STRIVE, Model ITI, LWE 
Scheme, ESDI scheme.  
The above efforts of DGT are encouraging ITIs to opt for new age courses. 
However, the adoption of new age courses by ITIs and trainees is slow. The 
trainees are opting for traditional courses as there are established job 
opportunities for these trades. DGT is committed to increase penetration of 
new age courses with necessary policy cha nges and support of Industry 
partners. 
 
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship OM No. DGT-
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023)  
 

14 
 
(Recommendation Para No.3) 
 The Committee note that the DGT had conducted an exercise for grading of all 
ITIs, Government and Private. This was done in two phases and the final 
results of grading of both the phases have been published. The scores obtained 
in the grading are used for affiliation of the ITIs for addition of new trades or 
new Units. The scores obtained are also used as one of the criteria to select ITIs 
for funding under the STRIVE project. According to the Ministry, this grading 
was valid till the academic session 2022 -23. For the academic year 2023 
onwards, a fresh dynamic data driven system of grading is being formulated. In 
the considered opinion of the Committee, the grading of ITIs is a valuable tool 
for improving the quality of training of ITIs and helps to identif y the best 
performing ITIs and provide feedback to the ITIs on how they can improve their 
performance. Grading also helps to create a competitive environment among 
ITIs, which can lead to better quality training. The Committee recommend that 
the DGT expedi te the introduction of the new grading system for ITIs and 
ensure that it is implemented effectively. The new data -driven system should 
also be transparent, especially in redressal of grievance(s), if any, and provide 
updated and reliable information about the functioning of ITIs. 
Reply of the Government 
The Directorate General of Training (DGT) had earlier conducted grading 
of ITIs in two phases. The methodology adopted for grading involved field visits 
and data validation. This grading system was valid up  till the academic year 
2022-23.  
In order to bring in more transparency in the grading process, DGT had 
developed a new methodology for grading ITIs ( Data Driven Grading 
Methodology) using the parameters/information available on the NCVT (DGT) 
MIS portal. The DDGM grading has been implemented from session 2023-24.  
Following parameters are used for generation of grading scores: 
 Sl. 
No. 
Parameters Weightage 
1 Admission percentage 35 
2 Female admission percentage  5 
3 Trade Diversity (New emerging Trades /Non-Engineering Trades) 5 
4 Pass percentage  35 
5 Computer Based Test (CBT) examination participation percentage 5 
6 Average marks percentage of all the trainees appeared in CBT exam 5 
7 Dual System of Training (DST) enrolled trainee’s percentage 5 
8 SC/ST/PwD enrolled trainees’ percentage  5 
 
  
            The DDGM grading system is based on the data driven parameters 
available on the portal with the least amount of human interference. 

15 
 
Grading of ITIs is generated automatically. The grading is also dynamic and 
can improve/ go down every year depe nding on the performance of the ITI 
in the last year. It will be published on DGT MIS portal for every ITI and 
visible to stakeholders/public. All the information/ scores against each 
parameter are available in public domain for transparency. 
Following tab le and graphs represent grading distribution across 
ITIs.               
                    
                                                                        
   
                                            
         
                                 
  
Grading 
Range 
No. of ITIs 
less than 2 883 
2 to less than 
4 
1,808 
4 to less than 
6 
4,670 
6 to less than 
8 
5,464 
8 to 10 1,856 
Total 14,681 

16 
 
                                     
Under the above Grading Methodology, two levels of grievance 
redressal mechanism is also available with ITIs to resolve the issues related 
to grades assigned to ITIs. Two level of grievance mechanism are 
a)    Grading Grievance Redressal Committee (GGRC) 
b)  Appellate Committee 
The ITIs were given 15 calen dar days to submit their grievances regarding 
grading score with evidences to DGT from the date of allocation of final grades. 
In this time period, DGT had received a total of 173 grievances. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship OM No. DGT-
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
  
 
 Total Number of Grievances received 173 
Total number of Grievances resolved at GGRC 
Level 
160 
Total number of Grievances resolved at Appellate 
Committee Level 
 
02 
Total number of Grievances under process 13 

17 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 The Committee are particularly concerned to note the large number of vacant 
positions of instructors in ITIs in the country. The Committee had expressed 
their concern on this count in their Reports presented on earlier occasions too. 
As per the informatio n available on the NCVT portal, in case of Government 
ITIs, out of the total of 71921 posts sanctioned, only 34663 posts (48.20%) 
have been filled, whereas in the case of private ITIs, out of the 133741 posts 
sanctioned only 56163 posts (41.99%) have been filled. DGT has submitted 
that the Government ITI instructors are employees of the State Government 
and are recruited by the various State Governments by following their 
Recruitment Rules. Their promotion and career progression policy is also the 
responsibility of the State Government concerned. Moreover, the DGT portal 
(the NCVT MIS portal) has a functionality where the details of the Instructors 
working are to be provided in respect of each ITI. However, this functionality is 
not a mandatory  one wherein t he data is to be filled and updated. DGT on its 
part has directed all the State Governments to ensure that the Instructors’ 
vacancies are filled and also updated on the system (portal). As emphasized 
upon in their earlier reports, the Committee expect that  the DGT and the State 
Governments work together to address the issue of vacant instructor positions 
in ITIs. In this regard, the DGT should consider inter -alia holding meeting(s) 
with the Chief Secretaries  of all the States and highlight the cascading imp act 
vacancies of instructors is having on the quality of training, seek feedback 
regarding the ways to address the situation and ease the bottlenecks being 
faced by the State Governments in their recruitment process.  DGT may also 
consider developing a mech anism for incentivising States  that successfully 
address the shortage of instructors/trainers and direct the RDSEs to make 
sure that the private ITIs comply with the norms concerning the number of 
instructors/trainers. Also, the specific problems, if any, faced by the Private 
ITIs in connection with filling up the posts of Instructors may be objectively 
assessed and in case policy interventions are required, the same may be 
effected. 
  
Reply of the Government 
The Craftsmen Training Scheme (CTS) is implement ed through a network of 
Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) established all across the country. The 
quality of training provided by ITIs depends on the availability of qualified 
Instructors. The day to day administration of ITIs including recruitment, 
appointment, career progression of instructors is the responsibility of State 
governments/UT administration. To address the shortage of instructors in ITIs, 
DGT has written to States to fill the instructor vacancy. Meetings are also held 
with state governments and during visits to states, this issue is taken up. 
Further, DGT has revisited the essential qualifications of Instructors in ITIs 
and based on the recommendations of State/UTs & other stakeholders, CITS 
being an essential qualification for appointment  of Instructors in 
Degree/Diploma category has been removed. These categories of instructors, if 
not CITS qualified will have to complete CITS through RPL/regular route within 
3 years of appointment. It is expected that this policy decision will help the 
states to fill up the Instructor vacancy. 

18 
 
In order to incentivize States/UTs to reduce Instructor vacancy, reduction of 
Instructor vacancy is one of the Key Performance Indicator (KPI) under STRIVE 
project. Under STRIVE, 14 states have successfully reduced their vacancies by 
more than 20%.   
  
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship  OM No. DGT -
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
The Committee would also highlight in this regard the aspect of a number of 
vacancies existing in instructor/trainer positions in case of Union Territory 
Governments as well. From the information made available, it is seen that in 
Union Territory of Andaman an d Nicobar Islands and also Ladakh, more than 
50% of the posts are lying vacant. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
DGT take immediate steps to assess the reasons for the same and direct the 
administrations of the Union Territories concerned to fill up the vacancies at 
the earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
The day to day administration of ITIs including recruitment, appointment, 
career progression of instructors is the responsibility of State governments/UT 
administration. To address the shortage of instructors in ITIs, DGT has written 
to States/UTs to fill the instructor vacancy.  
 
Further, DGT has revisited the essential qualifications of Instructors in ITIs 
and based on the recommendations of State/UTs & other stakeholders, CITS 
being an essential qualification for appointment of Instructors in 
Degree/Diploma category has been removed. This is especially for new age 
courses where CITS is not available. These categories of instructors, if not CITS 
qualified will have to complete CITS through RPL/regu lar route within 3 years 
of appointment. The revised qualification of Instructors is placed at Annexure 
IX. It is expected that this policy decision will help the states to fillup the 
Instructor vacancy. 
  
In order to incentivize States/UTs to reduce Instr uctor vacancy, 
reduction of Instructor vacancy is one of the Key Performance Indicator (KPI) 
under STRIVE project. A total amount of Rs. 5.25 crores have been earmarked 
for achievement of this Key Performance Indicators in UTs. Under STRIVE, 3 
UTs have successfully reduced their vacancies by more than 20%.  

19 
 
   
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship OM No. DGT-
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I 
(Recommendation Para No.7) 
According to the Ministry, the National Council for Vocational Training 
(NCVT) had mandated that all trainers in ITIs need to be CITS trained. The 
Committee note with concern that as per the information furnished by the 
Ministry, out of 90826 trainers avai lable on the NCVT portal, only 16215 are 
CITS trained instructors. In order to address the issue, the Secretary of MSDE 
has written to all the Chief Secretaries of States/UTs with the request to revise 
the Recruitment Rules of Vocational Instructors for IT Is in their States by 
including CITS qualification as an essential requirement to bring standardised 
improvement in quality of vocational training across the country. Moreover, 59 
new State Government Institutes of Training of Trainers (IToTs) were affilia ted 
for admissions from Session 2022-23, which has enhanced the seating capacity 
by 2320 under CITS. The Committee emphasize the need for urgent and 
concrete action to meet the NCVT mandate and call for initiating measures for 
effective monitoring and crea tion of compliance mechanisms to track the 
progress of CITS training for ITI trainers. Regular reporting and data collection 
should be established to keep a record of the number of trainers who have 
undergone CITS training. Also, it will also be equally im portant to formulate a 
facilitative environment for the ITI trainers to undergo the training at CITS.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Training of Craft Instructors is the mandated responsibility of DGT and It has 
been operational since the inception of the Craft smen Training Scheme (CTS). 
Comprehensive training both in skills and training methodology is imparted to 
the instructor trainees to make them conversant with techniques of 
transferring hands-on skills, to train skilled manpower for the industry. 
                          To ensure that quality instructors are available, DGT has 
mandated educational qualifications for Instructors. Further, DGT has revisited 
the essential qualifications of Instructors in ITIs and based on the 
recommendations of State/UTs &ot her stakeholders, CITS being an essential 
qualification for appointment of Instructors in Degree/Diploma category has 
been removed. These categories of instructors, if not CITS qualified will have to 
complete CITS through RPL/regular route within 3 years o f appointment. The 
revised qualification of Instructors is placed at Annexure IX. It is expected that 
this policy decision will help the states to fill up the Instructor vacancies. 
              Further, to increase the pool of CITS qualified Instructors a nd make 
CITS training accessible to trainees, DGT has permitted States/UTs to offer 

20 
 
CITS training in their Nodal/Model ITIs by converting Govt ITI into Institute for 
Training of Trainers (IToT). Copy of the order is placed at Annexure X. This step 
has lead  to increase of IToT by 104 and CITS seating capacity by 4250. 
States/UTs are also permitted to get their  in service Instructors obtain CITS 
certification through Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) route. Under CITS-RPL 
about 8300 instructors have been certified. 
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship  OM No. DGT -
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 12) 
The dual system of training is an innovative approach to skill development that 
combines theoretical training in ITIs with practical training in industry. The 
Committee note from the information furnished that the number of ITIs 
imparting training under th e Dual System of Training Scheme has increased 
from 81 in 2018 to 978 in 2022. The Committee recognise the efforts of the 
Directorate General of Training (DGT) in increasing the number of ITIs 
imparting training under the system. The dual system of trainin g has the 
potential of being effective in augmenting the employability of the trainees and 
in preparing them to be suitable for absorption by the industry upfront; help 
bridge the gap between the skills imparted in ITIs and the skills required by 
employers; and also contribute to reducing the training cost of the employers. 
The Committee expect the DGT to ensure that the system does not increase the 
overall cost of training for the trainees and also consider extending support to 
the employers so as to enabl e in more entities to participate in the programme. 
The Committee also desire that the DGT strive to expand the reach of the dual 
system of training so that more young people can be skilled in an industry and 
employment friendly manner. Further, being conv inced of the effectiveness of 
the dual system of training in scaling up the employability of 
candidates/passouts, the Committee recommend that a similar system be 
considered for being formulated and implemented for Polytechnics.  
  
Reply of the Government 
The Dual System of Training (DST) enables trainees to get the institutional 
training in ITIs along with shop floor experience in industries. DST has not only 
enabled trainees to gain experience of industrial technology, shop floor etc. but 
has also brought ITIs and industries closer.  
The fee charged from trainees in DST is similar to the regular CTS courses in 
ITIs. DST is expected to reduce the training cost of ITIs by utilizing the ITI 
infrastructure to run short term courses during the industrial exposure period 
of DST trainees. In order to boost DST, DGT had revised the DST guidelines 
relaxing the eligibility criteria for industries to participate in DST. In addition, 
DGT has mandated all CTS course running in 3rd shift will be mandatorily 

21 
 
covered under DST from session 2023. It is expected that above steps will boost 
the DST training.   
The courses offered in Polytechnics are being regulated by All India Council for 
Technical Education (AICTE). The recommendation of the parliamentary 
committee has been forwarded to Ministry of Educa tion to take appropriate 
steps on DST in polytechnics. 
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship  OM No. DGT -
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 13) 
The Committee note that industry partners are  being made part of the 
Institutional Management Committee (IMC) of the ITIs to bring in the much 
needed inputs from the job market with respect to skills required in the 
industry as well as necessary modifications related to course curricula. In 
addition, to further strengthen industry partnership, Industry Clusters (IC) are 
formed and set up under the Scheme. For each IC, a sum of Rs.1 crore is 
provisioned under the Scheme to promote industry participation and 
apprenticeship training. The Committee believ e that industry participation 
allows ITIs to provide practical and real-world training to its students. Industry 
participation in curriculum design and evaluation provides better recognition 
and value to the certifications. There will also be a positive im pact on the 
employability of the passouts, especially by cutting down the training cost of 
the employers. It also allows synergy of curriculum with the industry and thus 
make ITIs more relevant and contemporary. The Committee desire that 
necessary impetus be given towards implementing the policy for active 
participation of the industry in framing the training programmes so as to 
effectively capture the changing requirements and realities of employment. 
Reply of the Government 
DGT is actively engaged with Industry partners in implementing training, 
placements of trainees and curriculum development. Active engagement of 
Industry partners in training activity is being ensured through DST, Flexi -MoU 
schemes. It has bridged the industry academia gap, being helpfu l for both the 
training institution and industry. Institutions have benefited by getting support 
in technical know, placement of trainees and CSR support. Industry has 
benefited in training the candidates as per their requirements during the 
training phase and thereby reducing their cost of hiring. 
In addition, DGT is regularly updating the course content and 
introducing the new courses as per the market requirements and changing 
technology. All the course content is being updated with recommendation of 
industry partners while designing of courses. 
Further, to give an impetus for apprenticeship training, MSDE under the 
STRIVE project is providing financial assistance to Industry clusters. This 
initiative is expected to boost apprenticeship training providing  better skilling 

22 
 
opportunities to trainees and excel their skills. The fund details state wise 
under RA-4 component, focusing on apprenticeship is placed at Annexure-IV. 
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship  OM No. DGT -
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
(Recommendation Para No. 14) 
According to the DGT, MoUs have been signed with the Indian Armed 
Forces for providing the National Trade Certificate to the Agniveers on 
completion of their four year stint with the Armed Forces. For the purpose, an 
extensive trade mapping exercise was done individually with all the three wings 
of the Indian Armed Forces. Based on this, ‘on the job’ training would be 
imparted to the Agniveers during their stint with the Armed Forces a nd an 
exam would be conducted by the DGT for all the Agniveers. On successful 
passing of the exam, the National Trade Certificate in the relevant trade would 
be provided to the Agniveers by the DGT which would help them secure 
employment after they complet e their time in the forces. The Committee are 
appreciative of the steps taken by the Ministry for the benefit of the Agniveers 
and would like to highlight the significance employment opportunities in 
ensuring the success of the new initiative. The Committe e desire that the 
Ministry can work with industry partners to provide the Agniveers holding 
National Trade Certificates with job opportunities relevant to the skill they 
acquire during their service. Also, appropriate measures need to be taken for 
promoting and expanding the scheme of ‘Flexi MOU’ under which the training 
is imparted almost entirely in the work place(s), which include public 
enterprises such as SAIL. Also, it needs to be ensured that the training courses 
are designed to be effective in encouraging the trainees to work independently. 
  
Reply of the Government 
Flexi-MoU scheme is designed to meet the very specific industry demand 
for which flexible course content is required. This allows industries to train 
candidates as per their specific skil l set requirements and provides training to 
the candidates which is aligned with the industry needs and latest 
technological know-how in industries. The scheme offers flexibility to Industry, 
for their tailored and customized courses, and has topical marke t relevant 
content.  
 DGT has signed MoUs with the armed forces under Flexi MoU scheme. 
The scheme will allow Agniveers to obtain National Trade Certificate after 
completion of their training under Agniveer. MSDE is in continuous touch with 
the employers t o hire trained candidates including that of NTC/NAC 
candidates. DGT has also written to Ministry of Railways, Department of Public 
Enterprises and others requesting to revise their recruitment rules giving due 
recognition to NTC/NAC (Annexure VII). 
 Flexi MoU scheme of DGT is available to all the Industrial Training 
Partners to train the candidates as per their specific requirements. Under this 
scheme prominent industry partners including public sector enterprises are 

23 
 
actively engaged in training candidates . Some of the prominent industry 
partners are Maruti Suzuki India Limited, NMDC Steel Ltd., Suzuki Motors 
Private Limited, Gujarat, Toyota Kirloskar Motor Private Limited etc. 
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship OM No. DGT-
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I 
 
  

24 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
Nil 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
The Committee note that the new age courses that have been introduced 
recently in ITIs will require certified instructors for imparting training under 
these courses. According to the Ministry, the curricula for the instructor 
training programmes under Craft Instructor Training Schemes (CITS) are being 
developed based on the feedback from the industry, academia, and States/UTs. 
Keeping in view the demand for these new age courses, respective CITS 
curricula will be developed accordingly in due course of time. The Committee 
note that trainers play an important role in  the uptake of new age courses. 
They are critical for the training ecosystem and as new age courses continue to 
evolve, the role of qualified trainers will become even more important. Since 
training of Craft Instructors is the mandated responsibility of DG T, the 
Committee would urge upon the DGT to take steps to expedite the development 
of curricula of the instructor training programmes under CITS. More 
importantly, comprehensive training, both in skills and training methodology is 
a necessity to make the i nstructor trainees conversant with techniques of 
transferring hands-on skills, and thereby enable in building adequately skilled 
manpower for the industry. Further, the Committee would also emphasise on 
ensuring that the course curricula to be symbioticall y connected to the 
industry and be responsive and pliable according to the requirements of 
employability as per market demands. 
Reply of the Government 
DGT is offering CTS training through a network of about 15000 ITIs in 
more than 150 trades including 23 new age trades.  Updation of course content 
and introduction of new age courses is a continuous process with changing 
technology and feedback from industry. With regular updation of course 
content/introduction of new courses, the availability of trained in structors is 
also essential to give maximum benefits to trainees. 
In order to ensure quality training, DGT has prescribed essential qualifications 
for appointment of Instructors. Recently DGT has revisited the educational 
qualifications of Instructors and based on the feedback of the State/UT, the 
CITS being an essential qualification for new age trades has been removed. 
However, to ensure effective training is delivered  pedagogy training has to  be 
completed within one year. Further, DGT is conducting ToT p rograms for the 
newly introduced courses, to ensure trainers are being updated regularly. 
 
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship OM No. DGT-Coord/11014/36/Parliament 
Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Paras No. 15 and 16 of Chapter-I 
  

26 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
The Committee note that for the Session 2022 -23, the enrollment percentage 
for Government and Private ITIs was 59.18% and 39.52% respectively. This 
implies that there are a large number of seats remaining vacant in ITIs. The 
Committee gather that the reasons for the low enrollment figures may include, 
lack of awareness , poor quality of training and lack of job opportunities after 
completion of training. In case of private ITIs, there is also a need to investigate 
whether the fees being charged is acting as a deterrent for students. The 
Committee are deeply concerned to note the poor enrollment figures and 
recommend that the DGT initiate a process to identify the reasons for the low 
enrollment figures and take steps to remedy the situation since increasing the 
enrollment figures in ITIs is essential for meeting the growin g demand for 
skilled workers in India. The key to this may lie in improving the employability 
of graduates which eventually can underpin the efforts towards reducing 
poverty, creating a more skilled workforce, and providing opportunities for all. 
Reply of the Government 
                          The issue of vacant seats in ITI is being monitored closely by 
DGT. In order to boost the admission percentage in ITIs, DGT has released the 
academic calendar well in advance. Further, State Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship Committee (SSDEC) has been requested to make wide 
publicity of admission process and enable a mechanism for walk in admission 
after regular admission process.  
                          As per the Affiliation norms any ITI not taking admissi on in 
any trade/unit for consecutive 2 years, that trade/unit is to be de -affiliated. 
Further, in order to effectively utilize the training Infrastructure, DGT has 
permitted running of short term courses in ITIs having a grade of more than 4 
out of 10.  
            Regarding fee charged from trainees by private ITI, DGT had notified in 
2022 normative fee charged by private ITI. As per the guidelines issued annual 
fee charged per trainee by an ITI could be Rs 26,000 for engineering trade and 
Rs 21,200 for non engineering trade.  Normative fee in rural and urban area is 
same, so as to encourage opening ITI in rural area and provide quality training 
near to residence of trainees. 
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship  OM No. DGT-
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
 
  

27 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
The Committee are deeply concerned to note the low level of enrolment of 
candidates under the CTS scheme in the North Eastern States. As per the 
information provided to the Committee, only 6839 candidates got enrolled in all 
the North eastern states during the 2021 -22 Session. The number for States 
such as Manipur and Mizoram was extremely low. The Committee note that in 
all 8 North Eastern States there are a total 104 ITIs present out of which 89 are 
Government ITIs and 15 are Private ITIs, which is significantly less as 
compared to others States/UTs. Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Nagaland and Sikkim have no Private ITIs. As per the submission of the 
Ministry, these figures are indicative of less popularity/awareness about ITIs in 
North Eastern (NE) Region, the reason for which could be the less number of 
Industries/placement opportunities present in NE Region. Funding is provided 
by the Central Govern ment under Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure 
in North Eastern States (ESDI) Scheme to strengthen the Skill development 
Infrastructure in NE Region. The Committee while agreeing with the Ministry 
that the development of good infrastructure may create awareness and increase 
popularity of ITIs in the North East, impress upon the Ministry and DGT the 
need to enhance the reach of ITIs in the North Eastern State. The Committee 
suggest that the Ministry should partner with the North Eastern Council and 
the Ministry for Development of the North East Region for development of the 
ITI infrastructure in the North Eastern Region. In this regard, apart from 
roping in major industrial establishments, it is important to work with the local 
industries and businesse s including MSMEs to create employment 
opportunities for the ITI pass outs. The Committee feel that the unique 
challenges call for unique solutions and the Ministry may consider developing 
specific courses that can cater to the thriving industries of the R egion such as 
bamboo related industries, tourism, food processing and hospitality. In the 
opinion of the Committee the addition of new ITIs, development/upgradation of 
the existing ones, tailor made region -specific solutions to problems, infusion of 
requisite funds, escalated efforts to secure industry participation, incentivized 
awareness programmes to spur enrolment, etc. are the need of the hour and 
the same signals to a mission mode initiative by the Ministry which goes 
beyond the ESDI Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
Low enrollment in ITIs of north eastern states is being monitored closely 
at the central government level. DGT has introduced many courses related to 
local economy viz. horticulture, floriculture and landscaping, bamboo works 
etc. apart from other emerging sectors. States are encouraged to adopt courses 
as per the local industry requirements and may utilize the funds under various 
schemes having financial assistance components. 
In order to encourage establishments of new ITIs in North Eastern  states and 
border districts, relaxation in minimum land requirement and minimum 4  
  

28 
 
 
trade/8 units has been granted. It is expected this step will further increase 
the footprint of ITIs  including private ITIs in north eastern states. 
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship  OM No. DGT -
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
It is a matter of concern for the Committee to note that data on placement of 
ITI passouts is not available with the DGT. The Committee had, in their 
Reports presented on earlier occasions too emphasized on ensuring that data 
on placements is generated and maintained. According to DGT, although the 
exact figures are not available, it is known that the employment percenta ge of 
the graduates is quite high. A large number of ITI passouts are taken as 
Apprentices in various industries and some of them are absorbed as 
permanent employees on completion of Apprenticeship. It is also seen that 
many ITI passouts do not opt for job s as they intend to pursue higher studies. 
DGT, while highlighting the difficulty in tracing such a large number of pass -
outs, also submitted that in order to trace the percentage of employment, the 
nature of employment and other employment related paramet ers, a 
functionality was created in the DGT Portal (NCVT Portal) wherein the ITIs were 
required to capture and upload the data pertaining to employment status of 
those passing out from their respective ITIs. This is not a mandatory function, 
and an analysi s of the data as available reveals that most ITIs have not filled 
this information. In the considered opinion of the Committee, data on 
placements is essential to analyze the real impact of the ITI ecosystem and for 
identifying and addressing weaknesses by  way of effective policy interventions. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate the need on the part of DGT to consider 
making it mandatory for ITIs to upload data on the employment status of their 
pass outs. The DGT should also commission a study to collect m ore detailed 
information on the employment outcomes of ITI pass outs. The Committee also 
feel that technology can play a valuable role in the collection of placement data. 
This will require participation of all the stakeholders including the ITIs, 
employers and the pass outs. Making all the establishments recruiting ITI pass 
outs to upload the relevant data on the NCVT portal or such similar steps can 
be adopted. This can be achieved with the help of appropriate outreach of the 
recruiting industry partners.  Organising campus placement and promotion of 
Alumni networks by ITIs may also inter -alia help in this connection. The 
Committee reckon that the needed focus on employment data as an indicator of 
performance may prompt the ITIs to ramp up efforts to improv e the quality of 
training offered.  
Reply of the Government 
Industrial Training Institutes have been the backbone of skilling since 
Independence. ITIs were established to supply a steady flow of skilled 
manpower for the industries. Trainees apart from being taught technical skills 
are also taught employability skil ls having IT related skills, behavioural skills, 

29 
 
entrepreneurship awareness etc. as an inbuilt component. Both technical and 
employability skills makes the trainee easily employable. The placement of ITI 
trainees is quite high, with Railways, PSUs, giant p rivate companies having ITI 
pass outs constituting most of their workforce. DGT is also in the process to 
provide entrepreneurship training in select ITIs across the country to boost the 
entrepreneurship among the ITI trainees.  
The functionality to track the placement of ITI trainees in NCVT MIS 
portal was not a mandatory field as a result most of the trainees/ITIs did not 
fill up the related data of placement of trainees. MSDE has recently launched 
Skill India Digital (SID) portal, NCVT portal is proposed  to be merged with SID. 
All the functionalities of NCVT portal are being relooked and necessary 
amendments required are being implemented in SID to ensure better data flow 
to track the impact of skilling activities. 
DGT under the STRIVE project is also conducting a tracer study to evaluate the 
impact of skilling activities including placement in ITIs. The report will 
highlight the correct picture of placements and other aspects. It is expected to 
give necessary inputs for required policy interventions. 
 
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship OM No. DGT-
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
The scheme envisaged for development of Polytechnic Institutions inter -alia 
had a provision for construction of 500 women’s hostels in various 
Polytechnics. In addition, 295 new polytechnics were to be established in un -
served and underserved districts and  500 existing polytechnics were to be 
upgraded in terms of infrastructure, with all the targets envisaged for being 
achieved by 31st March, 2023. However, as submitted by DGT, work in a large 
number of cases continues to be pending or is partially complete d. Among the 
objectives of the Scheme, the Committee note that the work pertaining to the 
upgradation of the Polytechnics has been particularly slow wherein out of the 
500 existing polytechnics to be upgraded, only 115 polytechnics have been 
upgraded  and the remaining 385 are in different stages of completion. The 
Scheme for Polytechnics was earlier run by the Department of Higher 
Education, subsequently, transferred to DGT, MSDE in FY 2018 -19. With a 
significant amount of work remaining to be completed vi s-à-vis the original 
targets, the DGT is contemplating designing a new scheme with an extended 
date of completion, which is subject to approval by the Cabinet. Considering 
the facts, as submitted, the Committee would like the DGT to seriously look 
into the factors contributing to the underachievement of targets of the Scheme 
of Polytechnics in general, evaluate the implementation strategies and identify 
bottlenecks and administrative or logistical challenges that have impeded the 
progress. The Committee are  of the considered opinion that Polytechnics are 
also cornerstones of the initiative of the Government to upskill the youth of the 
Country. Keeping this in view, it is recommended that the DGT should make all 

30 
 
out efforts to launch the new scheme for Polyte chnics with objectives that are 
not restricted to that of the old scheme, and are in tune with contemporary 
needs. 
Reply of the Government 
The ministry has noted the recommendation for compliance. A new 
scheme is currently under development, marked by obje ctives that transcend 
the confines of the existing scheme of polytechnic. 
 
(Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship  OM No. DGT -
Coord/11014/36/Parliament Matters/2022-Part(1) dated 20.12.2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
05 February, 2024                             CHAIRPERSON, 
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka )                    STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
  

31 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAIN ED IN THE FORTY -NINTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
 
      Total Percentage 
   
I. Total number of Recommendations 14  
II. Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government – 
Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 12, 13, 
and 14. 
 
09 64.29% 
III. Recommendations/Observations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply –  Nil 
 
00 00% 
IV Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration – Rec. Para 
Nos. 6 
01 7.14% 
V Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the Government 
are interim in nature - Rec. Para Nos. 8, 
9, 10 and 11. 
 
04 28.57% 
   100% 
 