49 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
FUNCTIONING OF 
 
 
i 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
(2022-23) 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP
 
FUNCTIONING OF DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF TRAINING
  
FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) & ENTREPRENEURSHIP DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF TRAINING LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  (Saka) 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP
 
FUNCTIONING OF 
 
ii 
FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA)
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP
FUNCTIONING OF DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.08
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 04.08.202
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  LOK SABHA) MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF TRAINING 8.2023 .2023 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  (Saka) 

iii 
CONTENTS 
PAGE No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)           (iv)  
 
   
INTRODUCTION                     (vi)   
      REPORT 
PART-I NARRATIVES  
I. INTRODUCTORY 1 
II. ROLE AND FUNCTIONING OF DGT  2 
III. FUNCTIONING OF PRIVATE AND GOVERNMENT ITIs 5 
IV. INTRODUCTION OF NEW-AGE COURSES 8 
V. GRADING OF ITIs 9 
VI.      VACANCIES OF INSTRUCTORS IN ITIs 10 
VII.     PLACEMENTS 12 
VIII.    SCHEME OF POLYTECHNICS 13 
IX. ENROLLMENT IN ITIs 15 
X. OTHER ISSUES 16 
PART-II OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 20-34 
                 ANNEXURES  
Annexure I  ( State-wise number ITIs running New Age Courses )  35 
Annexure II  (State-wise number of students enrolled in New Age Courses) 37 
Annexure III (State-wise total number of vacancies existing in it is) 44 
Annexure IV (Vacancies of Instructors existing in ITIs in the North-
Eastern Region) 
45 
APPENDICES  
Appendix I- Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee held on  
9th January, 2023. 46 
*Appendix II- Minutes of the Twenty Fourth Sitting of the Committee held on  
3rd August, 2023.  
____________________________________________________________________________________
*Not appended with this cyclostyled copy. 
  

iv 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
5. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
6. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
7. Shri Bache Gowda B.N. 
8. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
9. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
10. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
11. Shri Pakauri Lal 
12. Prof. Sanjay Sadashivrao Mandlik 
13. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori  
14. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
15. Dr. D. Ravikumar 
16. Shri Naba (Hira) Kumar Sarania 
17. Shri Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Nayab Singh 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan 
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24.  Shri R. Dharmar 
25. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
26.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
27.  Ms. Dola Sen 
28.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
29. Shri Shibu Soren 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.     Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  -  Additional Secretary 
 2  Shri S. Sreekanth   - Deputy Secretary 
 3. Shri Aditya Runthala  - Assistant Committee Officer 
  

v 
INTRODUCTION 
          I,  the  Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2022-23) having been authorized by the Committee do present 
on their behalf this Forty-Ninth Report on  ‘Functioning of Directorate General 
of Training' relating to the Ministry of Skill Development &  Entrepreneurship. 
2.  The Committee (2022-23) took oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship on 9th January, 2023. The 
Committee considered and adopted this Report during the sitting held on  
3rd August, 2023. 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship for tendering evidence and 
placing before the Committee all the requisite information sought for in 
connection with the examination of the subject. 
4. For ease of reference and convenience, the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the 
body of the Report. 
 
                     
New Delhi;                     BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB 
3 August, 2023                                  CHAIRPERSON, 
12  Sravana, 1945 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
 TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
   

1 
 
REPORT 
PART-I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 The Directorate General of Training (DGT) is an apex organization under 
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) of the 
Government of India. It is responsible for the development and coordination of 
vocational training programmes in India. 
2. The DGT plays a key role in the development of the skill ecosystem in 
India. It works to provide quality vocational training to the youth of India and to 
promote apprenticeship training. The DGT is mandated to making India a 
skilled nation. DGT operates Vocational Training Schemes in some of the 
specialized areas through field institutes under its direct control. Development 
of these programmes at national level, particularly in the area concerning 
common policies, common standards and procedures, training of instructors 
and trade testing are the responsibility of the DGT. But day-to-day 
administration of Industrial Training Institutes rests with the State 
Governments/ Union Territories Administrations. 
3. The DGT is responsible for framing the overall policies, norms and 
standards for vocational training in India. This includes setting the curriculum, 
training modules, and assessment criteria for vocational training programs. The 
DGT is responsible for diversifying, updating and expanding training facilities in 
terms of craftsmen and crafts instructor training. This includes establishing 
new ITIs, upgrading existing ITIs, and providing training to instructors. The 
DGT is also responsible for organizing and conducting specialized training and 
research at the specially established training Institutes. This includes 
conducting training programs in new technologies, conducting research on 
vocational training, and publishing research reports. The DGT provides 
financial assistance to State Governments and Union Territory Administrations 
for the development and upgradation of training infrastructure. This includes 
funding the construction of new ITIs, renovation of existing ITIs, and 
procurement of training equipment.  
4. Directorate General of Training (DGT) is implementing the following 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes for infrastructure development of ITIs and 
capacity building in the skilling ecosystem in the States/UTs:  
1. Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure in North Eastern Region 
(ESDI) 
2. Upgradation of existing Government ITIs into Model ITIs 

2 
 
3. Skill Development in 48 districts affected by Left-Wing Extremism 
4. Scheme of Polytechnics 
5. Skills Strengthening for Industrial Value Enhancement (STRIVE) 
For implementation of the schemes, DGT releases funds to States/UTs as 
per the approved guidelines of the Scheme and monitors the progress of the 
respective Schemes. The Schemes are implemented by the States/UTs 
concerned. 
5. With a view to assess the performance of the Directorate General of 
Training of the Ministry in terms of policy formulation and its monitoring as well 
as outcomes in terms of the employment generated, the Committee took up the 
Subject, for examination and report. In the process, the Committee obtained 
background material, took Oral evidence of and sought Post Evidence written 
Replies from the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. Based on 
the written and oral depositions of the Ministry, the Committee have analysed 
various issues pertaining to the subject matter as enumerated in the succeeding 
paragraphs which is followed by the Committee’s Observations/ 
Recommendations. 
 
II. ROLE AND FUNCTIONING OF DGT 
6. The Committee sought to know about the role of the DGT in the 
implementation of the various schemes of the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship. In response, the Ministry furnished the following details: 
‘The Directorate General of Training (DGT) under the Ministry of Skill Development 
and Entrepreneurship (MSD) is responsible for overall policy formation and setting 
broad standards and norms for long term vocational training. It is also responsible 
for developing course content and learning materials for vocational training. It has 
been recognised as an Awarding and Assessing body and conducts exams for the 
Industrial Training Institute trainees and provides the National Trade Certificate to 
the successful candidates.  
The DGT has developed and provided course content and curriculum for 152 long 
term courses / trades, all of which are National Skills Qualification Framework 
(NSQF) aligned. These trades are available for the ITIs to take up for teaching in 
their institutes.  The day to day management of the ITIs, however, lies with the 
State Governments.   
The DGT is also responsible for conducting training of trainers for ITI Instructors 
under the Craftsmen Instructor Training Scheme (CITS) through a network of 33 
National Skill Training Institutes (NSTIs) all over the country.    

3 
 
Directorate General of Training (DGT) is implementing the following Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes for infrastructure development of ITIs and capacity building in 
the skilling ecosystem in the States/UTs:  
1. Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure in North Eastern Region (ESDI) 
2. Upgradation of existing Government ITIs into Model ITIs 
3. Skill Development in 48 districts affected Left-Wing Extremism 
4. Scheme of Polytechnics 
5. Skills Strengthening for Industrial Value Enhancement (STRIVE) 
For implementation of the schemes, DGT releases the funds to States/UTs as per 
the approved guidelines of the scheme and monitors the progress of the respective 
schemes. The schemes are implemented by the concerned States/UTs. 
For implementation of the STRIVE (Skills Strengthening for Industrial Value 
Enhancement)project, DGT has, in addition, signed Performance Based Financial 
Agreement (PBFA) with 34 States / UTs and Performance Based Grant Agreement 
with 493 ITIs for their upgradation. In addition, 61 Industry Clusters have also 
been selected to foster industry engagement as well as to promote apprenticeship.’  
 
7. Asked about the obstacles being faced by the DGT in the smooth 
functioning of ITIs and other Government and Private Training Institutes, the 
Ministry stated as follows: 
 
‘The DGT designs new age courses based on requirements of Industry 4.0 for 
latest/ upcoming technologies.  These courses have been put up for taking up by 
the ITIs in the States. However, it is noticed that the traditional courses like 
Electrician, Fitter, Welder, Machinist and Motor Mechanic (Diesel) are far more 
popular and most ITIs still run such traditional courses.  There is less demand for 
the new age courses.   
Also, as the day-to-day management of the ITIs is with the State Government, the 
issues like filling up the post of Instructors, etc. lie with the State Governments.  
Due to various reasons, the shortage of Instructors is there which is an obstacle 
for providing quality training in the ITIs.   
There are a large number of private ITIs.  While the quality of training imparted 
and fulfilling of other parameters has to be monitored regularly by the State 
Governments and the Regional Directorate of Skill Development Entrepreneurship 
(RDSDEs), it is practically difficult at times to regularly monitor the quality of 
Training imparted in the Private ITIs.’ 
 
8. The Secretary, MSDE, during Oral Evidence stated the steps being taken 
to address  some of the challenges as under:  
 
“It comes out that we have most of the private ITIs. We have a little quality issue in 
them. As the DG has just said, we have also decentralized the affiliation and new 
job roles of many government ITIs by forming a state level committee. The state 

4 
 
recommended for the Institute of Training of Trainers and we added a lot to it so 
that the number of teachers also increased.” 
 
9. The Committee desired to know whether any third-party 
evaluation/impact assessment had been conducted for the schemes being 
implemented by the DGT. In reply, the Ministry submitted as follows: 
‘Third party evaluation/impact assessment has been conducted for above 
schemes as per the details mentioned below: 
● Evaluation of the Scheme “Upgradation of existing Government ITI into 
Model ITI” has been carried out by DGT through the third party National 
Productivity Council (NPC) in October 2021. 
● Evaluation of the Scheme “Skill Development in 48 Districts affected by 
LWE” has been carried out through the third-party Indian Institute of Public 
Administration (IIPA) in August 2021. 
● Evaluation of ESDI Scheme has been carried out through the third-party 
National Institute of Labour Economics Research and Development (NILERD) 
in 2021. 
● Evaluation of the Polytechnic Scheme has been carried out by National 
Institute of Labour Economics Research and Development (NILERD) in 2018. 
● The Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Indore is the Independent 
Verification Agency (IVA) for the STRIVE Project.  The last report was given 
in Feb 2023.’ 
10. The Committee also wanted to know whether NITI Aayog had studied any 
of the schemes being administered by the DGT and, if so, the action taken on 
the recommendations made by NITI Aayog. In response, the Ministry submitted 
as under:  
 
‘NITI Aayog has published a Report called – “Transforming Industrial Training 
Institute” in January,2023. Report of the NITI is available on the website. 
NITI Aayog has proposed some recommendations to transform ITIs into 
aspirational vocational training institutes. 
However, DGT has observed that there were some factual inaccuracies and 
incorrect presumption about ITIs which have been highlighted in the report of the 
NITI Aayog. Observation of the MSDE on report of NITI Aayog has been 
communicated to NITI Aayog vide D.O. letter dated 20.02.2023. 
The suggestions made in the said NITI Aayog Report inter-alia include: (i) 
instituting a robust process for continuous monitoring, (ii) upgrading training of 
trainers, and increasing the number of NSTIs to train the instructors, (iii) facilitating 
tie-ups with MSMEs also and (iv) mapping relevant trades and training in emerging 
areas  
III. FUNCTIONING OF PRIVATE AND GOVERNMENT ITIs 
11. The Committee was informed that the total number of ITIs in the country 
is 14,953 out of which 3247 are Govt. ITIs and 11,707 are Private ITIs. Their 
total capacity is 26,04,055 and current enrolment is 12,22,435.  
12. The Committee was also provided the State wise list as given below: 

5 
 
Sl. 
No. States Number of 
Govt. ITI 
Number of 
Pvt. ITIs 
Total Number 
of ITIs 
1 Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands 3 1 4 
2 Andhra Pradesh 83 432 515 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 7 0 7 
4 Assam 30 12 42 
5 Bihar 150 1219 1369 
6 Chandigarh 2 0 2 
7 Chhattisgarh 119 113 232 
8 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
Daman and Diu 3 0 3 
9 Delhi 17 36 53 
10 Goa 11 2 13 
11 Gujarat 274 234 508 
12 Haryana 160 228 388 
13 Himachal Pradesh 128 140 268 
14 Jammu And Kashmir 49 1 50 
15 Jharkhand 76 269 345 
16 Karnataka 275 1227 1502 
17 Kerala 149 314 463 
18 Ladakh 3 0 3 
19 Lakshadweep 1 0 1 
20 Madhya Pradesh 194 883 1077 
21 Maharashtra 422 606 1028 
22 Manipur 10 0 10 
23 Meghalaya 7 1 8 
24 Mizoram 3 0 3 
25 Nagaland 8 0 8 
26 Odisha 63 450 513 
27 Puducherry 8 7 15 
28 Punjab 113 237 350 
29 Rajasthan 160 1491 1651 
30 Sikkim 4 0 4 
31 Tamil Nadu 87 414 501 
32 Telangana 66 229 295 
33 Tripura 20 2 22 
34 Uttar Pradesh 286 2937 3223 
35 Uttarakhand 105 84 189 
36 West Bengal 150 138 288 
 Total 3,246 11,707 14,953 
 
13. The Committee queried to know the main differences between the Private 
and Government ITIs in terms of quality of training, functioning, teaching staff, 

6 
 
number of enrolled students, number of training programs etc. In response, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
The main difference between the private and government ITI is that the 
Government ITIs are run by the State Governments and are directly under the 
control of the State Government.  The private ITIs, on the other hand, are run by 
Private Management and decisions for day-to-day administration are taken by 
that management.  The fee structure in the case of Government ITIs is also 
nominal and the fee is usually subsidized, while in the case of private ITIs the fee 
charged is usually high and as per market rates. However, there are some private 
charitable organizations which run a chain of ITIs with nominal fee. 
As far as the DGT is concerned, there is no discrimination between Private and 
Government ITIs as far as affiliation norms and standards are concerned. In other 
words, the same norms of affiliation, as applicable to Government ITIs are also 
applicable to Private ITIs.  Similarly, the exam conducted by DGT for the students 
on the basis of which the National Trade Certificate is provided is the same.  Also, 
the courses provided by the DGT which can be run in the ITIs are the same for 
both Government and Private ITIs. Both Government and Private ITI can run any 
trade among the 152 NSQF aligned courses. 
Enrollment for session 2022-23 is given below: 
Category Total Seats count 
for Session 2022 
Total Enrollment 
for Session 2022 
Percentage 
Government 983006 581748 59.18% 
Private 1620989 640687 39.52% 
 
 
 
 
 
14. With regard to the administration of ITIs by the State Governments, the 
Secretary, MSDE deposed as under: 
“The day-to-day administration of ITI is done at the State level. We are in constant 
touch with the State Governments and we keep telling them a lot of your things. 
There has been some progress in some places and we have to find out a solution 
to this problem only with the help of the State Governments. The most important 
thing is that we should have our own standards or benchmarks. We have also 
graded them according to that benchmark. We have also marked red, yellow and 
we have made many efforts with the State Governments and we will continue to 
do so. Apart from this, we have no other way. We have to move forward in 
improving on this only by working with them. 
 

7 
 
15. The Committee desired to know about the mechanism available for 
monitoring the functioning/performance of the ITIs as well as quality of 
instruction/training across the ITIs. In response the Ministry submitted as 
under: 
‘The Private ITIs are also run under the overall aegis of the State 
Government.  In fact, whenever a private organization applies for affiliation, the 
State Governments has to give a No Objection Certificate (NOC) to the DGT for 
affiliation of that ITI. The State Government also has to conduct the assessment of 
the ITI called ‘Desktop Assessment’ and send the report to the DGT recommending 
its affiliation or otherwise. The State Governments are also responsible for 
ensuring that the functioning and performance of the Private ITIs continues to be 
good.   
In addition, the Directorate General of Training also has Regional Directorates of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (RDSDE) in various States whose job is to 
ensure that the decisions taken by DGT are implemented in the State. The 
RDSDEs are also to ensure that the Private as well as Government ITIs are 
running as per DGT norms.  
For ensuring that the exams are conducted smoothly, there are Controller of 
Examinations (CoE) posted in each States who, in collaboration with RDSDEs, 
conduct surprise visits during exams in the examination centres.  This is in 
addition to posting of invigilators and flying squads.  
In addition, to ensure the attendance of students and teachers, biometric 
attendance has been prescribed and availability of biometric machine(s) with GPS 
connection has been made mandatory. Instructions are issued to the State 
Government for monitoring the attendance regularly. 
For providing more trainers, the DGT has affiliated 59 Institutes of Training of 
Trainers (IToTs) to enhance the pool of trainers available for teaching in the ITIs.’ 
 
IV. INTRODUCTION OF NEW-AGE COURSES 
 
16.      The Craftsmen Training Scheme (CTS), being implemented in ITIs, was 
introduced by the Government of India in the year 1950 to ensure a steady flow 
of skilled workers in different trades for the domestic industry, to raise 
quantitatively and qualitatively the industrial production by systematic training. 
Vocational Training is a Concurrent Subject of both Central and State 
Governments. The development of training schemes at National level, evolution 
of policy, laying of training standard, norms, conducting of examinations, 
certification, etc. are the responsibilities of the Central Government, whereas, 
day to day administration including admission in ITIs rests with the respective 
State Governments / UTs.  
 

8 
 
17. Presently, training courses under Craftsmen Training Scheme (CTS) are 
being offered through a network of 14,953 ITIs (Govt. 3,246 + Private 11,707) 
located all over the Country with an objective to provide skilled work force to the 
industry in 150  NSQF compliant trades.  
18.  The Committee wanted to know about the steps taken to keep pace with 
the changes in technology and the market and the new age courses introduced 
in the ITIs in this regard. In reply, the DGT stated as follows:  
‘List of the NSQF aligned New Age courses introduced by DGT in ITIs  
i. Computer Hardware & Network Maintenance  
ii. Computer Operator and Programming Assistant  
iii. Electrician Power Distribution 
iv. Electronics Mechanic 
v. Information Communication Technology System Maintenance 
vi. Information Technology 
vii. Instrument Mechanic 
viii. IoT Technician (Smart Agriculture) 
ix. IoT Technician (Smart City) 
x. IoT Technician (Smart healthcare) 
xi. Mechanic Consumer Electronics 
xii. Mechanic Electric Vehicle 
xiii. Smartphone Technician Cum App Tester 
xiv. Solar Technician (Electrical) 
xv. Solar Technician 
xvi. Technician Mechatronics 
xvii. Technician Power Electronics System 
Note: In some of these courses, though working since long, the syllabus has been 
recently updated (2022) and modified to make it more topical and aligned with 
latest Industry requirements.   
Two more ‘green’ courses, Small Hydro Power Plant Technician and Wind Energy 
Technician have been recently developed and would be available for taking up 
from the next academic session.’ 
 
State wise number of ITIs running new age courses and the State-wise 
number of students enrolled in these courses are attached at Annexures I and 
II. 
 
19. The Committee further sought to know the steps taken for introducing 
new-age courses such as Internet of Things (IoT), Renewable Energy, 3-D 
Printing, Drone Technology, etc. under CITS on the lines of CTS. In response, 
the DGT submitted as under: 
‘The curricula of instructor Training program under CITS are being 
developed based on the feedback from industries, academia, States/UTs and 
demand in emerging areas. The new age CTS courses have been introduced 

9 
 
recently in ITIs. In view of demand of these courses, respective CITS curricula will 
be developed accordingly in due course of time.’ 
V. GRADING OF ITIs 
20. Directorate General of Training (DGT) under the aegis of Ministry of Skill 
Development (MSDE) has conducted grading of 14000+ ITIs in two phases in 
the country through independent third-party agencies. Final Grades of ITIs 
under both the phases have been published on DGT website after grievance 
handling and approval by Core Grading Committee.  
21. The rationale behind this exercise was to: 
 
i. Bring out a quality assurance mechanism in ITIs,  
ii. Provide benchmark for comparison between ITIs.  
iii. To identify the problem areas, design appropriate policy interventions 
and ensure effective implementation of quality standards.  
 
Highlights of Phase 1 Methodology 
 
i. 43 Parameters classified into 10 categories. 
ii. Parameters such as a functional Institute Management Committee 
(IMC), Institute-Industry engagement, availability of qualified 
instructors, availability of high-end trades, existence of production 
centres, etc. were incorporated in the grading framework. 
iii. Total of 4,811 ITI were graded under this phase 
 
  

10 
 
Highlights of Phase 2 Methodology 
 
i. 27 Parameters classified into 5 categories. 
ii. Each parameter has a score of 0 to 5 and have relative weights as per 
their importance within the category. 
iii. Resolution of grievances of ITIs not satisfied with their tentative grades 
by Grievance Redressal Committee (consisting of officers from State 
Directorates and RDSDEs) and approval of Draft grades of ITIs by Core 
Grading Committee (consisting of officers from AICTE, NAAC and DGT). 
iv. Review of appeals of ITIs not satisfied with Draft Grades by Appellate 
Committee with some conditions. 
v. A total of 12,352 ITIs were graded under this phase. This includes ITIs 
from Phase 1 who opted for re-grading under Phase 2. 
 
22. When asked whether the exercise would be undertaken again and, if so, 
at what intervals, the Ministry furnished the following reply: 
‘This grading was valid till the academic session 2022-23. For the 
academic year 2023 onwards, fresh system for grading is being formulated and 
process is going on.  This proposed grading methodology is data driven and is 
based on annual performance parameters like Admission percentage, Pass 
percentage etc.  The grading of the ITIs will therefore, vary each year depending 
on its performance in the previous academic year.  This dynamic system of 
grading is proposed to be used in future.’   
23. The Committee also asked about the steps proposed to be taken based on 
the results of the grading exercise. In reply, the Ministry stated as follows:-  
‘The scores obtained as a result of grading are used for affiliation of the ITI 
for addition of new trades or new Units. The scores obtained were also used as 
one of the criteria to select ITIs for funding under the STRIVE project.’ 
 
VI. VACANCIES OF INSTRUCTORS IN ITIs 
24. As regards the issue of vacancies of instructors/teachers the Ministry 
furnished the following details: (PER 13) 
As per details available on the NCVT portal, the trainer details in the ITIs is given 
below:  
Category Total Post 
Sanctioned 
Total Post 
filled 
Percentag
e 
Government 71921 34663 48.20% 
Private 133741 56163 41.99% 
 
As per the affiliation norms, affiliation is granted only when the ITI has enough 
Instructors.  As far as the Government ITIs are concerned, the State Governments 

11 
 
are responsible for recruitment and career progression of the Instructors.  The 
Government ITI Instructors are employees of the State Government and they are 
recruited by the various State Governments following their Recruitment Rules. 
Their promotion and career progression policy is also the responsibility of the State 
Government.  The Instructors in the Private ITIs are recruited by the Private ITI 
management. The State Governments and the RDSDEs are to check and monitor 
that the DGT norms for Instructors are followed.   
The DGT portal (the NCVT MIS portal) has a functionality where the details of the 
Instructors working are to be provided in respect of each ITI.  However, this 
functionality is not a mandatory one.  Recently, all the State Governments have 
been directed by the DGT to ensure that the Instructors vacancy are filled and also 
updated on the system (portal) so that effective training can be imparted to the 
students.’ 
 
25. As regards the State-wise total number of vacancies existing in ITIs, as 
per the data available on NCVT MIS Portal, the number of available instructor 
posts filled by the ITIs is attached at Annexure III. Moreover, the total number 
of vacancies existing in ITIs in the North-Eastern Region has been separately 
attached at Annexure IV. 
 
26.  The Committee observed that it had made a recommendation concerning 
the vacancies of trainers in ITIs in its report on the DFG 2023-24 as well. In its 
recommendation the Committee had expressed its alarm and displeasure at the 
large number of vacancies and the lack of any concrete follow-up action on the 
part of the Ministry. The Committee had also emphasized the importance of 
having adequate number of instructors/trainers at each ITI in order to provide 
quality instruction necessary for augmenting employability. 
 
27. Asked about the role of DGT in the recruitment of instructors/ trainers in 
ITIs, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
‘Vocational training is a concurrent subject.  Policies such as setting the criterion 
for affiliation, conducting the examination along with certification and designing 
curriculum, defining Instructor qualification are the responsibilities of DGT.  
As per the affiliation norms, the affiliation is granted only when the ITI has enough 
Instructors.  As far as the Government ITIs are concerned, the State Governments 
are responsible for recruitment and career progression of the Instructor. The 
Government ITI Instructors are employees of the State Government and they are 
recruited by the various State Governments following their Recruitment Rules. 
Their promotion and career progression policy is also the responsibility of the State 
Government.  The Instructors in the private ITIs are recruited by the ITI 
management. The State Governments and the RDSDEs are to check and monitor 
that the DGT norms for Instructors are followed.’  
28. On being asked about the steps taken to address the issue of shortage of 
Instructors/Trainers, the Ministry submitted as under:  

12 
 
 
‘DGT is in regular discussion with the State Governments for the 
appointment of Instructors in Govt and Pvt ITIs with the State/UT governments. 
Further, for the affiliation of new ITIs/addition of new trades and units, 
availability of enough qualified Instructors is an essential criterion and the grading 
of ITIs is also linked with the Instructor vacancy. DGT is monitoring Instructor 
details through its centralised portal called NCVT-MIS portal, where each ITI is 
needed to update in NCVT-MIS portal by entering instructor details. But it is 
noticed that most of the ITIs have not updated instructor details in NCVT-MIS 
portal as it was not made mandatory. Now, DGT has issued letter dated 
25.01.2023 to all State Directorates asking them to ensure that all the ITIs in their 
jurisdiction appoint the requisite number of Instructors and update the Instructor 
details in NCVT-MIS portal.’ 
 
VII. PLACEMENTS 
 
29. The Committee desired to be apprised of the number of candidates who 
received training from the Government/Private Institutes under DGT and were 
successful in acquiring permanent jobs. In reply, the Ministry stated as follows:  
 
‘The Craftsmen Training Scheme (CTS) of the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship is implemented through a network of 14,953 ITIs spread all over 
the country.  The ITIs have since long been the backbone of the skilling ecosystem 
in the Country. 
The ITIs have been set up with the objective to ensure a steady flow of skilled 
manpower to the Public and Private sectors, and equipping the youth with the 
required skills, education, and discipline for the same. The training courses in ITIs 
impart basic skills and knowledge in various trades to prepare trainees for 
employment as semiskilled/ skilled workers or for self-employment. As of now, 
DGT provide courses in 152 trades, all of which are National Skill Qualification 
Framework aligned. Currently around 25 lakh trainees are being imparted 
training in the ITIs.  
The placement data of ITI passouts is not available.  However, it is known that the 
employment percentage of the graduates is quite high.  The Central Public Sector 
Undertakings, Railways and other Industries traditionally employ ITI graduates.  
A large number of ITI passouts are taken as Apprentices in various industries and 
some of them are absorbed as permanent employees of that Industry on 
completion of Apprenticeship.  It is also seen that many ITI passouts do not opt for 
jobs as they want to pursue higher studies.   
To trace the percentage of employment, nature of employment and other such 
employment related parameters, a functionality was created in the DGT portal 
(NCVT Portal) wherein the ITIs were required to capture and upload the data 
pertaining to employment status of the passouts from their respective ITIs.  This 

13 
 
was not a mandatory field.  Analysis of the data shows that most ITIs have not 
filled this information and the placement figures as per the portal are therefore 
showing to be very low.   
Though, it is very difficult to trace such a large number of almost 15 lakhs 
passouts each year (especially keeping in mind the authenticity and veracity of 
the data), the DGT has recently issued instructions to all the State Governments to 
ensure that this functionality in the portal is used and the ITIs provide the true 
and authentic data of the passouts of the institutions.’ 
30. Regarding the lack of data related to placements, the Hon’ble Chairperson 
observed as under during the oral evidence of MSDE :  
 
 “This survey may be carried out by you because you have a portal for ITIs which 
tells about what all is happening along with details of the employment. If you don’t 
have such portal, please have one into which concerned ITIs have to feed in. If you 
create a portal of national level, the tracking system too shall be made accordingly. 
Along with that, there was also a discussion about Women Polytechnic here. I am not 
aware of that and Madam must be taking care of that. Most of the trades on offer in 
ITIs are male specific. They are not women specific. This discrepancy needs to be 
done away with. It won’t be possible to do them away with, however, if you make 
more and more female centric curriculum, our girls would also start taking interest in 
it. They won’t only participate in self help groups but would also take part in such 
activities.” 
 
VIII. SCHEME OF POLYTECHNICS 
 
31. (a) Objectives of the Scheme 
● To set up new Polytechnics in un-served and under-served districts of 
States/UTs. 
● To construct Women Hostels in selected polytechnics of States/UTs. 
● To upgrade infrastructure in selected polytechnics of States/UTs. 
● To develop community through polytechnics by imparting skills. 
● So far 65 new Polytechnics have been set up under the Scheme, 85 
Polytechnics have been upgraded and 206 Women Hostels have been 
constructed. Under Community Development through Polytechnics, 
14,09,860 trainees have been trained.  
  
 
 
To strengthen the implementation of Scheme, the monitoring has been 
strengthened through means of Quarterly progress reports, seeking 
photographs and Video Conferencing (VC). 
 
32. The Scheme of Polytechnic had provision of construction of 500 women 
hostels in various Polytechnics.  In addition, 295 new Polytechnics were to be 

14 
 
established.  Also, 500 existing Polytechnics were to be upgraded in terms of 
infrastructure. 
 
(b) Implementation of the Scheme 
33. When asked about the timeline for the various targets under the Scheme, 
the Ministry replied as under: 
‘Regarding timelines fixed to complete the works, it is submitted that the 
scheme is uptill 31.03.2023.  Therefore, all the work was to be completed by 
31.03.2023.  However, as work is still pending in several cases, budgetary 
allocation of Rs.50 crores has been sought for the financial year 2023-24. 
The work already started and nearing completion would be taken up for 
completion by 2024.  However DGT is contemplating to design a new scheme with 
an extended date to complete the original targets.  In case the new scheme is 
approved by the Cabinet, all the works would be completed before the completion 
date of the new scheme.’  
34. With regard to the progress of the various works under the Scheme, the 
Ministry apprised as follows:  
‘Out of 500 Girls Hostels, envisaged to be constructed, 351 are complete. 149 are 
under various stages of completion. Out of these 149, about  38 are almost 
completed with more than 80% work done and only these would be taken up for 
the completion before the extended end date of the scheme.     
Regarding, 295 new polytechnics envisaged to be constructed under the scheme, 
in 138 Polytechnics construction has been completed. Remaining 157 Polytechnics 
are at different stages of construction.  Out of these 50 polytechnics are more than 
80% complete and only these would be taken up for completion before the 
proposed extended end date of the scheme.   
Regarding upgradation of 500 existing polytechnics, 115 polytechnics have been 
upgraded and the remaining 385 are in different stages of completion. Out of 
these, in 52 polytechnics upgradation work is more than 80% complete and only 
these would be taken up before the proposed end date of the scheme.  
The decision to take up only those cases in which work is more than 80% complete 
was taken by the Standing Finance Committee (SFC).  
It is also submitted that the Scheme of Polytechnics was earlier run by the 
Department of Higher Education. It was transferred to DGT, MSDE in FY 2018-19.  
As a lot of work is still to be done for completion of the original target assigned, the 
DGT is contemplating to design a new scheme with an extended date to complete 
the original targets.  However, this is subject to Cabinet approval.’ 
35. As regard the budgetary allocation for the Scheme, the Ministry stated as 
follows: 
‘The budgetary allocation of Rs. 5140.80 Crore was made for this purpose 
to the Department of Higher Education in 2007-08. So far, Rs, 3655.60 Crore has 
been released for all the three works mentioned above.’ 
 

15 
 
IX. ENROLLMENT IN ITIs 
36. The Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons behind the decrease 
in the number of students enrolling for courses under ITIs and why a significant 
number of seats of the National Skill Training Institute (NSTIs)and Institute of 
Training of Trainers (IToTs) have remained vacant in the previous few years. In 
reply, the Ministry submitted as under:  
The enrolment of trainees in ITIs has decreased perhaps due to Covid-19 pandemic 
situation from last two years 2020-21, 2021-22. However, Directorate General of Training 
(DGT) has taken following steps to increase seats utilization in ITIs:   
 
a. DGT is providing the admission calendar well in advance before start of each 
training session to enable State/UTs for maximum utilization of seats. 
b. State Skill Development & Entrepreneurship Committees (SSDEC) have been 
constituted at each State level to ensure adequate publicity in schools, with 
intent to reach-out students completing class X. 
SSDEC is entrusted with responsibility to make efforts for filling up vacant seats by 
walk-in-admission of eligible candidates after admission schedule. 
Due to Covid, admission was low in NSTIs and IToTs during that period.  However, post 
Covid, now admissions are increasing and seats are almost filled in NSTIs. 
● For the year 2022-23, admission under CITS in NSTIs is:  6601/7450 (89%) 
● For the year 2022-23, admission under CITS in IToT is: 4146/6960 (60%) 
CITS admissions in NSTIs and IToTs for the session 2022-23 
Sl. 
No. 
Institute 
Type 
Seating 
Capacity 
Admissions for 
Session 2022-23 
Percentage 
1 NSTI 5301 4605 86.87 
2 NSTI(W) 2150 1996 92.84 
3 Govt. IToT 4201 2676 63.70 
4 Pvt.IToT 2760 1470 53.26 
  Grand Total 14412 10747 74.57 
37. Regarding the decrease in enrolment figures, the Secretary, MSDE, during 
oral evidence before the Committee deposed as under:  
“The enrollments are on slightly declining trend. We have found out its reason. We 
have taken two decisions. We shall conduct the exams in timely manner. We shall 
keep education and admission calendars synchronised which shall reduce the 
number of such students who drop out of ITIs and go to some other course. We 
have simplified the admission process. As the DG has informed, we have done the 
rationalisation of CTS and CITS. A credit framework has been formulated under 
new education policy. On the basis of per credit 30 hours, it has been formulated 
for 40 credits with the total of 1200 hours. We have also launched employability 
skills within that. It also includes the subjects of digital skill, communication skill 
and briefing about one’s skills for 1600 hours, 1900 hours and 2000 hours 
respectively. We have also kept an optional course of 240 hours so that the 

16 
 
students can obtain the certificate by upgrading that trade, by learning a language 
or of 10+2 also. These are the reforms we have brought in it.” 
 
38. Asked for the reasons behind the low level of enrolment of candidates 
under the CTS scheme in the North Eastern States, the Ministry stated as 
under:  
‘In all 8 North Eastern States there are total 104 ITIs present out of which 89 are 
Government ITIs and 15 are private ITIs, which is significantly less as compared 
to others States/UTs. 
The above figure indicates less popularity/awareness about ITIs in North Eastern 
(NE) Region, one of the reasons can be less numbers of Industries/placement 
opportunities present in NE region.’ 
X. OTHER ISSUES 
 
39. When asked about the steps being taken to ensure the recognition of the 
certifications provided under the various schemes administered by DGT and 
whether the Ministry had issued any guidelines to Government departments for 
recognition of certifications with regard to the process of recruitment, the 
Ministry stated as follows:  
Directorate General of Training (DGT) erstwhile Directorate General of Employment 
& Training (DGE&T) has recognized National Trade Certificates as the requisite 
qualification for recruitment to the subordinate posts and services under the 
Government of India.  
DGT is taking action to reiterate to the Department of Public Enterprises about the 
courses being run in the ITIs including the new age courses and these trainees 
could be beneficial for the efficient working of CPSUs with the changing 
technology. Further, MSDE in order to boost apprentices engagement in various 
central govt ministries and departments has taken initiative of payment of stipend 
to these apprentices under the SANKALP scheme. 
DGT is implementing and monitoring Craft Instructor Training Scheme (Regular 
and Recognition of Prior Learning Mode) through NSTIs, IToTs and Govt Model ITIs 
(Converted as IToTs) and trainees are awarded National Craft Instructor 
Certificate (NCIC) after completion of training and passing the prescribed 
examinations. NCIC is as of now a mandatory qualification for recruitment of 
Vocational Instructors in Industrial Training Institutes.  
40. The Committee wanted to know whether any surveys have been 
conducted to find out the average income of the candidates who are employed 
after being trained especially in the unorganised sector. In reply, the DGT stated 
as follows:  
 
‘As on date, DGT has not conducted any survey to find out the average 
income of the candidates who are employed after trained, especially in 
unorganized sector.’  

17 
 
41. The Committee were informed that the National Council for Vocational 
Training (NCVT) has mandated that all trainers in ITIs need to be CITS trained. 
Further details in this regard were furnished by the Ministry as under: 
A. 27413 trainees have been trained under Regular CITS training in the last 
three years.  
B. 3731 have passed CITS examination under CITS-RPL in the last three 
years. 
C. Out of 90,826 trainers available as on date in the portal, 16,215 are CITS 
trained instructors. 
42. Asked about the steps being taken to ensure compliance with the above 
mandated position, the Ministry replied as under:  
‘DGT has developed 55 courses under Crafts Instructor Training Scheme (CITS) for 
training of ITI trainers. 
Steps taken to ensure all trainers are CITS trained: 
A.  A DO letter D.O. MSDE(DGT)-19/07/2020-CD dated 29.09.2022 was 
written by Secretary MSDE to all the Chief secretaries of States/UTs with 
request to revise the recruitment rules of Vocational Instructors for ITIs in 
their State by including CITS qualification as per essential qualification to 
bring qualitative improvement in the Vocational training across the country. 
B. 59 new State Government Institute of Training of Trainers (IToTs) were 
affiliated for admissions from session 2022-23, which enhanced the seating 
capacity by 2320 under CITS. 
C. Under Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) scheme, a total of 8,292 
candidates registered on the online portal for the session 2022-23.’ 
 
43. The Committee were apprised, of the steps taken for encouraging the 
participation of industry partners/stakeholders within the ITI ecosystem, as 
under:  
‘Directorate General of Training has started following two (2) Schemes for 
encouraging the participation of industry within the ITI ecosystem. 
1. Flexi MoU Scheme  
2. Dual System of Training (DST) 
DGT has introduced Dual System of Training (DST) mode in ITIs. For implementing 
DST mode, ITIs has to sign an MoU with the relevant Industry. In DST mode, 
trainee completes theoretical portion and basic practical in ITI and advanced 
practical in Industries. Dual System mode of Training strengthens Industry 
linkages and acquaints trainees with latest technologies used in the Industry and 
thus enhancing their employability by making them industry ready. Flexi MoU 
scheme has also been introduced in association with Industries for training the 
candidates as per the industry requirements. 
Under STRIVE, industry partners are being made part of the Institutional 
Management Committee (IMC) of the ITI to bring in the necessary inputs from the 
industry with respect to skills required in the market as well as necessary 

18 
 
modifications related to course curriculum. The Chairman of the IMC is an industry 
partner of repute for e.g. Maruti, Pidilite, Nirma, and Honda are some of the 
partners that have been on IMC of ITI. In addition, to further strengthen industry 
partnership, Industry Clusters (IC) are formed and set up under the scheme. For 
each IC, a sum of Rs 1 crore is provisioned under the Scheme to promote industry 
participation and apprenticeship training. 
Under the Scheme “Upgradation of existing Government ITIs into Model ITI”, 35 
MoA (Memoranda of Agreement) & under Scheme “Skill Development in 48 
Districts affected by LWE”, 14 MoA have been signed between DGT, ITI & Industry 
for encouraging the participation of industry partners/stakeholders within ITI 
ecosystem.’ 
44. Regarding the Flexi MoU Scheme the Secretary, MSDE, during oral 
evidence, deposed as under:  
 
‘The other scheme is Flexi-MoU, which has a slightly different curriculum. In 
this situation, trainees are trained almost entirely in the workplace. We have a few 
flexible Memorandums of Understanding with Maruti, NMDC, and the Steel 
Authority. We have also signed the Flexi MoU just last week with the Indian Air 
Force, Army, and Navy for the Agniveer Scheme. Those children who will be 
joining in the Agniveer in the Armed Forces under our flexi-MoU scheme, they 
would be given the NTC in the trade in which they are working in the Armed 
Forces.’ 
 
45. The Committee wanted to know the measures taken by the Ministry for 
the benefit of candidates who are trained in DGT Institutes and plan to work in 
unorganised sector and work independently. In reply, the Ministry stated as 
under:  
‘A compulsory subject ‘Employability Skills’ has included in curricula of 
Craftsmen Training Scheme covering modules mainly “Introduction to 
Employability Skills, Basic English Skills, Communication Skills, Financial and 
Legal Literacy, Essential Digital Skills and Entrepreneurship with a duration of 
120 hours for 1year/1st year of 2 year and additional 60 hours for 2nd year, to 
encourage and motivate the candidates towards work independently.’  
46. The Committee desired to be apprised of the role of DGT regarding the 
training of Agniveers after their completion of tenure. In response, the Ministry 
submitted as follows:  
‘Information was sought during the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
proceeding regarding the Agniveer Scheme and DGT’s role in the same.  It is 
submitted that the DGT has signed MoUs with the Indian Armed Forces for 
providing the National Trade Certificate to the Agniveers on completion of their four 
year stint with the Armed Forces.  For the purpose, an extensive trade mapping 
exercise was done individually with all the three wings of the Indian Armed 
Forces, namely Indian Army, Indian Air Force and the Indian Navy.  Based on 

19 
 
this, ‘on the job’ training would be imparted to the Agniveers during their stint with 
the Armed Forces and an exam would be conducted by the DGT for all the 
Agniveers.  On successful passing of the exam, the National Trade Certificate in 
the relevant trade would be provided to the Agniveers by the DGT. This would help 
the passouts to either get employment in the Industry / CPSUs or start their own 
enterprise and be productive members of the Civil Society.’ 
 
 
  

20 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE OF ITIs 
1. The Committee observe that NITI Aayog had published a report 
called – “Transforming Industrial Training Institutes” in January, 2023. In 
the report, NITI Aayog had given recommendations towards transforming 
ITIs into aspirational vocational training institutes. According to the 
Report, the transformation of ITIs remains incomplete in view of three 
facts - ITIs remain underutilized, the quality of training, faculty, and 
infrastructure is in general not of global standards and most of the 
trainees are neither employable nor skilled enough to start their 
ownenterprise. The Ministry and DGT have reportedly initiated action on 
many of the recommendations contained in the Report. However, DGT has 
also observed that there were some factual inaccuracies and incorrect 
presumption(s) about ITIs which have been highlighted in the Report of 
the NITI Aayog. The Committee expect the Ministry to take appropriate 
measures to have the factual inaccuracies rectified at the earliest. At the 
same time, the Ministry should give serious consideration to the other 
issues that have been highlighted in the NITI Aayog report such as the 
need for establishing a placement and entrepreneurship cell in the ITIs 
and facilitating tie-ups with MSMEs. Such arrangement can also inter-alia 
help in securing and maintaining data regarding placements secured by ITI 
passouts, which is of paramount importance. The Committee wish to be 

21 
 
kept apprised of the action taken in this regard within two months of 
presenting this Report to Parliament. 
NEW AGE COURSES 
2. The Committee observe that the Directorate General of Training 
(DGT) has taken the initiative of introducing new age courses such as 
Information Communication Technology System Maintenance, Solar 
Technician (Electrical), Technician Mechatronics etc. in Industrial 
Training Institutes (ITIs) across the country. However, from the 
submission of DGT it is noticed that traditional courses like Electrician, 
Fitter, Welder, Machinist and Motor Mechanic (Diesel) are far more popular 
and there is less demand for the new age courses. Keeping in view the 
requirements of the industry and the potential of the new age courses for 
providing employment in emerging fields, the Committee feel that the 
DGT needs to take urgent and effective steps to address the challenges 
posed and promote the new courses in ITIs. Measures need to be taken to 
increase awareness about the new courses through every available channel, 
including social media, on-line advertising, and outreach programmes. It is 
also important to strengthen the job prospects for candidates who pursue 
the new courses by working in tandem with employers to create adequate 
opportunities in the new and emerging sectors. DGT should ensure that 
ITIs get the necessary technical and financial support in their efforts 
towards introduction of the new age courses. The Committee would, 
therefore, emphasise that necessary measures be taken for giving an 

22 
 
impetus to the new disciplines introduced in ITIs so as to be in tune with 
the changing industrial milieu.  
GRADING OF ITI’s 
3. The Committee note that the DGT had conducted an exercise for 
grading of all ITIs, Government and Private.  This was done in two phases 
and the final results of grading of both the phases have been published. 
The scores obtained in the grading are used for affiliation of the ITIs for 
addition of new trades or new Units. The scores obtained are also used as 
one of the criteria to select ITIs for funding under the STRIVE project. 
According to the Ministry, this grading was valid till the academic session 
2022-23. For the academic year 2023 onwards, a fresh dynamic data-
driven system of grading is being formulated. In the considered opinion of 
the Committee, the grading of ITIs is a valuable tool for improving the 
quality of training of ITIs and helps to identify the best performing ITIs 
and provide feedback to the ITIs on how they can improve their 
performance. Grading also helps to create a competitive environment 
among ITIs, which can lead to better quality training. The Committee 
recommend that the DGT expedite the introduction of the new grading 
system for ITIs and ensure that it is implemented effectively. The new 
data-driven system should also be transparent, especially in redressal of 
grievance(s), if any, and provide updated and reliable information about 
the functioning of ITIs.  
  

23 
 
VACANCIES OF INSTRUCTORS 
4. The Committee are particularly concerned to note the large number 
of vacant positions of instructors in ITIs in the country. The Committee 
had expressed their concern on this count in their Reports presented on 
earlier occasions too. As per the information available on the NCVT portal, 
in case of Government ITIs, out of the total of 71921 posts sanctioned, 
only 34663 posts (48.20%) have been filled, whereas in the case of private 
ITIs, out of the 133741 posts sanctioned only 56163 posts (41.99%) have 
been filled. DGT has submitted that the Government ITI instructors are 
employees of the State Government and are recruited by the various State 
Governments by following their Recruitment Rules. Their promotion and 
career progression policy is also the responsibility of the State 
Government concerned. Moreover, the DGT portal (the NCVT MIS portal) 
has a functionality where the details of the Instructors working are to be 
provided in respect of each ITI.  However, this functionality is not a 
mandatory one wherein the data is to be filled and updated. DGT on its 
part has directed all the State Governments to ensure that the Instructors’ 
vacancies are filled and also updated on the system (portal). As 
emphasized upon in their earlier reports, the Committee expect that the 
DGT and the State Governments work together to address the issue of 
vacant instructor positions in ITIs. In this regard, the DGT should consider 
inter-alia holding meeting(s) with the Chief Secretaries of all the States 
and highlight the cascading impact vacancies of instructors is having on 
the quality of training, seek feedback regarding the ways to address the 

24 
 
situation and ease the bottlenecks being faced by the State Governments 
in their recruitment process. DGT may also consider developing a 
mechanism for incentivising States that successfully address the shortage 
of instructors/trainers and direct the RDSEs to make sure that the private 
ITIs comply with the norms concerning the number of 
instructors/trainers. Also, the specific problems, if any, faced by the 
Private ITIs in connection with filling up the posts of Instructors may be 
objectively assessed and in case policy interventions are required, the 
same may be effected. 
5. The Committee would also highlight in this regard the aspect of a 
number of vacancies existing in instructor/trainer positions in case of 
Union Territory Governments as well. From the information made 
available, it is seen that in Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands and also Ladakh, more than 50% of the posts are lying vacant. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the DGT take immediate steps to assess 
the reasons for the same and direct the administrations of the Union 
Territories concerned to fill up the vacancies at the earliest. 
CRAFT INSTRUCTORS TRAINING SCHEME (CITS) 
6. The Committee note that the new age courses that have been 
introduced recently in ITIs will require certified instructors for imparting 
training under these courses. According to the Ministry, the curricula for 
the instructor training programmes under Craft Instructor Training 
Schemes (CITS) are being developed based on the feedback from the 
industry, academia, and States/UTs.  Keeping in view the demand for 

25 
 
these new age courses, respective CITS curricula will be developed 
accordingly in due course of time. The Committee note that trainers play 
an important role in the uptake of new age courses. They are critical for 
the training ecosystem and as new age courses continue to evolve, the role 
of qualified trainers will become even more important. Since training of 
Craft Instructors is the mandated responsibility of DGT, the Committee 
would urge upon the DGT to take steps to expedite the development of 
curricula of the instructor training programmes under CITS. More 
importantly, comprehensive training, both in skills and training 
methodology is a necessity to make the instructor trainees conversant 
with techniques of transferring hands-on skills, and thereby enable in 
building adequately skilled manpower for the industry. Further, the 
Committee would also emphasise on ensuring that the course curricula to 
be symbiotically connected to the industry and be responsive and pliable 
according to the requirements of employability as per market demands.  
7. According to the Ministry, the National Council for Vocational 
Training (NCVT) had mandated that all trainers in ITIs need to be CITS 
trained. The Committee note with concern that as per the information 
furnished by the Ministry, out of 90826 trainers available on the NCVT 
portal, only 16215 are CITS trained instructors. In order to address the 
issue, the Secretary of MSDE has written to all the Chief Secretaries of 
States/UTs with the request to revise the Recruitment Rules of Vocational 
Instructors for ITIs in their States by including CITS qualification as an 
essential requirement to bring standardised improvement in quality of 

26 
 
vocational training across the country. Moreover, 59 new State 
Government Institutes of Training of Trainers (IToTs) were affiliated for 
admissions from Session 2022-23, which has enhanced the seating 
capacity by 2320 under CITS. The Committee emphasize the need for 
urgent and concrete action to meet the NCVT mandate and call for 
initiating measures for effective monitoring and creation of compliance 
mechanisms to track the progress of CITS training for ITI trainers. Regular 
reporting and data collection should be established to keep a record of the 
number of trainers who have undergone CITS training. Also, it will also be 
equally important to formulate a facilitative environment for the ITI 
trainers to undergo the training at CITS. 
ENROLLMENTS 
8. The Committee note that for the Session 2022-23, the enrollment 
percentage for Government and Private ITIs was 59.18% and 39.52% 
respectively. This implies that there are a large number of seats remaining 
vacant in ITIs. The Committee gather that the reasons for the low 
enrollment figures may include, lack of awareness, poor quality of training 
and lack of job opportunities after completion of training. In case of 
private ITIs, there is also a need to investigate whether the fees being 
charged is acting as a deterrent for students. The Committee are deeply 
concerned to note the poor enrollment figures and recommend that the 
DGT initiate a process to identify the reasons for the low enrollment 
figures and take steps to remedy the situation since increasing the 
enrollment figures in ITIs is essential for meeting the growing demand for 

27 
 
skilled workers in India. The key to this may lie in improving the 
employability of graduates which eventually can underpin the efforts 
towards reducing poverty, creating a more skilled workforce, and providing 
opportunities for all.  
9. The Committee are deeply concerned to note the low level of 
enrolment of candidates under the CTS scheme in the North Eastern 
States. As per the information provided to the Committee, only 6839 
candidates got enrolled in all the North eastern states during the 2021-22 
Session. The number for States such as Manipur and Mizoram was 
extremely low. The Committee note that in all 8 North Eastern States 
there are a total 104 ITIs present out of which 89 are Government ITIs and 
15 are Private ITIs, which is significantly less as compared to others 
States/UTs. Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim 
have no Private ITIs. As per the submission of the Ministry, these figures 
are indicative of less popularity/awareness about ITIs in North Eastern 
(NE) Region, the reason for which could be the less number of 
Industries/placement opportunities present in NE Region. Funding is 
provided by the Central Government under Enhancing Skill Development 
Infrastructure in North Eastern States (ESDI) Scheme to strengthen the 
Skill development Infrastructure in NE Region. The Committee while 
agreeing with the Ministry that the development of good infrastructure 
may create awareness and increase popularity of ITIs in the North East, 
impress upon the Ministry and DGT the need to enhance the reach of ITIs 
in the North Eastern State.  

28 
 
The Committee suggest that the Ministry should partner with the 
North Eastern Council and the Ministry for Development of the North East 
Region for development of the ITI infrastructure in the North Eastern 
Region. In this regard, apart from roping in major industrial 
establishments, it is important to work with the local industries and 
businesses including MSMEs to create employment opportunities for the 
ITI pass outs. The Committee feel that the unique challenges call for 
unique solutions and the Ministry may consider developing specific 
courses that can cater to the thriving industries of the Region such as 
bamboo related industries, tourism, food processing and hospitality. In the 
opinion of the Committee the addition of new ITIs, 
development/upgradation of the existing ones, tailor made region-specific 
solutions to problems, infusion of requisite funds, escalated efforts to 
secure industry participation, incentivized awareness programmes to spur 
enrolment, etc. are the need of the hour and the same signals to a mission 
mode initiative by the Ministry which goes beyond the ESDI Scheme.  
  

29 
 
JOB PLACEMENTS 
10. It is a matter of concern for the Committee to note that data on 
placement of ITI passouts is not available with the DGT. The Committee 
had, in their Reports presented on earlier occasions too emphasized on 
ensuring that data on placements is generated and maintained. According 
to DGT, although the exact figures are not available, it is known that the 
employment percentage of the graduates is quite high. A large number of 
ITI passouts are taken as Apprentices in various industries and some of 
them are absorbed as permanent employees on completion of 
Apprenticeship. It is also seen that many ITI passouts do not opt for jobs 
as they intend to pursue higher studies. DGT, while highlighting the 
difficulty in tracing such a large number of pass-outs, also submitted that 
in order to trace the percentage of employment, the nature of employment 
and other employment related parameters, a functionality was created in 
the DGT Portal (NCVT Portal) wherein the ITIs were required to capture 
and upload the data pertaining to employment status of those passing out 
from their respective ITIs. This is not a mandatory function, and an 
analysis of the data as available reveals that most ITIs have not filled this 
information. In the considered opinion of the Committee, data on 
placements is essential to analyze the real impact of the ITI ecosystem 
and for identifying and addressing weaknesses by way of effective policy 
interventions. The Committee, therefore, reiterate the need on the part of 
DGT to consider making it mandatory for ITIs to upload data on the 
employment status of their pass outs. The DGT should also commission a 

30 
 
study to collect more detailed information on the employment outcomes 
of ITI pass outs. The Committee also feel that technology can play a 
valuable role in the collection of placement data. This will require 
participation of all the stakeholders including the ITIs, employers and the 
pass outs. Making all the establishments recruiting ITI pass outs to upload 
the relevant data on the NCVT portal or such similar steps can be adopted. 
This can be achieved with the help of appropriate outreach of the 
recruiting industry partners. Organising campus placement and promotion 
of Alumni networks by ITIs may also inter-alia help in this connection. The 
Committee reckon that the needed focus on employment data as an 
indicator of performance may prompt the ITIs to ramp up efforts to 
improve the quality of training offered.  
SCHEME FOR UPGRADATION OF POLYTECHNICS 
11.  The scheme envisaged for development of Polytechnic Institutions 
inter-alia had a provision for construction of 500 women’s hostels in 
various Polytechnics. In addition, 295 new polytechnics were to be 
established in un-served and underserved districts and 500 existing 
polytechnics were to be upgraded in terms of infrastructure, with all the 
targets envisaged for being achieved by 31st March, 2023. However, as 
submitted by DGT, work in a large number of cases continues to be 
pending or is partially completed. Among the objectives of the Scheme, 
the Committee note that the work pertaining to the upgradation of the 
Polytechnics has been particularly slow wherein out of the 500 existing 
polytechnics to be upgraded, only 115 polytechnics have been upgraded 

31 
 
and the remaining 385 are in different stages of completion. The Scheme 
for Polytechnics was earlier run by the Department of Higher Education, 
subsequently, transferred to DGT, MSDE in FY 2018-19. With a significant 
amount of work remaining to be completed vis-à-vis the original targets, 
the DGT is contemplating designing a new scheme with an extended date 
of completion, which is subject to approval by the Cabinet. Considering 
the facts, as submitted, the Committee would like the DGT to seriously 
look into the factors contributing to the underachievement of targets of 
the Scheme of Polytechnics in general, evaluate the implementation 
strategies and identify bottlenecks and administrative or logistical 
challenges that have impeded the progress. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that Polytechnics are also cornerstones of the 
initiative of the Government to upskill the youth of the Country. Keeping 
this in view, it is recommended that the DGT should make all out efforts 
to launch the new scheme for Polytechnics with objectives that are not 
restricted to that of the old scheme, and are in tune with contemporary 
needs. 
SYSTEM OF TRAINING 
12. The dual system of training is an innovative approach to skill 
development that combines theoretical training in ITIs with practical 
training in industry. The Committee note from the information furnished 
that the number of ITIs imparting training under the Dual System of 
Training Scheme has increased from 81 in 2018 to 978 in 2022. The 
Committee recognise the efforts of the Directorate General of Training 

32 
 
(DGT) in increasing the number of ITIs imparting training under the 
system. The dual system of training has the potential of being effective in 
augmenting the employability of the trainees and in preparing them to be 
suitable for absorption by the industry upfront; help bridge the gap 
between the skills imparted in ITIs and the skills required by employers; 
and also contribute to reducing the training cost of the employers. The 
Committee expect the DGT to ensure that the system does not increase 
the overall cost of training for the trainees and also consider extending 
support to the employers so as to enable in more entities to participate in 
the programme. The Committee also desire that the DGT strive to expand 
the reach of the dual system of training so that more young people can be 
skilled in an industry and employment friendly manner. Further, being 
convinced of the effectiveness of the dual system of training in scaling up 
the employability of candidates/passouts, the Committee recommend that 
a similar system be considered for being formulated and implemented for 
Polytechnics.  
INDUSTRY CLUSTERS 
13. The Committee note that industry partners are being made part of 
the Institutional Management Committee (IMC) of the ITIs to bring in the 
much needed inputs from the job market with respect to skills required in 
the industry as well as necessary modifications related to course curricula. 
In addition, to further strengthen industry partnership, Industry Clusters 
(IC) are formed and set up under the Scheme. For each IC, a sum of Rs.1 
crore is provisioned under the Scheme to promote industry participation 

33 
 
and apprenticeship training. The Committee believe that industry 
participation allows ITIs to provide practical and real-world training to its 
students. Industry participation in curriculum design and evaluation 
provides better recognition and value to the certifications. There will also 
be a positive impact on the employability of the passouts, especially by 
cutting down the training cost of the employers. It also allows synergy of 
curriculum with the industry and thus make ITIs more relevant and 
contemporary. The Committee desire that necessary impetus be given 
towards implementing the policy for active participation of the industry in 
framing the training programmes so as to effectively capture the changing 
requirements and realities of employment.   
TRADE CERTIFICATION 
14. According to the DGT, MoUs have been signed with the Indian Armed 
Forces for providing the National Trade Certificate to the Agniveers on 
completion of their four year stint with the Armed Forces.  For the 
purpose, an extensive trade mapping exercise was done individually with 
all the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces.  Based on this, ‘on the job’ 
training would be imparted to the Agniveers during their stint with the 
Armed Forces and an exam would be conducted by the DGT for all the 
Agniveers.  On successful passing of the exam, the National Trade 
Certificate in the relevant trade would be provided to the Agniveers by the 
DGT which would help them secure employment after they complete their 
time in the forces. The Committee are appreciative of the steps taken by 
the Ministry for the benefit of the Agniveers and would like to highlight 

34 
 
the significance employment opportunities in ensuring the success of the 
new initiative. The Committee desire that the Ministry can work with 
industry partners to provide the Agniveers holding National Trade 
Certificates with job opportunities relevant to the skill they acquire during 
their service.  
Also, appropriate measures need to be taken for promoting and 
expanding the scheme of ‘Flexi MOU’ under which the training is imparted 
almost entirely in the work place(s), which include public enterprises such 
as SAIL. Also, it needs to be ensured that the training courses are designed 
to be effective in encouraging the trainees to work independently.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                     BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB 
3 August, 2023                                  CHAIRPERSON, 
12  Sravana, 1945 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
 TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
  

35 
 
Annexure – I 
State wise number of ITIs running new age courses 
Sl. No. State Name Computer Hardware & Network Maintenance Computer Operator and Programming Assistant Electrician Power Distribution Electronics Mechanic Information Communication  Technology System Maintenance Information Technology Instrument Mechanic IoT Technician (Smart Agriculture) IoT Technician (Smart City) IoT Technician (Smart healthcare) Mechanic Consumer Electronics MECHANIC ELECTRIC VEHICLE Smartphone Technician Cum App Tester Solar Technician (Electrical) Solar Technician Technician Mechatronics Technician Power Electronics System Grand Total 
1 Andaman 
And Nicobar 
Islands  1   1 1            3 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh  65  101 3  21    1       191 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 1 3  1 2             7 
4 Assam  15  11 5  2           33 
5 Bihar  31  164 135 2 5  1 5 4  2     349 
6 Chandigarh  2  1 1  1           5 
7 Chhattisgar
h 3 189  4 6 2 8      1     213 
8 Delhi 8 30  20 3 1 7    1      2 72 
9 Goa  8  6 3  2       1    20 
10 Gujarat 11 369  65 36 1 26  3 2   2 4 1 1  521 
11 Haryana 14 171  53 3 1 7    2  1  1 1 18 272 
12 Himachal 
Pradesh 4 76  78 16 6 3 1 1     2   1 188 
13 Jammu & 
Kashmir 11 45  21 8  2   1 1  1    1 91 
14 Jharkhand 2 30  44 9 3 2    1  3 1  1 1 97 
15 Karnataka 4 158  451 47  8 3 1  4 15
0  3 1  1 831 
16 Kerala 12 90  119 10 1 11  1 1   1 1  1 14 262 
17 Ladakh 1 2  1 1        1 1    7 
18 Laksha 
dweep 1 1                2 
19 Madhya 
Pradesh 5 249  47 6  12 1 1         321 
 

36 
 
Sl. No. State Name Computer Hardware & Network Maintenance Computer Operator and Programming Assistant Electrician Power Distribution Electronics Mechanic Information Communication  Technology System Maintenance Information Technology Instrument Mechanic IoT Technician (Smart Agriculture) IoT Technician (Smart City) IoT Technician (Smart healthcare) Mechanic Consumer Electronics MECHANIC ELECTRIC VEHICLE Smartphone Technician Cum App Tester Solar Technician (Electrical) Solar Technician Technician Mechatronics Technician Power Electronics System Grand Total 
20 Maharasht
ra 18 309  207 111 1 20  2 1 3  2 10  3 4 691 
21 Manipur  8  7 5  1           21 
22 Meghalaya  1                1 
23 Mizoram  3  2 2             7 
24 Nagaland  3                3 
25 Odisha 2 80  58 14  10 2 1 1 2  2 9 1 4  186 
26 Puducherr
y  4  4 3  1           12 
27 Punjab 10 173  39 16  6 1   2       247 
28 Rajasthan 7 207  88 30 2 4      1 2    341 
29 Sikkim 1 3  1 1             6 
30 Tamil Nadu 7 69  36 14 1 20 1 1 1 1  7 4  7 3 172 
31 Telangana  60  59 1  9 2  1   1 4 1   138 
32 The Dadra 
And Nagar 
Haveli And 
Daman 
and Diu 
 3  1 2             6 
33 Tripura 1 15  13 7 1            37 
34 Uttar 
Pradesh 16 439 3
4 241 101 1
0 15 1 1 1 1
1   4 1  16 891 
35 Uttarakhan
d  36  44 6  1 2  1 1   2 1   94 
36 West 
Bengal 16 62  80 4 5 4 1 1  1  5 9  1 1 190 
 Grand 
Total 
15
5 
3,01
0 
3
4 
2,06
7 
61
2 
3
8 
20
8 
1
5 
1
4 
1
5 
3
5 
15
0 30 57 7 19 62 6,528 
 
  

37 
 
Annexure – II 
  
State-wise number of students enrolled in New Age courses 
Trade Name StateName Total 
Computer Hardware & Network 
Maintenance (NSQF) 
Arunachal Pradesh 19  
Chhattisgarh 36  
Delhi 312  
Gujarat 337  
Haryana 294  
Himachal Pradesh 103  
Jammu And Kashmir 228  
Jharkhand 37  
Karnataka 54  
Kerala 544  
Ladakh 22  
Lakshadweep 58  
Madhya Pradesh 153  
Maharashtra 454  
Odisha 93  
Punjab 373  
Rajasthan 205  
Sikkim 0  
Tamil Nadu 137  
Tripura 33  
Uttar Pradesh 577  
West Bengal 358  
Total 4,427 
Computer Operator and 
Programming Assistant (NSQF) 
Andaman And Nicobar Islands 31  
Andhra Pradesh 1,632  
Arunachal Pradesh 55  
Assam 258  
Bihar 162  
Chandigarh 113  
Chhattisgarh 7,739  
Delhi 1,412  
Goa 270  
Gujarat 17,844  
Haryana 5,943  
Himachal Pradesh 1,895  
Jammu And Kashmir 1,234  
Jharkhand 416  
Karnataka 2,351  
Kerala 2,576  
Ladakh 45  

38 
 
Lakshadweep 45  
Madhya Pradesh 8,094  
Maharashtra 8,211  
Manipur 0  
Meghalaya 48  
Mizoram 52  
Nagaland 50  
Odisha 1,560  
Puducherry 81  
Punjab 5,268  
Rajasthan 5,128  
Sikkim 60  
Tamil Nadu 1,511  
Telangana 1,231  
The Dadra And Nagar Haveli And 
Daman And Diu 113  
Tripura 485  
Uttar Pradesh 13,807  
Uttarakhand 665  
West Bengal 1,602  
Total 91,987 
Electrician Power Distribution 
(NSQF) Uttar Pradesh 556  
Total 556 
Electronics Mechanic (NSQF) 
Andhra Pradesh 985  
Arunachal Pradesh 14  
Assam 81  
Bihar 2,486  
Chandigarh 17  
Chhattisgarh 37  
Delhi 390  
Goa 92  
Gujarat 1,388  
Haryana 1,059  
Himachal Pradesh 666  
Jammu And Kashmir 134  
Jharkhand 573  
Karnataka 8,635  
Kerala 1,925  
Ladakh 7  
Madhya Pradesh 799  
Maharashtra 3,860  
Manipur 0  
Mizoram 34  
Odisha 958  

39 
 
Puducherry 60  
Punjab 363  
Rajasthan 1,327  
Sikkim 0  
Tamil Nadu 438  
Telangana 600  
The Dadra And Nagar Haveli And 
Daman And Diu 9  
Tripura 189  
Uttar Pradesh 5,025  
Uttarakhand 397  
West Bengal 1,558  
Total 34,106 
Information Communication 
Technology System 
Maintenance (NSQF) 
Andaman And Nicobar Islands 47  
Andhra Pradesh 11  
Arunachal Pradesh 28  
Assam 36  
Bihar 1,877  
Chandigarh 0  
Chhattisgarh 78  
Delhi 32  
Goa 24  
Gujarat 738  
Haryana 35  
Himachal Pradesh 204  
Jammu And Kashmir 77  
Jharkhand 157  
Karnataka 330  
Kerala 143  
Ladakh 13  
Madhya Pradesh 63  
Maharashtra 1,980  
Manipur 0  
Mizoram 10  
Odisha 191  
Puducherry 0  
Punjab 208  
Rajasthan 225  
Sikkim 24  
Tamil Nadu 200  
Telangana 0  
The Dadra And Nagar Haveli And 
Daman And Diu 24  
Tripura 129  
Uttar Pradesh 1,791  

40 
 
Uttarakhand 72  
West Bengal 35  
Total 8,782 
Information Technology (NSQF) 
Andaman And Nicobar Islands 5  
Bihar 122  
Chhattisgarh 40  
Delhi 0  
Gujarat 0  
Haryana 5  
Himachal Pradesh 118  
Jharkhand 14  
Kerala 24  
Maharashtra 0  
Rajasthan 22  
Tamil Nadu 24  
Tripura 31  
Uttar Pradesh 109  
West Bengal 50  
Total 564 
Instrument Mechanic (NSQF) 
Andhra Pradesh 233  
Assam 21  
Bihar 71  
Chandigarh 21  
Chhattisgarh 144  
Delhi 66  
Goa 29  
Gujarat 907  
Haryana 147  
Himachal Pradesh 24  
Jammu And Kashmir 23  
Jharkhand 41  
Karnataka 62  
Kerala 209  
Madhya Pradesh 129  
Maharashtra 197  
Manipur 0  
Odisha 162  
Puducherry 19  
Punjab 0  
Rajasthan 61  
Tamil Nadu 329  
Telangana 43  
Uttar Pradesh 279  
Uttarakhand 28  
West Bengal 43  

41 
 
Total 3,288 
IoT Technician (Smart 
Agriculture)(NSQF) 
Himachal Pradesh 0  
Karnataka 0  
Madhya Pradesh 0  
Odisha 48  
Punjab 0  
Tamil Nadu 0  
Telangana 34  
Uttar Pradesh 0  
Uttarakhand 0  
West Bengal 15  
Total 97 
IoT Technician (Smart 
City)(NSQF) 
Bihar 0  
Gujarat 16  
Himachal Pradesh 0  
Karnataka 0  
Kerala 0  
Madhya Pradesh 0  
Maharashtra 22  
Odisha 48  
Tamil Nadu 0  
Uttar Pradesh 0  
West Bengal 0  
Total 86 
IoT Technician (Smart 
healthcare)(NSQF) 
Bihar 12  
Gujarat 5  
Jammu And Kashmir 0  
Kerala 0  
Maharashtra 19  
Odisha 48  
Tamil Nadu 20  
Telangana 0  
Uttar Pradesh 0  
Uttarakhand 0  
Total 104 
Mechanic Consumer 
Electronics (NSQF) 
Andhra Pradesh 0  
Bihar 0  
Delhi 22  
Haryana 0  
Jammu And Kashmir 15  
Jharkhand 0  
Karnataka 0  
Maharashtra 0  
Odisha 0  

42 
 
Punjab 0  
Tamil Nadu 0  
Uttar Pradesh 133  
Uttarakhand 23  
West Bengal 0  
Total 193 
MECHANIC ELECTRIC 
VEHICLE (NSQF) Karnataka 2,818  
Total 2,818 
Smartphone Technician Cum 
App Tester (NSQF) 
Bihar 0  
Chhattisgarh 15  
Gujarat 26  
Haryana 0  
Jammu And Kashmir 0  
Jharkhand 8  
Kerala 0  
Ladakh 0  
Maharashtra 0  
Odisha 96  
Rajasthan 0  
Tamil Nadu 146  
Telangana 0  
West Bengal 1 
Total 292 
Solar Technician (Electrical) 
(NSQF) 
Goa 19  
Gujarat 52  
Himachal Pradesh 56  
Jharkhand 0  
Karnataka 3  
Kerala 20  
Ladakh 19  
Maharashtra 133  
Odisha 316  
Rajasthan 60  
Tamil Nadu 110  
Telangana 100  
Uttar Pradesh 23  
Uttarakhand 34  
West Bengal 110  
Total 1,055 
Solar Technician (NSQF) 
Gujarat 0  
Haryana 0  
Karnataka 0  
Odisha 0  

43 
 
Telangana 0  
Uttar Pradesh 0  
Uttarakhand 0  
Total 0 
Technician Mechatronics 
(NSQF) 
Gujarat 0  
Haryana 0  
Jharkhand 7  
Kerala 24  
Maharashtra 43  
Odisha 117  
Tamil Nadu 122  
West Bengal 0  
Total 313 
Technician Power 
Electronics System (NSQF) 
Delhi 23  
Haryana 340  
Himachal Pradesh 24  
Jammu And Kashmir 0  
Jharkhand 11  
Karnataka 18  
Kerala 355  
Maharashtra 77  
Tamil Nadu 45  
Uttar Pradesh 321  
West Bengal 0  
Total 1,214 
Grand Total 149,882 
 
 
  

44 
 
Annexure –III 
STATE-WISE TOTAL NUMBER OF VACANCIES EXISTING IN ITIs 
(Data culled from NCVT MIS Portal) 
S. No. Name of the State/UT 
Number of 
Sanctioned 
Posts 
Number of 
Filled Posts 
Number of 
Vacant 
Posts 
1 Andaman And Nicobar 
Islands 58 12 52 
2 Andhra Pradesh 8077 1199 6878 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 112 80 32 
4 Assam 580 383 197 
5 Bihar 17509 7878 9631 
6 Chandigarh 72 62 10 
7 Chhattisgarh 2442 1914 528 
8 Delhi 1280 725 555 
9 Goa 281 250 33 
10 Gujarat 10007 6376 3631 
11 Haryana 7096 3039 4057 
12 Himachal Pradesh 3145 1897 1248 
13 Jammu And Kashmir 672 398 274 
14 Jharkhand 6100 3419 2681 
15 Karnataka 13872 7608 6264 
16 Kerala 5081 3738 1343 
17 Ladakh 38 6 32 
18 Lakshadweep 25 25 0 
19 Madhya Pradesh 12902 3314 9588 
20 Maharashtra 18222 9823 8399 
21 Manipur 233 20 213 
22 Meghalaya 90 83 29 
23 Mizoram 52 39 13 
24 Nagaland 28 41 0 
25 Odisha 9107 3419 5688 
26 Puducherry 147 133 14 
27 Punjab 5724 3010 2714 
28 Rajasthan 18817 7622 11195 
29 Sikkim 76 64 12 
30 Tamil Nadu 6537 4817 1720 
31 Telangana 4512 1845 2667 
32 The Dadra And Nagar Haveli 
And Daman and Diu 74 34 40 
33 Tripura 342 296 46 
34 Uttar Pradesh 44700 12042 32658 
35 Uttarakhand 1900 1175 725 
36 West Bengal 5754 4040 1714 
 
 Grand Total 205664 90826 114838 

45 
 
 
Annexure – IV 
 
VACANCIES OF INSTRUCTORS IN ITIs IN THE NORTH-EASTERN REGION 
S. 
No
. 
Name of 
the 
State/UT  
 
Govt ITIs 
 
Private ITIs 
 
Total 
Numb
er of 
Sancti
oned 
Posts 
Numb
er of 
Filled 
Posts 
Numb
er of 
Vacan
t 
Posts 
Numb
er of 
Sancti
oned 
Posts 
Numb
er of 
Filled 
Posts 
Numbe
r of 
Vacant 
Posts 
Numbe
r of 
Sancti
oned 
Posts 
Numb
er of 
Filled 
Posts 
Numb
er of 
Vacan
t 
Posts 
1 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
112 80 32 0 0 0 112 80 32 
2 Assam 452 285 167 128 98 30 580 383 197 
3 Manipur 233 20 213 0 0 0 233 20 213 
4 Meghalaya 72 43 29 18 40 0 90 83 29 
5 Mizoram 52 39 13 0 0 0 52 39 13 
6 Nagaland 28 41 0 0 0 0 28 41 0 
7 Sikkim 76 64 12 0 0 0 76 64 12 
8 Tripura 330 279 51 12 17 0 342 296 51 
 
 
  

46 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2022-23) 
 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 9th January, 2023 from 1130 
hrs. to 1315 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
5. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
6. Shri Bhola Singh 
7. Shri Ganesh Singh 
8. Shri Nayab Singh 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Naresh Bansal 
10. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
11. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
12. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
13. Shri Binoy Viswam 
    
  SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director 
3. Shri K.G. Sidhartha  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
  

47 
 
 
Witnesses 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
   
1.  Atul Kumar Tiwari Secretary 
2.  Trishaljit Sethi Director General (Training) 
3.  V. K. Sinha Joint Secretary 
4.  Suparna S. Pachouri Joint Secretary 
5.  Hena Usman Joint Secretary 
6.  Sandhya Salwan Dy. Director General 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship to the sitting of the Committee convened to have a 
briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship on the Subject ‘Functioning of Directorate General of 
Training’. Drawing the attention of the representatives to Direction 58 of 
the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the 
proceedings of the Committee, the Chairperson asked the Secretary, 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship to apprise the 
Committee of the specific functioning of the Directorate General of 
Training(DGT); schemes implemented by them, specifically Craftsmen 
Training Scheme(CTS); Craft Instructor Training Scheme (CITS); Skill 
Strengthening for Industrial Value Enhancement (STRIVE); Upgradation 

48 
 
of ITIs; schemes for Polytechnic Institutes; Scheme to enhance Skill 
Development Infrastructure in NE States & Sikkim (ESDI) and other Skill 
Development schemes in districts affected by Left Wing Extremism(LWE); 
New trades introduced to keep pace with changes in Technology  and 
recent reforms under DGT, etc. 
3.   The Secretary, Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
accordingly gave an overview of the functioning of DGT and thereafter, the 
Director General (Training), made a Power Point Presentation inter-alia  
highlighting the functioning/coverage of DGT; schemes for Craftsmen 
Training Scheme(CTS) and Crafts Instructor Training Scheme (CITS); Skill 
Strengthening for Industrial Value Enhancement(STRIVE); Upgradation of 
ITIs; Schemes for creation/improvement of training infrastructure; 
Enhancing Skill Development Infrastructure in NE States & 
Sikkim(ESDI); Scheme for Polytechnics; convening of Kaushal Dikshant 
Samaroh for trainees of ITIs; Functioning of Bharat Skill Portal, etc.     
4. The Members then raised certain specific queries on various issues, 
which inter-alia included number of instructors/teachers at training 
Centres; Employability of students trained at ITIs; Issues relating to 
private ITIs; Number of beneficiary students employed within one year of 
passing out; Sanctioned and actual strength of the faculty of DGT; 
reasons for low enrollment in admissions in ITIs; Revision of syllabus and 
curriculum at ITIs; Provision of Girls Hostels; Low levels of occupancy in 
National Skill Training Institute and Institute of training of Trainers; 

49 
 
Mechanism for inspection and monitoring  etc. The representatives of the 
Ministry responded to the queries raised by the Members.  
5. As some points required detailed and statistical data, the 
Chairperson asked the Secretary, Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship to furnish written replies thereon within three weeks. 
He assured to comply.   
6. The Chairperson thanked the representatives for appearing before 
the Committee and responding to the queries of the Members.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
7. The Committee decided to meet again on 20.01.2023 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 