i 
 
52 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
(2023-24)  
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
NATIONAL POLICY ON CHILD LABOUR – AN ASSESSMENT 
  
 
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
  


ii 
 
 
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
(2023-24) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
NATIONAL POLICY ON CHILD LABOUR – AN ASSESSMENT 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.12.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.12.2023 
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No.                       
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) v 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) vi 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24) vii 
INTRODUCTION  viii  
      REPORT  
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTORY 1 
CHAPTER II Ministry of Labour & Employment  7 
CHAPTER III Ministry of Education (Department of School Education and 
Literacy) 96 
CHAPTER IV Ministry of Women and Child Development 122 
CHAPTER V Ministry of Home Affairs 168 
CHAPTER VI Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment) 192 
CHAPTER VII Ministry of Tribal Affairs 220 
CHAPTER VIII Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 244 
CHAPTER IX Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development) 252 
CHAPTER X Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare) 264 
CHAPTER XI Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries); and Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry & Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry & 
Dairying) 
271 
CHAPTER XII Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 282 
CHAPTER XIII State Government of Odisha 294 
CHAPTER XIV State Government of Punjab 309 
CHAPTER XV State Government of Jharkhand 318 
CHAPTER XVI State Government of NCT of Delhi 327 
CHAPTER XVII State Government of Madhya Pradesh 340 
CHAPTER XVIIIState Government of Assam 348 

iv 
 
CHAPTER XIX State Government of Maharashtra 357 
CHAPTER XX State Government of Rajasthan 366 
CHAPTER XXI State Government of Kerala 373 
CHAPTER XXII State Government of Tamil Nadu 389 
CHAPTER XXIII State Government of Bihar 405 
OVERVIEW 415 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Annexure Schedule of Hazardous Occupations and Processes 420 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix-I Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee (2021 -22) 
held on 1st November, 2021. 
427 
Appendix-II Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Committee (2021-22) held 
on 29th April, 2022. 
430 
Appendix-III Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Committee (2021 -22) 
held on 6th May, 2022. 
433 
Appendix-IV Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Committee (2021 -22) 
held on 31st May, 2022. 
436 
Appendix-V Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Committee (2021-22) 
held on 7th June, 2022. 
439 
Appendix-VI Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Committee (2021 -
22) held on 15th June, 2022. 
443 
Appendix-VII Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Committee (2021 -22) 
held on 22nd June, 2022. 
447 
Appendix-VIII Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Committee (2021 -22) 
held on 29th June, 2022. 
448 
Appendix-IX Minutes of the  Seventeenth sitting of the Committee (2021 -
22) held on 12th July, 2022. 
453 
Appendix-X Minutes of the  Eighteenth sitting of the Committee (2021 -
22) held on 12th July, 2022. 
457 
Appendix-XI Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Committee (2021 -
22) held on 13th July, 2022. 
461 
Appendix-XII Minutes of the Twentieth sitting of the Committee (2021-22) 
held on 13th July, 2022. 
466 

v 
 
Appendix-XIII Minutes of the  Twenty-Fourth sitting of the Committee 
(2021-22) held on 22nd August, 2022. 
473 
Appendix-XIV Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee (2022-23) held 
on 27th October, 2022. 
477 
Appendix-XV Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee (2022 -23) held 
on 10th November, 2022. 
482 
Appendix-XVI Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Committee (2022 -23) held 
on 24th November, 2022. 
486 
*Appendix-XVII Observations/Recommendations of the Committee and the 
Ministries/Departments/State Governments responsible for 
taking action 
490 
*Appendix-XVIII Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee (2023 -24) 
held on 18th December, 2023. 
 
*Not appended with this cyclostyled copy.  

vi 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Ravikumar D. 
5. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
6. Shri Pasunoori Dayakar 
7. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
8. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
9. Shri B.N. Bache Gowda 
10. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kashyap 
12. Shri Pakauri Lal Kol 
13. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
14. Shri Sanjay Sadashiv Rao Mandlik 
15. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
16. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
17. Shri Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Nayab Singh 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan 
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
25. Ms. Dola Sen 
26.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
27.  Shri Vivek Thakur 
28.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
29. Vacant 
30.* Vacant 
31. ** Vacant 
 
* Vacancy occurred vice Dr. Banda Prakash resigned w.e.f  04.12.2021. 
** Vacancy occurred vice Shri Dushyant Gautam retired w.e.f. 01.08.2022. 
  

vii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES 
AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2022-23) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
5. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
6. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
7. Shri Bache Gowda B.N. 
8. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
9. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
10. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
11. Shri Pakauri Lal 
12. Prof. Sanjay Sadashivrao Mandlik 
13. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori  
14. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
15. Dr. D. Ravikumar 
16. Shri Naba (Hira) Kumar Sarania 
17. Shri Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Nayab Singh 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan 
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24.  Shri R. Dharmar 
25. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
26.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
27.*  Ms. Dola Sen 
28.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
29. Shri Shibu Soren 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
__________________________________________________________________________________ 
*  Re-nominated w.e.f. 23.08.2023. 
 

viii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES 
AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2023-24) 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
5. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
6. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
7. Shri Bache Gowda B.N. 
8. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
9. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
10. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
11. Shri Pakauri Lal 
12. Prof. Sanjay Sadashivrao Mandlik 
13. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori  
14. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
15. Dr. D. Ravikumar 
16. Shri Naba (Hira) Kumar Sarania 
17. Shri Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Nayab Singh 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan 
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24.  Shri R. Dharmar 
25. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
26.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
27. Ms. Dola Sen 
28.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
29.  Shri Shibu Soren 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31. Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri Jadumani Baisakh - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Sanjay Sethi  - Director 
 3. Shri Sreekanth S.  - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Shri K.G. Sidhartha  - Deputy Secretary 
 5. Ms. Shilpa Kant  - Committee Officer 
 6. Shri Aditya Runthala - Assistant Executive Officer  

ix 
 
INTRODUCTION 
          I,  the  Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Text iles and 
Skill Development (2023 -24) having been authorized by the Com mittee do 
present on their behalf this Fifty -Second Report on ‘National Policy on Child 
Labour – An Assessment’ relating to the Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
2.  The Committee (2021 -22) took oral evidence of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Labour  and Employment on 01.11.2021 and 29.04.2022. 
The Committee also took oral evidence of the representatives of ten other 
Ministries viz. Ministry of Education (Department of School Education and 
Literacy); Ministry of Home Affairs; Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs; 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development); Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare); Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying (Department 
of Fisheries) and Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying; Ministry of 
Women and Child Development ; Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment); Ministry of 
Micro,  Small  & Medium Enterprises; and Ministry of Tribal Affairs at their 
sittings held on 06. 05.2022, 31. 05.2022, 07. 06.2022, 15. 06.2022, 
22.06.2022, 29. 06.2022 and 22. 08.2022. The Committee also took o ral 
evidence of five NGOs/ Stakeholders viz. CHILDLINE India Foundation; 
Bachpan Bachao Andolan; PRAYAS Juvenile Aid Center; Save the Children 
India; and SOS Children's Villages India at their sitting held on 12.07.2022. 
Written submissions were also received from another NGO viz. Aid et Action. 
The Committee also took oral evidence of eight State Governments viz. Delhi, 
Rajasthan, Punjab, Madhya Pr adesh, Odisha, Assam, Jharkhand and  Tamil 
Nadu on 13.07.2022.  
3. The Committee (2022 -23) took oral evidence o f three State 
Governments viz., Bihar, Mahar ashtra and Kerala at their sitting held on 
27.10.2022. The Committee also took oral evidence of United Nations 
International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF); National Commission 
for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) and Shri G. Asok Kumar, Director 
General, National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) at their sittings held on 

x 
 
10.11.2022 and 24.11.2022. The Committee took final oral evidence of the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment on 10.11.2022.  
4. The Committee (2 023-24) considered and adopted this Report during 
the sitting held on 18th December, 2023. 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of 
various Ministries/State Governments/ Organisations/NGOs/Stakeholders/ 
expert for tendering evidence/furnishing written submissions  and placing 
before the Committee all the requisite information sought for in connection 
with the examination of the subject. 
6. For ease of reference and convenience, the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committe e have been printed in thick type in the 
body of the Report. 
 
                     
New Delhi;                 BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB 
18th December, 2023                      CHAIRPERSON, 
27 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)        STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
  TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER - ONE 
INTRODUCTORY 
 A child below 14 years of age, if found employed or working in any 
occupation or processes is a child labour. Children affected by economic 
hardship, extreme poverty, conflict, migration, displacement, communal 
riots, natural and manmade disaster are most likely to be pushed into child 
vulnerability leading to forced labour. Child labour is the system of 
employing a child to provide labour or service by the child to any person, for 
any payment or benefit to the child, or any other person exercising control 
over the said child. Child labour includes children prematurely leading adult 
lives, working long hours for low wages under conditions damaging to their 
health and to their physical and mental development, sometimes separated 
from their families, frequently deprived of meaningful education and training 
opportunities that could open up for them a better future. Child labour, 
therefore, undermines the development of the community and the Country 
as a whole. Today, child labour exists in multiple sectors and p ose 
multifaceted challenges to address it.  
1.2 Child labours are employed in both Organised and Unorganised 
Sectors. Organised sector child labours are working in establishments like 
factories, mines, shops, plantations, stone crushers, brick kilns, beedi  and 
cigar manufacturing industries, cracker industries and any work place that 
comes under the definition of small scale or large scale industries. The 
Unorganised Sector children work as Rag pickers, beggars, helping the 
parents in farm land and cattle r earing, domestic helps, informal 
stall/shop/dhaba workers and those doing other odd jobs which distract 
them from going to school. The largely family owned informal sector prefers 
child labour for low costs and ‘easy to hire, easy to fire’ outlook towards 
children. Even school going children work in such establishments after 
attending school. 
1.3 India is home to about 1.01 crore working children between the age 
five and fourteen years as per 2011 census. Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra employ over half of India’s 
child labour. As per 2001 Census, there were about 1.26 crore working 
children. While the incidence of child labour declined between 2001 and 
2011, it is more visible in rural areas due to migration. Child workers mi ght 
have actually increased in urban areas across all sectors and age categories 
due to the economic woes brought about by the Covid-19 induced crises. 
1.4 Children who constitute a large segment of our society are undeniably  
our assets and our future.  I t is therefore, an index of a nation’s level of 
development, both societal and economic.  The Constitution of India, both in 
the Directive Principles of State Policy and as a part of the Fundamental 
Rights, has laid down that the state shall direct its pol icy towards child 
development and protection.  The constitutional provisions pertaining to 
child labour are as follows:          

2 
 
“Fundamental Rights: Right against exploitation 
Article 24  - “ No Child below the age of fourteen years shall be 
employed to w ork in any factory or mine or engaged in any other 
hazardous employment.” 
Directive Principles of State Policy  
Article 39(e) -“that the health and strength of workers, men and 
women, and the tender age of children are not abused and that 
citizens are not forced by economic necessity to enter avocations 
unsuited to their age or strength. 
Article 39(f) – “that children are given opportunities and facilities to 
develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity 
and that childhood and youth a re protected against exploitation and 
against moral and material abandonment.” 
National Policy on Child Labour, 1987: 
1.5 The National Policy on Child Labour, 1987 laid emphasis on three 
focus areas of action, which are: 
“The Legislative Action Plan:  
Child Labour Technical Advisory Committee was set up to advise the 
Central Government on addition of occupations and processes to the 
Schedule contained in the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Act, 1986 (herein after referred to as CLA, 1986). The provisions of the 
CLA, 1986, the Factories Act, 1948 and the Mines Act, 1952 were 
enforced so as to ensure that children are not employed in factories or 
mines or in any other hazardous employment, and where they are 
employed in non -hazardous employments or o ccupations, to ensure 
that the work is regulated in accordance with provisions of CLA, 
1986. State Governments were also asked to make rules, where 
necessary, to protect  the interests of child labour. Government also 
made necessary amendments in the provis ions of the Minimum 
Wages Act,  Payment of Wages Act,  Equal Remuneration Act etc., to 
ensure there is no discrimination to child labour. The Central and 
State inspection machinery was also geared up for this purpose. 
The focusing of general development prog rammes, for benefiting child 
labour:  
In this context, focused and concerted efforts were initiated to achieve 
convergence of the ongoing developmental schemes at the Central 
Government, State Government and the District level. The basic idea 
was to draw s ynergies from the various developmental schemes such 
as income generating schemes of the Ministry of Rural Development 
that are already in existence in the country, the SarvaSiksha Abhiyan 
(SSA) Scheme of Development education etc. Linking the parents of 
the Children covered under the National Child Labour Project (NCLP) 
Scheme to the various poverty alleviation and employment generation 
programmes to play a positive role in improving the family income and 
enable the working children to attend school. Simil arly, convergence 
with other ongoing Schemes of Departments such as Health and 

3 
 
Family Welfare, Women and Child Development, Social welfare and 
Tribal welfare would be critical for the ultimate attainment of the 
objective of elimination of Child Labour in a time bound manner.  
Project- based Plan of Action in areas of high concentration of child labour:  
In addition to the legislative action and convergence with the general 
development programmes, the National Policy on Child Labour, 1987 
also envisaged proj ect-based action in areas of high concentration of 
Child Labour. It was in this context that the National Child Labour 
Project (NCLP) Scheme was initiated. The main thrust of the project 
was to reduce the incidence of Child Labour in the project -area, 
thereby encouraging the elimination of Child Labour progressively.”  
Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 
1.6 Government having given consideration to various aspects of the 
problem of child labour enacted the Child Labour (Protec tion and 
Regulation) Act, 1986.  The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 
1986 has been amended  in 2016. The amended Act is now called the Child 
and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, which inter -
alia provides for:  
“Complete ban on employment below 14 Years: Employment of a Child below 
14 years completely prohibited in any occupation or processes. 
Linking age of child with RTE Act: For the first time the age of child is linked 
with the age of the child in the Right of Chil dren to free and Compulsory 
Education Act, 2009. The objective is that every child should attend school 
as per their fundamental right as enshrined in the RTE Act. 
Coverage of Adolescents:  For the first time the definition of adolescent was 
introduced and the ambit of the Act enhanced to include adolescents in the 
age group of 14 -18 years. The amendment prohibits the employment of 
adolescent in hazardous occupations and processes. The objective is to 
protect the health and well -being of the adolescents also  and at the same 
time allow them to work in non -hazardous occupations, in view of the socio -
economic status of the country. If required Government may also specify the 
nature of non -hazardous work where an adolescent may be permitted to 
work- A provision for possibility of a positive list where adolescent can work. 
Stricter Punishment for Employers:  Stricter punishment for employers for 
violation of the Act to act as deterrent. A comparative table of the earlier 
penalty and that under the amended Act is as under. The offence under this 
Act is a cognizable offence for the employers. 
For children 
below 14 years 
Earlier Penalty Penalty as per Amended Act 
First Offence 
Fine amount 
or 
Minimum – Rs. 10,000 which 
may extend up to Rs. 20,000 
Minimum- Rs. 20,000 which 
may extend up to Rs. 50,000 
Imprisonment 
Or both 
Minimum term- 3 months 
Maximum term- 1 year 
Minimum term- 6 months 
Maximum term- 2 years 
Second or subsequent Offence 
Imprisonment Minimum- 6 months Minimum- 1 year 

4 
 
Maximum- 2 years Maximum- 3 years 
For adolescent No such category existed Similar provision for first and 
second offence 
  
Punishment for Parents  : For parents/ guardians, there is no punishment 
for the first offence and in case of second and subsequent offence the 
penalty would be a fine which may extend to Rs. 10,000/ -. For parents/ 
guardians, offence under the Act would be non-cognizable.   
Responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of the Act:  With the 
enactment of the Amendment Act, the powers and duties for carrying out the 
provisions of the Act has been vested with  District Magistrate  who may 
specify the officer, subordinate to him,  who shall exercise all or any of the 
powers, and perform all or any of the duties, so conferred or imposed.” 
Initiatives taken by Government subsequent to the enactment of 
the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 
1986: 
“Framing of  State Action Plan and circulating to all States/ UTs for 
enforcement of the Amended Act:   Labour is under concurrent subject and 
State Governments are the important stakeholders for implementation of the 
Act in an effective manner. Specifically, a model S tate Action Plan was 
framed enumerating action points to be taken by respective State 
Governments and was circulated Vide D.O. letter dated 19.08.2016 from 
Secretary (L&E) to all Chief Secretaries. 
Framing of Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amend ment Central 
Rules: Consequent upon enactment of the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, Ministry of Labour & Employment 
has notified the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment 
Rules, 2017 vide Gazette Notification dated 02.06.2017.  
Review of the Schedules of hazardous occupations and processes by 
Technical Advisory Committee:  After enactment of Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, the Schedule under the Act 
has been categorized   into Part A   and Part B. Part A contains the list 
of  Hazardous Occupation and Processes   (total 38)   in which Adolescents 
are prohibited to work and children to help and Part B prohibits the list of 
occupations and processes (total 54)   where children are prohibited to help 
in family or family enterprises (in Addition to Part A).  
Ratification of International Labour Organization (ILO) Conventions 138 and 
182 in 2017:  ILO Convention No.138  inter-alia prescribes that there should 
be a minimum age of entry to employment which should not be less than age 
of compulsory education or 15 years (relaxable   to 14 years in the case of 
developing countries). ILO Convention 182  inter-alia, prescribes to secure 
the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour for all 
persons below the age of 18.”        
National Child Labour Project: 
Government had initiated the National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme 
in 1988 to rehabilitate working children in 10 child labour endemic districts 
of the country.  In its present form, the NCLP Scheme seeks to:   

5 
 
 Eliminate all forms of child labour through identification and 
withdrawal of all children from child labour, 
 Preparing children withdrawn from work for mainstream education  
 Identification and withdrawal of all adolescent workers from 
hazardous occupations / processes and  facilitating vocational 
training  opportunities for such adolescents through existing 
scheme of skill developments; 
 Raising awareness amongst stakeholders and target communities 
Under this Sch eme, the District Project Societies are required to conduct 
survey to identify working children. Of the children identified those in the 
age group 5-8 years are to be mainstreamed directly to formal educational 
system through the Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan (S SA) of the Ministry of 
Education. Working children in the age group of  9-14 years are to be 
rehabilitated through NCLP Special Training Centres (STCs) established by 
the Project Society, wherever STCs under SSA Scheme are not functioning. 
The STCs under th e scheme provide: Non -formal/bridge education, 
Vocational training, Mid-Day Meal, stipend @ Rs.400/ - per child per month, 
and health care facilities through School Health Programme of NRHM. 
So far, NCLP scheme has been sanctioned in 324 no. of districts in 21 States 
and about 1.43 million working children have been mainstreamed to regular 
education system through NCLP scheme.     
         
Now a policy decision has been taken to merge NCLP Scheme with Samagra 
Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) being run by the Department  of School Education 
and Literacy (DoSEL) w.e.f. 01.04.2021. 
Platform for Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour (PENCIL) 
 The Government has developed an online portal i.e. PENC iL (Platform for 
Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour ) for enforcemen t of the legislative 
provision and effective implementation of NCLP scheme. The PENCIL portal, 
launched in 2017 connects the Central Government with State Governments, 
Districts and all the Project Societies.                        
1.7 The Committee initially made an appraisal on implementation of abolition of 
child labour in the Country on 1st November, 2021 and the Ministry presented their 
view point. Subsequently, t he Ministry also constituted an inter -Ministerial 
Committee  under the chairmanship of Sec retary (L&E) comprising the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Ministry of Rural 
Development, Department of Commerce, Ministry of Skill Development, etc. to 
discuss the effective implementation of Child Labour and Adole scent (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Act, 1986  and strategy of sector wise eradication of child labour.  A 
meeting of the Committee was held on 7th January, 2022. 
1.8 In view of some glaring gaps in the implementational aspects of the 
National Policy on Child Labour, the Committee took up the subject for a 
comprehensive examination and an in -depth assessment. In the process, 
the Committee obtained background notes, writ ten replies/clarifications, 

6 
 
post-evidence information besides taking oral evidences of various 
Ministries/ Departments, State Governments, NGOs and Experts. 
1.9 Oral evidence taken by the Committee chronologically is as under in 
tabular form: 
Date of 
Meeting 
Ministry/Department 
01.11.2021 Ministry of Labour and Employment 
29.04.2022 Ministry of Labour and Employment 
06.05.2022 Ministry of Education  
(Department of School Education and Literacy) 
31.05.2022 Ministry of Home Affairs 
07.06.2022 Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.06.2022 
Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development) 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare(Department of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare) 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & 
Dairying (Department of Fisheries) 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & 
Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry & 
Dairying) 
22.06.2022 
 
Ministry of Women and Child Development 
29.06.2022 Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) 
22.08.2022 
 
Ministry of Micro,  Small  & Medium Enterprises  
Ministry of Tribal Affairs  
10.11.2022 Ministry of Labour and Employment 
(ii) Oral evidence of the following five NGOs was held : 
Date of 
meeting 
NGO 
 
 
12.07.2022 
CHILDLINE India Foundation 
Bachpan Bachao Andolan 
PRAYAS Juvenile Aid Center 
Save the Children India 
SOS Children's Villages India 
(iii) Oral evidence of the following Eleven State Governments  
was held : 
Date of 
Meeting 
State Government 
 
 
13.07.2022 
Delhi 
Rajasthan 
Punjab 
Madhya Pradesh 
Odisha 
Assam 
Jharkhand 
Tamil Nadu 

7 
 
27.10.2022 Bihar 
 Maharashtra 
 Kerala 
(iv) Oral evidence of the following organizations/expert was 
held: 
Date of 
Meeting 
Organizations/expert 
10.11.2022 United Nations International Children's 
Emergency Fund (UNICEF)  
24.112022 National Commission for Protection of Child 
Rights (NCPCR)  
Shri G. Asok Kumar, Director General, National 
Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG)  
 
1.10 Written submissions were also received from another NGO viz. Aid et 
Action. 
1.11 Based on the abovesaid written and oral depositions of various 
Government and Non -Government entities, the Committee have analysed 
the subject matter in great details in the s ucceeding chapters and given 
their considered opinions/suggestions at the end of each Chapter. 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER - TWO 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
I. INTRODUCTION 
2.1 Government is following a robust multi -pronged strategy to tackle the 
issue of child labour.  It comprises of statutory and legislative measures, 
rescue and rehabilitation, universal elementary education along with social 
protection & poverty alleviation and employment generation schemes.One of 
the items of work allocated to Ministry of Labour & E mployment is policy 
relating to special target group such as child labour. Accordingly, 
eliminating child labour is one of the objectives of Ministry, which is the 
nodal agency responsible for administering the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986, as amended in 2016. 
 
2.2 The Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 
as amended in 2016, inter -alia, covers complete prohibition on employment 
or work of children below 14 years of age in all occupations and pr ocesses; 
linking the age of the prohibition of employment with the age for free and 
compulsory education under the Right to Education Act, 2009; prohibition 
on employment of adolescents (14 to 18 years of age) in hazardous 
occupations or processes and maki ng stricter punishment for the employers 
contravening the provisions of the Act. 
 
2.3 The Act defines the jurisdiction of both Central and State 
Governments in implementing the Act. The Central Government is the 
“appropriate Government” in relation to esta blishments under the control of 
the Central Government or a railway administration or a major port or a 
mine or oilfield. In all other cases, the State Government is the “appropriate 
Government”. The State Action Plan issued by the Ministry enumerates the 
actions arisen on the part of State Governments/UTs after enactment of the 
Amendment Act. 
 
2.4. The Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Amendment Rules, 2017, 
inter-alia, cover provision for prevention, rescue and rehabilitation and 
convergence, defini tion of “help” in the family enterprises owned by the 
family of the child and regulation of child artists to ensure their safety and 
security. The Rules also provides for District Nodal Officer (DNO) and Task 
Force under the chairmanship of District Magist rate to ensure that the 
provisions of the Act are properly enforced. 
 
2.5 After making suitable amendment in the Child Labour (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Act 1986 in 2016, India ratified ILO conventions No.138 
(minimum age of entry to employment) and 182 (w orst form of child labour) 
on 13.06.2017. By ratifying these two core conventions, India join majority 
of the countries who have adopted the legislation to prohibit and place 
severe restrictions on the employment and work of children. 
 

9 
 
2.6 The Standard Ope rating Procedure (SOP) framed by the Ministry 
works as a ready reckoner for trainers, practitioners and monitoring 
agencies to ensure complete prohibition of child labour and protection of 
adolescents from hazardous labour ultimately leading to Child Labou r Free 
India.  
 
2.7 In pursuance of the National Policy on Child Labour, the Government 
started the National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme in 1988 to 
rehabilitate working children in the child labour endemic districts of the 
country. 
 
2.8 The NCLP Scheme is a Central Sector scheme. Under the scheme, 
project societies are set up at the district level under the Chairpersonship of 
the Collector / District Magistrate for overseeing the implementation of the 
project. Under the NCLP Scheme, child ren in the age group of 9 -14 years, 
withdrawn from work are put into Special Training Centers, where they are 
provided with bridge education, vocational training, mid -day meal, stipend, 
health-care facilities etc. and finally mainstreamed to the formal edu cation 
system. Children in the age group of 5 -8 years are directly linked to the 
formal education system through coordination with the Samagra Shiksha 
Abhiyan (SSA).  
2.9 A Central Monitoring Committee under the chairpersonship of 
Secretary, Ministry of La bour & Employment, exists for the overall 
supervision and monitoring of the National Child Labour Project. State 
Governments have also been advised to set up State Level Monitoring 
Committees similar to the Central Monitoring Committee. 
2.10 The year-wise budget allocation and expenditure incurred under the 
scheme during last seven years are as under: 
 
(in crore) 
Year Budget Allocation (Final Grant) Expenditure 
2017-18 95.17 94.03 
2018-19 89.99 89.99 
2019-20 78 77.47 
2020-21 49 41.19 
2021-22 20 18.45 
2022-23 20 15.93 
2023-24 10  
2.11 The online portal PENCIL (Platform for Effective Enforcement for No 
Child Labour) developed by the Ministry provide for a mechanism for both 
enforcement of the legislative provisions and effective implementation of the 
National Child Labour Project (NCLP). The Portal has components like 
Complaint Corner, Child Tracking System, and NCLP Scheme 
implementation and monitoring. Now complaints of child labour can be 
registered electronically on the Portal to the concerned Distr ict Nodal 
Officers (DNOs) for taking prompt action. 

10 
 
2.12 The NCLP Scheme has now been assimilated with “Samagra Shiksha 
Abhiyan” Scheme of Ministry of Education, Department of School Education 
and Literacy in phased manner after 01st April 2021 to avoid th e 
duplication of efforts at the District and State level. The children rescued / 
identified as child labour, after completing the necessary formalities, may be 
admitted to Special Training Centre, operated in the district under SSA 
Scheme. 
(i) Distinction between child  and adolescent labour 
 
2.13 The Committee desired to know the basis on 
which distinction has been drawn between child and ado lescent labour and 
whether this distinction has be en codified/legalized. In response, the MoLE 
stated as under:  
  
“As per definition under the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986,  “adolescent” means a person who has completed his 
fourteenth year of age but has not completed his eighteenth year and “child” 
means a person who has not completed his fourteenth year of age or such 
age as may be specified in the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education Act, 2009 whichever is more.” 
 
2.14 In response to a specific query whether the Government is considering 
a red uction in the up per lim it of sta tutory a ge for ad olescents, the MoLE 
replied that at present, no such proposal is under consideration.  
 
2.15 In this context, the representatives of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
"Now we come to the topic of adolescent. Earlier this subject was not in the 
Act, which was brought for the first time in this Amendment Act that a child 
of fourteen to eighteen years of age cannot work in hazardous occupation. 
Earlier it was that a child of fourteen to eighteen years can work anywhere, a 
child below fourteen cannot work only in hazardous occupation, now there is 
a provision in this Act, which was passed by Parliament that a child of 
fourteen to eighteen years cannot work in hazardous occupation. Due to 
demand, some exceptions hav e been also kept in this act within which 
children were allowed to work under certain conditions in industries such as 
audio-visual industry, sports industry... 
 
...The second thing was said about the definition of the adolescent. ....has 
raised this issue. I want to say that we have a lot of clarity in definitions. A 
child who is below the age of 14 years is considered a child and someone 
who is between the age of 14 to 18 years is considered as adolescent and 
someone who is above the age of 18 years is considered adult”. 
 
(ii) Schedule under the Act 
 
2.16 The Schedule of hazardous occupations and processes of the Act is 
divided in two parts namely 'Part A' covering a list of hazardous occupations 
and processes in which adolescents are prohibited to work and children are 
prohibited to help in family or famil y enterprises and 'Part B' covering an 

11 
 
additional list of occupations and processes where children are prohibited to 
help in family or family enterprises (in addition to 'Part A').  Schedule ‘A’ 
which enlists 38 hazardous occupations and processes in which adolescents 
are prohibited to work and children to help and Schedule ‘B’ having 15 
occupations and  54 processes where children are prohibited to help in 
family or family enterprises, is at Annexure.  
 
2.17 When questioned about revision of the list of occupations and 
processes under the Act, the representative of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
“Based on the deliberations of the Committee so far, the Ministry is in the 
process of revising the list of occupations and processes under the Act 
through the technical advisory committee so that we can have an updated 
list of occupations and processes to monitor the implementation of the Act 
more effectively and to avoid children and adolescents working in hazardous 
occupations.” 
2.18 In this co ntext, the representatives of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
"Earlier, children below the age of fourteen years could work in non -
hazardous occupation and could not work in hazards occupation, under this 
amendment, any child below fourteen years of age is banned from working in 
any occupation, it has been banned. Not only this, if the age of this child is 
fourteen years today, we have dynamically linked with the Right to 
Education Act. Just as the Right to Education Act covers a child between six 
and fourteen years today, tomorrow if you increase this age to fifteen or 
sixteen years, then automatically this age will increase under it also, 
because we have dynamically linked it with Right to Education. So here we 
have converged with it.” 
2.19 When asked about the mechanism put in place for mapping of 
adolescent labour rescued from hazardous occupations in the Schemes 
implemented by the Ministry, the MoLE stated as under:   
“The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 has been amended 
in 2016. For the first time the definition of adolescent was introduced and 
the ambit of the Act enhanced to include adolescents in the age group of 14 -
18 years. The amendment prohibits the employment of adolescent in 
hazardous occupations and processes.  The objective is to protect the health 
and well-being of the adolescents also and at the same time allow them to 
work in non-hazardous occupations, in view of the socio -economic status of 
the country. If required Government may also specify the nature of non-
hazardous work where an adolescent may be permitted to work - A provision 
for possibility of a positive list where adolescent can work. 
Since its inception in 2014, Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) has initiated several skilling  schemes, such as, 
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), Jan ShikshanSansthan 
(JSS) etc.  
Under the MSDE Ministry, there are no vocational training 
programs/schemes exclusively for the training of the rescued adolescent 

12 
 
child labour. However, MSDE t hrough its flagship scheme viz. 
PradhanMantriKaushalVikasYojana (PMKVY) is catering to the needs for skill 
training of the youths across the country including the rescued adolescent 
children with focus on unemployed / drop -out youth between the age-group 
of 15-45 years, including adolescents of 15 -19 years. Since July 2015 three 
versions of the PMKVY scheme namely, PMKVY 1.0, PMKVY 2.0 and PMKVY 
3.0; have been implemented.  
Further, MSDE is implementing the scheme of Jan 
ShikshanSansthan (JSS) to impart ski ll training in non -formal mode at the 
doorsteps of the beneficiary through registered societies (NGOs) with 100% 
grant from MSDE.  The target beneficiaries of the Scheme are non -literate, 
neo-literates, persons with rudimentary level of education and schoo l drop-
outs upto 12th standard in the age group of 15-45 years. The skill training is 
low-cost, flexible, and highly accessible to disadvantaged groups of society, 
among others.” 
2.20 Another NGO suggested that the policy may examine the relevance 
and myth  of hazardous and non -hazardous nature of work in current 
agriculture sector. Indian agriculture has been transforming rapidly into 
extensive use of chemical fertiliser, use of heavy machineries which makes 
some of the agriculture sector hazardous. 
(iii) Need for the laws to be made more stringent 
2.21 When enquired whether the Ministry agree that there is a need for the 
laws to be made more stringent to effectively prohibit engagement of Child 
Labour in various Schemes run by various Ministries and the con crete 
suggestions in this regard, the MoLE replied as under:  
 “…Ministry of Labour& Employment has set up Central Advisory Board 
(CAB) on Child Labour through executive order with following objectives: - (i) 
To suggest measures for effective enforcement of  Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 (ii) To suggest legislative 
measures as well as welfare measures for welfare of child and adolescent 
labour (iii) To review the progress of welfare measures for child and 
adolescent labour (iv) To recommend the industries and areas where there 
must be progressive elimination of adolescent labour (v) To recommend 
measures for stopping the misuse of exception provided under Section 3, 
sub-section (2), (a) & (b) of the said Act…” 
2.22 In this context, the representatives of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
“As regards law, the law has been made by the Parliament; it is a Central 
law. Sir, you had also asked, what happens to the domestic workers. So, 
employment of children as domestic workers or servants is prohibited under 
the Act; employment of children in dhabhas, restaurants, hotels, motels, tea 
shops, resorts, bars or other recreation centres is also prohibited. So, with 
regard to the law, I think, we need to look at what are t he provisions; 
whether they address the issues in the current circumstances properly or 
not. I think we need to look at the law itself. In terms of penalties also, there 
was a revision of penalties. But, perhaps, it is not acting as a deterrence 
and, there fore, the same person from where the children are rescued 
engages in that occupation again and again. Perhaps, we have not included 

13 
 
as to what will happen to the licence or the registration of the occupation 
where child labour has been found. 
So, I think, from the point of view of law, there is a possibility of having a 
relook at the penalties also.” 
2.23 The representative further supplemented as under: 
 
“I am saying this because unless and until we close these units, where 
licences have been given or regi stration has been done, these penalties are 
not acting as effective deterrence. Therefore, from the point of view of law, I 
would be seeking your guidance on those issues as to how we can proceed 
ahead. If there is a need for any amendments under the law, we should 
bring them.” 
2.24 In this context, some of the NGOs suggested as under: 
 
i. Need to remove discrepancy in the age verification criteria of child under 
the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Rules and 
the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) (JJ) Act, 2015.  
ii. Need to amend Child and Adolescent  Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) 
Act 1986/2016 to define child as a person of 18 years of age so as to 
make the definition in agreement with Juvenile Justice Act, 2015, other 
laws and ILO Convention 182 & 138;  
iii. Recent amendment to Juvenile Justice Act is legally untenable as it leads 
to child labour offence as non -cognizable and non -bailable. A non -
bailable offence can not be non -cognizable. If child labour offence is 
cognizable under one Act and non -cognizable under other then FIR will 
not be filed.  
iv. Need to include child begging in Juvenile Justice Act.  
v. Need to amend Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 so as to make serious offences 
against children as cognizable;  
vi. Need to amend part B of Schedule to CALPRA, 1986 to exclude 
occupation & processes, which are hazardous in nature;  
vii. Need to include prohibited forms of child labour in child labour Act like 
domestic worker children, etc.” 
2.25 One of the NGOs suggested that CALPRA Act has provision for 
punishment for employer. It does not mention a nything about traffickers 
and principal employers, which needs to be included. In the case of 
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, there is provision for action 
against Police for not registering FIRs. Similar provisions need to be made in 
CALPRA Act. In the Juvenile Justice Act, there is provision for creation of 
Juvenile Justice Fund. Similar provisions may be incorporated in CALPRA 
Act for Child Labour Protection Fund. 
 
 

14 
 
(iv) Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for enforcement of the Child 
and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986. 
 
2.26 The Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)  for enforcement of the Child 
and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 issued by the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment in September, 2017 is a comprehensive 
document containing detailed guidelines on (i) understanding legal 
framework; (ii) prevention, identification and reporting of child and 
adolescent labour in hazardous employment; (iii) pre -rescue; (iv) rescue; (iv) 
post-rescue; (v) rehabilitation; (vi) monitoring mechanism and (vii) role and 
responsibilities of enforcing agencies and other stakeholders at different 
stages. The gist of SOP is as under: 
 
“A. Legal framework 
 
A child below 14 years if found employed or working in any occupation or 
processes is a child labour. Employment of children below 14 years in any 
form in any occupation and process is prohibited and attracts the penalty 
provisions under Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Act, 1986. 
 
Any adolescent in the age group of 14 to 18 years is prohibited to work or 
employed in any occupation or process set forth in Part A of the Schedule of 
Hazardous Occupations and Processes in the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 198 6.In all occupations or processes other 
than those set forth in Part A of the Schedule of the Act, the following 
conditions shall apply if adolescent is permitted to be employed in non -
hazardous occupations and processes: 
 
Element of 
Work 
Conditions applicable 
Hours of 
work 
1. Cannot work for more hours than prescribed for that 
establishment or class of establishments 
2. No period of work shall be fixed as stated in point 1 above 
but no adolescent shall work consecutively for over three 
hours; hence no adolescent shall work for more than 3 hours 
without rest 
3. No period of work shall be more than six hours a day 
4. Timing of work cannot be between 7 pm and 8 am 
5. They cannot work overtime 
6. Cannot work at an establishment on the same day as he 
has been working in another establishment 
Weekly 
Holiday 
1. Every Adolescent shall be allowed one whole day holiday 
every week 
2. The specific day of such holiday shall be evidently 
displayed in the organisation 
3. Such day shall not be altered more than once in ev ery 
three months 
Notice to 
Inspector 
1.Every establishment employing an adolescent has to send 
the following information to labour inspector within local 
limits about their establishment: 
-Name and the situation of the establishment 

15 
 
-Name of the persons in actual management of the 
establishment 
-Address to which related communication to be sent 
-Nature of the occupation or process carried on in the 
establishment 
2. This should be sent within 30 days from the starting of the 
employment of the adolescent in the establishment 
Regulation 
regarding age 
1. During a labour inspection, the inspector shall in every 
instance where he is unsure if the employed person is a child 
below 14 years or an adolescent who is employed in a 
hazardous occupation shall ask for a  certificate of age 
granted by the prescribed medical authority. 
2. In case such record does not exist, the inspector may refer 
child to prescribed medical authority for decision regarding 
age of concerned child or adolescent 
Maintenance 
of Register 
All e stablishments where adolescents are employed or 
permitted to work shall maintain a register as prescribed in 
the Rules. 
Health and 
Safety 
The health and safety of the adolescents shall be ensured 
with respect to points given in Section 13 sub -section (2) of 
the C&AL (P&R) Act. 
 
 B. Prevention 
 
 Prevention activities to be undertaken have been categorized as under: 
 
(a) Creation of Awareness 
 
(i) Launching of public awareness campaigns targeted to the general public, 
consumers, vulnerable communities, employers etc. using folk, 
traditional media, mass media such as television and / or radio etc.  
(ii) Awareness campaigns to encourage reporting by facilitating access to the 
number of the police, child line and local district nodal office in the 
labour department.  
(iii) Create and display in an easily understandable manner salient 
provisions of the Act and the Rules in public places.  
(iv) Empower an d enable the public and community resources like 
Panchayat, Women’s groups, children’s groups, schools, teachers etc. to 
generate intelligence regarding any violation. Awareness among children 
and adolescents can be undertaken at the school  level or throu gh mid-
media activities such as street plays, competitive activities and folklore 
activities etc. 
(v) Aid and assist different training institutes for senior government officials, 
judicial training institutes, business schools, law schools etc to include 
information on legal implication of child and adolescent labour. 
(vi) Conduct sensitization programs for the employers/ officials of industries 
or institutions to generate legal awareness and their role in eliminating 
child labour by district administration. 
 
(b) Building Capacity of Institutions 
 
(i) Formation of a District Task Force (DTF) in every district with the District 
Magistrate as its chairperson, with members as prescribed under Rule 17 

16 
 
C (iii) of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regul ation) 
Rules, 1988. The task force shall meet once a month and shall identify 
areas in the district vulnerable to child labour (NCLP survey, survey as 
per the Bonded Labour Rehabilitation Scheme and/ or information from 
the local CWC etc may be used). The task force shall coordinate such 
activities as necessary at the local level for awareness generation, 
monitoring and stopping child labour and adolescent labour in 
hazardous employment.  
(ii) The labour department /DM shall appoint a District Nodal Officer  (DNO) 
who shall track the cases of child labour on PENCIL Portal and 
recommend necessary activities in the monthly DTF meetings for 
prevention of child labour and adolescent labour in hazardous 
employment.  
(iii) Consistent tracking of complaints of child  labour and adolescent labour 
in hazardous employment through the online portal ‘PENCIL’. The 
District Nodal Officer to fill and bring all the complaints from other 
sources to ‘PENCIL’. Child Tracking System under PENCIL would ensure 
prevention through che cking their re -entry into the labour market and 
their regularity in school. 
 
(c) Coordination and Convergence among agencies at the District, 
State and Center. 
(i) Coordination with Ministry of Women and Child Development – sharing 
of information from child he lpline, surveys or portals of M/o WCD for 
identification of child labour. 
(ii) Coordination with Department of School Education & Literacy - At the 
school level reporting of children who have been consistently absent from 
school for 30 days and ensuring enrolment and retention of all children; 
and at the State and Central level inclusion of information about child 
labour in the syllabus and education material is key in ensuring 
prevention of child labour. 
(iii) Consistent coordination and work with other agencies at the district level 
such as District Child Protection Unit (DCPU), Special Juvenile Police 
Unit (SJPU), Child Line, District Magistrate/ Sub -District Magistrate , 
Child Welfare Committee, National Child Labour Project, Village -level 
Child Protec tion Committee under ICPS, District -level Vigilance 
Committee under ITPA Act, 1986, Schools and Panchayat through the 
District Task Force (DTF). 
 
C. Identification and reporting 
 
Information can be obtained from following sources for identification of chil d 
labour and adolescent labour employed in hazardous occupations and 
processes: 
 
Survey  National Child Labour Project 
 Bonded Labour Scheme 
 Out of School children- HRD 
 Need Assessment of District Child Protection 
Units and State Child Protection Units 
Proactive Investigation  District Task Force  
 Officials of District Labour Department  
 District Magistrate  

17 
 
 District Nodal Officer  
 Police 
Institutional 
Complaint 
 on PENCIL - www.pencil.gov.in  
 on Childline- 1098  
 by NCLP Project Society 
 by District Nodal Officer 
 From NCPCR, SCPCR, NHRC, SHRC, NALSA, 
SLSA, DLSA, CWC 
Complaint from Other 
Sources 
 from employer associations and trade unions  
 from NGOs  
 from parents and relatives  
 from teachers & Principal on absence of 30 
days self reported by Victim 
 Any person 
 
Any person, member of civil society, institutions or organizations can report 
through PENCIL Portal of Ministry of Labour and Employment, phone, letter, 
written complaint, e-mail, helpline, in person, or any other means can report 
an incident of child labour, or, adolescent labour in hazardous employment. 
Anyone having any information about a child labour, may contact the 
following agencies. 
 
Reporting Agencies 
Complaint 
Corner at 
PENCIL 
Portal 
Any Police 
Station/SJPU 
District 
Task 
Force 
under 
DM 
State Labour 
Dept./Labour 
Insp. 
Child 
Line 
(1098) 
District 
Nodal 
Officer 
 
These agencies will verify the complaint, either through direct site visits or 
through resources identified by the District Task Force within 24 hours of 
the receipt of the complain t. If the complaint is found to be genuine, all 
agencies are to report the complaint to the police department who may begin 
the process for rescue.  
 
The written complaint should contain a description about the place where 
the child/ adolescent is working,  details of place and address of working 
place, name of employer, suspected child/ adolescent labour, probable age 
of child/ adolescent, if possible picture of the child/ adolescent. 
 
On receipt of the complaint the police proceeds to identify the relevant  laws 
to include when a complaint is registered, including the following provisions 
of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Regulation and Prohibition) Act, 1986. 
 
Section14 Offence Punishment 
(1) Employing a child or 
permitting a child to 
work 
Imprisonment for a term that shall not 
be less than 6 months but which may 
extend to 2 years or with fine which 
shall not be less than Rs. 20,000 but 
which may extend to Rs. 50,000 or with 
both. (Parents or guardians may not be 
punished under this section) 

18 
 
(1A) Employing an 
adolescent or 
permitting an 
adolescent to work in 
a hazardous 
occupation or process 
listed in Part A of the 
Schedule 
Imprisonment for a term that shall not 
be less than 6 months but which may 
extend to 2 years or with fine which 
shall not be less th an Rs. 20,000 but 
which may extend to Rs. 50,000 or with 
both. (Parents or guardians may not be 
punished under this section) 
(2) A repeat offence of the 
above stated sections 
Imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than 1 year but which may 
extend to 3 years. 
(2A) Parents who commit a 
repeat offence 
Fine which may extend to 10000 rupees. 
(3) Violations of any other 
section of the Act 
incluiding conditions 
for adolescents to 
work 
Imprisonment for a month or with fine of 
10000 rupees or with both. 
 
 D. Pre-rescue 
 
A comprehensive rescue team consisting of a spectrum of 
stakeholders shall be constituted for the rescue of child labourer or 
adolescent labourer in hazardous employment. A suggestive list of law 
enforcement agencies, independent witnesse s and other persons with 
valuable skill sets to be included in a rescue team is as under: 
 
a) Police/ Special Juvenile Police Unit;  
b) District Nodal Officer or Labour Inspectors;  
c) District Magistrate or the Sub - Divisional Magistrate or Nominee of 
the DM (A case of child labour could also be a case of Bonded Labour) 
d) CWCs/ DCPO/ Members of village level child protection 
 committees;  
e) Representative of District Legal Services Authority;  
f) Women police officer;  
g) NGOs, representative of child helpline services; and 
  h) Translators, counsellors etc. 
 
E. Rescue 
 
Each rescue should be dealt with on a case to case basis. The rescue 
team should be alert and each action must be guided towards 
rescuing all victims, ensuring protection of the victims an d collecting 
evidence for investigation.  
Children rescued have to be produced in front of the CWC or where 
that is not possible in front of one member within 24 hours from the 
time of rescue, excluding the time of travel. 
 
 F. Post Rescue 
 
(a) Registration of FIR 
The police should ensure that FIR is registered including relevant 
provisions of all laws. Additional to child labour or adolescent labour 

19 
 
in hazardous employment, the child could also be a victim of 
trafficking, crimes against the child, kidnappi ng, sexual exploitation 
etc. In case of trafficking also remember to include economic offences 
under Maharashtra Control of Organized Crime Act, 1999 and 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002.  
 
(b) Production in front of the CWC 
All children must be pr oduced in front of the CWC who shall then 
order inquiry which may include medical examination, determination 
of age, intermediary care and protection, tracing parents or if the 
CWC deems fit sending the child with parents, home verification etc. 
The social investigation report to be filed within 15 days. At this stage 
or the end of the inquiry, CWC may recommend inclusion of 
additional sections in the FIR through the Juvenile Justice Board as 
per the JJ Act, 2015.  
 
(c) Counseling of victim 
Counseling should be provided to victims by trained counselor, 
community social worker or NGOs or DLSA so that the victim is well 
informed. An assessment of mental trauma caused to the victim and 
support required should be determined and such information 
provided to the CWC so that they may pass suitable orders for the 
same. All information s/he possess is obtained for the investigation 
and her/ his needs are heard at all stages of prosecution and 
rehabilitation.  
 
(d) Legal Aid 
Legal aid is to be provided to the victim at the police station and at 
the place of safety wherever necessary by empanelled lawyers of the 
DLSA/ SLSA and NGOs. Legal Counseling and advice to the parents 
of the child must be provided. 
 
G. Rehabilitation 
 
(a) Social Rehabilitation 
All persons below 18 years who have been rescued have to be 
produced in front of the CWC. The CWC must conduct an inquiry 
which includes a home verification process and a social investigation 
report.  
 
  (b) Educational Rehabilitation 
Children who are rescued from labour or adolescents who are rescued 
from hazardous employment shall be linked to suitable education 
facilities by National Child Labour Project (NCLP) in following steps:  
 
If the child is between 5 - 8 years she/ he will be directly linked to th e 
Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan to access their Right to Education.  
 
A child between 9 - 14 years will attend two year bridge education in 
the NCLP Special Training Centers and then will be mainstreamed to 
the schools under Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan programme. 
 
To ensure quality of educational rehabilitation, the index card 
prepared under PENCIL portal of Ministry of Labour and Employment 

20 
 
would be updated regularly by the District Project Society under 
NCLP. 
 
An adolescent between 14 -18 years will be linked to a sk ill 
development program run by the Government of India or the 
particular State Government.  
 
The data of recued adolescents would be shared with Ministry of Skill 
Development through PENCIL Portal. 
 
(c) Economic Rehabilitation 
 
Back wages: All rescued child labourer and adolescent labourers in 
hazardous employment shall be paid back wages at a rate not less 
than minimum wages for their period of employment.  
 
Immediate financial assistance of Rs 30000 under the Central Sector 
Scheme for Reh abilitation of Bon ded Labourer 2017 if the child/ 
adolescent is  a bonded labour. Additional compensation up to Rs. 
3,00,000 is available  upon proof of bondage  and other legal 
consequences as per judicial process. 
 
Economic Compensation: As per MC Mehta vs.  State of Tamil Nadu 
and Ors. AIR 1997 SCC 699 judgment- 
 
Rs 20000 per child are to be paid by the employer to a “Child Labour 
Rehabilitation-cum-Welfare Fund” to be used only for the benefit of 
that child.  
 
In addition, the Government is to provide emplo yment to an adult 
family member of the child or contribute Rs 5000 per child to this 
fund 
 
As per Section 14(B) of C&AL (P&R) Act 1986, a Child and Adolescent 
Labour Rehabilitation Fund is to be formed by appropriate 
government in every district or for two  or more districts. The amount 
of Fine and an additional amount of Rs 15000 is to be credited by the 
Government for each child or adolescent in such fund. The amount 
deposited and income accrued shall be given to the child as per Child 
and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Central Rules. 
 
 H. Monitoring 
 
  Enforcement of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986 and Rules made therein are to be monitored both by 
an elaborate monitoring mechanism within the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment as well as by external independent agencies, thereby assuring 
robust enforcement of the law. 
   
 Monitoring Mechanisms at the District, State and Central Level 
 
Commissions formed at the center, state and district level have the 
mandate to monitor the implementation of child labour 
 

21 
 
National Human Rights Commission along with its counterpart at the 
State are to look into any violation of human rights not addressed, 
including child labour and adolescent labour in hazardous industries.  
The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights and its 
counterpart at the State levels as well as those at the District Child 
Protection Unit at the district level have a mandate to monitor the 
protection systems for children all over the country. While the NCPCR 
and SCPCR reviews policy implementation, the DCPU regulates and 
monitors institutions on the field such as the children’s homes, 
community level monitoring committees etc.  
 
NALSA, SLSA and DLSA have the mandate to monitor coordination  
among agencies, and convergent implementation of laws and schemes 
for the eradication of child labour. They also have the mandate to 
monitor access to justice of every child. 
 
I. Role and responsibilities of enforcing agencies and other 
stakeholders 
 
 The role and responsibilities of enforcing agencies and other 
stakeholders at different stages are as under: 
 
 
 
Enforcing agency/ 
stakeholder 
Role and responsibilities 
District Nodal Officer Prevention, identification, preparation 
before rescue, rescue, post  rescue, 
rehabilitation and follow up 
Police/Special Juvenile 
Police Officer 
Prevention, identification, pre -rescue 
planning, rescue, post rescue and 
investigation 
District Magistrate Prevention, identification, preparation 
before rescue, rescue, post rescue and 
rehabilitation 
Project Director – National 
Child Labour Project 
Society 
Prevention, identification, assistance  in 
rescue, rehabilitation and follow up. 
State Resource Centre - 
State Labour Department 
Prevention, identification, assistance in 
rescue, rehabilitation and follow up. 
State or District Legal 
Services Authority 
Prevention, assistance in rescue and 
rehabilitation. 
Child Welfare Committees Rescue and rehabilitation 
Department of Education 
and Schools 
Prevention, identification and 
rehabilitation. 
2.27 In this context, the representatives of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
 
“Now we come to the Standard Operating Procedure, which was launched in 
the year 2017. What will be the provisions under it, what will be the 
reporting system, how will first action report, second action report and legal 
action report, come, all these were described in detail. As it was in the rules, 

22 
 
pre and post rescue, how the child will be rescued from child labour, how 
the child will be presente d before the Child Welfare Committee after rescue 
and who will be in that rescue team, counseling will also be needed, legal 
experts will be needed, women police officers will be needed, who all will be 
in that rescue team, It was mentioned in detail. Afte r the post rescue, the 
child appears before the Child Welfare Committee, if that child has been 
rescued from a faraway place , then complete provision is there regarding 
the procedure to reunite him with his family. If the child is there with his 
parents, then how to rehabilitate him with his family, all this was mentioned 
in the Standard Operating Procedure. The enforcement agencies, whether 
they are District Magistrates, District Task Force, State Police agencies, what 
are their rules, what is the line of  action, all that has been explained in 
detail.” 
 
2.28 In this context, some of the NGOs suggested as under: 
“i. Need to provide employment to one adult member of family of rescued 
child or contribution of Rs. 5,000 to the Welfare Fund by State 
Government and need to formulate guidelines for the utilization of the 
Fund  
ii. need to substantially increase financial assistance from Rs. 5000 to 
an appropriate amount keeping in view inflation  
iii. Need to ensure implementation of the Child & Adolescent Labour 
Rehabilitation Fund at district level to ensure that child and 
adolescent is not only rescued but his/her future is secured by the 
amount collected in fund for his/her welfare and education Oft en due 
to non -receipt of fine from the employer deprive rescued children 
rehabilitation.  
iv. Central Sector Plan for rehabilitation of bonded labourer has a 
provision of creating a district corpus fund of Rs. 10 lakhs for meeting 
immediate relief of rehabilitation of legally released bonded labourers. 
Therefore, there is a need for district level corpus fund for meeting the 
immediate relief and rehabilitation of child labourers. The district 
corpus fund will also be used for the rehabilitation of traf ficked and 
migrant child labourers repatriated from other states.” 
(v) Roles and Responsibilities of the District Magistrate 
2.29 As regards, the role and responsibilities of the District Magistrate by 
virtue of ‘The Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibitio n and Regulation) 
Rules, 2017' the Ministry stated as under: 
“The Rule 17C deals with the Duties of the District Magistrate : 
1. The District Magistrate shall — 
(i) Specify such officers subordinate to him, as he consider necessary, to be 
called nodal offi cers, who shall exercise all or any of the powers and 
perform all or any of the duties of the District Magistrate conferred and 
imposed on him by the Central Government under Section 17 A: 

23 
 
(ii) Assign such powers and duties, as he thinks appropriate, to a nodal 
officer to be exercised and performed by him within his local limits of 
jurisdiction as subordinate Officer: 
(iii) Preside over as chairperson of the Task Force to be formed in a District 
Consisting of - 
(a)  inspector appointed under Section 17  for the purposes of his local 
limits of jurisdiction; 
(b)  Superintends of Police for the p urposes of his local limits of 
jurisdiction  
(c) Additional District Magistrate for the purposes of his local limits of 
jurisdiction; 
(d) Nodal Officer referred to under  clause (i) for the purposes of his local 
limits of jurisdiction; 
(e) Assistant Labour Commissioner (Central) for the Purposes of his local 
limits of jurisdiction; 
(f) Two representatives each from a voluntary organization involved  in 
rescue and rehabilit ation of employed children in the district on 
rotation basis for a period of two year; 
(g) A representative of the District Legal Services Authority to be 
nominated by the District Judge; 
(h) A member of the District Anti-trafficking Unit; 
(i) Chairperson of the Child Welfare Committee of the District; 
(j) District Child Protection Officers in the District under the Integrated 
Child Protection Scheme of the Ministry of the Government of India 
dealing with women and child development; 
(k) District Education Officer; 
(l) Any other person nominated by the District Magistrate; 
(m) Secretary of the Task Force shall be any of the nodal officers referred 
to in clause (i) and nominated by the Chairperson. 
(2) The Task Force referred to in clause (iii) of sub -rule (1) shall meet at 
least once in every month and shall make a comprehensive action plan for 
conducting the rescue operation, taking into account the time available, 
point of raid in a ccordance with the law for the time being in force, 
confidentiality of the p lan, protection of victims and witnesses and the 
interim relief, in accordance with the guidelines for rescue and repatriation 
issued by the Central Government from time to time; and the Task Force 
Shall also cause to upload the minutes of such meeting on the portal created 
for such purpose by the Central Government. 
(3) In addition to the duties referred to in sub -rule (1), the District 
Magistrate shall ensure through Nodal Officers that the children and 

24 
 
adolescents who are employed in contravention of the  provisions of the Act 
are rescued and shall be rehabilitated - 
 
Roles and Responsibilities of the State Government by Virtue of the 
revised NCLP Guidelines.  
(a) The State Government has the responsibility in the matter of 
planning, co-ordination and monitoring of the NCLPS. The State Level 
Monitoring Committee (SLMC) headed by the Chief Secretary of the 
State is meant for effective and efficient implementation of NCLP 
Scheme and convergence of various development initiatives. The State 
Department of Labour or any other department may be designated to 
monitor and review the functioning of child labour project(s) in the 
state and give secretariat help to State Level Monitoring Committee 
(SLMC) (Para 3.14)  
(b) The SLMC headed by the Chief Secretary of the st ate should be the 
apex body to converge the efforts of all departments for the delivery of 
various services to the rescued child workers and their families. The 
Secretaries of other concerned departments, Civil Society working in 
this area may be invited in the SLMC meeting. It is recommended that 
the SLMC meet at least once a year to take stock of the progress in 
elimination of child labour efforts in the state and review the progress 
in convergence of services for the benefit of the families of child 
workers (Para 116). Further Ministry has also framed Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) as a ready reckoner for enforcing agencies 
and other stakeholders.” 
 
(vi) State Action Plan/State Resource Centres 
 
2.30 The Committee desired to know about the dir ectives / ad visories 
issued by the Ce ntral G overnment to var ious Sta te G overnments to 
prevent / eradicate Child labour. In response, the MoLE stated as under:  
  
“The Government has been issuing directives / advisories   to States / UTs 
from time to time on certain  issues viz. conduct survey to identify the child 
labour, collect and furnish the enforcement data relating to enforcement of 
Child Labour and Adolescent (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986,    State 
Action Plan indicating the provisions and related action s by State 
Governments / UTs for enforcemcent of the amended Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition & Regulations) Act 1986 which came into force 
01.09.2016, uploading of data on PENCiL portal etc.”  
   
2.31 In response to a pointed query as to what extent, model State Action 
Plan has been implemented and whether any further instructions have been 
issued to the Sta tes dur ing the last 5 yea rs and t he o utcome t hereof, the 
MoLE replied as under:  
  
“……Labour being in the concurrent list, effective implementation of the 
Child Labour Act requires cooperation and active participation of the State 
Governments. After amendment, various provisions were required to be 

25 
 
implemented immediately by State Govern ments, especially strengthening 
the monitoring and inspection system. A State Action Plan was prepared for 
effective enforcement. As per Section 17 A of the amended Act, powers and 
duties for carrying out the provisions of the Act are vested with District 
Magistrate. Child and Adolescent Labour (P&R) Central Rules also provides 
for specific duties for District Nodal Officer. Provisions related to the action 
by Nodal Officers are made in online portal PENCIL. Therefore intervention 
was sought to facilitate nomination of Nodal Officer(s) in every district and to 
provide their details to the Ministry for enforcement of the Act. Vide D.O. 
letter dated 19.08.2016 from Secretary (L&E) to all Chief Secretaries., a 
State Action Plan was circulated and state governme nts were requested for 
its implementation. Consequently , it has been found that many states have 
framed the state action plan like Punjab, Odisha etc.” 
  
2.32 In this context, some of the NGOs suggested for need for appointment 
of District Nodal Officers to track the cases of child labour at PENCIL Portal 
and also to attach complaints received from other sources to the Portal; 
strengthening of PENCIL portal; development of state -based child tracking 
systems for each rescued/at risk child; 
2.33 On the issue of the functioning of the State Resource Centres and the 
review mechanism for the purpose, the MoLE replied as under:  
“…..State Resource Centre (SRC) ensured state involvement in National 
Child Labour Project (NCLP) implementation and monitoring. Each state had 
one SRC under the Principal Secretary Labour/Labour Commissioner. 
Funds were released to every resource centre which was used for awareness, 
rescue activities, and enforcement of the Act. SRCs were manned by State 
Labour Department officials. SRC f unctions include coordinating rescue 
efforts, monitoring enforcement of the Child and adolescent labour Act, 
supervising NCLP implementation, coordinating child labour data on 
PENCIL, creating and implementing Awareness Generation Plans, and 
communicating with the Central Government on enforcement of the Child 
and adolescent labour Act and NCLP implementation.The NCLP scheme has 
been subsumed with Samagara Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) Scheme in phased 
manner. Now it has been decided to provide bridge education to the rescued 
child labour directly through Special Training Centres of Samagra Shiksha 
Abhiyaan (SSA) of Department of School Education and Literacy.” 
 
(vii) Identification and Prohibition of Child Labour 
2.34 The Committee desired to know the process being  followed to ide ntify 
the are as of high con centration of  Child Lab our acr oss the cou ntry. In 
response, the MoLE responded as under:  
  
“Preliminary survey is  conducted by the District Administration with the 
help of Labour and Education Department to know the number of children / 
adolescents engaged in hazardous and non -hazardous occupation and 
processes in the District.   If the District Administration observes high 
incidence of child labour and decides to implement NCLP, composition of the 
District Project Society is finalized by the District Collector / 
Magistrate.  The District administration submits the proposal through the 
State Gover nment to Ministry of Labour & Employment for opening of 

26 
 
Special Training Centres (STCs) under the NCLP in particular district. The 
proposal of the District Administration is examined in the Ministry and 
necessary approval is conveyed if proposal is in line with NCLP guidelines.”   
  
2.35 When enquired about the mechanism put in place to effectively 
implement the directions/instructions as laid down under various 
Acts/Rules for identification and prohibition of Child Labour, the MoLE 
submitted as under:  
 “…..The Government has also notified Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition & Regulation) Rules, 2017. The Rules also provides for District 
Nodal Officer (DNO) and Task Force under the chairmanship of District 
Magistrate to ensure that the provisions of the Act are properly enforced. 
 
To ensure the effective enforcement of the provisions of the Child and 
Adolescent (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 and smooth implementation 
of the National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme an online portal PENCIL 
(Platform for Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour) was launched in 
September 2017. The Portal connects Central Government to State 
Government(s), District(s), all Project Societies and the General 
public.  Further, online complaints regarding child l abour can also be filed 
by anybody on the PENCIL Portal.   The complaint gets assigned to the 
concerned Nodal Officer automatically by the system for further necessary 
action.” 
 
2.36 In response to a specific query as to how do the Ministry propose to 
identify those areas where children are deployed as family labour or 
otherwise and also to mechanise the jobs undertaken by such children, the 
MoLE submitted as under:  
“…… Ministry of Labour and Employment functions to ensure improving life 
and dignity of labour force of the country by protecting and safeguarding the 
interest of workers, promotion of their welfare and providing social security 
to the labour force both in organized and unorganized sector by enactment 
and implementation of various labour laws, wh ich regulate the terms and 
conditions of service and employment of workers.  
 
The Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 
1986 prohibits employment of children below   14 years of age   in all 
occupations and processes and the employment of adolescents in hazardous 
occupations and processes. However, the child is permitted to help his 
family or in family enterprises, which is other than any processes or 
hazardous occupations/ processes set forth in the Schedule of the  Act , and 
only aft er school hours or during vacations. This “help” does not include 
“engagement in employment” or the situation where a relationship of 
“employer-employee” exists. In the Act, “family enterprises” means any work, 
profession, manufacture or business which is performed by the members of 
the family.” 
2.37 In this context, the representatives of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
 

27 
 
“…Poverty is one of the main causes of child labour. The government has 
launched many schemes targeting poverty, you have mentioned NREGA in it, 
we have to see what is the family approach for child labour? Whether the 
family income is sufficient enough so that their child does not get into child 
labour? We need to make it a little family oriented.” 
 
2.38 In this context some of the NGOs suggested as under: 
 
“i. Need to formulate special Scheme for providing financial assistance to 
a rescued victim of child labour. This financial assistance shall be 
interim assistance until such time the child receives access to 
economic benefits under laws, schemes and Court orders.  
ii. Need to address the economic crisis of families/provide Socio -
economic assistance  by the Labour Department through the District 
Magistrate or the Sub-Divisional Magistrate. 
iii. Need to address factors responsible for child labour including family 
circumstances, viz. family not being economically empowered; earning 
member suffering from  life threatening illness; marital dispute; man 
made or natural calamities; loss of livelihood due to COVID -19 
pandemic; 
iv. need to put identified children under Individual Foster Care, Kinship 
care, after care Program or any other support system that meet the 
need. Wherever possible, the child should be re -linked to their 
biological families and the family is supported t o take care of the 
child.  
v. need to allocate resources for identification of family having higher 
incidents of child labour followed by Family Strengthening Measures 
viz. livelihood support, provision of education material, nutrition 
supplement, legal & psycho social support for a period of 5 years 
vi. Need for monitoring supply chain and hot spots and mapping of 
vulnerable families and children at risk of child labour.” 
(viii) District Project Societies and  Special Training Centres 
2.39 As regards the functioning of the District Project Societies, the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment stated as under:  
 
“National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme is implemented by the 
District Project Societies (DPS) under the chairmanship of the administrative 
head of the district namely,District Magistrate/Dy. Commissioner/ District 
Collector of the district under administrative control of the State 
government. Under the NCLP Scheme, the DPS at District level are required 
to conduct the baseline survey to identify child labour. Based on the number 
of child labour identified and rescued from the survey, Special Training 
Centres are opened for rehabilitation of the child labour in the age group of 
9-14 years. The Scheme is regularly monitored and evaluated  by the 
Chairman, Project Director of the Society, District Nodal Officer, Labour 
Commissioner and. Ministry of Labour and Employment.” 

28 
 
 
2.40 When asked as to how the Ministry get information on the agencies 
that are provided with the fund by the District Project Society for operating 
Special Training Centres as per NCLP guidelines and the action the 
Ministry take on any act of deviation or malpractices in utilization of NCLP 
fund, the MoLE replied as under: 
 
“As per NCLP scheme guidelines, the Special Training Center (s) could be 
operated by reputed and experienced Non -Government Organisations 
(NGOs), Civil Society Organisations etc. or by the Project Society directly 
themselves. The onus of selection / identi fication of implementing agencies 
to operate the STC under NCLP scheme lies with District Project Society.  
i) The NGO/voluntary agency should be a body registered under the 
Societies Registration Act or Public Trust Act and should have been in 
existence for a minimum period of two years. 
ii) The NGO/voluntary agency shall not entrust / sub contract the 
activities assigned to it under the Project nor shall it divert any part of 
financial assistance to any other organization / agency. 
iii) It should not have been blacklisted for misuse of public funds, non -
delivery of satisfactory service in a previous project or any other 
misdemeanor. 
iv) It should have prior experience in implementation of social projects. 
v) All accounts, stocks and registers maintained by the NGO / vo luntary 
agency for the project shall be open to inspection by the officers 
appointed by the Central Govt/ State Govt. / District Project Society 
or the monitoring institutions entrusted with the task by the 
appropriate government. 
vi) The NGO/voluntary agency should have a properly constituted 
managing / governing body and powers and duties clearly defined in 
its constitution. 
vii) Name of all office bearers involved in the establishment and 
management of such voluntary agency should be disclosed along with 
their roles and responsibilities in the organization. 
viii) If any of the officer bearers is holding public office, the details of the 
office should also be mentioned specifically. 
ix) The performance of these voluntary agencies engaged in NCLP Scheme 
should be assessed per iodically and the renewal of the mandate for 
the next year should depend upon its performance being found 
satisfactory in the current year. 
x) It should not discriminate in any manner on the basis of religion, 
caste, creed. 
However, as and when a complaint is  registered against the implementing 
NGOs, the Ministry requests the State Government to conduct an inquiry 
and take appropriate action in the matter.” 
 
2.41 In response to a specific query as to how the engagement of staff of 
Special Training Centres (STC s) helped in preventing children from slipping 
back into child labour, the MoLE stated as under: 
“Many District Collector / District Magistrate / Deputy Commissioner -cum-
Chairman of the NCLP District Project Societies have certified that the staff 
of STCs were actively engaged in preventing children from slipping back into 

29 
 
child labour and made alternative arrangements (for benefit of children 
enrolled before the pandemic) to give bridge education to the children during 
the time STCs were closed.” 
 
2.42 With regard to the number of Schools/Training Centres set up under 
NCLP by various State Governments and the number of rescued Child 
Labours imparted education/training there during the last one decade, the 
MoLE replied as under:  
“National Child Labour Project (NCLP) scheme was approved for continuation 
up to 31.03.2021 and since then has been subsumed/merged  
withSamagara  Shiksha Abhiyan  (SSA) Scheme.  No   new permission after 
31.03.2021 has been given for opening STCs under NCLP scheme. The Child 
Labour Project under NCLP at a particular location has limited time frame. 
Eligible Children are enrolled in the Special Training Centres (STCs) for a 
maximum period of 2 years. STCs provide   bridge   education   to   children   
before   they   are mainstreamed in to formal education system.  STCs are 
closed on mainstreaming of the enrolled children in formal schools and the 
volunteers are disengaged.  
7,12,426 number of children were rescued / withdrawn from work, 
rehabilitated and mainstreamed under NCLP Scheme  during 2011 -12 to 
2022-23.” 
(ix) Norms pre scribed for the selecti on of Dis tricts/Operational 
Districts 
 
2.43 As regards the spe cific norms prescribed for the selecti on of dis tricts 
for implementing NCLP, the MoLE stated as under:  
  
“The scheme is demand driven and projects are approved as per scheme 
guidelines on the basis of applications received for setting up of projects in 
districts. The State Government, based on the outcome of baseline survey for 
identification of child labour conducted by District Administration, 
recommends the proposal for opening new District Project Society. The 
approval is given by the Ministry of Labour and Employment after 
examination of the survey report & recommendations by the State 
Government.” 
2.44 When asked about the number of Dis tricts (State -wise) acr oss the 
Country covered under the Nat ional Child Labour Project (NCLP), the MoLE 
replied as under: 
          
  
“The NCLP Scheme has been sanctioned in 324 districts in 21 States of the 
country as on 31.03.2021.  Further,  the NCLP scheme has been  subsumed  
in  Samagra  Shiksha  Abhiyan  (SSA),  a  scheme   of Deparment of  School 
Education &  Literacy. The state wise details are as under: 
 
 
 

30 
 
Sl.  
No. 
Name of 
State 
No. of 
Sanctioned 
NCLP 
Districts 
Name of District 
 1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
13 Anantapur, Chittor, Kadapa, Guntur, Kurnool, 
Nellore, Prakasam, Srikakulam, Vizianagaram, 
Vishakhapatnam, West Godavari, East 
Godavari, and Krishna. 
 2 Assam 5 Nagaon, Kamrup, Bongaigaon, Nalbari and 
Lakhimpur  
 3 Bihar 24 Nalanda, Saharsa, Jamui, Katihar, Araria, 
Gaya, East Champaran, West Champaran, 
Madhepura, Patna, Supaul, Samastipur, 
Madhubani, Darbhanga, Muzaffarpur, Nawada, 
Khagaria, Sitamarhi, Kishanganj, Begusarai, 
Banka, Saran, Purnia and Bhagalpur 
 4 Chhattisgarh 8 Durg, Bilaspur, Rajnandgaon, Surguja, 
Raigarh,   Raipur, Dantewada and Korba  
 5 Gujarat 9 Surat, Panchmahal, Kutch (Bhuj), 
Banaskantha, Dahod, Vadodara, Bhavnagar, 
Ahmedabad and Rajkot  
 6 Haryana 3 Gurgaon, Faridabad and Panipat  
 7 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
3 Srinagar, Jammu and Udhampur 
 8 Jharkhand 8 Garwha, Sahibganj, Dumka, Pakur, West 
Singhbhum (Chaibasa), Ranchi, Palamu,    and 
Hazaribagh  
 9 Karnataka 17 Bijapur, Raichur, Dharwad, Bangalore Rural, 
Bangalore Urban, Belgaum, 
Koppal,   Devangere, Mysore, Bagalkot, 
Chitradurga, Gulbarga, Bellary, Kolar, Mandya, 
Havery and Tumkur. 
 10 Madhya 
Pradesh 
22 Mandsaur, Gwalior, Ujjain, Barwani, Rewa, 
Dhar, East Nimar(Khandwa), Rajgarh, 
Chhindwara, Shivpuri, Sidhi, Guna,   Shajapur, 
Ratlam, West Nimar(Khargon), Jhabua, Damoh, 
Sagar, Jabalpur, Satna, Indore and Katni. 
 11 Maharashtra 18 Solapur, Thane, Sangli,    Jalgaon, Nandurbar, 
Nanded, Nasik, Yavatmal, Dhule, Beed, 
Amravati, Jalna, Aurangabad, Gondia, Mumbai 
Suburban, Pune, Buldana and Parbhani. 
 12 Nagaland  1 Dimapur 
 13 Odisha 24 Angul, Balasore, Bargarh, Bolangir, Cuttack, 
Deogarh, Gajapati (Udayagiri), Ganjam, 
Jharsuguda, Kalahandi, Koraput, Malkangiri, 
Mayurbhanj, Nabarangpur, Nuapada, 
Rayagada, Sambalpur, Sonepur, Jajpur, 
Keonjhar, Dhenkenal, Khurda, Nayagarh and 
Sundergarh. 
 14 Punjab 3 Jalandhar, Ludhiana and Amritsar   
 15 Rajasthan 27 Jaipur, Udaipur, Tonk, Jodhpur, Ajmer, Alwar, 
Jalore, Churu, Nagaur, Chittaurgarh, 
Banswara, Dhaulpur, Sikar, Dungarpur, 
Bharatpur, Bikaner, Jhunjhunu, Bundi, 
Jhalawar, Pali, Bhilwara, Sri Ganganagar, 
Barmer, Dausa, Hanumangarh, Kota and 

31 
 
Baran. 
 16 Tamil Nadu 18 Chidambaranar/Toothikudi (Tuticorin), 
Coimbatore, Dharmapuri, Vellore, Salem, 
Tiruchirapallli, Tirunelveli, Krishnagiri, 
Chennai, Erode, Dindigul, Theni. Kanchipuram, 
Thiruvannamallai, Tiruvallur, Pudukkottai, 
Nammakkal and Virudhunagar. 
 17 Telangana 31 Hyderabad, Karimnagar, Khammam, 
Nizamabad, Rangareddy, Warangal, Nalgonda, 
Medak, Mehbubnagar, Adilabad, Mancherial, 
Nirmal, KomuramBheemAsifabad, Jagtiyal, 
Warrangal (Urban), JayashankarBhupalpally, 
Jangaon, Sangareddy, Siddipet, Wanaparthy, 
Nagarkurnool, JogulambabGajwal, Suryapet, 
MedchalMalkajgiri, Vikarabad, Mahabubabad, 
Pedapally, RajannaSircilla, 
BhadradriKothagudem, YadadriBhuvanagiri 
and Kamareddy. 
 18 Uttar 
Pradesh 
56 Varanasi, Mirzapur, Bhadohi (Sant Ravi Das 
Nagar), Bulandshahar, Saharanpur, Azamgarh, 
Bijnour, Gonda, Kheri, Bahraich, Balrampur, 
Hardoi, Barabanki, Sitapur, Faizabad, Badaun, 
Gorakhpur, Kushinagar, Kannuaj, 
Shajahanpur, Rae Bareli, Unnao, Sultanpur, 
Fatehpur, Shravasti, Pratapgarh, Basti, 
Sonebhadra, Mau,   Kaushambi, Banda, 
Ghaziabad, Jaunpur, Rampur, Bareilly, 
Lucknow, Meerut, Etawah, Agra, 
Ghazipur,  Mathura, Etah, Moradabad, 
Allahabad, Kanpur Nagar, Aligarh, Ferozabad, 
Ballia, Sambhal, Hapur, Mainpuri, Sant Kabir 
Nagar, Gautam Budh Nagar, Jhansi, Lalitpur 
and Maharajganj. 
 19 Uttarakhand 13 Dehradun, Chamoli, Nainital, Champawat, 
Almora, Haridwar, Tehri Garhwal, Pauri 
Garhwal, Udham Singh Nagar, Pithoragarh, 
Rudraprayag, Bageshwar and Uttarkashi. 
 20 West Bengal 20 Burdwan, North Dinajpur, Dakshin Dinajpur, 
North 24-Parganas, South 24 -Parganas, 
Kolkata, Murshidabad, West 
Midnapore,  Maldah, Bankura, Purulia, 
Birbhum, Nadia, Hoogli, Howrah, Jalpaiguri, 
Cooch Behar, East Midnapore, Alipurduar and 
Darjeeling.  
 21 Delhi 1 NCT of Delhi 
 Total  324   
 
2.45 The Ministry further supplemented that a s on 31.03.2021, the NCLP 
Scheme was operational in 59 districts across 11 States / UTs as per details 
given below: 
 
 

32 
 
S. No. Name of State No. of 
Operational 
Sanctioned 
Districts 
Name of Operational Districts 
1 Andhra Pradesh 6 Guntur, Kurnool, Nellore, 
Srikakulam, 
Vizianagaram, Krishna.    
2 Assam 2 Nagaon, Kamrup, 
3 Jammu &Kashmir 1 Srinagar 
4 Jharkhand 2 Ranchi, Hazaribagh 
5 Karnataka 1 Bangalore Rural, 
6 Madhya Pradesh 6 Gwalior, Ujjain, Barwani, Rewa, 
Shajapur, Katni    
7 Maharashtra 6 Nandurbar, Nanded, Nasik, Beed, 
Mumbai Suburban, Parbhani.    
8 Odisha 3 Deogarh, Jharsuguda, Keonjhar, 
9 Rajasthan 3 Alwar, Bhilwara, Dausa, 
10 Tamil Nadu 15 Chidambaranar/Toothikudi 
(Tuticorin), Coimbatore, 
Dharmapuri, Vellore, Salem, 
Tiruchirapallli, Tirunelveli, 
Krishnagiri, Chennai, Erode, 
Dindigul, Kanchipuram, 
Thiruvannamallai, 
Nammakkal, Virudhunagar. 
   
11 Telangana 4 Khammam, Nizamabad, Vikarabad, 
Kamareddy.    
12 Uttar Pradesh 3 Balrampur, Fatehpur, Kaushambi, 
13 West Bengal 7 Dakshin Dinajpur, North 24-
Parganas, Kolkata, Bankura, 
Howrah, Cooch 
Behar, Alipurduar 
   
 Total 59  
 
Further, on the basis of permission granted earlier by this Ministry to start 
new STCs, the scheme is operational during 2022-23 in 11 Districts across 5 
States in the country and the details thereof may be seen as under: 
 
Sl. No. State District No. of 
STCs 
1 Madhya Pradesh Shajapur 15 
2 Odisha Jharsuguda 16 
3 Odisha Sundargarh 28 
4 Assam Kamrup (Metro) 40 
5 Assam Nagaon 93 
6 West Bengal Dakshin Dinajpur 30 
7 West Bengal Alipurduar 13 
8 West Bengal Cooch Behar 19 
9 Tamil Nadu Vellore 10 

33 
 
10 Tamil Nadu Dharmapuri 9 
11 Tamil Nadu Krishnagiri 9 
 Total  282 
 
The Ministry further stated that the NCLP Scheme was appraised for its 
continuation beyond 31st March 2021 in terms of relevant instructions of 
Ministry of Finance.” 
 
2.46 On a pointed query as to whether ind ividual State Governments have 
proposed cov erage of cer tain dis tricts in  the State un der NC LP, the MoLE 
stated as under:  
  
“The Ministry of Labour & Employment has not received such proposal from 
any State Government. The NCLP scheme is demand driven and projects are 
approved as per scheme guidelines on the basis of applications re ceived for 
setting up of projects in districts. From time to time State Governments send 
proposal for inclusion of certain district under NCLP Scheme based on the 
outcome of baseline survey  for identification of child labour conducted by 
District Administration.”   
 
(x)  Achievement of objectives of NCLP 
 
2.47 In response to a pointed query as to what  extent NCLP Sche me has 
been able to achieve its objectives, the MoLE replied as under:  
  
“So far, NCLP scheme has been sanctioned in 324 no. of districts in 21 
States and about 1.43 million working children have been mainstreamed to 
regular education system through NCLP scheme since the inception of the 
scheme.”   
 
(xi)  Census data of child labour/number of child labours 
2.48 The comparative census data of working children and the main 
working children as furnished by the Ministry of Labour and Employment is 
as under: 
Year Data Source No. of working 
Children 
No. of Main working 
Children 
2001 Census 1.26 crore 57.79 Lakh 
2011 Census 1.01crore 43.53 Lakh 
 
2.49 When asked as to how the Ministry  differentiate bet ween 'Wo rking 
Children' and 'Main Working Children', the MoLE stated as under:  
  
“In the previous census i.e. Census 2001, workers were categorized as ‘Main 
workers’ and ‘Marginal workers’. Those who worked for more than 6 months 
during last year were categorized as ‘Main workers’ whereas those who 
worked less than 6 months were catego rized as ‘Marginal Workers’. 

34 
 
In  Census 2011, for better capturing and analysis of Census data, ‘Marginal 
workers’ have been classified into two categories viz., (i) worked for 3 months 
or more but less than 6 months (ii) worked for less than 3 months. The  
definition of ‘Main worker’ remains the same.” 
 
2.50 When questioned about the plan of action of the Ministry to 
interact/coordinate with the line Ministries for collection of data on child 
labour as well as its elimination, the MoLE replied that at present, the 
Ministry of Labour& Employment relies on the Census data in the matter of 
child labour.  
2.51 The Ministry furnished the following industry -wise data of main 
workers in the age group of 5 to 14 years, as per 2001 census:  
 
S. 
No. 
Industry No. of main workers in the 
age group of 5-14 years 
1 Agriculture, Hunting and Forestry; and 
Fishing 
3973894 
2 Mining and Quarrying 34106 
3 Manufacturing 790022 
4 Electricity, Gas and Water Supply  2285 
5 Construction 137937 
6 Wholesale and Retail Trade  299162 
7 Hotels and Restaurants 50415 
8 Transport, Storage and Communications  46093 
9 Financial Intermediation; and Real Estate, 
Renting and Business Activities  
192359 
10 Public Administration and Defence, 
compulsory  Social Security; Education; 
health and Social Work; Other Community, 
Social and Personal Service Activities; and 
Private Households with Employed Persons; 
and Extra -Territorial Organisation and 
Bodies 
227928 
 Total  5754201 
 
(xii) Action against violators  
  
2.52 When asked about the number of em ployers punished for viol ation of 
provisions con tained in the Ch ild and Ad olescent Labour (Pr ohibition & 
Regulation) Act, 19 86 after its am endment in 20 16; the pu nitive acti on 
taken against the offenders and the current conviction rate, the MoLE stated 
as under:  
  
“.........According   to section 14 of the Act whoever employs any child or 
permits any child to work in contravention of the provisions of section 3 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less  
than six months but which may extend to two years, or with ﬁne which shall 
not be less than twenty thousand rupees but which may extend to ﬁfty 
thousand rupees, or with both. Further,  the  Act  also provides  that  
whoever,  having been  convicted of   a n  oﬀence  under section  3 or section  
3A commits a like o ﬀence afterwards, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which 

35 
 
may extend to three years. The o ﬀence under this Act has also been made 
cognizable offense for the employers. 
 
As per “Crime in India” a publication of  National Crime Records Bureau, 
772, 476 and  613 number  of  cases were registered  during calendar  years  
2019     to  2021  respectively  under  the  Child  and Adolescent   Labou r   
(Prohibition   and   Regulation)   Act,  1986   in  the country.As per records 
of NCRB, the latest available data pertains to the year 2021.”  
 
2.53 In this context, the representatives of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
 
“Child labour offense has been made cognizable offense for the first time. Not 
only this, penalty provisions have been made in it, unless there is a 
deterrent, this practice is not going to stop. Keeping this in mind, the 
penalties were also increased and for the first time parents are also included 
in it. Penal provisions have also been made for parents who send their 
children for child labour. Direct responsibility for implementation of the Act 
has been given to the District Magistrates” 
 
2.54 The Ministry further stated as under:  
  “The Ministry of Labour & Employment does not conduct survey 
across the country to have the number of child labour. The details of State / 
Union Territories wise cases registered under Child  and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and  Regulation) Act, 1986 during calendar year 2015 to 2021 is 
as under: 
State / Union Territories wise cases registered under Child  and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and  Regulation) Act, 1986  
 
  State / Union Territories 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 
1 Andhra Pradesh 0 2 0 0 2 37 12 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 
3 Assam 4 2 11 39 68 40 78 
4 Bihar 0 0 0 14 15 3 14 
5 Chhattisgarh 2 1 0 0 2 0 0 
6 Goa 0 3 1 0 0 0 0 
7 Gujarat 4 7 3 35 64 39 40 
8 Haryana 4 0 2 6 11 1 12 
9 Himachal Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 
10 Jammu & Kashmir* 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
11 Jharkhand 2 0 16 17 18 27 5 
12 Karnataka 34 23 72 63 83 54 58 
13 Kerala 0 5 0 3 2 0 3 
14 Madhya Pradesh 2 0 26 3 4 1 5 
15 Maharashtra 96 93 130 90 53 29 57 
16 Manipur 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
17 Meghalaya 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 
18 Mizoram 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
19 Nagaland 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 
20 Odisha 2 0 0 0 0 0 6 

36 
 
21 Punjab 2 0 6 8 8 11 8 
22 Rajasthan 6 21 99 32 48 30 19 
23 Sikkim 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
24 Tamil Nadu 0 0 3 6 3 2 26 
25 Telangana 5 6 58 125 314 147 224 
26 Tripura 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 
27 Uttar Pradesh 26 6 7 2 9 1 1 
28 Uttarakhand 1 0 5 0 27 41 25 
29 West Bengal 1 4 2 5 7 1 2 
30 A&N Islands 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 
31 Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 0 1 7 
32 D&N Haveli 0 0 0 0  
2 
0 0 
33 Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0 0 
34 Delhi 57 31 20 15 30 6 11 
35 Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
36 Puducherry 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
  TOTAL (ALL INDIA) 251 204 462 464 772 476 613 
* Including Ladakh 
Source: Publications of National Crime Records Bureau 
 
   
 
2.55 It was noticed from the details of cases registered under Child & 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 that in 2020 only 
one case was registered in Uttar Pradesh where a large number of cases of 
child labour are seen / reported. When aske d as to how the Ministry ensure 
the authenticity of the data provided in respect of all States/UTs, coordinate 
with those State Governments where cases of violation of child labour laws 
are registered / reported and whether any Task Force has been constitu ted 
for the purpose, the MoLE replied as under:  
“The reports of cases registered under the Act are published by National 
Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) and this Ministry has no role to play in the 
reports. However, the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibitio n and 
Regulation) Act, 1986 inter alia provides for complete prohibition of work or 
employment of children below 14 years in any occupation and process and 
prohibition of adolescents in the age group of 14 to 18 years in hazardous 
occupations and processes . The Amendment Act also provides stricter 
punishment for employers for violation of the Act and has made the offence 
as cognizable.” 
2.56 When asked as to how the data on child labour is collected while 
conducting census and when will the census report wi th regard to child 
labour for 2021 be made available to the Ministry and whether the Ministry 
themselves propose to develop a mechanism to generate and maintain data 
relating to child labour instead of depending on census undertaken every 10 
years, the MoLE submitted as under:  
“The report of Census conveying the number of children engaged in child 
labour is published by Registrar General of India (RGI) and this Ministry has 
no role to play in the reports. There is no proposal under consideration in 
the Ministry to develop a mech anism to maintain child labour data without 

37 
 
depending on census data. 
It is further stated that in census, the data of main workers (who works for 
than six months in year) in the age group of 5 -14 years are available. 
Ministry of Labour& Employment considers these data as child labour data.” 
 
2.57 In this context, some of the NGOs pointed out that registration of the 
cases under the Act are still very low and suggested for mandatory 
registration of FIRs; imposition of fine, fixing time limit for repatriation; need 
to fix timeline for filing the chargesheet and completion of trial; and need to 
make a policy of strong implementation of the law to create deterrence in the 
society. 
(xiii) Survey 
2.58 The Committee were apprised that the Ministry of La bour and 
Employment does not conduct survey across the country to ascertain the 
number of child labour. On being asked, how do the Ministry ensure the 
effectiveness of the NCLP Scheme in the absence of such data, the MoLE 
submitted as under:  
“The NCLP is a demand-driven scheme insofar as the fund for conducting 
survey in a district is released by the Ministry only on receipt of a request 
thereof from the District Collector / District Magistrate / Deputy 
Commissioner-cum-Chairman of the District Project Soc iety. After receipt of 
survey report, the same is considered by the Ministry and grant necessary 
permission to operate STC under NCLP Scheme. While granting permission, 
the details of number of children to be enrolled, number of STC to be 
operated are also  taking into consideration. After proper bridge education, 
these children are mainstreamed.” 
 
2.59 During meeting of the Committee with representatives of Census 
department, it was informed that surveys relating to children in urban areas 
viz., children living under the bridges, flyovers, pipes etc are being 
conducted by the Census Department. The Department of School Education 
and Literacy (DoSEL) conduct door-to-door survey for identification of out of 
school children. When asked as to how do  the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment propose to extend assistance in accurately quantifying 
homeless ‘out of school children’ living in urban areas, the MoLE replied as 
under:   
“Education is in the Concurrent List of the Constitution and majority of the 
schools come under the domain of the State/UT Governments. Under the 
Samagra Shiksha Scheme, all the States and Union Territories (UTs) are 
required to conduct Household Survey for identification of Out of School 
Children (OoSC). DoSEL Department has develo ped an online module for 
compiling the data of OoSC identified by each State/UT and their mapping 
with Special Training Centres (STC) on the PRABANDH Portal. The 
concerned State/UT validates the child wise information of the identified 
OoSC and STC uploade d by the concerned Block Resource Centre of the 
State for monitoring the progress of mainstreaming of OoSC.” 
 

38 
 
2.60 In this context, the representatives of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
“So, Sir, I take your point.  Internally, within the Ministry, we will look at the 
urban areas to see how we can do a certain kind of survey there because 
Census is 10 years.  Sarva Shiksha Abhiyaan will be annual, and they have 
their limitation. We would look into this issue as to whether in the urban 
areas should we be doing a separate survey which we can bring it under 
NCLP.” 
 
2.61 In this context, various NGOs suggested as under: 
“i. Need to map the hotspots.   
ii. Need to also map the hotspots where the BPL families and children 
who are from dysfunctional families exist.   
iii. Need to create database of children at Panchayat level;  
iv. Village Level Child Protection Committees (VLCPCs) or panchayats be 
made respon sible for the welfare of the children and tracking them 
and their movement outside to other districts and states.  
v. Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) to include child labour and 
trafficking as part of their monitoring activity;  
vi. Need to conduct surv ey to have data regarding hotspots/endemic 
areas and number of child labours in the country;  
vii. need to have reliable data of child labour for any Action Plan on Child 
labour.  
viii. Need to conduct national/district level periodic survey and census for  
child labour;  
ix. need to identify areas/clusters having high incidents of child labour;  
x. Identification of vulnerable children susceptible for trafficking, 
recruitment for child labour can be prevented through a coordinated 
approach at the village an d panchayat level through the Parichayat 
Child Protection Committee set up under the Integrated Child 
Protection Scheme (ICPS). 
xi. Need to incentivize villages and communities by Central or State 
Governments to achieve  child labour -free   villages. Such villages/ 
panchayats be rewarded  by  Government concerned.” 
(xiv) Rescue and Rehabilitation   
2.62 The Committee were apprised that 14.3 lakh child labours were 
withdrawn from work, rehabilitated and mainstreamed. When asked to state 
the manner in which t he rescued child labours have been rehabilitated to 
enable them to earn their livelihood, the MoLE replied as under: 
“National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme has been implemented since 
1988. Under the scheme, the child labour in the age group of 9 -14 y ears 

39 
 
found in the survey were withdrawn from work and put into NCLP Special 
Training Centres. In these Centres, the children are provided bridge 
education, vocational training, mid -day meal, stipend, healthcare and 
recreation etc. with the ultimate objecti ve of preparing them to be 
mainstreamed into the formal system of education. Duration of the training 
shall be for a minimum period of three months which may be extended, 
based on periodical assessment of learning progress, for a maximum period 
not exceeding two years.” 
2.63 In response to a specific query as to what specific provisions / 
facilities have been enumerated under NCLP to rehabilitate the identified 
Child Labour and the mechanism established to ensure their compliance, 
the MoLE responded as under:  
“Under this Scheme, those children identified in the age group 5 -8 years are 
mainstreamed directly to formal educational system through the Samagra 
Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) of the Ministry of Education. Working children in the 
age group of 9 -14 years are to be rehabilitated through NCLP Special 
Training Centres (STCs) established by the Project Society, wherever STCs 
under SSA Scheme are not functioning. The STCs under the scheme provide: 
Non-formal/bridge education, Vocational training, Mid -Day Meal, stipend @ 
Rs.400/- per child per month, and health care facilities through School 
Health Programme of National Rural Health Mission (NRHM). 
 To ensure the effective enforcement of the provisions of the Child Labour 
Act and smooth implementation of the National  Child Labour Project (NCLP) 
Scheme a separate online portal PENCIL (Platform for Effective Enforcement 
for No Child Labour) has been launched w.e.f. 26.9.2017. The Portal 
connects Central Government to State Government(s), District(s), all Project 
Societies and the General public.  Further, online complaints regarding child 
labour can also be filed by anybody on the Pencil Portal.  The complaint gets 
assigned to the concerned Nodal Officer automatically by the system for 
further necessary action.” 
2.64 In this context, the representatives of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
 
“Now daily attendance of children is marked, whether they are present, 
absent, because eligibility conditions depend on their attendance. If their 
attendance is 60 percent  then they are eligible for stipend. it is an 
automated process on this basis, which is a stipend calculation, which is 
calculated at Rs 400 per month.” 
2.65 When questioned about the specific steps taken for the rescue and 
rehabilitation of children engag ed in beggary, particularly, those found at 
traffic lights in urban areas, the MoLE replied as under:  
“Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has formulated a scheme 
“SMILE - Support for Marginalized Individuals for Livelihood and 
Enterprise”, which i ncludes a sub -scheme - ‘Central Sector Scheme for 
Comprehensive Rehabilitation of persons engaged in the act of Begging’. This 
scheme covers several comprehensive measures including welfare measures 
for persons who are engaged in the act of begging. The focus of the scheme is 
extensively on rehabilitation, provision of medical facilities, counseling, basic 

40 
 
documentation, education, skill development, economic linkages and so on. 
Persons engaged in the act of begging are to be covered under the Scheme.  
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment had launched a pilot 
project in 2020 for comprehensive rehabilitation of persons engaged in the 
act of begging in major seven cities of the country including Delhi, Patna, 
Nagpur, Indore, Hyderabad, Bengaluru and Lucknow. Objective of this 
project was identification and rehabilitation of the person engaged in the act 
of Begging. It also had provision of medical facilities, counselling, skill 
development, sustainable settlement and education to person engaged in 
Begging. These pilots have been implemented in these cities by State 
Governments/UTs/Local Urban Bodies and Voluntary Organizations. In 
total, Ministry has released Rs. 13 Crore to these cities for the project. 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has l aunched an umbrella 
scheme “SMILE - Support for Marginalized Individuals for Livelihood and 
Enterprise” on 12.02.2022, which includes sub -scheme – ‘Central Sector 
Scheme for Comprehensive Rehabilitation of persons engaged in the act of 
Begging’. This sub-scheme covers several comprehensive measures including 
welfare measures for persons who are engaged in the act of begging with 
focus extensively on rehabilitation, provision of medical facilities, 
counselling, education, skill development, economic linkages  etc. with the 
support of State Governments /Local Urban Bodies, Voluntary 
Organizations, NGOs and institutions and others.” 
2.66 The Committee desired to be apprised of the specific obstacles/ 
constraints faced during rescue of Child Labours and the steps  taken to 
overcome them, the MoLE responded as under:  
“Labour is under Concurrent List and State Governments are the important 
stakeholders for implementation of the Act in an effective manner. In most of 
the cases, state authorities take necessary action  to rescue the child 
labourers.”  
2.67 One of the NGOs suggested that the Traffic Police may be given the 
responsibility of reporting children selling goods or begging at traffic lights 
and they be held accountable for not reporting such instances. 
 
(xv) Children Rescued, Rehabilitated and Mainstreamed 
 
2.68 On being asked about the number of Child Labours rescued and 
rehabilitated under NCLP as on 31.03.2023, MoLE replied as under:  
  
“Around 14.3 lakh were rescued / withdrawn from work, rehabilitated and  
mainstreamed under National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme since 
inception of the Scheme as on 31.03.2023.” 
 
2.69 As regards the number of children rehabilitated / mainstreamed 
during last six years, the Ministry furnished the following data: 
Year No. of children rehabilitated 
2017-18 47,635 
2018-19 50,284 
2019-20 54,894 
2020-21 58,289 

41 
 
2021-22 18,137  
2022-23 13,761 
 
2.70 In response to a specific query regarding the estimated number of 
children rescued, rehabilitated and mainstreamed from working in 
hazardous Industries specifically, the MoLE stated as under:  
“……..The information on children rescued rehabilitated and mainstreamed 
is not maintained specifically in respect of hazardous industries. A 
statement showing the number of children rescued, rehabilitated and 
mainstreamed to formal education system under NCLP Scheme during 2018 
-19 to 2022-23 is as under: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 Total  
1 Andhra Pradesh 778 1049 622 2090 441 4980 
2 Assam 4562 6175 2800 0 1291 14828 
3 Bihar 0 0 0 --    
4 Gujarat 101 341 531 50 0 1023 
5 Haryana 171 -- 0 NA   171 
6 Jharkhand 1225 2940 3239 755 410 8569 
7 Karnataka 763 363 275 230 0 1631 
8 Madhya Pradesh 4910 4010 29179 1268 172 39539 
9 Maharashtra 8122 9337 2031 2537 337 22364 
10 Odisha 0 6 495 76 1415 1992 
11 Punjab 915 483 1307 986 2504 6195 
12 Rajasthan 0 1712 0 301 18 2031 
13 Tamil Nadu 2534 3928 1456 2183 2628 12729 
14 Telangana 935 214 300 618 935 3002 
15 Uttar Pradesh 8020 10371 9383 1833 339 29946 
16 West Bengal 17137 13879 6671 5207 3270 46164 
17 Uttarakhand 0 62 0 3 1 66 
18 Nagaland 111 24 0 --   135 
 Total 50284 54894 58289 18137 13761 195365 
 
(xvi)     Budgetary allocation and expenditure 
  
2.71 As regards the det ails of fun ds allo cated, rele ased and util ized by 
various Sta tes, un der NC LP in t he C ountry, the MoLE furnished the 
following data:  
  
“Grant released under NCLP Scheme State-wise during the last five years i.e. 
2018-19 to 2022-23 is as under: 
  
(Rs. in lakh) 
Sl. No. Name of  State 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23* 
1 AndhraPradesh 309.46 202.68 306.29 32.01 116.37 
2 Assam 1109.45 198.28 49.64 81.10 140.68 
3 Gujarat 99.41 154.31 61.36 12.23 0 
4 Haryana 234.66 191.77 116.83 34.79 0 
5 Jammu&Kashmir 56.14 0 32.48 0 0 
6 Jharkhand 0 274.54 177.42 0 60.72 

42 
 
7 Karnataka 184.23 127.38 82.74 7.53 12.27 
8 MadhyaPradesh 514.34 491.67 363.41 143.29 236.50 
9 Maharashtra 106.19 998.70 931.49 196.53 102.54 
10 Nagaland 0 4.00 0 0 0 
11 Odisha 138.62 188.57 115.16 236.66 43.24 
12 Punjab 256.88 282.35 206.41 317.35 37.53 
13 Rajasthan 319.46 281.40 124.19 16.64 0 
14 TamilNadu 878.53 811.44 482.00 323.45 178.14 
15 Telangana 204.56 132.11 152.86 71.56 94.65 
16 UttarPradesh 1420.72 759.66 433.83 137.70 99.91 
17 Uttarakhand 0 32.64 0 0 0 
18 WestBengal 1896.90 2503.72 463.37 203.10 424.26 
*upto 31.1.2023 
 
2.72  On being asked to furnish the details of funds utilised and the 
activities on which the expenditure was incurred by the respective States, 
the MoLE replied as under:  
“Under NCLP scheme, funds are released to District Project Society, 
constituted under the  chairmanship of District Magistrate / District 
Collector only after receipt of necessary documents viz. utilization certificate, 
audited statement, etc. in respect of the funds released during previous 
years. At many occasions, funds for last year are als o released at later year 
after receipt of the necessary documents. Thus, it may not be necessary that 
the fund released during the year has been utilized in that particular year 
but it may be utilized during forthcoming year. Further, some of the released 
amount may also be liability to the Government i.e. that amount has already 
been incurred by the District Project Society and Ministry has reimbursed it. 
Therefore, it becomes difficult to indicate the year -wise utilization by the 
State Government.” 
 
2.73 In this context one of the NGOs suggested for need to allocate at least 
10% of the Union and State Budget to matters of the development, 
protection and well being of children and also need to integrate ‘Child 
Budgeting’ into all the budgets and programmes of the State and Central 
Government of India and various central and state undertakings. 
 
(xvi) Monitoring Mechanism 
 
2.74 On being asked to ela borate on the con stitution, am bit and 
effectiveness of the trip artite Committee in tackling Child Labour, the MoLE 
replied as under:  
  
“Under the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 
1986, there is no provision for tripartite Committee for Child Labour. But the 
Ministry constitutes Central Advisory Board (CAB) on Child Labour through 
executive order.   The CAB on Child and Adolescent Labour was first 
constituted in March 1981 in accordance with the recommendations of the 
Gurupadswamy Committee with following objectives:-   
  

43 
 
(i) To suggest measures for effective enforcement of Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 
(ii) To suggest legislative measures as well as welfare measures for 
welfare of child and adolescent labour 
(iii) To review the progress of welfare measures for child and adolescent 
labour 
(iv) To recommend the industries and areas where there must be 
progressive elimination of adolescent labour 
(v) To recommend measures for stopping the misuse of exception 
provided under Section 3, sub-section (2), (a) & (b) of the said Act. 
  
The Central Ad visory Board on Child and Adolescent Labour was last re -
constituted vide Resolution Gazette Notification dated 20.01.2017 under the 
chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister for Labour & Employment. At present, 
there are 54 members in the CAB. 
  
The CAB on Child an d Adolescent Labour comprises Hon’ble Minister 
Labour & Employment Minister as Chairman, Secretary, Ministry of Labour 
& Employment as Vice Chairman, Joint Secretary in charge of Child Labour 
Division as Member -Secretary, representatives of various Ministr ies not 
below the rank of Joint Secretary of such Ministries, with whom this 
Ministry is converging in implementing the National Child Labour Project 
Scheme, two Hon’ble Members of Parliament (one each from Rajya Sabha 
and Lok Sabha) nominated by the Minis try of Parliamentary Affairs, 
representatives of major Trade Unions of the country e.g. BMS, INTUC, 
CITU, HMS, AITUC etc., representatives of Employers (FICCI, SCOPE, EFI, 
ASSOCHAM etc.), representatives of NGOs associated with the work of 
elimination of c hild labour, educationists, activists and prominent 
personalities. 
  
The CAB suggests measures for effective enforcement of Child and 
Adolescent (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, but also welfare 
measures for welfare of child and adolescent labour, besides other.”  
 
2.75 In this context, the representative of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
 
“Sir, the third area which you have mentioned is, how we can effectively have 
this monitoring and coordination mechanism.  Now, whatever monitoring is 
being done by the States, it is not reaching the Central level; whatever 
monitoring is being done at the District level, it is not reaching even the 
States or the Central level.  So, I think, we will work upon that and see that 
if either we c an get it through the pencil portal or we go for some better 
portal which can collate this data.” 
 
(xvii) Coordination Mechanism 
 
2.76 When asked as how do the Ministry coo rdinate with the Sta te 
Governments with reg ard to for mulation of Rules to protect the interests of 
Child Labour, the MoLE submitted as under:  
  
“The Ministry has instructed all the concerned States where NCLP Scheme is 
sanctioned, to form State Resource Centre (SRC) under the chairmanship of 

44 
 
State Labour Secretary, which would monitor the enforcement of Child 
Labour Act, coordinate for the rescue of children and adolescents, child 
tracking system and supervise all the functions through PENCIL portal. SRC 
would also prepare and implement awareness generation plan to curb the 
menace of child labour in the State” 
 
2.77 When asked as to how it is ensured that the Inspectors -cum-
Facilitators  take  due cognizance of child labours deployed in various 
establishments so as to facilitate suitable corrective action, the MoLE replied 
as under: 
 
“This Ministry seeks enforcement data from all the state government to 
ensure that the Inspectors -cum-Facilitators take due cognisance of child 
labours deployed in various establishments so as to facilitate suitable 
corrective action.” 
 
2.78 On 7th January, 2 022, the Ministry of Labour & Employment had 
held detailed discussions with the Ministries concerned on National Policy 
on Child Labour. On being asked about the specific inputs/feedback 
provided by the Ministries and what further follow up action has been  taken 
by the Ministry of Labour & Employment, the MoLE replied as under:  
“An inter -ministerial meeting was held to discuss the child labour related 
issue under the chairmanship of Secretary (L&E) on 07.01.2022, wherein 14 
Ministries/Departments were invited. D/o School Education and Literacy, 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, 
Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurshi p, 
Ministry of Women and Child Development attended the meeting. 
Department of Commerce, Department of Rural Development, Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare, Ministry of Textiles, Ministry of Mines, 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment did not attend the meeting. The 
Ministries/ Departments were requested to prepare the action plan to 
eradicate child labour”. 
2.79 In this context, the representative of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
“As far as monitoring mechanism is concerned, as I have already mentioned, 
we had an inter -ministerial meeting in January in which we called for the 
action plan from the stakeholder ministry. We also plan to conduct these 
inter-ministerial meetings with the line ministries at least once in six 
months so that a comprehensive Government of India approach can be 
evolved for tackling this problem.” 
2.80 In response to a specific query about the other Mi nistries 
/ Departments / Organization / Agencies responsible for elimination of child 
labour and how do the Ministry effe ctively coordinate with them, the MoLE 
replied as under:  
  
“An important step towards prevention is coordination among various child 
protection agencies at the District, State and Center. 
  

45 
 
Ministry of Women and Child Development and Department of School 
Education & Literacy are important Government Departments / Ministries 
apart from Ministry of Labour & Employment to eliminate the child 
labour.  Besides these, certain roles are also of Ministry of Home Affairs.  
  
Ministry of Labour & Employment has set up Central Advisory Board (CAB) 
on Child Labour….The CAB has the representative of various Ministries not 
below the rank of Joint Secretary of such Ministries. Besides, the Ministry 
has also set up Task Force under the chairpersonship of Joint Secretary, 
M/o Labour & Employment comprising representative of Ministry of Home 
Affairs, etc. Recently, an Inter -Ministerial Committee has also been 
constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary (L&E) to discuss the 
effective implementation of Child Labour and Adolescent (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Act, 1986  and strategy of sector wise eradication of child labour. 
Representatives of various Ministries / Departments vil. Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Mini stry of Rural 
Development, Department of Commerce, Ministry of Skill Development, etc. 
are part of the Committee.” 
 
2.81 In this context one of the NGOs suggested for formulation of detailed 
guidelines/SOPs for inter-department coordination of Labour, Health, Social 
Justice, Panchayati Raj, Women & Child Education, Police, etc. and their 
execution. Another NGO pointed out that due to lack of co-ordination among 
stakeholders, deserving rescued children cannot get benefit from different 
central and state schemes, as such, there is need to fix accountability of  
state agencies.   
 
2.82 Another NGO suggested as under: 
“Need for convergence of various Schemes run by various Ministries/ 
Departments & also convert to action plan; MoLE to constitute a high -level 
advisory Committee comprising Ministries/ Departments concerned, 
Commissions for Child Rights, law enforcement agencies & representatives 
of Civil Society Organisations (CSOs)” 
(xviii)  Awareness Campaigns 
  
2.83 The Committee desired to be apprised of the platforms available for a 
common man to report the cases of  Child  Labour  and  the  steps  taken  to  
spread  awareness  amongst masses about existence of such platforms, the 
MoLE replied as under:   
  
“The public can raise complaints/report incidences of child labour on 
PENCiL portal through its “complaint corner”. Public awareness about this is 
being done through electronic/print/social media handles of the Ministry.” 
  
2.84 When further asked about the  co ncrete  measures  taken  by  the  
Government  to  create awareness among the parents/ guardians about the 
ill effects of Child Labour  and  how  do  the Ministry  encourage/incentivize  
them  to  send  their children to schools, the MoLE responded as under:  
 

46 
 
“Awareness Generation at the district level is done by the district project 
society. At the district level, the District Project Society  would be 
responsible for operationalizing the social mobilization component of the 
project. From the time to time the District Project Society organizes various 
activities to create awareness among the general people about the menace of 
child labour.” 
2.85 In this context NGOs suggested that need to launch awareness 
campaigns to report cases of child labour to Childli ne helpline number; 
spreading awareness about the ill effects of employment of children; and 
need to launch National campaigns and community engagement to generate 
awareness  
 
xix. Utilization of funds collected through imposition of penalties 
 
2.86 In order to give the statutory back up for the rehabilitation Fund, the 
Government has made a provision in the Child Labour (Prohibition 
&Regulation) Amendment Act, 2016 for constitution of Child & Adolescent 
Labour Rehabilitation Fund at district level to en sure that child and 
adolescent is not only rescued but his future is secured by the amount 
collected in fund for his welfare and education. The amount of fine realized 
from the employer of the child or adolescent shall be credited in the 
rehabilitation Fund and an amount of fifteen thousand will also be credited 
by the appropriate Government for each of the child and adolescents 
rescued from the work. 
2.87 On being asked as to how do the Government utilize the fund collected 
through imposition of penalties, the MoLE submitted as under:  
  
“As per section 14B of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986, the appropriate Government shall constitute a Fund 
in every district or for two or more districts to be called the Child and 
Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation Fund to which the amount of the fine 
realized from the employer of the child and adolescent, within the 
jurisdiction of such district or districts, shall be credited. (2) The appropriate 
Government shall credit an amount of fifteen thousand rupees to the Fund 
for each child or adolescent for whom the fine amount has been credited 
under sub -section (1). (3) The amount credited to the Fund under sub -
sections (1) and (2) shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such 
manner, as the appropriate Government may decide. (4) The amount 
deposited or invested, as the case may be under sub -section (3), and the 
interest accrued on it, shall be paid to the child or adolescent in whose 
favour such amount is credited, in such manner as may be prescribed.” 
 
2.88 In this context, some of the NGOs suggested as under: 
i. Need to ensure compliance of Directions of Supreme Court in MC 
Mehta v/s State of Tamil Nadu case regarding contribution of Rs. 
20,000 per child by offending employers; 
ii. need to increase the amount of fine fixed in 1996 from Rs. 20,000/- to 
Rs.1 lakh per child; and 
iii. Need to utilize the fines collected  as per judgement. 

47 
 
xx. ILO Conventions 
2.89 When enquired as to whether India is a signatory to  any  
International  Convention  for elimination of Child Labour and steps taken 
to liaise with other agencies globally to achieve the targets thereon, the 
MoLE stated as under:  
 
“Consequent upon strengt hening the legislative framework for complete 
prohibition of employment of children below 14 years through amendment in 
the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986, ILO Conventions No. 
138 and No. 182 have been subsequently ratified. The Governme nt has 
reaffirmed its commitment for eradication of child labour at the Global level.” 
 
2.90 On being asked about the ext ent of compliance with targets enshrined 
under United Nations Goals for sustainable Development number 8.7 under 
which it was de cided to end all fo rms of C hild Labour by 20 25, MoLE 
responded as under:  
 
“Government has ratified the ILO Convention No. 138 concerning minimum 
age for employment and No. 182 concerning prohibition and elimination of 
worst forms of child labour.  
 
With the ratification of these two ILO Conventions India has reaffirmed its 
commitment towards elimination of child labour and sent a message to the 
international community for achieving the target stipulated in Sustainable 
Development Goal 8.7. These ratifications  are also relevant for economic 
development of the country. Thus these ratifications will not only help in 
eradication of child labour but also brighten the image of the country in the 
international forum.” 
 
2.91 In this context, the representatives of the  Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
“We also went ahead and ratified the ILO Conventions which underline the 
commitment of India towards eradication of child labour. We ratified 
Convention 138 which is of 1st June, 1973, in June 2017. Similarly, India 
ratified Convention 182 which is of 1st June, 1999, in June 2017. Now, 
what is Convention 138? It speaks about minimum age for admission to 
employment. It lays down that the minimum age for employment should be 
15 years but for countries which are de veloping, the minimum age for 
employment can be 14 years. So, as per our RTE Act, it is 14 years. We have 
also placed the same provision in our Act in which minimum age is 14 years. 
In this Convention, there is provision that minimum age should not be less  
than the compulsory age of schooling. So, it is dynamically linked to the RTE 
Act. We have basically put in place the entire mechanism and then we had 
ratified Convention 138. When we speak about Convention 182, this 
concerns worst forms of child labour. Now, what are worst forms of child 
labour? This could include slavery, trafficking, bonded labour, prostitution, 
forced labour, trafficking for drugs, or child soldiers itself.” 
 
 
 

48 
 
2.92 In this context, some of the NGOs suggested as under: 
 
i. “Need to take up the issue in mission mode to meet international 
commitment to eliminate child labour by 2025 need to devise 
systematic action plan based national policy to meet the objective of 
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 8.7 to eliminate child lab our in 
all its forms by 2025;  
ii. need for a National Policy on Child Labour with a vision of achieving 
the SDG targets and provide guidance to all concerned stakeholders 
to address child labour keeping in mind the Best Interest of the Child 
as stated in Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act 
2015.  Also to regularly monitor the outcome of the efforts through 
data and evidence.” 
 
2.93 An NGO pointed out that the Ministry of Education’s Scheme 
‘Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan’ doesn’t have the requi site provisions for the 
legally required care. As such, there is need to have separate/exclusive 
scheme for child labour as merger of NCLP with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan 
(SSA) may have serious repercussions. 
 
xxi. PENCIL Portal 
 
2.94 On being asked about the  effectiveness of the PENCIL Portal, which 
empowers citizens to lodge complaint regarding child labour; whether 
implementing/enforcement agencies to whom the complaint is forwarded 
share their findings with the Ministry; and whether such information is 
placed on PENCIL portal for better monitoring, the MoLE replied as under: 
 
“The portal has five components namely, Central Government, State 
Government, NCLP District Project Society level, Child Tracking System and 
Complaint Corner. The District Nodal Office rs appointed by each State 
Government being the enforcement agency in respect of the complaints 
registered on PENCiL update the Action Taken Report on the cases in the 
order of: First Action Report(FAR), Second Action Report (SAR), Legal Action 
Report (LAR ) and Closed. Of the 4290 complaints received on the PENCIL 
Portal as on 15.11.2023, the District Nodal Officers have updated the status 
of 3312 complaints as closed.” 
 
2.95 When asked to clarify whether any suo -motu action is taken by the 
Ministry for registration of cases on detection of child labour at public and 
residential places and whether the Ministry propose to launch a Special 
Drive to identify such cases, the MoLE stated as under:  
 
“The complaints received directly in the Ministry from the complainants are 
forwarded to the respective State Governments for necessary action. The 
complaints received on PENCiL are resolved by the District Nodal Officers 
(DNOs) appointed by the State Governments.” 
 
2.96 As regards the details of number of complaints of Child Labour 
registered on the Platform for Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour 

49 
 
(PENCIL) portal since its launch in 2017 and the number of complaints 
resolved, the MoLE furnished the following data: 
  
“(1)        No. of complaints of registered: (as on 15.11.2023): 4290 
  
 (2)        No. of complaints resolved (as on 15.11.2023): 3312” 
  
2.97 On being asked as to how  the use of tec hnology has been 
leveraged to che ck the incidence of Chi ld Labour and in eas ier enforcement 
of the Law in so far as penalties imposed for engaging children below the age 
of 14, the MoLE responded as under:  
  
“To check the incidence of Child Labour, easier enforcement of the Law, 
to ensure effective enforcement of the provisions of the Child Labour Act and 
smooth implementation of the National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme 
a separate online portal PENCIL (Platform for Effective Enforcement for No 
Child Labour) has been launched w.e.f. 2 6.9.2017. The Portal connects 
Central Government to State Government(s), District(s), all Project Societies 
and the General public.  Further, online complaints regarding child labour 
can also be filed by anybody on the Pencil Portal.  The complaint gets 
assigned to the concerned Nodal Officer automatically by the system for 
further necessary action.” 
 
2.98 In this context, the representatives of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
 
“Sir, now I come to the PENCIL portal. The Platform for Effective 
Enforcement for No Child Labour was launched in 2017. With this, we can 
coordinate with the state government, with the district administration in a 
better way. It has online attendance, stipend processing, tracking of the 
child and we also involve the gene ral public and NGOs in this. The main 
components of the PENCIL portal are Central Government, State 
Government District, etc. It has a main complaint corner. Any person, NGO 
or any institution of our country can go to the complaint corner and 
complain. The complaint goes to the concerned nodal officer, whom the DM 
appoints and after that the District Nodal Officer takes action on it. 
Whatever investigation has to be done, there is a First Action Report, etc., 
and if the complaint is true, an FIR is also registered.” 
 
2.99 The representatives of the Ministry further supplemented as under: 
 
“Under this PENCIL portal, all our project societies of NCLP have the facility  
to upload all  the  activities that  we have done, documents or periodical 
reports. Earlier, it used to take a lot of time to send it by post, half of the 
reports were lost in it, so we have done that. Now this has speeded up the 
entire process. Now they can upload directly on the PENCIL portal and we 
can access it and take action on it.  Not only  this, what we had earlier called 
Tracking of Children, now I have to track the rescued child, otherwise all our 
hard work goes in vain. We track it completely. The child's daily attendance 
is marked and not only that, through linking with PFMS portal stip end is 
processed automatically. So, we process stipend directly through DBT to the 
accounts of these children.” 

50 
 
xxii. National Commission on child labour 
 
2.100 In response to a pointed query whether there is any proposal to set up 
a Nat ional Co mmission on  Child Lab our for a t argeted ap proach to tac kle 
the issue of Chi ld Labour in the Co untry, the MoLE replied in negative and 
stated that currently, no such proposal is under consideration.  
 
2.101 In this context, one of the NGOs suggested for need to have National 
Child Labour Elimination Mission or the National Child Protection Mission. 
  
xxiii. Child Welfare Committees 
 
2.102 As regards the number of Child  Welfare Co mmittees set up and 
operational acr oss the Co untry, their composition and the per iodicity of 
their meetings, the MoLE stated as under:  
  
“Child Welfare Committees (CWCs) are to be constituted by State 
Government under Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 
2015 (JJ Act) under Ministry of Women and Child Development.  
 
2.103 In this context, some of the NGOs pointed out that all the 
departments have different Committees at the district level which burdens 
the District Magistrate to hold multiple meetings which results in 
multiplicity of proceedings and dilutes the efforts of ind ividual committees 
and suggested for need of joint efforts by the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment and Education Department; need for convergence of Child 
Welfare Committees, District Child Protection Units, District Legal Service 
Authorities at District le vel with District Labour Officer as District Nodal 
Officer. Another NGO pointed out that Labour Department is burdened with 
various other works and the enforcement of the CLPR Act becomes a least 
priority for them. Therefore, proper convergence could not h appen which 
add to the vulnerabilities of the rescued child labour. In order to avoid such 
situation, the structure under the Integrate Child Protection Scheme (ICPS) 
be used. 
xxiv. Employment of child lab our in tea plantations and be edi/ 
firecrackers industries 
  
2.104 On being asked about the spe cific att ention paid tow ards the 
employment of Child Lab our in Tea Plantations and Be edi/ 
Firecrackers Industries, the MoLE replied as under:  
  
“..........The Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 
1986,   also provides for stricter punishment for employers for violation of 
the Act and has made the offence as cognizable. The Rules framed under the 
Act provide for District Nodal Officer (DNO) and Task Force at district level 
under chairpersonship of District Magistrate to ensure that the provisions of 
the Act are properly enforced. There is no separate act for child labour in tea 
plantations and Beedi/Firecrackers industries.” 
 
 

51 
 
xxv. Economic security and social protection  
 
2.105 When asked about the rob ust measures taken to en hance economic 
security and soc ial pro tection so as to mi nimize the exp osure of Chi ld 
Labours to hazardous and exploitative works, the MoLE submitted as under:  
  
“The Government amended the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 
1986 through the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Amendment Act, 
2016 which came into force w.e.f. 1.9.2016 which inter alia provides for: 
 
1) Complete prohibition of employment of children below 14 years. 
2) Prohibition of employment of adolescents (aged 15 -18 years) in 
hazardousccupations 
3) Enhancement of penalty for contravention of the provisions of the Act. 
4) Employment of children in contravention of the Act, made a 
cognizable offence 
  
Further the Government has gone one step ahead and made a provision in 
the Act for constitution of Child and Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation Fund 
for one or more districts for carrying out rehabilitation activities for the child 
or adolescent rescued.” 
  
xxvi. Minimum Wages Act 
 
2.106 The Committee were apprised that "Government also made necessary 
amendments in the provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, Payment of 
Wages Act, Equal remuneration Act etc., to ensure there is no 
discrimination to child labour. The Central and State i nspection machinery 
was also geared up for this purpose. On being asked about the efficacy of 
the said provisions/ measures, the MoLE replied as under:  
  
“In its Legislative Action Plan, the National Child Labour Policy mentioned 
that “Government will als o bring forward legislation to delete the provision 
contained in the Minimum Wages Act allowing different wages to be fixed for 
children, adolescents and adults. In other words, children will have to be 
paid the same as adults. This will remove  the economic incentive to employ 
child labour on lower wages. For enforcing other protective legislation like 
payment of Wages Act, the Equal Remuneration Act etc, it will be ensured 
that child labour is not discriminated against as compared to adult labour. 
The Cent ral and State inspection machinery will be geared up for this 
purpose.” 
  
The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 vide its amendment in 1986 defined "child" 
means a person who has not completed his fourteenth year of age. As per 
the Act, the "wages"   means all remuneration, capable of being expressed in 
terms of money, which would, if the terms of the contract of employment, 
express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a person employed in respect 
of his employment or of work done in such employment.   Further,  Rule 24 
of Minimum Wages (Central) Rules, as amended in  states that: 
The number of hours which shall constitute a normal working day, shall be - 
(a) in the case of an adult – 9 hours; 
(b) in the case of a child – 4 &1/2 hours. 

52 
 
  
       Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 as amended in 1987 provides that  “No 
employer shall pay to any worker, employed by him in an establishment or 
employment, remuneration, whether payable in cash or in kind, at rates less 
favourable than those at which remuneration is paid by him t o the workers of 
the opposite sex in such establishment or employment for performing the same 
work or work of a similar nature. ” Further section 2 of the Act defines men 
and women. As per this,  “man” and “woman” mean male and female human 
beings, respectively, of any age.” 
xxvii. Imposition of Cess 
 
2.107 When asked as to whether  the  Government  is  considering  the  
imposition  of  a  Cess  to address the issue of Child Labour, the MoLE 
replied in negative and stated that at present no such proposal is under 
consideration  
 
xxviii. Compliance of Instructions / Advisories           
 
2.108 On being enquired as to how it is ens ured t hat the 
instructions/advisories issued by the Central Government are complied with 
by t he Sta te Go vernments for stri ct enf orcement of the  statutes of Chi ld 
Labour so as to completely eradicate the menace, the MoLE replied as under:  
  
“For Effective enforcement and implementation of the provisions of the 
various legislations, convergence of resources of Government both 
horizontally and vertically, coordination between various stakeholders and 
active involvement of the community, a Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) 
has been circulated. A simple step by step SoP is provided to ensure 
enforcement of the provisions of the protective legislation.” 
 
2.109 Instances of child labourer s brought by middlemen or placement 
agencies among the migrant workers are reported. When asked to clarify 
whether the Ministry have issued any instructions/advisory to State Labour 
Departments or any other Department to take action on this issue, the 
MoLE responded as under:  
“The issue  regarding regulation/registration of placement agencies/  
employment agencies lies in the domain of the States. Accordingly, all States 
were advised to take all necessary steps to protect the interest of workers by 
regulating the conduct of private placement agencies, if necessary, by 
making their own Policy / Act.”  
2.110 In this context, one of the NGOs suggested for inter State repatriation 
policy, pointing out that m ultiple departments have issued advisories and 
SOPs which are in conflict with each other. To avoid confusions and 
conflicts, a single document approved by all the Ministries and States could 
be outlined in the current policy document which would help all the 
stakeholders to work in uniformity. The following stakeholders of destination 
state and origin states need to work together to ensure rehabilitation and 
repatriation of the rescued children: 1. Police, 2. AHTU, 3. Child Welfare 

53 
 
Committee, 4. District Child Protection Unit, 5. Department of Social Welfare 
& Ministry of Women and Child Development.  
2.111 Another NGO suggested for need to obtain permission of State 
Government for mass movement of children from one State to another. An 
NGO suggested for need for targeted intervention for child migrants/children 
of migrant labourers and those belonging to socially disadvantaged groups. 
xxix. Participation  of  public representatives  
 
2.112 When asked as to how  do  the Ministry  ensure  the  participation  of  
local  representatives  in  the meetings conducted by the respective district 
authorities in connection with various aspects of Child Labour, the MoLE 
replied as under:  
 
“Labour is under Concurrent List and State Governments are the important 
stakeholders for implementation of the Act in a effective manner. The State 
Government(s) ensures the participation  of local representatives  in  the 
meetings conducted by the respective district authorities in connection with 
various aspects of Child Labour. The NCLP Societies which are headed by 
the District Magistrate/Collector conduct awareness generation campaigns 
and ensure  the participation of  local  representatives  in  the meetings 
conducted.” 
2.113 In this context, the representative of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under 
 
“Sir, I take your suggestion very seriously that unless and until NGOs are 
brought in, unless and until the MPs, MLAs and other public representatives 
are bro ught into their committees and they meet frequently, this 
enforcement by the District Magistrate or, perhaps, by the State Government 
will not be in the same seriousness as the seriousness which the hon. 
Committee has shown here.” 
2.114 The Committee were apprised that the State Governments ensure the 
participation of local representatives in the meetings conducted by the 
respective District Authorities in connection with issues relating to child 
labour in the respective States. On being asked whether the M inistry of 
Labour and Employment (MoLE) propose to send advisories to the State 
Governments to involve Members of Parliament / local representatives as in 
the case of other Ministries like Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj and Minis try of Health & Family Welfare which reportedly 
provide for the Members of Parliament Chair the District LevelCommittees, 
the MoLE replied as under: 
 
“As per revised NCLP Guidelines, a District Vigilance & Monitoring 
Committees (VMCs) monitor the National Child Labour Project. A local 
Member of Parliament chairs the committee, which functions in an advisory 
capacity. The committee ensures proper fund allocation and beneficiary 
identification. It reviews project progress and considers member suggestions 
within scheme guidelines. It also examines synergy with other departments 
for child benefit and compliance with the Right to Education Act. Meeting 

54 
 
minutes are shared with the State Government and the Ministry of Labour& 
Employment. The State Level Monitoring Committee (SLMC), headed by the 
Chief Secretary, oversees the project and coordinates development 
initiatives. The state government reviews project directors biannually and 
enforces protective legal provisions. The NCLP scheme has now been 
subsumed with Sa magara Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) Scheme in phased 
manner.” 
 
2.115 In this context, the representative of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
 
“All the honourable Members have told that their participation in the 
committees at the district level is n ot ensured. We will see how to improve 
participation. If there is a need to change the institutional structure, then we 
will definitely do it.” 
xxx. Support to NGOs 
2.116 When asked as to how do the Ministry guide and support the NGOs 
and other organizations working for the benefit of the children and whether 
the Ministry propose to devise an independent mechanism for identification 
of child labour working in organized as w ell as unorganized sector, through 
NGOs engaged by the Ministry, the MoLE replied as under:  
“Currently, there is no such proposal under  consideration of Ministry of 
Labour& Employment.”  
2.117 In this context, the representative of the Ministry during evi dence 
deposed as under: 
 
“Now let's talk about NGOs involved in it. Firstly, we made a direct 
involvement of him that he can file a complaint on his own. Secondly, the 
Ministry has decided that we give NGOs a role in this and  we have given 
access to an NGO on a pilot basis to the complaint corner. They can also see 
all the complaints that come to them and can take up aggressively with the 
concerned DNO and get those complaints resolved. What will be the result of 
this, we will see now, because it is still on pilot basis.” 
2.118 The representative of the Ministry further supplemented as under 
under:  
“Sir, your last point was about monitoring and coordination as to how we 
can do better coordination between the District Magistrates at the District 
level, at the State level and at the Central level.  We have tried somehow to 
bring in these NGOs, which you rightly said that there are a lot of NGOs 
working there. PRAYAS has been on -boarded. We will be on boarding other 
NGOs depending upon their credibility in the areas”. 
 
2.119 In this context, one of the NGOs suggested for need to involve 
NGOs/voluntary organizations while formulating national policy on children; 
and also have representation of NGOs/voluntary organizations in Technical 
Advisory Committee 
 

55 
 
2.120 Suggestions/views received from various NGOs etc. in the matter were 
forwarded to the Ministry of Labour & Employment for comments. In 
response the Ministry stated as under: 
“As per the provisions of the Act, the Government has constituted a 
Technical Adv isory Committee (which is a body of experts) to advise the 
Central Government on inclusion of additional occupations and processes to 
the Schedule of the Act.” 
 
xxxi. Vocational training 
 
2.121 On being enquired about the emphasis laid on vocational training for 
students so as to equip the rescued children for various income generating 
activities under NCLP, the MoLE replied as under: 
“As per NCLP Scheme Guidelines, a Project Society can hire volunteer 
vocational trainer(s) at the district level for a  consolidated honorarium of Rs 
9000/- per month. One vocational trainer is to be deployed for three NCLP 
Special Training Centres(STCs). Project Society may involve craftsmen / 
trainers from local ITIs or other vocational institute(s) for developing a 
training module for providing training to the beneficiaries in accordance with 
the market requirement.” 
 
2.122 When questioned about the types of vocational training being 
imparted to rescued adolescent child labour, the MoLE replied as under:  
“Facilitating vocational training opportunities for adolescents is to be done 
through existing schemes of skill development department. (The District 
Project Society under NCLP scheme was acting as a linking agency for 
facilitating vocational training through existing sc hemes of Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship of the Govt of India and skill 
development department of respective states). 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) has been 
mandated to synergize and accelerate the skilling ef forts across geographies 
in collaboration with Central Government Ministries, State Governments, 
Industries, Voluntary Organizations and Academia. Since its inception in 
2014, MSDE has initiated several skilling schemes, such as, Pradhan Mantri 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), Jan ShikshanSansthan (JSS) etc.” 
2.  Under this Ministry, there are no vocational training programs/  
schemes exclusively for the training of the rescued adolescent child labour. 
However, MSDE through its flagship scheme viz. Pradhan  Mantri Kaushal 
Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) is catering to the needs for skill training of the youths 
across the country including the rescued adolescent ch ildren with focus on 
unemployed/drop-out youth between the age -group of 15 -45 years, 
including adolescents of 15-19 years. Since July 2015 three versions of the 
PMKVY scheme namely, PMKVY 1.0, PMKVY 2.0 and PMKVY 3.0; have been 
implemented.  
Further, MSDE is implementing the scheme of Jan ShikshanSansthan (JSS) 
to impart skill training in non -formal mode at the doorsteps of the 
beneficiary through registered societies (NGOs) with 100% grant from MSDE.  
The target beneficiaries of the Scheme are non-literate, neo-literates, persons 

56 
 
with rudimentary level of education and school drop -outs upto 12th 
standard in the age group of 15 -45 years. The skill training is low -cost, 
flexible, and highly accessible to disadvantaged groups of society, among 
others…” 
2.123 In this context, the representative of the Ministry during evidence deposed 
as under: 
 
“...has talked about skill development. I agree to this and we have included it 
in the policy that adolescents can also work, Adolescents are only banned in  
the hazardous industry but they can do other things. If they are found in the 
hazardous industry and if you want to shift them to the non -hazardous 
industry, then there will be a need to re -skill them and we will definitely pay 
attention to it.” 
2.124 In this context one of the NGOs suggested that t he interest, aptitude 
and skill of the children needs to be understood to link them to their 
vocations of interest.  A child rescued from a garage and interested in that 
field should be encouraged to take up an ITI course related to that line. 
2.125 Another NGO suggested for need to establish residential training 
centres for rescued children for sustainable rehabilitation and behavioural 
change. To prevent from re-trafficking, skill development may be provided 
 
xxxii. Training to officials 
2.126 Some of the NGOs suggested for n eed to impart  training to officials of  
NGOs, CWC, Anti-Human Trafficking Unit (AHTU),  District Child Protection 
Unit   (DCPU), District Legal Service Authority (DLSA),  Railway Protectio n 
Force (RPF)/ Ground Railway Police,  Labour Inspector , Factories inspector, 
RDO/ deputy collector , Child Welfare Police Officer. It was also suggested 
that there is need to provide training to central armed police forces and 
sensitize them to prevent c rimes such as that of trafficking at the border of 
India with other countries. 
xxxiii. Deployment of children at construction sites 
2.127 When asked about the number of surprise visits undertaken by the 
officials of Labour Departments of States/UTs concern ed to prevent 
deployment of child labours at construction sites and the State/UT -wise 
details of such exercise undertaken during the last three years, the MoLE 
replied as under:  
“Construction work by both child and adolescents have been prohibited by 
specifying it in S No. 37 of Part A of the schedule to Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act 1986. 
In the case of the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) Organization, no 
surprise visit have been undertaken due to the launch of Shram Suvidha 
Portal w.e.f. 16 th October 2014. Further the data relating to States/UTs is 
not maintained by CLC (C).  

57 
 
There are provisions under the Building and other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996, 
administered by the Ministry of Labour and Employment, which regulate the 
employment and service conditions of building and construction workers.” 
2.128 When asked about the suggestions of the Ministry for effective 
implementation of these Rules so as to prohibit t he engagement of Child 
labour in such works, the MoLE replied as under:  
“To maintain linkage with the Building and other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996, Hazardous 
processes as specified in Schedule IX t o the Building and Other 
Construction Workers’ (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Central Rules, 1998 have been explicitly prohibited by specifying at S. No. 
37 of Part A of the schedule to Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act 1986. 
Mass Media campaign and involvement of state government machinery and 
social partners like NGOs and trade unions may be an effective tool to curb 
the engagement of Child Labour in such work.”  
2.129 On being asked about the  mechanism put  in place for effective 
compliance of Contractors with the various labour laws and specifically with 
the provisions of the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 
between the commencement and completion of work, the MoLE replied as 
under:  
“The appropriate Government may appoint Inspectors for the purposes of 
securing compliance with the provisions of this Act and any Inspector so 
appointed shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the 
Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860). 
The Government of India has developed a mechanism for inspections 
through Shram Suvidha Portal w.e.f 16th  October 2014.”  
xxxiv. Street children 
2.130 When asked about the chances of street children becoming child 
labour, the representative of the Ministry during evidence deposed as under:  
“...has raised the matter of street children.  You are absolutely right that all 
street children are not child labour, but if they are street children then the 
chances increase that they should go towards child labour. 
Now we have recently launched the e -shram portal. It covers registration of 
unorganised workers above the age of 16 years. This means that if there are 
street children and are working, then that will also be captured from our 
data. I think with this data we will be able to pay attention to them.” 
xxxv. ‘Child Labour Free’ tag/label in the supply chain 
 
2.131 One of the NGOs suggested for need to make mandatory provisions for 
‘Child Labour Free’ tag/label in the supply chain in the contracts executed 
by Government for procurement of various items/products. Another NGO 

58 
 
suggested out that a special campaign and appeal should be made to 
Industries, factories and employers to be sensitive about child labour and to 
make their premises no child labour zone. One of the NGOs suggested for 
need for mandatory declaration of ‘No Child Labour’ as per CALPRA 1986 by 
industries/business houses as a pre -requisite for receiving labour cards; 
one of the NGOs suggested for need to maintain a directory of all employers  
to re -check double offenders in order to provide them graver punishment 
which would create deterrence. The directory should be updated every 
quarter at district and state level in order to have a proper monitoring 
mechanism 
 
xxxvi. Role of Residential Welfare Associations 
 
2.132 One of the NGOs suggested for need for reporting of cases of child 
labour by the Residential Welfare Associations.  
xxxvii. Child Friendly Police Stations 
2.133 One of the NGOs suggested for need to bridge the gap between the 
police and children by making all police stations child -friendly including a 
dedicated corner for children. It was also suggested that there is need to 
introduce child -friendly approach to investigation   in police training 
institutes. Need to provide legal   to the victim at the police station and at 
the place of safety wherever necessary by empanelled lawyers of the DLSA/ 
SLSA and NGOs. Legal counsel ling and advice to the parents of the child 
must be provided. 
xxxviii. Child Friendly Courts 
2.134 One of the NGOs suggested for need to have all courts as child 
friendly in terms of infrastructure and processes including exclusive or 
dedicated children’s courts for crimes against children, child friendly spaces 
and rooms in the courts, expediting processes through day -to-day trial, and 
victim/ witness protection to the child and his family amongst other 
measures 
II. MERGER OF NCLP WITH SSA 
 
2.135 The chronology of events leading to the merger of NCLP with SSA, as 
informed by the Ministry of Labour and Employment, is as under: 
(a) Instructions issued by Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure regarding continuation of Schemes beyond 31.03.2021. 
2.136 In this context, the representative of the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment during evidence deposed as under:  
“Our scheme was approved up to 31st March, 2021 and we were in 
receipt of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance’s instructions, 
which had  laid down certain conditions. This OM, which we have also 
highlighted, is dated 8th of December, 2020, which says that any scheme 
which needs to be continued beyond 31st of March, 2021 needs 

59 
 
evaluation by the third party. Then, it needs to be appraised by  SFC or 
EFC, as the case maybe. Then, also we need to rationalise the various 
schemes of the Government of India through merging, restructuring or 
dropping existing schemes or sub -schemes that are duplicate or have 
redundant or ineffective with passage of time. And, then to ensure above 
before submitting the proposal to Department of Expenditure for 
continuation of schemes. The Department of Expenditure had the right to 
merge, restructure or drop any existing scheme, sub -scheme in 
consultation with the Admi nistrative Ministry or the Department to 
improvement in economy of scale for better outcomes. So, in view of this 
OM, we basically focused on two schemes – National Child Labour Project 
Scheme and Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan Scheme.” 
(b) Comparision of NCLP and SSA 
 
A Comparative analysis of both the Schemes viz. NCLP of MoLE 
and SSA of DoSEL, as furnished by the Ministry, is as under:  
 
• NCLP was started in1988,when SSA was not in operation. 
• SSA scheme also caters to all“out of school”children(which 
would also include child labour). 
• As on 31.03.2021-NCLP was operational in 59 districts, 
whereas SSA was operational in all districts of the country. 
2.137 The number of children enrolled/mainstreamed at STCs of SSA vs 
those at STCs of NCLP during 2018-19 to 2020-21 are as under: 
 
Year No.of children enrolled/mainstreamed 
  at/from STCs under 
SSA NCLP 
2018-19 4.78 Lakhs 0.50 Lakhs 
2019-20 5.07 Lakhs 0.55 Lakhs 
2020-21 3.26 Lakhs 0.58 Lakhs 
 
 The Ministry subsequently informed that 18,000 and 13,000 children 
were enrolled/mainstreamed during 2021 -22 and 2022 -23 respectively at 
STCs of NCLP.  During the last five years, 1,94,000 children were enrolled in 
STCs of NCLP. 
 
2.138 The Ministry further submitted the following comparative statement: 
 
Issue NCLP SSA 
Survey Within three years on request 
of the District 
Every year to identify all “out 
of school” children  
Rehabilitation of 
children 
( 5-8 years) 
Directly linked to the formal 
education  system through 
coordination with SSA 
Directly linked to the 
formal education system 

60 
 
Rehabilitation  of 
children 
( 9-14 years) 
Rescued children are enrolled at 
NCLP- STCs to provide them 
bridge education,  vocational 
training, PM-Poshan(mid-day 
meal), stipend, health care 
facilities, etc.  preparing them for 
formal system of education 
Out of School  children are 
enrolled at SSA - STCs to provide 
them bridge education, 
vocational training, PM-
Poshan(mid-day meal), health 
care facilities, etc. preparing them 
for formal system of education 
 
Hostel facility is under SSA, due 
to which the retention rate of 
child labourers from migrant 
families may increase in schools.  
Rehabilitation 
of Adolescents • Rescued Adolescents working 
in hazardous occupations / 
processes are provided 
vocational training  
opportunities            through existing 
schemes of skill development 
( State / Central). 
• No funds are provided 
District Authorities will 
continue to do so 
Rescue of Child 
Labour • State Authorities conduct 
raids to find the child labour 
in any establishment. 
• Produced before CWC ( of Min 
of WCD) 
• Sent to STCs 
 
• Inspection of establishments 
done by CLC / State Labour 
Dept to identify Child Labour. 
State Authorities will continue to 
do so 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspection authorities will 
continue to do so 
Stipend • No Stipend to rescued 
children aged ( 5-8 ) years 
• Stipend @Rs. 400/- per child 
per month enrolled at  NCLP’s 
STC, who have 60 % 
attendance 
No provision of Stipend   under 
SSA 
Responsibility District Magistrate District Magistrate 
Rehabilitation 
fund • Rescued child/adolescent to 
get the amount from the 
Rehabilitation Fund ( Fine + 
Rs 15000 deposited by the 
appropriate Govt) + Interest 
thereon, as per CALPR Act 
will continue to do so 
 
2.139 The Ministry further mentioned that the following decisions were 
taken in consultation with Ministry of Finance  and D/o School Education 
and Literacy: 
 

61 
 
(i) NCLP Scheme be merged with SSA in a phased manner 
 
(ii) District Project  Society and STCs  opened before 31.03.2021,  
 will be  allowed to continue till  enrolled children are 
mainstreamed in formal education system. 
 
(iii)  The pending/committed liability of Grant in Aid and Stipend 
will be cleared. Rs. 3.0 crore has been released as stipened through 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) to children enrolled under the NCLP 
Scheme during 2022-23 (upto 31.01.2023). During 2022-23, funds to 
the tune of Rs. 15.93 Crores approx. were released, and for the FY 
2023-24, budgetary provision of Rs. 10 crores has been made. 
 
(iv) No new permission has been given  for opening of new STC 
under NCLP Scheme after 31.03.2021. 
 
(v) The survey report, received in the Ministry, will be forwarded to 
D/o School Education and Literacy for  enrolment of children in the 
STCs of SSA 
 
(vi) As per NCLP guidelines, the Project Society will continue to be 
functional for a period of 6 months after closure  of  STCs. 
 
(vii) Identified / Rescued child labour will continue to be  provided 
bridge education at STCs of SSA” 
 
Submission of Ministry of Education, (DoSEL) regarding convergence of 
National Child Labour Project (NCLP) with Samagra Shiksha:  
2.140 The chronology of events leading to merger of National Child Labour 
Project (NCLP) with Samagra Shiksha, as stated by the DoSEL, is as under: 
 A Standing Finance Committee (SFC) note was received by 
Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSEL)  from M/o Labour& 
Employment (MoLE) for furnishing comments on continuance of 
implementation of National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme beyond 
31.03.2021. 
 DoSELvide OM dated 12.08.2021offered their comments as under: 
In NCLP, the children in the age group of 9-14 are withdrawn from work and 
put into NCLP Special Training Centres (STCs) and are provided with bridge 
education, stipend etc. before being mainstreamed into formal education 
system. The children in the age group of 5 -8 years are directly link ed to the 
formal education system through a close coordination with the Samagra 
Shiksha. NCLP provides only Bridge education and does not provide Formal 
Primary and Secondary education. NLCP scheme and Samagra Shiksha, 
both, undertake independent surveys. This includes 'out of school children' 
and it is noticed that names of many children find mention in both the 
surveys.  
In order to ensure optimum utilization of available resources, better 
convergence between both the schemes and avoid duplication at any stage, 
following suggestions are made: 

62 
 
1. NCLP may continue to rescue children from work as mandated by the 
extant Act, however, either they may be directly enrolled to school or may be 
got admitted to STCs run by the States and UTs under Samagra Shiksha 
depending upon the age and requirement of the child In case bridge courses 
are required, they are also provided in STCs under Samagra Shiksha. In that 
case NCLP need not run their separate STCs.  
2. A comprehensive guidelines on running the STCs and mainstr eaming the 
OoSC may be prepared jointly by both the Ministries. 
3. In so far as sharing of data between both the schemes is concerned, the 
representatives of M/o Labour at Block and District level may share the data 
with Block Education Officers. 
4. The other child centric benefits such as text books, uniforms and mid day 
meal are already provided to the children in NCLP STC.  
5. If both the schemes are converged comprehensively, the children under 
NCLP might get an opportunity to access greater benefits un der Samagra 
Shiksha. Also access to Hostels can be provided which might increase 
retention rate of children in schools, as many children engaged in Child 
Labour belong to migrant families having no permanent home. 
 MoLE examined the comments of DoSEL in co nsultation with Department of 
Expenditure (Ministry of Finance) and conveyed the following decision to 
DoSELvide OM dated 04.01.2022: 
i. National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme may be subsumed with 
Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) with immediate effect. 
 
ii. Henceforth, no new STC under NCLP will be opened and no survey 
under NCLP scheme will be conducted as it will be duplication with 
SSA and in contradiction with Department of Expenditure. Ministry of 
Finance's O.M. No. 42(02) PF-II/2014 dated 8.12.2020.  
 
iii. The Surveys being conducted under SSA to also capture data 
pertaining to "Child Labour" if any. For this, necessary field(s) may be 
added in the Survey format.  
 
iv. The Child Labour rescued or withdrawn from work to be 
mainstreamed directly to SSA either directly to the Schools or through 
Special Training Centres, being operated in the district under SSA 
Scheme for bridge education, as the case may be. 
 
  In response, DoSELvide OM dated 21.02.2022 informed MoLE as under: 
i. The above OM states that the NCLP scheme  will be subsumed into 
Samagra Shiksha. However, it is made clear that there will be no change in 
the norms of Samagra Shiksha and Samagra Shiksha will not be taking over 
or running the centres being run by the NCLP scheme. Further, the Ministry 
of Educati on will not be taking over the liabilities from MoL&E including 
legal cases/parliamentary matters etc. The past liabilities/legal matters 
pertaining to the NCLP/centers may be dealt by MoL&E only. 

63 
 
ii. MoL&E may continue to survey and rescue child labour fr om work as 
mandated by the extant Act, as under Samagra Shiksha, States/UTs 
conduct a basic door to door survey for identifying out of school children and 
these surveys are generally conducted by teachers and they don't have any 
expertise to identify child labour. 
 iii. However, the child labour surveyed and rescued by MoL&E may be 
directly enrolled to schools or may be got admitted to Special Training 
Centers (STCs) run by the States and UTs under Samagra Shiksha 
depending upon the age and requirement of the child. In case bridge courses 
are required, they are also provided in STCs under Samagra Shiksha. In that 
case NCLP need not run their separate STCs. Under PM POSHAN Scheme, 
noon meal is also served to children in STCs in various states. 
 In response, M oL&Evide O.M. Z -16025/04/2021-CL dated 30.03.2022 
informed DoSEL that it has been decided to merge/subsume the NCLP scheme 
with SSA as per following details: 
The children enrolled at the STCs of NCLP Scheme as on 31.03.2021 be 
mainstreamed in accordance with NCLP guidelines. 
If any child has been enrolled after 31.03.2021 in any STC functional under 
NCLP, he/she be mainstreamed or shifted to STCs functional under 
Samagra Shiksha. 
After mainstreaming of the children enrolled in  the STCs under NCLP 
scheme as per NCLP guidelines, the NCLP STC will cease to be operational. 
The State Government may continue to identify and rescue the child labour, 
as mandated in Child Labour&Adolscent (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 
1986. The ch ildren rescued/identified as child labour after completing the 
necessary formalities, be mainstreamed through Samagra Shiksha either 
directly to schools or through Special Training Centre, operated in the 
district under Samagra Shiksha. 
 MoL&Evide letter dated 14.03.2022 also communicated the above mentioned 
decisions to States/UTs as well District Magistrate/Collector, inter alia, stating that 
as per the scheme guidelines of NCLP Scheme, NCLP Special Training Centre were 
to be operational only in those districts where no Special Training Ce ntre(s) under 
SSA are operational in that area. Further, the NCLP scheme guidelines also 
envisages the convergence with the annual survey of ‘out of school’ children under 
SSA as it would help to reduce duplication of efforts at the District and State level.  
 The following observations of Department of Expenditure were also conveyed 
to DoSEL by MoL&Evide the above mentioned OM:  
 i DoSEL and MoLE have come to an agreement for the merger of NCLP with 
 SSA, therefore, Department of Expenditure has no objection to the proposal. 
ii. MoL&E may release the amount of Rs. 20 crore from the budgetary outlay 
of NCLP scheme during FY 2021-22. 
iii. MoL&E may also spend not more than Rs. 20 crores in 2022 -23 and Rs. 
10 crore in 2023-24 under NCLP to meet the committed liabilities. 
iv. MoL&E may devise a plan in consultation with DoSEL for the following: 

64 
 
a) To allow children enrolled in existing STC under NCLP to complete 
their bridge education before mainstreaming formal education system 
in STC under NCLP. 
b) Child labou r identified through recent survey to be enrolled under 
STC of Samagra Shiksha. 
With regard to the comments of DoSEL that there will be no change in the 
norms of Samagra Shiksha and Samagra Shiksha will not be taking over or 
running the centres being run b y the NCLP scheme, MoLE clarified that it was not 
proposed to DoSEL to run the NCLP STCs. 
 The following suggestions/comments of DoSEL were agreed to by MoLE: 
(i) The Ministry of Education will not be taking over the liabilities from 
Ministry of Labour and Employment (MoL&E) including legal cases / 
parliamentary matters etc. The past liabilities/legal matter pertaining 
to the NCLP/centers may be dealt by MoL&E only.  
(ii) The child labour surveyed and rescued by MoL&E may be directly 
enrolled to school or may be got admitted to Special Training Centers 
(STCs) run by the States and UTs under Samagra Shiksha depending 
upon the age and requirement of the child. In case bridg e courses are 
required, they are also provided in STCs under Samagra Shiksha. In 
that case NCLP need not run their separate STCs.  
 
 In response to the comments of DoSEL that MoL&E may continue to survey 
and rescue child labour from work as mandated by the  extant Act, as under 
Samagra Shiksha, States/UTs conduct a basic door to door survey for identifying 
out of school children and these surveys are generally conducted by teachers and 
they don't have any expertise to identify child labour, MoLE clarified as under: 
NCLP is a demand driven scheme. Proposals are received from District 
Project Societies (DPS), through State Govt. to conduct the survey. Under 
NCLP, survey is not conducted in entire country at a time, it is conducted as 
per the proposal approved by the Ministry.  
DPS is funded through NCLP scheme. Once, NCLP is closed/merged, DPS 
will also be closed. Therefore, it may not be feasible to conduct survey by 
this Ministry under NCLP. 
In view of this, it was decided while conducting the survey under SSA  
Scheme, an additional field may be added in survey format to indicate the 
work, if done by the child.  
However, as far as rescue of Child Labour is concerned, it will continue as 
before by the District Administration as per the Act. 
 With regard to the cl arification sought by DoSEL whether the decision 
conveyed vide O.M. dated 4th January, 2022 by Ministry of Labour and 
Employment had the approval of Department of Expenditure through SFC or 
separately,  MoLE stated that a separate approval has been obtaine d from the 
Department of Expenditure vide their ID Note dated 25.11.2021.   
 

65 
 
(ii) Preparedness in carrying forward the NCLP Scheme following its merger 
with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan 
2.141 In response to a specific query of the Committee regarding the level of 
the Department's preparedness in carrying forward the NCLP Scheme 
following its merger with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan and mechanism put in 
place for effective coordination with the Ministry of Labour& Employment 
and with the State Governments which are al so involved in elimination and 
rehabilitation of child labour, the DOSEL stated as under: (PER 1) 
“This Department vide ID note dated 18 th May, 2022 has shared the 
concerns being faced and likely to be faced by different 
stakeholders/implementing agencies with MoLE  suggesting therein that a 
Committee of the two Departments be formed for framing a set 
guidelines/modalities/procedures for smooth convergence of the two 
Schemes as under: 
There are certain practical issues which are being faced by the stakehold ers 
and at this stage it is our mutual responsibility to work towards an amicable 
solution to resolve the issues being faced by the implementing 
agencies/stakeholders as also the issues that are likely to be faced by the 
different implementing agencies and stakeholders:  
i. This Department had agreed only for the convergence of the 
Schemes. In other words, both the schemes will continue, with NCLP 
reaping the benefits of Samagra Shiksha.  
ii. However, Ministry of Labour& Employment has informed all the 
implementing agencies that the Schemes have been 
merged/subsumed. However, in absence of detailed 
instructions/procedure, it has created ambiguity at ground level.  
iii. State Education departments are writing to this Department 
seeking directions with referen ce to their fund requirement as also 
utilization of human resource. Likewise, representations are being 
received in this Department from different stakeholders about their 
salary dues and further continuance.  
iv. NCLP is a Central Sector Scheme- 100% sponsored by GoI whereas 
Samagra Shiksha is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme with funding 
pattern of 60:40/90:10/100% as per fund sharing pattern decided by 
M/o Finance. In other words, financial burden on the part of the 
States is likely to increase, and they sho uld have been consulted 
before taking this decision.  
v. As MoLE has informed that all the District Project Societies (DPSs) 
will cease to exist with merger/subsuming of both of the Schemes, 
there is likely to be litigation and increased inflow of parliame ntary 
issues, RTI, Public Grievances and miscellaneous matters. It is 
requested that as informed earlier, these matters may continue to be 
dealt by the MoLE, which are now being sent to this department.  
vi. Integration of NCLP online portal named PENCiL ( Platform for 
Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour) with Samagra Shiksha 
PRABANDH Portal, needs to be worked out.  

66 
 
vii. Under Samagra Shiksha, a door-to-door survey to identify the Out 
of School Children (OOSC) is done by the respective State and UT 
Government through the teachers. Now, the Survey format needs to 
be improvised with the addition of new entries for identification of 
child labour as also to identify if the child is a working child only or is 
the Main Working Child, i.e. the sole earner.  
As a step towards resolution to the issues being faced or are likely to 
be faced, it is suggested that:  
i. MoLE has agreed to take care of all the past liabilities, court cases, 
parliamentary matters and other issues. However, all the court 
matters, audit  issues and miscellaneous matters resulting due to 
merger/subsuming of the Scheme shall also be handled by MoLE till 
their conclusion.  
ii. A joint committee of the two Departments be constituted for 
preparing guidelines/procedure/modalities for smooth mer ger of 
NCLP with Samagra Shiksha. 
This Department has also vide D.O. letter dated 17 th May, 2022 informed all 
the States and UTs about the action to be taken by stakeholders/  
implementing agencies during the transition phase as under: 
The detailed Guidelin es/Modalities/Procuedures for merger of the two 
Schemes are being worked out in consultation with MoLE and till such time 
it may be noted that:  
i. There will be no change in the norms of Samagra Shiksha.  
ii. DoSEL/Samagra Shiksha will not be taking over or running the 
centres being run under the NCLP Scheme.  
iii. The manpower of the NCLP STCs/District Project Societies will not 
get subsumed under Samagra Shiksha. All the issues relating to 
closure of NCLP STCs/DPS including utilization of human resource of 
these NCLP STCs/DPS and the issues prior to the stage of NCLP STC 
Child being admitted to Samagra Shiksha STC shall be exclusively 
dealt with by the Ministry of Labour and Employment.  
iv. The child/children admitted/shifted to Samagra Shiksha STC shall 
be entitled to all the benefits under Samagra Shiksha and PM 
POSHAN schemes.  
v. All the Court matters and other miscellaneous matters arising due 
to the merger/subsuming of the Scheme shall be dealt with by the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment.  
vi. The  State Government may continue to identify and rescue the 
child labour, as mandated in Child Labour& Adolescent (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Act, 1986. The children rescued/identified as child labour 
after completing the necessary formalities, be mainstreame d through 
Samagra Shiksha either directly to schools or through Special 
Training Centre, operated in the district under Samagra Shiksha.  

67 
 
vii. While conducting the survey of out of school children, the 
states/UTs may also include a category for child labou r and the 
children from the fresh survey may be mainstreamed into schools or 
through special training centres as per the procedure adopted under 
Samagra Shiksha scheme. Funds for the same may accordingly be 
budgeted into the AWP&B of Samagra Shiksha.  
(iii) Changes envisaged in the NCLP Scheme after merger with the Samagra 
Shiksha Abhiyan 
2.142 On a pointed query as to what positive changes are envisaged in the 
NCLP Scheme after being merged with the Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan, the 
DoSEL submitted as under:  
 There will be no change in the norms of Samagra Shiksha Scheme…. 
After convergence of the two Schemes, the children will be admitted/shifted 
to SamagraShisksha Special Training Centres or mainstreamed for formal 
education in a school…. 
Also, the children w ill have all the benefits of Samagra Shiksha 
Scheme which, inter -alia, includes free textbooks and free uniform at 
elementary level, vocational education, identification and assessment of 
children with special needs, aids and appliances, braille kits and b ooks, 
appropriate teaching learning material and stipend to girl students with 
disability etc. Access to Hostels will also be available as many children 
engaged in Child Labour belong to migrant families having no permanent 
home.  Further, one hot cooked m eal is also provided at elementary level 
under PM-POSHAN Scheme. 
2.143 On the same issue, MoLE replied as under:   
 The following changes are envisaged after merger of NCLP with SSA: 
1. Samagra Shiksha Abhiyaan (SSA) aims to improve the access, 
infrastructure and quality of education to children throughout the country. 
2. In the SSA trained teachers provide quality education to the enrolled 
children. 
3. There is provision of Hostel facility under SSA, due to which the 
retention/attendance rate of child labourers from migrant families may 
increase in schools.  
4. Duplicity  of schemes at  Centre and the State level is minimised. 
5. Under SSA, the  survey i s conducted every year to identify all “out of 
school” children, whereas under NCLP the survey is conducted within three 
years only on the request of the District. 
2.144  On being asked about the specific inputs/feedbacks provided by the 
DoSEL to the MoLE at the meeting held in January, 2022 with the 
Ministries concerned on NCLP and whether the suggestions were accepted 
by the MoLE, the DoSEL replied as under: 
 The following inputs were provided in respect of Minutes of the 
meeting held on 7th January, 2022: 

68 
 
  …..Section 4 of the RTE Act provides for special training for age 
appropriate admission of out of school children. Those children who have 
missed out certain academic years either for being never enrolled to school 
or having dropped out of school, have  a right to Special Training in 
residential and non -residential mode, subsequently to be mainstreamed in 
formal schools in age appropriate class. These out of school children include 
those who are never enrolled, those who drop out, children of migrants, 
street and working children, children without adult protection etc.  
          Under ‘Pradhan MantriPoshan Shakti Nirman’(PM POSHAN) one hot 
cooked meal in Govt and Govt aided schools is provided to students at the 
elementary level of education.  
 Under Sam agra Shiksha, for the first time in 2021 -22, financial 
assistance uptoRs. 2000 per annum has been provided for supporting Out of 
School Children of age group of 16-19 years, belonging to socio economically 
disadvantaged groups, for completing their educati on through NIOS/SIOS, 
for accessing course materials and certification. Also, under National Means-
cum-Merit Scholarship Scheme, scholarship is awarded to meritorious 
students of economically weaker sections to arrest their drop out at class 
VIII and encourage them to continue the study at secondary stage. 
            This Department has also developed an online module for compiling 
the data of Out of School Children (OoSC) identified by each State/UT and 
their mapping with Special Training Centres (STC) on  the PRABANDH Portal 
(http://samagrashiksha.in). The concerned State/UT validates the child 
wise information of the identified OoSC and STC uploaded by the concerned 
Block Resource Centre of the State for monitoring the progress of 
mainstreaming of OoSC. 
 For providing skill training to the rescued Adolescents under Samagra 
Shiksha, it may be stated that the component of Vocational education of 
School Education under Samagra Shiksha caters to the in -school students 
of Classes 9 -12. There is provision for pr oviding exposure of vocational 
education to the students of Classes 6-8.  Such rescued adolescents who are 
mainstreamed in school education can be considered for vocational 
education.  However, the Skill Hubs Initiative is being implemented by the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship under PMKVY 3.0 
in which schools have also been identified as hubs for providing skill 
training to the Out of School/Education youth of the age group 15 -29.  The 
rescued adolescents may be considered for skill tra ining under this 
initiative.   
 Further, the Ministry of Labour has been requested to instruct their 
agencies in the States to coordinate with the School Education Department 
and Skill Department in States and UTs for providing skill training to the 
rescued adolescents. 
2.145 When asked as to how do the Right to Education Act, 2009 & the 
Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 work in 
tandem and whether there is any need for amendment to any of the 
provisions of these Acts so as t o empower the Department to make 
implementation of RTE better, the DoSEL responded as under:  

69 
 
 “The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 
2009, provides for rights of every child of the age of 6 to 14 years to obtain 
free and compulsory elementary education.  The Act further provides the 
pathways for education of the child, including Out of School Children.   
 The Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 
1986 provides that no child shall be employed or permitted to work in any 
occupation or process that has an effect on the school education of the child. 
The Act further provides the pathways for education and rehabilitation of the 
child so engaged as child labour. Thus, both the Acts strive to provide 
universal access of education to every child….” 
2.146 On the same issue, MoLE replied as under:   
“In order  to ensure compulsory education of children as per Right of 
Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, the age of child in 
the Child & Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 has 
been linked with the age of child in the Right of Ch ildren to Free and 
Compulsory Education Act, 2009. As per Section 2(ii) of the Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, a "child" means a 
person who has not completed his fourteenth year of age or such age as may 
be specified in the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009, whichever is more.” 
(iii) Framing of Standard Operating Procedures 
2.147 There are some penal provisions under Child & Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986. The Rules provi ding for prevention, 
rescue and rehabilitation of child and adolescent labour have also been 
framed. The Ministry of Labour& Employment has also devised SOPs 
providing for reporting mechanism, pre & post rescue action, repatriation 
and rehabilitation of ch ildren, role & responsibilities of enforcing agencies 
etc. On being asked whether the Rules need to be made more stringent and 
whether the SOPs need further improvement, the DoSEL stated as under:   
“Child labour is the mandate of MoLE. The mandate further  extends to the 
identification, rescue/ withdrawal of the child, special training/ 
mainstreaming and rehabilitation. This mandate is governed/regulated by 
the extant Acts and Rules of MoLE. 
 The Rules for prevention, rescue and rehabilitation of child and 
adolescent labour provide for specific provisions incorporating duties and 
responsibilities of enforcement agencies in order to ensure effective 
implementation and compliance of the provisions of the Act.  However, with 
the convergence of the two schemes, detailed Standard Operating Procedure 
with regard to mainstreaming of children to schools is required to be 
prepared in consultation with all the Stakeholders and implementing 
agencies including all States & UTs and all concerned departments. 
However, rules regarding rescue and prevention of child labour may be dealt 
by MoLE….” 
(iv) Monitoring Mechanism  
2.148 The Ministry of Labour& Employment has at present three level 
monitoring mechanism i.e Central Level Monitoring Committee, State Level 

70 
 
Monitoring Com mittee and District Level Monitoring Committee. There is 
direct responsibility of District Magistrate in appointing District Nodal 
Officers and district task force. On being asked whether the DoSEL have any 
suggestions to further strengthen the monitoring mechanism, the DoSEL 
replied as under:  
“The Samagra Shiksha Scheme is implemented as a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme through a single State Implementation Society (SIS) at the State 
level. At the National level, there is a Governing Council/Body headed by the 
Minister of Education and a Project Approval Board (PAB) headed by 
Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy. The Governing 
Council/body will be empowered to modify financial and programmatic 
norms and approve the detailed guidelines for imp lementation within the 
overall Framework of the scheme. Such modifications will include 
innovations and interventions to improve the quality of school education.  
 At the State Level, there is a single Implementation Society for the 
Integrated Scheme to fa cilitate better decision making at the state level by 
resolving issues of coordination and convergence. It also provides a focused 
and time bound arrangement for decision -making and the presence of 
representatives of Planning and Finance Departments on these bodies at the 
state level to facilitate this process.  
 At district level, there is a District Project Office(DPO). The main role 
of DPO is to implement and review the progress of the programme and widen 
networking with the participating agencies. Depending on the State, it would 
be headed by District Collector/ Magistrate/ Chief Executive officer of the 
Zilla Parishad.” 
2.149 The DoSEL further supplemented as under:  
“This Department has also developed an online module for compiling the 
data of Out of School Children (OoSC) identified by each State/UT and their 
mapping with Special Training Centres (STC) on the PRABANDH Portal 
(http://samagrashiksha.in). The concerned State/UT validates the child 
wise information of the identified OoSC and STC uploa ded by the concerned 
Block Resource Centre of the State for monitoring the progress of 
mainstreaming of OoSC… 
 The scheme also has an inbuilt comprehensive monitoring and 
evaluation mechanism to ensure optimum implementation of interventions, 
which, inter-alia, includes, Performance Grading Index (PGI), Unified District 
Information System for Education (UDISE+), Project Appraisal, Budgeting 
Achievements and Data Handling System (PRABANDH), National 
Achievement Surveys (NAS), Audit Mechanism, Comprehensive R eview 
Mission (CRM), Social Audit, Third Party Monitoring through Monitoring 
Institutes and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). The Samagra Shiksha 
Manual on Financial Management and Procurement contains detailed 
procedures on fund flow arrangements, accoun ting, financial reporting, 
internal control and audit, external audit, procurement procedures, etc 
Annual Reports of the State Implementing Societies for implementation of 
the scheme at State / UT level are also laid on the Table of the Parliament 
every year.” 

71 
 
2.150 On the same issue, MoLE responded as under:   
“Labour being in the Concurrent List, enforcement of the provisions of the 
Act is the responsibility of both Central and State governments in their 
respective sphere. Section 17A of the Child & Adolescent Labour (Prohibition 
& Regulation) Act, 1986 provides for conferring the power and imposing 
duties on District Magistrate for effective implementation of the provision of 
the Act. The District Magistrate may specify the officer, subordinate to him 
who shall exercise all or any of the powers and perform all or any of the 
duties, so conferred or imposed and the local limits within which such 
powers or duties shall be carried out by the officer as may be prescribed. 
Further, Section 17B provides for perio dic inspection and monitoring of the 
implementation of the Act.  
 Further, PENCiL portal (Platform for Effective Enforcement of No Child 
Labour) was developed by the Ministry in September 2017, which connects 
Central Government, State Governments, and the Districts. The objective of 
PENCiL portal is to strengthen the NCLP as well as provide a platform for 
implementation of the provisions of the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986. One of the main components of 
PENCiL portal is  complaint corner wherein anybody can lodge a complaint 
regarding child labour. At district level District Nodal Officers (DNOs) are 
nominated to take action on the complaints of their respective districts. The 
portal can be updated to improve monitoring of disposal of complaints.” 
(v) ILO Convention 
2.151 The Government of India has ratified ILO Convention (Convention 138 
and 182) which underlines the commitment of India towards eradication of 
child labour. The minimum age for admission to employment as per RTE Act 
is 14 years. Convention 182 concerns worst  forms of child labour like 
slavery, trafficking, bonded labour, prostitution etc. On being asked about 
the role and responsibility of the DoSEL to meet the international 
commitment of the Government, the DoSEL replied as under:  
“It is pertinent to mentio n here that only NCLP scheme is being converged 
with Samagra Shiksha that too to the extent of providing Special training 
and mainstreaming of students. The mandate of rescuing Child Labourers 
and following the convention 182 of ILO is in the domain of the M/o L&E. As 
far as M/o Education is concerned, its mandate is to provide free and 
compulsory education to all children of age group of 6 -14 years as per the 
RTE Act.  
 Further, the Samagra Shiksha scheme is an integrated centrally 
sponsored scheme for school education and aims to ensure that all children 
have access to quality education with an equitable and inclusive classroom 
environment which should take care of their diverse background, 
multilingual needs and different academic abilities, thereby makin g them 
active participants in the learning process.” 
(vi) Special Training Centers (STCs) 
2.152 While NCLP run Special Training Centers (STCs) do not have hostel 
facility, the STCs under SSA have hostel facility. In the opinion of Ministry of 

72 
 
Labour& Emplo yment, the retention rate of children could be higher for 
children of migrant workers, if there is hostel facility. When asked about the 
opinion of DoSEL and how many STCs are functional under SSA and, out of 
them, how many have hostel facilities, the DoSEL replied as under:  
“As per the information provided/uploaded by the States and UTs on the 
PRABANDH portal(2023 -24), there are 83979 Functional Special Training 
Centres. ” 
2.153 The Ministry further submitted that as per the information 
provided/uploaded by the States and UTs on the PRABANDH portal (2023 -
24), the number of Functional STCs having hostel facilities is 228. 
2.154 On the same issue, MoLE submitted as under: 
The State-wise information regarding the functional STCs is as under: 
 Sl. 
No. State Name 
Mode of special Training being 
provided in the STC 
Total  Number 
of Functional 
Centres Non-
Residential 
Residential  Both 
1 ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR 
ISLANDS 
0 0 0 0 
2 ANDHRA PRADESH 288 3 2 293 
3 ARUNACHAL PRADESH 0 0 0 0 
4 ASSAM 2534 76 2 2612 
5 BIHAR 4445 0 2 4447 
6 CHANDIGARH 57 0 3 60 
7 CHHATTISGARH 93 0 0 93 
8 DELHI 740 0 0 740 
9 DND - DNH 0 0 0 0 
10 GOA 8 0 0 8 
11 GUJARAT 1111 4 0 1115 
12 HARYANA 694 0 0 694 
13 HIMACHAL PRADESH 63 0 0 63 
14 JAMMU AND KASHMIR 1594 1 5 1600 
15 JHARKHAND 1214 0 1 1215 
16 KARNATAKA 0 2 0 2 
17 KERALA 63 0 0 63 
18 LADAKH 0 0 0 0 
19 LAKSHADWEEP 0 0 0 0 
20 MADHYA PRADESH 0 4 0 4 
21 MAHARASHTRA 1157 0 0 1157 
22 MANIPUR 118 61 14 193 
23 MEGHALAYA 358 0 0 358 
24 MIZORAM 25 21 0 46 
25 NAGALAND 46 1 5 52 
26 ODISHA 18 0 0 18 

73 
 
27 PUDUCHERRY 2 0 0 2 
28 PUNJAB 209 0 0 209 
29 RAJASTHAN 587 13 3 603 
30 SIKKIM 0 0 0 0 
31 TAMIL NADU 529 35 0 564 
32 TELANGANA 149 0 0 149 
33 TRIPURA 2 7 3 12 
34 UTTAR PRADESH 65956 0 26 65982 
35 UTTARAKHAND 23 0 0 23 
36 WEST BENGAL 1475 0 0 1475 
  TOTAL 83558 228 66 83852 
Source: PRABANDH 
  
(vii) Integration of PRABANDH and PENCIL Portal: 
2.155 The Ministry of Labour and Employment have State Resource Centres 
to monitor the inspection of the rehabilitation fund. The Ministry also have 
Platform for Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour (PENCIL) Portal 
having complaints corner. The Committee de sired to know whether the 
Department of School Education and Literacy has tied up with the Ministry 
of Labour& Employment to have access to the Portal so as to take requisite 
and corrective measures as and when warranted and whether there is any 
proposal t o integrate PRABANDH Portal of the DoSEL with the PENCIL 
portal of Ministry of Labour& Employment. In response, the MoLE stated as 
under:  
“Currently, no such proposal is under active consideration of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment. However, the Ministry is considering the 
integration of PENCiL Portal with women/ child help line no. 1098, being 
administered by Ministry of Women and Child Development.”   
2.156 On being asked whether the DoSEL have tied up with the Ministry of 
Labour& Employment to have access to the Platform for Effective 
Enforcement for No Child Labour (PENCIL) Portal so as to take requisite and 
corrective measures as a nd when warranted and whether there is any 
proposal to integrate PRABANDH Portal of the DoSEL with the PENCIL 
portal of Ministry of Labour& Employment, the DoSEL responded as under:  
“DoSEL has flagged this issue with MoLE and has suggested that a 
Committee of the two Departments be formed for framing a set 
guidelines/modalities/procedures for smooth convergence or the two 
Schemes….” 
2.157 In this context, the representative during evidence stated as under: 
“Yes, it can be done. Now the academic session tak e over is going on. 
Frankly speaking the SOP has not been made robust yet. We are in the 
process of doing it.” 
 

74 
 
(viii) Stipend under NCLP 
2.158 Rescued children enrolled at NCLP  run STCs are provided stipend 
@Rs. 400/ - per month, which is not admissible to those enrolled under 
STCs run under SSA. On a specific query as to how will this impact the 
enrolment and retention of rescued children, the DoSEL replied as under:  
“….Under the Samagra Shiksha scheme, finan cial assistance is provided to 
States and UTs for undertaking various activities to reduce number of Out of 
School Children (OoSC) including opening/strengthening of new schools 
upto senior secondary level, construction of school buildings & additional 
classrooms, setting up, up -gradation and running of Kasturba Gandhi 
Balika Vidyalayas, setting up of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose 
AvasiyaVidyalayas, transport allowance and undertaking enrolment & 
retention drives. Under the student oriented component for the children with 
special needs, financial assistance is provided for identification and 
assessment of children with special needs, aids and appliances, braille kits 
and books, appropriate teaching learning material and stipend to girl 
students with disability etc.” 
2.159 On the same issue, MoLE replied as under: 
“Under NCLP survey is conducted within three years on request of the 
District, whereas under SSA survey is conducted every year to identify all 
“out of school” children. These out of School children ar e enrolled at SSA -
STCs to provide them bridge education, vocational training, PM -Poshan 
(mid-day meal), health care facilities, etc. preparing them for formal system 
of education. Also there is hostel facility under SSA, due to which the 
retention rate of child labourers from migrant families may increase in 
schools.  
 It is further stated that under Section 14B of the Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 there is a 
provision for constitution of a Child and Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation 
Fund in every district by the appropriate government, to which the amount 
of the fine realized from the employer (of the child or adolescent labourer 
identified) shall be credited. The appropriate Government shall credit an 
amount of fifteen thousand rupees to the Fund for each child or adolescent 
for whom the fine amount has been credited. The amount deposited and the 
interest accrued on it, shall be paid to the child or adolescent in whose 
favour such amount is credited, in such manner as may be prescribed.” 
(ix) Fate of District Project Societies 
2.160 As per NCLP guidelines, District Project Societies will continue to be 
functional for a period of 6 months after closure of STCs. When asked about 
the fate of District Project Societies after  merger of NCLP with SSA, the 
DoSEL replied as under:  
“This will have to be decided by the MoLE.  DoSEL/Samagra Shiksha will 
not be absorbing/taking over the District Project Societies or any liabilities of 
NCLP scheme.” 
 

75 
 
2.161 On the same issue, MoLE replied as under: 
“The Child Labour Project at a particular location under NCLP Scheme has 
limited time frame. The various volunteers for teaching and other activities 
including running the Special Training centers are selected among those 
committed to the cause of the community service and therefore engaged with 
the clear understanding that they will be paid only a consolidated 
honorarium for their services which are voluntary in nature and can in no 
way be considered permanent. As per NCLP guidelines, after the closure of 
STCs in the district, the Project Society would cease to exist after a period of 
maximum of 6 months thereafter.” 
2.162 The Committee were apprised that as per NCLP guidelines, the 
District Project Societies will continue to be functional fo r a period of six 
months after closure of STCs. On being asked about the mechanism put in 
place to look after the work being undertaken by the District Project 
Societies after merger of NCLP with SSA, the MoLE replied as under:  
“Since the NCLP Scheme has been merged with SSA under Ministry of 
Education, Department of School Education and Literacy, new STCs under 
NCLP will not start and as such the functions of the District Project Society 
will no longer be required. Further, it is informed that after closu re of all 
Special Training Centre (s) in the district, the Project Society may run at its 
full strength for the next six months and subsequent continuation of the 
Project Society even at reduced strength will require justification for the 
same and approval of the Ministry of Labour and Employment.” 
 
2.163 On being asked about the mechanism put in place to ensure that the 
rescued children are properly rehabilitated and also the tracking mechanism 
in the case of school drop outs, the MoLE replied as under: 
“It has been decided to merge the National Child Labour Project (NCLP) 
Scheme with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyaan (SSA) under Ministry of Education, 
Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSEL) in a phased manner. 
Accordingly, the authorities under SSA wi ll take the action on the school 
dropouts.” 
(x) Vision to completely eliminate child labour from the country 
2.164 In response to a specific query on the vision to completely eliminate 
child labour from the country, the representative of the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment during evidence elaborated as under: 
“...We have taken note of the best practises shared by the States during the 
hon. committee's deliberations. We will also work to establish a national -
level, child -level tracking system to facilitate c oordination among States. 
Umbrella  MoUs for States on the issue of release, rehabilitation, and 
repatriation of the rescued children by the Central and States, we will work 
on that also, as was suggested in the previous deliberations of the 
Committee. 
We are also planning to hold a Conference with the States  and stakeholders 
to obtain input on strengthening the implementati on of the Child Labour 
Act. ...through this Conferences, we will once again reinforce our efforts in 

76 
 
coordination with the State Gover nments for a more effective system for 
implementation of the Child Labour Abolition Act to take up rescue and 
rehabilitation activities more effectively”. 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
2.165  In the light of provisions contained in the Fundamental 
Rights pertaining to right against exploitation prohibiting employment 
of children below fourteen years of age and the Directive Principles of 
State Policy, the Government in the year 1986 enacted the Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986. The National 
Policy on  Child Labour framed in 1987 is the outcome of the Act made 
in the year 1986. A major amendment to the Act was made in the year 
2016, when  for the first time, ‘adolescent’ was  defined as a person 
who has completed fourteenth ye ar of age but has not completed 
eighteenth year. With a view to implementing  the amendments made 
in the year 2016, the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Rules, 2017 were formulated and simultaneously, the 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)  for enforcement of the Act were 
also issued by the Ministry of Labour and Employment in September, 
2017 for enforcing agencies and other stakeholders, which provides 
step by step SOP for effective enforcement and implementation.  The 
Committee took up examination of the Subject in  November, 2021. 
Thereafter, the Ministry of Labour & Employment started consultation 
with the line Ministries and formed an Inter -Ministerial Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (L&E) comprising representatives 
of fourteen Ministries/Departments to discuss the effective 
implementation of the  Act  and also to formulate strategy for sector -
wise eradication of child labour. After comprehensive examination of 
the Subject in all its ramifications and taking into consid eration that 
Labour is under concurrent list and State Governments are the 
important stakeholders for implementation of the Act, the Committee 
find that the implementation of the Policy has to go a long way for 
achieving the objective of elimination of chi ld labour as per 
commitments made by the county after ratification of ILO conventions   

77 
 
and to achieve the target stipulated in Sustainable Development Goal 
8.7 to end all forms of child labour by 2025 . The Ministry/State -wise 
recommendations of the Commit tee are contained in different 
Chapters  and are brought out in the succeeding paragraphs. 
i) Ambiguity in definition of child under various Acts 
2.166  The Committee note that under the Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, ‘child’ means a person 
who has not completed his fourteenth year of age or such age as may 
be specified in the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Ed ucation 
Act, 2009, whichever is more. The amendment made to the Act in 2016 
defines the child falling in the age group of (14 -18) years. Under the 
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, ‘child’ 
means  a male or female child of the age of six to fourteen years. Under 
the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 vide its amendment in 1986 defined 
“child” as a person who has not completed his fourteenth year of age. 
Under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, 
‘child’  means a person who has not completed eighteen years of age. 
The term ‘adolescent’ is not defined in JJ Act, 2015.  The Committee 
have also been given to understand that the Rashtriya Kishore 
Swasthya Karyakaram under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
defines an adolescent as a person between 10 -19 years.  The 
Committee further note that the employment of children in 
contravention of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986 is a cognizable offence, whereas under the 
Juvenile Justi ce  (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, it is a 
non-cognizable offence. The Committee desire that the discrepancies in 
the criteria for determination of age of child in the aforesaid Acts and 
other related Acts as well as the provisions of offence  being 
congnizable/non-cognizable under CALPRA Act/JJ Act be examined 
with a view to ensuring that these do not lead to any ambiguity  as well 
as delay in justice to the aggrieved children. 

78 
 
(ii) Schedule of Hazardous Occupations and Processes 
2.167  The Committee note that the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 prohibits employment of 
children below 14 years of age in all occupations and processes and the 
employment of adolescents in hazardous occupations and processes. 
The S chedule of hazardous occupations and processes of the Act is 
divided in two parts namely 'Part A' covering a list of 38 hazardous 
occupations and processes in which adolescents are prohibited to work 
and children are prohibited to help in family or family enterprises and 
'Part B' covering an additional list of 15 occupations and 54 processes 
where children are prohibited to help in family or family enterprises (in 
addition to 'Part A'). However, the child is permitted to help his family 
or in family enterpr ises, which is other than any processes or 
hazardous occupations/ processes set fo rth in the Schedule of the Act , 
and only after school hours or during vacations. This “help” does not 
include “engagement in employment” or the situation where a 
relationship of “employer -employee” exists. In the Act, “family 
enterprises” means any work, profession, manufacture or business 
which is performed by the members of the family. In this context, the 
Committee in their 4 th Report (2019 -20), 16 th Lok Sabha on the 
Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2019 had 
inter alia recommended that steps be taken to revise the list of 
hazardous industries in line with developed countries.  
2.168  The Committee note that as per the provisions of the Act, 
the Govern ment have constituted a Technical Advisory Committee 
(which is a body of experts) to advise the Central Government on 
inclusion of additional occupations and processes to the Schedule of 
the Act. In this context, the representatives of the Ministry during oral 
evidence informed that based on the deliberations of the Committee, 
the Ministry were in the process of revising the list of occupations and 
processes under the Act through Technical Advisory Committee. 
Subsequently, the Ministry also stated that if required, the Government 

79 
 
may also specify the nature of non-hazardous work where an adolescent 
may be permitted to work. The Committee note that ‘processes in 
agriculture where tractors, threshing and harvesting machines are used 
and chaff cutting’ has been  included in Part B of the Schedule. The 
Committee have been apprised that the agriculture sector has been 
transforming rapidly into extensive use of chemical fertilizers and use 
of heavy machineries which makes some component of agriculture 
sector hazardo us. While appreciating the efforts being made by the 
Ministry to have a positive list of occupations and processes where 
adolescent can work, the Committee desire that while undertaking the 
exercise of revising the list, it may also be ensured that such 
occupations and processes as included in Part B of the Schedule, which 
may be hazardous in nature, in the present context be excluded. The 
Committee further desire that depending upon their expertise, the 
representatives of NGOs/voluntary organizations be in vited to 
Technical Advisory Committee so as to have feedback from all possible 
sources engaged in the work relating to elimination of child labour in 
the country. 
(iii) Penalty/Economic Rehabilitation of the rescued child/adolescent 
2.169  The Committee no te that amendment to the Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, which came 
into force w.e.f. 01.09.2016 inter alia provided for stricter punishment 
for employers  through e nhancement of penalty for contravention of 
the provisions of the Act. As per the amended Act, the amount of 
penalty for first offence for employment of children below 14 years and 
adolescents ranges from Rs. 20,000  to Rs. 50,000 with imprisonment 
for a pe riod of 06 months to 2 years and for  second or subsequent 
offence it is for a  period of one year to three  years. In the case of 
parents/ guardians, there is no punishment for the first offence and in 
case of second and subsequent offence, the penalty  i s in the form of a 
fine upto Rs. 10,000.  The offence under the Act is a cognizable offence 
for the employers but f or parents/ guardians, it is  non -cognizable. For 

80 
 
violations of any other section of the Act,  penalty is in the form of 
imprisonment for a month or fine of Rs. 10000 or both. A provision was 
also made in the Act for constitution of “Child and Adolescent Labour 
Rehabilitation Fund” for one or more districts to which the amount of 
the fine realized from the employer of the child and adolescent i s 
credited. In addition, an amount of Rs. fifteen thousand is credited by 
the appropriate Government for each of the child and adolescents 
rescued from the work. The amount credited to the Fund is deposited 
in banks or invested and the interest accrued on is paid to the child or 
adolescent in whose favour such amount is credited. 
2.170  As per SOPs issued by the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment, all rescued child labourer and adolescent labourers in 
hazardous employment are to be paid back wages at a rate not less 
than minimum wages for their period of employment. Further, 
immediate financial assistance of Rs 3 0,000 under the Central Sector 
Scheme for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer 201 7 is required to be 
provided if the child/ adolescent is a bonded labour.  In addition, as per 
the judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of MC Mehta vs. 
State of Tamil Nadu and Ors. [AIR 1997 SC 699], a sum of Rs 20,000 
per child is to be paid by the employer to  “Child Labour Rehabilitation-
cum-Welfare Fund”, which is to be used only for the benefit of that 
child. In addition, the Government is to provide employment to an 
adult family member of the child or contribute Rs 5000 per child to 
this fund. The Committee, thus, find that two types of funds are in 
existence for economic rehabil itation of the rescued child/adolescent 
viz. “Child and Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation Fund”, as per 
amended Act and  “Child Labour Rehabilitation -cum-Welfare Fund”, as 
per judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court. The Committee have been 
apprised that, at pres ent, specific guidelines for the utilization of the 
Fund do not exist. The Committee also note that the Central Sector 
Scheme for Rehabilitation of B onded Labourer, 2017 has a provision of 
creating a district corpus fund of Rs. 10 lakhs for meeting immedia te 

81 
 
relief of rehabilitation of legally released bonded labourers. The 
Committee have also received suggestion to increase the amount of 
fine of Rs. 20,000 fixed by Hon’ble Supreme Court in 1996  under 
“Child Labour Rehabilitation-cum-Welfare Fund” as well as contribution 
of Rs. 5000 by the Government under “Child and Adolescent Labour 
Rehabilitation Fund”, as per the amended Act. 
2.171  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment to formulate suitable guidelines for the utilization of the 
fund and also take immediate steps to increase the amount of fine of 
Rs. 20,000/contribution of Rs.5000 keeping in view the inflation and 
ensure timely deposit of the amount in the account of the rescued 
child/adolescent so as to have their secure f uture. The Committee also 
urge the Ministry to take steps for creating a district corpus fund of 
appropriate amount for child labourers on the lines of the provisions 
contained in  the Central Sector Plan for rehabilitation of bonded 
labourer for meeting t he immediate relief and rehabilitation of child 
labourers. The Committee feel that the corpus fund so created may also 
be used for the rehabilitation of trafficked and migrant child labourers 
repatriated from other States. 
2.172  The Committee further note that employment of children 
as domestic workers/servants, in dhabas (roadside eateries), 
restaurants, hotels, motels, automobile workshops, garages, etc. is 
prohibited under the Act. However, children are deployed in these 
places. The Committee find that despite revision of penalties there is 
no deterrence on the employer and as informed by NGOs, the children 
after being rescued are again employed in the same occupation. The 
Committee, therefore, feel that there is a desperate nee d to make the 
laws more stringent for the employers/violators in particular. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that in addition to the three/four 
times increase in the amount of fine, some stricter punishment in the 
form of cancellation of license, attac hment of property, etc. also need 
to be incorporated so as to protect and safeguard the interest of the 

82 
 
children.  This may require amendment in the Act, which the Ministry 
of Labour & Employment should pursue in order to have zero tolerance 
on child labour. 
2.173  The Committee note that a large number of establishments 
outsource their work to contractors, who hire the contract workers 
through manpower suppliers. The Committee further note that while 
the Act has provision for punishment for employer, there  are no 
provisions for penalty on principal employer and traffickers. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that in the case of deployment of child 
labour, in addition to the employer, the accountability of principal 
employer and traffickers be also fixed. 
(iv) District Project Societies 
2.174  The Committee were apprised that under the NCLP, grants 
in aid are released to District Project Societies (DPSs) to operate the 
Special Training Centres (STCs). Further, stipend @ Rs. 400 per month 
is also released to the  eligible child enrolled at STC through Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) mode. The Committee were also apprised that 
after the closure of STCs in the District, the DPS would cease to exist 
after a period of 6 months. With regard to the fate of District Projec t 
Societies after merger of NCLP with SSA, while DOSEL have stated that 
DOSEL/Samagra Shiksha will not absorb/take over DPS or any 
liabilities of NCLP Scheme, the Ministry of Labour & Employment have 
stated that new STCs under NCLP will not start and as su ch the 
functions of DPS will no longer be required. The Committee, however, 
find that the activities undertaken by DPS on PENCIL Portal, inter-alia, 
include creating the Index Cards, validating the daily attendance, 
uploading bank account details of the re scued child etc. The 
Committee also note that awareness generation at the district level 
about the menace of child labour is done by the DPS, which is 
responsible for operationalising the social mobilization component of 
NCLP. The Committee further note th at the District Project Societies 

83 
 
act as a linking agency for facilitating vocational training through 
existing Schemes of the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship of the Government of India & Skill Development 
Departments of respective State G overnments. In addition, DPSs are 
also required to conduct the baseline surveys to identify child labour. 
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the functions of DPS 
with regard to uploading information of the rescued child on PENCIL 
Portal, aware ness generation, facilitating vocational training, 
conducting baseline survey, etc. have not been assigned to anyone. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that an appropriate mechanism in 
this regard be put in place in a time bound manner so that there is n o 
discontinuity with regard to mandate assigned to DPS through 
Standard Operating Procedure. 
(v) Children Rescued, Rehabilitated and Mainstreamed 
2.175  The Committee note that 14.3 lakh children were 
rescued/withdrawn from work, rehabilitated and mainstre amed under 
NCLP Scheme since its inception viz. since 1988 up to 31.03.2023. The 
Scheme, which was sanctioned in 324 Districts in 21 States, was 
operational in 59 Districts of 11 States, as on 31.03.2021. The 
Committee further note that during the last fiv e years, 1,95,365 
children were rescued and mainstreamed and majority of them were 
from the six States viz. West Bengal (46164), Madhya Pradesh (39539), 
Maharashtra (22364), Uttar Pradesh (29946), Assam (14828) and Tamil 
Nadu (12729), which is indicative o f existence of large number of child 
labour in these States in particular. The Committee are deeply 
concerned to note that despite existence of stringent measures in the 
Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 
and the Rules made thereunder, the scourge of child labour still exists 
in a big way. It has also been brought to the notice of the Committees 
that FIRs in child labour cases are not being lodged as it should be.  
During calendar year 2019, 2020 and 2021, the number of cases  
registered under the Act were 772, 476 and 613 respectively implying 

84 
 
that the implementation of the existing laws are not strictly enforced. 
The Committee are of the considered view that strict action needs to 
be taken against the violators. The Committee also  note that there are 
inherent provisions in Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 
2012 for action against police for not registering FIRs. The Committee 
desire that similar provisions need to be made in CALPRA Act, 1986. 
The Committee also desire that the responsibility of reporting children 
selling goods or begging at traffic lights be assigned to the Traffic 
Police and they may also be held accountable for not reporting such 
instances.  In addition, there needs to be a better coordination between 
various law enforcing agencies. Training needs to be provided to the 
officials of NGOs, Child Welfare Committee (CWC), Anti -Human 
Trafficking Unit (AHTU),  District Child Protection Unit (DCPU), District 
Legal Service Authority (DLSA),  Railway Pr otection Force (RPF)/ 
Ground Railway Police,  Labour Inspector, Factories inspector, RDO/ 
deputy collector, Child Welfare Police Officer and central armed forces 
and they need to be sensitized about the gravity of the crime and also 
about the international commitment made to eliminate child labour by 
2025 and its relevance for economic development of the country. The 
Committee also desire that at the local level, various Market 
Associations/Resident Welfare Associations be sensitized about 
consequences of deployment of child labours at commercial/residential 
places through launch of massive awareness campaigns through all 
possible means viz. Print, Electronic and social media platforms and be 
encouraged to report such cases. Further, the Government/PSU 
employees be asked to mandatorily furnish an undertaking annually 
regarding non -deployment of children below 14 years of age as 
domestic workers/ servants at their residence(s). The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the measures taken in this regard. 
(vi) Sector-Wise eradication of Child Labour 
2.176  The Committee note that as per 2001 census, the number 
of main workers in the age group of 5 to 14 years in various industries 

85 
 
was 57.54 lakh. Out of them, 39.73 lakh were in Agriculture, Hunting & 
Forestry & Fishing; 7.90 lakh in Manufacturing & 2.99 lakh in 
Wholesale and Retail Trade.  The Committee note that in the year 
2021, after the Committee started examination of the Subje ct, the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment constituted an Inter -Ministerial 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (L&E) to discuss the 
effective implementation of the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation), Act 1986 and strategy of s ector-wise 
eradication of child labour comprising representatives of various 
Ministries/Departments viz. Department of School Eduation and 
Literacy, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Women and Child 
Development, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Wel fare, Ministry of 
Rural Development, Department of Commerce, Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship, Ministry of Textiles, etc. While 
appreciating the step taken by the Ministry in the right direction, the 
Committee desire that it is imperative o n the part of the 
Ministries/Departments/State Governments to chalk out a Sector -wise 
focused strategy for effective enforcement of the Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 so as to ensure 
elimination of child labour. Further, as assured by the representative of 
the Ministry during evidence, the Committee desire that these inter -
Ministerial meetings with the line Ministries be conducted at least 
once in six months so that a comprehensive approach for tackling the 
issue of child  labour in various sectors could be evolved. The 
Committee further desire that a special campaign and appeal be made 
to industries, factories and employers to be sensitive about child labour 
and to make their premises ‘No Child Labour Zone’.  
(vii) Census & Survey 
2.177  The Committee note that the number of working children 
has decreased from 1.26 crore (as per 2001 census) to 1.01 crore (as 
per 2011 census) and the number of main working children in the age 
group of 5 -14 years have also decreased from 57. 79 lakh (as per 2001 

86 
 
census) to 43.53 lakh (as per 2011 census). The Committee further 
note that the Ministry of Labour & Employment do not conduct any 
survey to ascertain the number of child labours across the country and 
consider this data as child labou r data. The Ministry have also 
categorically stated that no proposal is under their consideration to 
develop a mechanism to maintain child labour data except depending 
on census data. The Committee further note that the Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 was amended 
in 2016 and for the first time, ‘adolescent’ has been defined as a person 
who has completed fourteenth year of age but has not completed 
eighteenth year. The amendment has been made after census 2011, 
wherein data of working children up to 14 years of age was captured & 
notified. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment to take up the matter regarding capturing data of children 
between 14 to 18 years during next census exercise with the Mi nistry 
of Home Affairs so as to have reliable data of children and adolescents, 
which would not only help in formulating policies but also devising 
action plan for eliminating child labour . Since census exercise is 
conducted after a period of ten years and  for 2021, it is yet to 
commence, the Committee impress upon the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment to conduct periodic survey particularly in urban areas to 
identify child labours, as assured by the representatives of the Ministry 
during oral evidence. 
2.178  The Committee also impress upon the Ministry to continue 
issuing directives/advisories to States/UTs on regular intervals to 
conduct survey to identify the child labour, collect and furnish 
enforcement data alongwith their views/suggestions on difficulti es 
being faced and measures to be taken for further improvement, framing 
of State Action Plan, functioning of State Resource Centres and other 
related actions on their part for enforcement of the Child & Adolescent 
Labour (Prevention and Regulation) Act, 1986. 
 

87 
 
(viii) Standard Operating Procedures 
2.179  The Committee note that the Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP)  for enforcement of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition 
& Regulation) Act, 1986 issued by the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment in Sep tember, 2017 is a comprehensive document 
containing detailed guidelines on (i) understanding legal framework; (ii) 
prevention, identification and reporting of child and adolescent labour 
in hazardous employment; (iii) pre -rescue; (iv) rescue; (iv) post -rescue; 
(v) rehabilitation; (vi) monitoring mechanism and (vii) role and 
responsibilities of enforcing agencies and other stakeholders at 
different stages. The document acts as a ready reckoner for enforcing 
agencies and other stakeholders and provides step b y step SOP for 
effective enforcement and implementation of the provisions of the 
various legislations, convergence of resources of Government both 
horizontally and vertically, coordination between various stakeholders 
and active involvement of the communit y. The Committee have been 
apprised that multiple Departments have issued advisories and SOPs 
which are in conflict with each other and to avoid confusion and 
conflicts, a single document needs to be prepared after consultation 
with the Ministries concerne d so as to maintain uniformity. The 
Committee desire that the document so prepared should inter-alia 
contain Inter -State Repatriation Policy highlighting clear cut 
demarcation of duties and responsibilities and coordination between 
various Ministries and D epartment concerned, State Governments, 
stakeholders, Police, Anti -Human Trafficking Unit (AHTU), Child 
Welfare Committee, District Child Protection Unit, etc. inter-alia 
containing provisions for grant of permission from State Governments 
for mass movement of children from one State to another and targeted 
interventions for child migrants/ children of migrant labours and those 
belonging to socially disadvantaged group. The Committee note that in 
this context, Department of School Education and Literacy hav e also 
stated that with the convergence of the two schemes viz. NCLP and 

88 
 
SSA, detailed Standard Operating Procedure with regard to 
mainstreaming of children to schools is required to be prepared in 
consultation with all the Stakeholders and implementing ag encies 
including all States & UTs and all concerned departments.  
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a detailed 
Standard Operating Procedure be worked out by the Ministry of Labour 
& Employment in consultation with all concerned in a time bound 
manner so as to avoid any confusion amongst all stakeholders. 
(ix) Child Budgeting 
2.180  The Committee note that the ‘budgetary allocation to 
Ministry of Labour & Employment under NCLP Scheme during 2017 -18 
to 2022 -23 was Rs. 352.16 crore and out of  which Rs. 337.0 6 crore 
(95%) was utilized. For 2023 -24, Rs. 10 crore has been allocated. The 
Committee during deliberations with various Ministries/Departments 
noted with concern that some of the Ministries viz. Ministry of 
Agriculture and Ministry of Soc ial Justice and Empowerment had 
expressed reservations with regard to their jurisdiction on child labour 
related issues. Though both the Ministries later extended full support 
and responded well to the points raised during deliberations, the 
Committee feel that although the overall responsibility for eliminating 
child labour vests with the Ministry of Labour & Employment, the other 
Ministries/Departments as well as State Governments have also an 
equally important role to play and this social evil can be eli minated 
only with the coordinated efforts of Central & State Governments. The 
Committee are of the considered view that all Ministries/Departments 
should have budgetary allocations in their Demands for Grants 
exclusively for the child labour related activi ties. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government besides integrating ‘Child 
Budgeting’ into all the budgets and programmes of the Central and 
State Governments and their Undertakings, should also ensure 

89 
 
optimum utilization of budget allocated for children while periodically 
increasing the allocation keeping in mind the evolving needs. 
(x) ILO Conventions 
2.181  The Committee note that consequent upon strengthening 
the legislative framework for complete prohibition of employment of 
children below 14 years through amendment in the Child Labour and 
Adolescent (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 in 2016, ILO 
Convention No. 138 of 01.06.1973 concerning minimum age for 
employment and No. 182 of 01.06.1999 concerning prohibition and 
elimination of worst forms of child labour viz. slavery, trafficking, 
bonded labour, child soldiers, etc. were subsequently ratified in J une, 
2017. The Committee further note that with the ratification of these 
two ILO conventions, the country has re -affirmed its commitment 
towards elimination of child labour and to achieve the target stipulated 
in Sustainable Development Goal 8.7 to end al l forms of child labour by 
2025. The Committee feel that various factors like economic 
insecurity, lack of social protection, inadequate household income, etc. 
has increased the risk of exposure to exploitative work. Considering 
the prevalence of child lab our at present, it is practically not possible 
to meet the international commitment to eliminate child labour by 
2025. As action taken today will determine the future of children of 
tomorrow, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to take up the 
issue in a mission mode and devise a systematic action plan based 
policy to meet international commitments, which are not only relevant 
for economic development of the country but will also brighten the 
image of the country in international forum. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that in line with the aim of the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) 8.7, the Government should take immediate and effective 
measures to eradicate forced labour and modern slavery and human 
trafficking and secure the prohibition and elimin ation of the worst 
forms of child labour, including recruitment and use of child soldiers 
and by 2025 end child labour in all its forms. 

90 
 
(xi) PENCIL Portal 
2.182  The Committee note that to ensure the effective 
enforcement of the provisions of the Child an d Adolescent (Prohibition 
& Regulation) Act, 1986 and smooth implementation of the National 
Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme, an online portal PENCIL (Platform 
for Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour) was launched w.e.f. 26 
September, 2017. The Por tal connects Central Government to State 
Government(s), District(s), all Project Societies and the General public.  
Further, online complaints regarding child labour can also be filed by 
anybody on the Portal.  The complaints received on the Portal are 
resolved by the District Nodal Officers (DNOs) which are appointed by 
the State Governments under the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition & Regulation) Rules, 2017.  
2.183  Further, as per Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for 
enforcement of the Child a nd Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986 issued by the Ministry in September, 2017, the 
role and responsibilities of the District Nodal Officer includes 
prevention, identification, preparation before rescue, rescue, post 
rescue, rehabilitation and follow up including uploading Information on 
the Portal. The Committee were apprised by National Commission for 
Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) that the District Nodal Officer has 
not been appointed by many States/UTs. Considering the fact th at the 
District Nodal Officer has a very important role to play, the Committee 
impress upon the Ministry to ensure that District Nodal Officers are 
appointed by all States/UTs within two months of the presentation of 
this Report to the Parliament. The Comm ittee also recommend that 
the District Labour Officer be appointed ex-officio District Nodal Officer 
under the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Rules, 2017.  The Committee further note that since its launch in 
September, 2017, 4290 complaints were registered on Portal and out of 
them, 3312 complaints have been resolved and 978 complaints (22%) 
are yet to be resolved. The Committee impress upon the Ministry to 

91 
 
issue appropriate instructions to the concerned to resolve these 
complaints on priority. The Committee further desire that a 
mechanism be put in place to resolve the complaints in a time bound 
manner.  
2.184  The Committee appreciate that an NGO has been on -
boarded on PENCIL Portal on pilot basis to have access to the 
complaints r egistered and take up the matter with District Nodal 
Officer for redressal of the same. The Committee desire that other 
NGOs be on-boarded on the portal for speedy redressal of complaints. 
2.185  The Committee find that PENCIL Portal has provision to 
register complaints for which details of child labour/adolescent child, 
address where child is found & details of reporting persons are required 
to be filled in. There is , however, no provisions for a child labour to 
register himself/herself. The Committee desire that a provision to this 
effect be made on the Portal for effective implementation of the Act. 
2.186  The Committee were apprised that the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment are considering the in tegration of PENCIL Portal with 
women/child help line no. 1098 being administered by the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development. The Committee desire that the 
exercise may be completed in a time bound manner. The Committee 
also desire that consequent upon  merger of NCLP with Samagra 
Shiksha Abhiyan, the integration of PENCIL Portal with PRABANDH 
Portal of Department of School Education & Literacy also needs to be 
undertaken. The Committee wish to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard. 
(xii) Deployment of Children at Construction Sites/Beedi -
making/firecrackers Industries 
2.187  The Committee note that construction work; beedi making; 
and production, storage or sale of fire crackers, etc. are included in 
Part A of the Schedule to the Child and Adole scent Labour (Prohibition 

92 
 
and Regulation) Act, 1986 containing hazardous occupations and 
processes in which adolescents are prohibited to work and children are 
prohibited to help. However, the instances of deployment of children in 
these hazardous occupati ons are often reported from time to time. In 
the case of construction work, the Ministry have stated that no 
surprise visits are being undertaken due to launch of Shram Suvidha 
Portal w.e.f. 16.10.2014. The Committee feel that deployment of 
children in haz ardous occupations can be prevented only through 
physical/on-site inspections and through massive awareness 
campaigns. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to undertake 
surprise physical inspections at construction sites/beedi making/fire 
cracker in dustries and other hazardous occupations included in 
Schedule ‘A’ and also launch mass media campaign by involving State 
Governments, NGOs, Trade Unions and other stakeholders so as to 
prevent the engagement of adolescents/ children in such work. 
(xiii) Participation of Public Representatives 
2.188  The Committee were apprised that the State Government(s) 
ensure the participation of local  representatives  in  the meetings 
conducted by the respective district authorities in connection with 
various aspects of Child Labour. The Committee were also apprised that 
as per revised NCLP Guidelines, a District Vigilance & Monitoring 
Committee (VMC) which functions in an advisory capacity, and  
monitors the National Child Labour Project under the Chairmanship of 
local Member of Parliament. The Committee, however, find that despite 
existence of laid down guidelines, the participation of local MPs, MLAs 
and other public representatives in District Level Committees is not 
ensured. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Mini stry to issue 
advisories to State Governments to adhere to the guidelines & ensure 
that such meeting are held at regular intervals so that the feedback 
and suggestions of public representatives with regard to the aspects 
related to child labour could be gainfully utilized. 

93 
 
(xiv) Vocational Training to Adolescents 
2.189  The Committee were apprised that under the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship, there are no vocational training 
programme/schemes exclusively for the training of rescued adoles cent 
children. As admitted by the representative of the Ministry during oral 
evidence, the rescued adolescent children from hazardous industry 
need to be re -skilled for utilizing their services in non -hazardous 
industries. The Committee, therefore, impress  upon the Ministry to 
take up the matter regarding skilling/re -skilling of rescued adolescent 
children with the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
and devise customized/need based training programmes keeping in 
view the interest, aptitude and  skill of the rescued adolescent. The 
Committee also call upon the Ministry of Labour & Employment to 
coordinate with School Education Departments and Skill Development 
Departments of States and UTs to provide skill training to the rescued 
adolescents. 
(xv) Child Friendly Police Stations 
2.190  The Committee agree with the views of the NGOs that there 
is a need to bridge the gap between the police and children by making 
all police stations child -friendly including a dedicated corner for 
children besides int roducing child friendly approach to investigations. 
In addition, legal aid and counseling to the parents and the victim be 
provided at the police station and at the place of safety wherever 
necessary by empanelled lawyers of the DLSA/SLSA and NGOs, as laid  
down in Standard Operating Procedures. The Committee desire the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment to take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs/others concerned on priority. 
(xvi) Child Friendly Courts 
2.191  The Committee also agree with the view s of NGOs that 
there is a need to have all courts as child friendly in terms of 
infrastructure and processes including exclusive or dedicated children’s 

94 
 
courts for crimes against children, child friendly spaces and rooms in 
the courts, victim/ witness prot ection to the child and his family, etc. 
The Committee desire that the matter be taken up with the concerned 
authorities by the Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
(xvii) Financial assistance to the family of rescued child 
2.192  The Committee were apprised t hat some of the factors 
responsible for child labour include family circumstances viz. family 
not being economically empowered, earning member suffering from life 
threatening illness, marital dispute, occurrence of manmade or natural 
calamities, etc. The C ommittee feel that under such circumstances, 
the family needs to be supported through livelihood support especially 
in the case of rescued child. The Committee desire that the issue of 
economic  crisis of the family needs to be addressed to prevent the 
recurrence of incidents of child labour and for the purpose, a special 
scheme for providing financial assistance to the family of rescued child 
be formulated to provide interim financial assistance until such time 
the child receives access to economic benefits under laws, schemes and 
court orders. 
(xviii) Monitoring and Coordination Mechanism 
2.193  The Committee note that Labour is under concurrent list 
and State Governments are the important stakeholders for 
implementation of the Act in an effective manner. There is no denying 
the fact that despite existence of monitoring and coordination 
mechanism, the menace of child labour still exists. The Committee 
were apprised that the Ministry of Labour & Employment propose to 
hold Conference with States and Stakeholders to obtain inputs on 
strengthening of implementation of the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act,1986. The Committee were also 
apprised that the Ministry propose to have umbrella MoU for States on 
the issue of release, repatriation and rehabilitation of rescued child by 

95 
 
Central Government. The Committee wish to be appris ed of the 
developments made in this regard.  
2.194  The Committee also desire that steps be taken to establish 
a National Level Child Tracking Mechanism to facilitate coordination 
among the States/Centre in such a way that the monitoring at District 
level is reported to States and from there to Centre by digital mode 
through coordinated efforts of all concerned so as to facilitate 
prevention, tracing, tracking, rescue, rehabilitation and reintegration 
of the rescued children. 
 

96 
 
CHAPTER - THREE 
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION AND LITERACY (DOSEL)  
3.1 The Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSEL), Ministry 
of Education also apprised the Committee about the provisions of the Right 
of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009 and 
Samagra Shiksha and other related issues. 
(i) Mandate of Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSEL) 
3.2 The mandate of the DoSEL is to implement the provisions of the Right 
of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act , 2009 and aims to 
provide universal access to free and compulsory elementary education to the 
child, including out of school children, in the age group of 6 to 14 years.  
(ii) Provisions of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education (RTE) Act, 2009: 
3.3 The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 
2009, mandates the appropriate Government to provide free and compulsory 
elementary education to every child of the age 6 to 14 years in a 
neighbourhood school. 
3.4 Section-4 of t he Act stipulates “Where a child above six years of age 
has not been admitted in any school or though admitted, could not complete 
his or her elementary education, then, he or she shall be admitted in a class 
appropriate to his or her age; 
 Provided that where a child is directly admitted in a class appropriate 
to his or her age, then, he or she shall, in order to be at par with others, 
have a right to receive special training, in such manner, and within such 
time-limits, as may be prescribed; 
 Provided fur ther that a child so admitted to elementary education 
shall be entitled to free education till completion of elementary education 
even after fourteen years.” 
3.5 Section 10 of the RTE Act states that it shall be the duty of every 
parent or guardian to admi t or cause to be admitted his or her child or 
ward, as the case may be, for elementary education in the neighbourhood 
school.  
(iii) Enforcement Agency under the RTE Act, 2009: 
3.6 When asked about the enforcement agency under the RTE Act, 2009, 
the DoSEL replied as under:  
“Section 8 of the RTE Act mandates the appropriate Government to 
implement the provisions of the Act.  As per Section 2 of the RTE Act: 
(a) “appropriate Government” means— 

97 
 
(i) in relation to a school established, owned or controlled by t he Central 
Government, or the administrator of the Union territory, having no 
legislature, the Central Government; 
(ii) in relation to a school, other than the school referred to in sub -clause (i), 
established within the territory of— 
(A) a State, the State Government; 
(B) a Union territory having legislature, the Government of that Union 
territory” 
(iv) Provisions of Samagra Shiksha: 
3.7 The Samagra Shiksha Scheme of the Department of School Education 
and Literacy is an overarching programme for the school education sector 
extending from pre -school to class XII and aims to ensure inclusive and 
equitable quality education at all levels of school education. The Scheme has 
been aligned with the recommendations of the National Education Policy: 
2020. The children are provided free uniforms and free Textbooks in 
appropriate regional languages at elementary level. Under ‘Pradhan Mantri 
Poshan Shakti Nirman’ (PM POSHAN) one hot cooked meal in Government 
and Government aided schools is provided to students at the elementary 
level of education.  
3.8 The scheme being an integrated scheme for school education also 
aims to ensure that all children have access to quality education with an 
equitable and inclusive classroom environment which should take care of 
their diverse background, multilingual needs and different academic 
abilities, thereby making them active participants in the learning process. 
3.9 Under Samagra Shiksha financial assistance is provided as per the 
fund sharing pattern as decided by the Ministry of Finance in the ratio of 
60:40 between Centre and State for all States and Union Territories with 
Legislature except for the 8 North -Eastern States and 2 Himalayan States 
viz. Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand and UT of Jammu and Kashmir, 
where it is 90:10. It is 100% centrally sponsored for Union Territories 
without Legislature. 
3.10 Under the Samagra Shiksha Scheme, financial assistance is pr ovided 
to States and UTs for undertaking various activities to reduce number of 
Out of School Children (OoSC) including opening/strengthening of new 
schools upto senior secondary level, construction of school buildings & 
additional classrooms, setting up, up-gradation and running of Kasturba 
Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas, setting up of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose 
Avasiya Vidyalayas, free uniforms, free text books, transport allowance and 
undertaking enrolment & retention drives. Under the student oriented 
component for the children with special needs, financial assistance is 
provided for identification and assessment of children with special needs, 
aids and appliances, braille kits and books, appropriate teaching learning 
material and stipend to girl students with disability etc. 

98 
 
3.11 Further, special training for age appropriate admission of out of 
school children and residential as well as non -residential training for older 
children, seasonal hostels / residential camps, special training centres at 
worksites, transport/ escort facility are also supported as follows to bring 
out of school children to the formal schooling: 
 “Up to ₹ 6,000/- per child per annum for non-residential courses. 
 Up to ₹ 20,000/- per child per annum for residential courses. 
 The Department has also developed an online module for compiling 
the data of Out of School Children (OoSC) identified by each State/UT 
and their mappin g with Special Training Centres (STC) on the 
PRABANDH Portal (http://samagrashiksha.in). The concerned 
State/UT validates the child wise information of the identified OoSC 
and STC uploaded by the concerned Block Resource Centre of the 
State for monitoring the progress of mainstreaming of OoSC.” 
 
(v) Objectives of Samagra Shiksha Scheme 
3.12 The major objectives of Samagra Shiksha Scheme are:  
(i) Support States and UTs in implementing the recommendations of the 
National Education Policy 2020 (NEP 2020); (ii) Support States in 
implementation of Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
(RTE) Act, 2009; (iii) Focus on Early Childhood Care and Education; (iv) 
Emphasis on Foundational Literacy and Numeracy; (v) Thru st on Holistic, 
Integrated, Inclusive and activity based Curriculum and Pedagogy to impart 
21st century skills among the students; (vi) Provision of quality education 
and enhancing learning outcomes of students; (vii) Bridging Social and 
Gender Gaps in School Education; (viii) Ensuring equity and inclusion at all 
levels of school education; (ix) Strengthening and up -gradation of State 
Councils for Educational Research and Training (SCERTs)/State Institutes 
of Education and District Institutes for Education and Training (DIET) as 
nodal agency for teacher training; (x) Ensuring safe, secure and conducive 
learning environment and maintenance of standards in schooling provisions 
and (xi) Promoting vocational education. 
(vi) Achievements of Samagra Shiksha 
3.13 The Achievements of Samagra Shiksha till 30.09.2023 are as under:  
A. From 2018-19 to 2023-24 
Activities Achievement* 
(2018-19 to 2023-24) 
Number of schools upgraded 3029 
New Residential schools/hostels 237 
Number of schools strengthen including additional classrooms 97071 
Schools covered under ICT & Digital initiatives including 
Smart Schools 122757 
Schools covered under Vocational Education 8619 
Number of KGBVs upgraded from class VIII to X 351 
Number of KGBVs upgraded from class VIII to XII 2271 
Construction of separate Girls toilets 28357 
*Works completed in the Financial Year 2018-2019 till 2023-2024 
* Till 30th September, 2023, Source: PRABANDH 

99 
 
 
Samagra Shiksha: 2018-19 to 2023-24 
Activities 2018-19  2019-20 2020-21 2021-22  2022-
2023 
2023-
2024* 
No. of OoSC 
provided special 
training at 
elementary level  
(Migrant 
Children 
excluded) 
3.73 lakh 3.98 lakh 2.40 lakh 7.59 lakh 5.14 lakh 
  
2.20 lakh 
Children 
provided 
transport and 
escort facility 
4.24 lakh 6.60 lakh 2.35 lakh 6.66 lakh 8.70  lakh 
1.41 lakh 
Children covered 
under Section 
12(1)(c) of the 
RTE Act 
16.76 
lakh 21.58 lakh 32.34 
lakh 
25.40 
lakh 
21.56 
lakh 
29.11 
lakh 
Free uniforms 7.09 cr 6.68 cr 6.83 cr 6.04 cr 7.24 cr 1.82 cr 
Free textbooks 8.85cr 8.64 cr 8.84 cr 9.44 cr 8.34 cr 3.72 cr 
Remedial 
teaching 
74.4 
Lakhs 1.76 cr 1.44 cr 1.23 cr 3.86  cr 1.66 cr 
Teachers trained 14.83 
lakh 29.11 lakh 14.57 
lakh 
25.69 
lakh 7.73 lakh 4.87 lakh 
No. of Schools 
provided Self -
defence training 
to girls 
30327 119770 83177 119283 178698 
38398 
CWSN girls 
given   stipend 3.75 lakh 3.01 lakh 3.64 lakh 4.02 lakh 3.71 lakh 1.90 lakh 
Special 
educators funded 
23443 23950 23276 25041 25373 17032 
* Till 30th September, 2023, Source: PRABANDH 
 
The fund released and expenditure incurred under Samagra Shiksha is as under (₹ In Cr) 
Year Release Expenditure 
2018-19 29239.95 44875.43 
2019-20 32326.82 48116.28 
2020-21 27759.50 45586.12 
2021-22 24848.54 43583.44 
2022-23 32154.15 51983.90 
2023-24  9393.37 10832.67 
Note: Expenditure include Expenditures  against funds released by Central 
Government, State Share, unspent balances of previous years etc. 
 
(vii) Budget for Child-Related Activities: 
3.14 On being asked about the budget allocated to DoSEL during FY 2022 -
23 and 2023-24 for child labour related activities and the mechanism put in 
place for release and utilisation of funds, the DoSEL responded as under:   
“The child labour related activities do not fall within the administrative 
domain of the Ministry of Education. However, appropriate Governments 

100 
 
under the RTE Act are committed to provide free and compulsory education 
to all children falling in the age group of 6 to 14 years... 
The BE 2022-23 and 2023-24 for Samagra Shiksha is ₹ 37805.07 crore and 
₹ 37453.37 crore respectively.  As per norms of the  Samagra Shiksha 
Scheme, the annual plans are prepared by the States and UTs based on 
their requ irements and priority and this is reflected in their respective 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWP&B) Proposals. These plans are then 
appraised and approved/estim ated by the Project Approval Board (PAB) in 
the Department of School Education & Literacy in consultation with the 
States and UTs as per the programmatic and financial norms of the scheme, 
and physical and financial progress of the State for the interventi ons 
approved earlier. Further, the funds are released on the basis of submission 
of Audited Accounts, Utilization Certificate, physical and financial progress 
and other documents as prescribed under the Financial Management & 
Procurement (FMP) Manual of Samagra Shiksha.” 
3.15 When asked whether the money is transferred to children under the 
various provisions of the Samagra Shiksha Abhiyaan (SSA) completely 
through DBT mode or released to them through various Institutes, the 
DoSEL replied as under:          
“As per the directions of Ministry of Finance O.M. dated 21.03.2021, the 
central share is released to the State Treasury who in turn transfer it to the 
Single Nodal Agency implementing the Samagra Shiksha Scheme in the 
State who again in turn transfer it to the Schools (last implementing agency).  
Some states are transferring the funds through DBT for various child centric 
interventions. However, in order to enhance the direct outreach of the 
scheme, all child centric interventions will be provided directl y to the 
students through DBT mode on an IT based platform over a period of time.” 
(viii) Financial Support to States/UTs for providing Special Training to 
Out of School Children 
3.16 With regard to the process of special training, the representative of the 
Ministry during evidence deposed as under: 
“Section 4 of the RTE Act provides for special training to Out of School 
Children in the age group of six to 14 years so that they can be 
mainstreamed into the age-appropriate classes. Purpose of special training is 
to mainstream them into the age -appropriate classes and to integrate them 
academically and emotionally. 
  The process of special training is like this. After identification, the 
children are enrolled to the nearby elementary schools. They are given all the 
child related entitlements. Then, we assess them whether they need to 
undergo a special training or whether they can go directly because the 
children who were already in schools and have dropped out may be brought 
back into the class directly, wherea s children who have never enrolled, they 
may require a special training. Then, we do a special training in residential 
and non-residential modes. Then, assessment and evaluation of the children 
is done periodically, and then they are enrolled in the age -appropriate 
classes. Once the child is enrolled, the educational and child entitlement 
support is continued to be given. So, this is the process that we adopt for 
identification and mainstreaming for Out of School Children.” 

101 
 
3.17 On being asked about the specific measures taken by the Department 
to cover ‘out of school' children of Nomadic Tribes while undertaking door -
to-door survey under SSA; the methodology being followed for their 
identification; and whether hostel facility is made available to them, the 
DoSEL submitted as under:  
 “Under the Samagra Shiksha scheme, the annual plans are prepared by the 
States and UTs based on their requirements and priority and this is reflected 
in their respective Annual Work Plan and Budget (A WP&B) Proposals. 
During the appraisal of AWP&B proposals, all States and UTs are requested 
to conduct household survey annually for the purpose of identification of 
Out of School Children (OoSC). This includes dropout children and never 
enrolled. The ident ified OoSC are brought back to school and assessed for 
their learning gaps. Also, in order to provide universal access of education to 
all the children, financial assistance is provided to all States and UTs under 
Management Monitoring Media Evaluation and  Research (MMMER) 
component of the scheme for various evaluation and research activities, 
including survey for identification of OoSC. 
In order to ensure universal enrolment and schooling facilities in areas 
which are sparsely populated with low density of  population (mostly tribal 
areas) where opening of schools may not be viable and for children in urban 
areas who are in need of care and protection, MoE  under Samagra Shiksha 
provides financial assistance for opening and running of Residential Schools, 
and Hostels in hilly terrain, small and sparsely populated areas for children 
without adult protection who are in need of shelter and care, in addition to 
the provision of regular schools.  The residential schools/hostels funded 
under Samagra Shiksha have be en named as “Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose 
residential schools/hostels”. 
The residential facilities are also provided to child labour rescued, migrant 
children who belong to poor landless families, children without adult 
protection, separated from their famil ies, internally displaced persons, and 
children from the areas of social and armed conflict and natural calamities.  
In this regard, preference is given to EBBs, LWE affected districts SFDs and 
the 115 Aspirational districts identified by NITI Aayog. 
In th ese residential schools and hostels, in addition to regular school 
curriculum, interventions for all round development of children such as 
provision of Specific Skill Training, physical self -defense, medical care, 
community participation, monthly stipend a re also made available to 
children. These residential schools and hostels follow the same norms as 
followed by KGBVs and aspire to achieve the standards set by the KGBVs.” 
3.18 In this context, the representative of the DoSEL during evidence 
deposed as under:  
“Our unit will conduct a house -to-house survey. There is a standing 
instruction for migrating nomadic children that they will get admission in 
government school without documentation where they will be found.  The 
only thing we will ask for is some for m of identity, the name of his father or 
mother and they will be admitted in a class as per their age.” 
 

102 
 
3.19 On being asked about the functioning of Kasturba Gandhi Balika 
Vidyalayas, DoSEL replied as under:  
 “Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya (KGBV) is a  provision under Samagra 
Shiksha, a flagship scheme of Department of School Education and Literacy.  
KGBVs are residential schools from Class VI to XII for girls belonging to 
disadvantaged groups such as SC, ST, OBC, Minority and Below Poverty 
Line (BPL). The KGBVs are set up in Educationally Backward Blocks. The 
objective behind establishing KGBVs is to ensure access and quality 
education to girls from disadvantaged groups by setting up residential 
schools and to reduce gender gaps at all levels of school education. Target 
Group for KGBVs is the Girls in the age group of 10 -18 years aspiring to 
study in classes VI to VII belonging to SC, ST, OBC, Minority Communities 
and BPL families. As on 30.09.2023, a total of 5639 KGBVs have been 
sanctioned in the count ry.  Out of it, 5074 KGBVs are operational with the 
enrolment of 691304 girls.” 
3.20 On being asked to provide the State -wise information regarding 
financial assistance sought by various States for ‘out of school’ children and 
the amount released during the last three years, the DoSEL replied as 
under:  
 “As per the information provided/up loaded by the States and UTs on 
the PRABANDH portal, financial outlay/assistance sought by various States, 
during the last three years,  for ‘out of school’ children is as under: 
Statewise Status of Financial Proposal for Special Training (2020-21 to 2022-23) 
S.No State 
Proposal 2020-21 Proposal 2021-22 Proposal 2022-23 
Physical Financial   (Rs 
in Lacs) 
Physical Financial   (Rs in 
Lacs) 
Physical Financial   (Rs in 
Lacs) 
1 Andaman And Nicobar 
Islands 
    139 8.34 548 32.88 
2 Andhra Pradesh 60205 8815.568 62328 6478.937 41530 3637.615 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 996 177.5 1531 243.2 238 36.4 
4 Assam 128707 8264.005 135700 7689.87 139123 7382.445 
5 Bihar 62803 2471.39 348131 12078.18 135501 4902.825 
6 Chandigarh 3681 211.005 4157 237 3646 209.205 
7 Chhattisgarh 10150 664.855 14474 737.96 6838 316.615 
8 Delhi 25500 1530 26346 1580.76 28880 1732.8 
9 Dadra And Nagar Haveli 124 7.44 875 52.5 384 23.04 
10 Goa 228 11.4 127 7.62 252 15.12 
11 Gujarat 74518 6936.85 64719 6167.47 60374 5852.63 
12 Haryana 23373 740.29 30693 1408 17802 803.685 
13 Himachal Pradesh 4017 220.29 3842 194.85 3158 166.515 
14 Jammu And Kashmir 49834 2990.04 52525 3151.5 40856 2413.14 
15 Jharkhand 12854 1138.46 195865 4102.615 47103 1190.385 
16 Karnataka 5353 432.37 6455 439.26 3849 11.95 
17 Kerala 3164 189.84 1811 108.66 3402 204.12 
18 Ladakh 150 9 28 1.68     

103 
 
19 Lakshadweep             
20 Madhya Pradesh 16195 2534.5 21192 2579.55 15680 2855.25 
21 Maharashtra 84753 6235.252 68956 3767.04 56011 3045 
22 Manipur 4975 507.165 5589 563.88 5006 648.82 
23 Meghalaya 10963 679.2 10287 617.22 8940 536.4 
24 Mizoram 4425 499.86 3983 390.52 4199 421.205 
25 Nagaland 1827 264.18 1726 103.56 645 106.32 
26 Odisha 11423 1237.18 9720 910.1 10788 1113.1 
27 Puducherry 35 2.1 42 2.52 45 2.7 
28 Punjab 2593 90.755 3807 209.385 2002 90.09 
29 Rajasthan 17800 530.25 21500 825 17700 517.6 
30 Sikkim 87 5.22 120 7.2 96 5.76 
31 Tamil Nadu 19627 1554.16 17493 1395.22 15407 1165.8 
32 Telangana 8980 662.6 10006 587.226 12004 577.12 
33 Tripura 5577 345.9 6715 396.88 6824 391.7 
34 Uttar Pradesh 107190 4823.55 247719 11147.355 250493 11272.185 
35 Uttarakhand 3616 181.1 3545 179.94 3390 167.995 
36 West Bengal 10507 630.42 9279 556.74 7854 471.24 
Grand Total 776230 55593.695 1391425 68927.738 950568 52319.655 
Source : PRABANDH 
 
3.21 With regard to the details of the States which have opted to provide 
residential and non-residential training, the DoSEL replied as under:  
PAB Approval for Special Training to Out of School Children in Residential and Non Residential Mode (2021-22) 
(Rs. in Lakh) 
S. No. State 
Residential Mode (RST) Non Residential Mode 
(NRST) Grand Total 
Phy. Fin. Phy. Fin. Phy. Fin. 
1 A&N Island     63 2.84 63 2.84 
2 Andhra Pradesh 16501 808.25 9359 412.47 25860 1220.72 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 1081 48.65 450 20.25 1531 68.90 
4 Assam 13450 1102.89 114281 4906.37 127731 6009.26 
5 Bihar     348131 12078.18 348131 12078.18 
6 Chandigarh UT     4157 187.08 4157 187.08 
7 Chhattisgarh 2705 245.25 9559 271.71 12264 516.96 
8 Daman & Dadra     875 39.38 875 39.38 
9 Delhi     26346 1580.76 26346 1580.76 
10 Goa     127 5.72 127 5.72 
11 Gujarat 28050 2102.25 26740 1143.30 54790 3245.55 
12 Haryana 173 10.38 29097 1309.37 29270 1319.75 
13 Himachal Pradesh     3842 194.85 3842 194.85 
14 Jammu & Kashmir     52525 3151.50 52525 3151.50 
15 Jharkhand 2227 87.02 193638 3812.58 195865 3899.60 
16 Karnataka 4023 407.90 199 5.47 4222 413.37 

104 
 
17 Kerala     1811 81.50 1811 81.50 
18 Ladakh     28 0.84 28 0.84 
19 Lakshdweep             
20 Madhya Pradesh 9150 411.75 4997 224.87 14147 636.62 
21 Maharashtra 56612 3396.72 12344 246.88 68956 3643.60 
22 Manipur 2975 133.88 2614 117.64 5589 251.52 
23 Meghalaya     10287 462.92 10287 462.92 
24 Mizoram 1689 101.34 1951 87.80 3640 189.14 
25 Nagaland     1726 25.89 1726 25.89 
26 Odisha 4463 446.30 1040 31.20 5503 477.50 
27 Puducherry     42 1.89 42 1.89 
28 Punjab     3807 171.32 3807 171.32 
29 Rajasthan 2000 105.00 17000 375.00 19000 480.00 
30 Sikkim 838 1.71 82 3.69 920 5.40 
31 Tamilnadu 2016 126.72 14677 631.23 16693 757.95 
32 Telangana 3322 90.00 7006 79.41 10328 169.41 
33 Tripura 211 23.99 6182 237.87 6393 261.86 
34 Uttar Pradesh 43   247719 11147.36 247762 11147.36 
35 Uttarakhand 50 4.19 3129 125.07 3179 129.25 
36 West Bengal     9279 417.56 9279 417.56 
Grand Total 151579 9654.17 1165110 43591.70 1316689 53245.87 
 
3.22 For 2022-23, the Ministry, subsequently, furnished the following data:  
PAB Approval for Special Training to Out of School Children (2022-23)  
Sl. 
No 
State   
Physical Financial 
(₹ In 
lakh) 
1 Andaman And Nicobar Islands 19 0.29 
2 Andhra Pradesh 36775 3167.28 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 183 25.40 
4 Assam 87308 4532.12 
5 Bihar 122480 4316.88 
6 Chandigarh 3146 186.71 
7 Chhattisgarh 6266 291.80 
8 Delhi 13171 790.26 
9 Dnd - Dnh 384 17.28 
10 Goa 186 11.16 
11 Gujarat 56438 5450.75 
12 Haryana 19481 876.65 
13 Himachal Pradesh 3075 161.54 
14 Jammu And Kashmir 40856 2413.14 
15 Jharkhand 4672 144.96 
16 Karnataka 126 11.70 
17 Kerala 2588 155.28 
18 Madhya Pradesh 8081 1335.45 

105 
 
19 Maharashtra 37705 1974.06 
20 Manipur 3964 498.38 
21 Meghalaya 8462 507.72 
22 Mizoram 4076 412.75 
23 Nagaland 623 48.53 
24 Odisha 9251 1024.01 
25 Puducherry 45 2.70 
26 Punjab 1981 89.15 
27 Rajasthan 17013 492.95 
28 Sikkim 74 4.44 
29 Tamil Nadu 10021 892.44 
30 Telangana 7175 432.25 
31 Tripura 6824 391.70 
32 Uttar Pradesh 250493 11272.19 
33 Uttarakhand 2911 143.79 
34 West Bengal 4521 271.26 
 Total  770374 42346.92 
Source: PRABANDH   
 
3.23 On being asked when was the amount of financial assistance of  
Rs. 6,000 per child per annum and Rs. 20,000 per child per annum for non -
residential and residential courses respectively fixed; whether this amount is 
sufficient or needs to be enhanced; how m uch disbursement State -wise on 
this count has been made during the last three years, the DoSEL replied as 
under:  
“MoE, under the Samagra Shiksha scheme, provides financial support to 
States and UTs for providing special training to Out of School Children.  The 
amount of Rs. 6000 per child per annum and Rs. 20,000 per child per 
annum for non -residential and residential courses (class 1 st to 8 th) 
respectively which was available under the erstwhile centrally sponsored 
scheme of SSA, has been continued for non  residential and residential (upto 
class XIIth)  under Samagra Shiksha also. The state -wise expenditure on 
Special Training as reported by States and UTs during the last three years is 
as under: 
(Rs. in Lakh) 
Status of Expenditure on Special Training of Out of School Children as reported 
by States and UTs on PRABANDH Portal 
S. 
No, 
State  2019-2020 2020-2021 2021-2022 2022-
23 
1 Andaman And Nicobar 
Islands 
    2.84  
2 Andhra Pradesh 1195.442 163.355 69.57 327 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 155.18     25 
4 Assam 4836.33 3535.115 3700.696 3596 
5 Bihar 867.489 463.573 1929.412 1063 
6 Chandigarh 181.204 189.76 156.81 183 
7 Chhattisgarh 2.04 15.71 237.27 110 
8 Delhi 1344.77 1474.751 1518.614 768 

106 
 
9 Dnd - Dnh 5.484 3.36 32.414 15 
10 Goa 9.35 3.9 5.72  
11 Gujarat 4671.964 1108.266 1543.36 2868 
12 Haryana 553.18 488.1 796 284 
13 Himachal Pradesh 288.73 129.689 159.7 162 
14 Jammu And Kashmir 1166.48 1984.92 809.56 1311 
15 Jharkhand 183.129 142.416 1775.545 107 
16 Karnataka 184.79 61.111 191.2 11 
17 Kerala 75.586 132.29 81.484 126 
18 Lakshadweep        
19 Ladakh        
20 Madhya Pradesh 394.44 5.778 10 43 
21 Maharashtra 1419.486 2742.09 37.833 1718 
22 Manipur 738.46 366.28 251.52 318 
23 Meghalaya 142.247 181.848 79.17 200 
24 Mizoram 326.052 112.827 55.55 330 
25 Nagaland 62.145 10.85 25.89 39 
26 Odisha 1178.05 4.95 9.57 450 
27 Puducherry 1.767 2.1 1.89 3 
28 Punjab 134.925 90.755 73.845  
29 Rajasthan 147.7 7.039 53.871 124 
30 Sikkim   5.22   2 
31 Tamil Nadu 1420.3 645.529 721.93 877 
32 Telangana 306.27 14.5   4 
33 Tripura 272.64 266.2 261.86 240 
34 Uttar Pradesh 573.878   2461.233 1667 
35 Uttarakhand 104.26 90.808 94.975 51 
36 West Bengal 11.788 5.23 217.56 48 
  Grand Total  22955.56 14448.32 17366.89 17070 
Source: PRABANDH Portal  
 
3.24 The DoSEL did not provide any information regarding the date from 
which financial support is provided to States/UTs. The DoSEL, however, 
stated that the amount was fixed as per the norms of erstwhile Sarva 
Shiksha  Abhiyan (SSA).  
(ix) Out of School children/drop-out rate 
3.25.  When asked about the State -wise data regarding the school drop -outs 
and the children not enrolled in schools, the DoSEL furnished the following 
data:  
As per Unified District Information System for Education + (UDISE +)  the 
State-wise dropout rate for 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 is as under: 
S. No. Annual Average Dropout Rate 
  2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
 State/UT Elementary Secondary Elementary Secondary Elementary Secondary 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
0.0 15.7 1.6 7.0 0.6 5.0 
2 Andhra Pradesh 0.0 14.8 - 16.7 0.1 16.3 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 6.6 34.3 7.8 10.1 8.4 11.7 

107 
 
4 Assam 4.0 32.2 3.8 30.3 7.0 20.3 
5 Bihar 4.5 21.4 - 17.6 0.3 20.5 
6 Chandigarh 0.0 4.7 - - - - 
7 Chhattisgarh 2.0 18.2 1.9 13.4 2.0 9.7 
8 Dadra & Nagar 
and Daman & Diu  
0.0 42.2 3.2 17.7 - 9.5 
9 Delhi 0.0 13.9 - 6.1 - 4.8 
10 Goa 0.1 10.2 1.2 5.7 - 9.0 
11 Gujarat 2.6 23.7 2.3 23.3 1.7 17.9 
12 Haryana 0.2 13.3 2.0 10.8 - 5.9 
13 Himachal Pradesh 0.7 7.2 1.7 7.6 - 1.5 
14 Jammu And 
Kashmir 
3.7 16.7 4.0 3.7 3.7 6.0 
15 Jharkhand 7.0 16.6 4.1 13.0 2.5 9.3 
16 Karnataka 1.6 16.8 1.4 16.6 - 14.6 
17 Kerala 0.0 7.9 - 7.1 - 5.5 
18 Ladakh 3.0 11.4 3.4 3.4 4.6 4.9 
19 Lakshadweep 0.0 6.7 - - 1.1 - 
20 Madhya Pradesh 2.0 23.2 3.2 23.8 5.2 10.1 
21 Maharashtra 0.4 15.2 1.2 11.2 0.6 10.7 
22 Manipur 7.3 9.2 7.1 9.4 10.8 1.3 
23 Meghalaya 7.3 22.2 7.9 27.6 10.1 21.7 
24 Mizoram 6.1 20.4 7.1 20.0 5.1 11.9 
25 Nagaland 4.6 21.2 5.3 23.6 4.7 17.5 
26 Odisha 2.2 23.6 - 16.0 2.4 27.3 
27 Puducherry 0.0 7.9 - 6.9 3.2 6.3 
28 Punjab 0.0 1.6 - 9.0 3.9 17.2 
29 Rajasthan 2.4 12.3 1.5 8.9 3.8 7.6 
30 Sikkim 0.0 23.2 - 21.6 1.0 11.9 
31 Tamil Nadu 0.8 9.6 0.6 6.4 - 4.5 
32 Telangana 0.0 12.3 - 13.9 0.8 13.7 
33 Tripura 2.6 26.7 4.7 26.7 2.3 8.3 
34 Uttar Pradesh 2.5 14.4 2.9 12.5 2.7 9.7 
35 Uttarakhand 2.4 8.4 1.9 8.3 1.5 5.0 
36 West Bengal 0.0 13.8 - 13.3 4.0 18.0 
 All India 1.9 16.1 1.3 14.0 2.0 12.6 
Source UDISE+; Negative dropout rate have not been reported. 
3.26 With regard to the system of ‘Out of School’ children, the 
representative of DoSEL during evidence deposed as under: 
“”In Samagra Shiksha Scheme there is a very important component of 
access and equity. There are out -of-school children and dropouts student s. 
Out-of-school children are of two types. One is those who have never been 
enrolled and others are those who come to school and  they get dropouts of 
schools for various reasons. Out of school children have to be identified and 
then they have to be mainst reamed in schools. This is a part of Samagra 
Shiksha Abhiyan. The state government conducts a house -to-house survey 
every year for the identification of such children. Thereafter, the 
mainstreaming process is done outside the school first, in which we also  
take the help of many civil society organizations and apart from that, the 

108 
 
schools and states also support a lot. After mainstreaming them, they are 
admitted to schools on the grade appropriate level. So, this is the system of 
'out of school’. We also track it.” 
3.27 With regard to the provisions contained in National Education Policy, 
2020, the representatives further supplemented as under: 
 “Secondly, both types of out of school children should be identified and 
mainstreamed. The third thing is to track the children once they are in 
school. This means that when the child has come to the first class, tracking 
will be made to find out whether they are promoted to second or third class 
or not. In that tracking system, we will access their learning outcomes. 
These are provisioned in NEP." 
3.28 When asked about the target group in OoSC, the representative stated 
as under: 
 “The target group in OoSC is the ‘never enrolled’ and ‘drop out’ children. 
They could be of any category, … they can be child labour also. Mo de of 
special training is residential as well as non -residential. The training is 
imparted either in the school premises itself if the children are directly 
brought to the school or it can be done outside the school in case of 
residential mode.” 
3.29 In th e context of tracking of children, the representative stated as 
under: 
“There is a query about Tracking. Right now we are tracking out -of-school 
children on the management portal, tracking of the rest of the children will 
take time. But we are committed to it." 
3.30 When asked as to how do the Department identify ‘out of school' 
children in urban areas; specific steps taken to conduct a door -to-door 
survey in urban areas especially in slums and bottlenecks/constraints faced 
by the Department in conducting s urveys in such areas, the DoSEL 
responded as under:  
“Education is in the Concurrent List of the Constitution and majority of the 
schools come under the domain of the State/UT Governments. State & UT 
Governments conduct door -to-door survey to identify the Out of School 
Children.” 
(x) District-wise details of OoSC 
3.31  When asked about availability of District -wise details of OoSC, the 
representatives during evidence submitted as under: 
“...We can do coalition district -wise. We have schools as per their 
locations.” 
(xi) ‘Working Children’ and ‘Main Working Children’ 
3.32 On a pointed query as to how do the Department distinguish between 
‘working children’ and ‘main working children’ and while undertaking the 

109 
 
next survey under SSA, do the Department propos e to add a column in this 
regard, the DoSEL replied as under:  
“Presently, there is no such distinction.  However, it is proposed to improvise 
the survey format of out of school children to add new entries with reference 
to the ‘working children’ and ‘main  working children’ in consultation with 
M/o Labour & Employment and States & UTs.” 
3.33  In response to a specific query regarding addition of another column 
in the survey format, whether the child is working or not, the 
representatives of DoSEL during evidence submitted as under: 
“Sir, we have actually agreed to that and we are going to do that. 
That is a commitment, Sir. 
Sir, I want to clarify that we do not have wherewithal to go from industry to 
industry or various other sites where the child labour is engaged. So, we are 
going to do house to house survey in which we are including this column, in 
which, if there is a child who is engaged in child labour, who is dropped out 
of out of school for any reason, would be identified and they would be 
mainstreamed. That is our mandate. We have been doing it. But in the past, 
we did not have a separate column, which we will be adding now. That is the 
only difference.” 
3.34 In this context, the representative further supplemented as under: 
“As for working children and main working children, we will now instruct the 
States because this is something which was not brought to our notice by 
Ministry of Labour and Employment.” 
(xii) Special Training to Teachers  
3.35 When asked whether any Special Training is being provid ed to the 
teachers who conduct survey under SSA, the DoSEL replied as under: 
“Education is in the Concurrent List of the Constitution and majority of the 
schools come under the domain of the State/ UT Governments. States & UT 
Governments conduct door to do or survey for identification of out of school 
children and providing training for the same rests with the appropriate 
government.” 
3.36 In this context, the representatives of the DoSEL during evidence 
deposed as under: 
 “Our Education Officers or teachers  do not have any wherewithal or 
expertise to identify the child labour. Even they do not have the mandate to 
do it. So, that has to be done by the Labour Officers.  That is what has been 
clarified by the Ministry of Labour and Employment.” 
(xiii) Rescue Unit for OoSC 
3.37 With regard to existence of rescue unit for OoSC, the representative 
stated as under: 

110 
 
“An Hon’ble  Member had asked, "Is there any rescue unit for out -of-school 
children? We don't have, we depend on the Ministry of Labour for this." 
(xiv) Student Registry 
3.38 On specifically being asked as to whether any Nodal Officer has been 
appointed for tracking the rescued children; how often the Officer interacts 
with the States and the periodicity of furnishing the information by the 
States, the DoSEL replied as under:  
 “To curtail dropout rate and ensuring universal access to education at all 
levels, NEP recommends achieving universal participation in school by 
carefully tracking students, as well as their learning levels, student registry 
by the States. Child tracking at national level is yet to be rolled out, however, 
around 20 States/ UTs have prepared Student registry with all relevant 
details. 
 Child labour is the mandate of MoLE. The mandate further extends to 
the identification, rescue/ with drawal of the child, special training/ 
mainstreaming and rehabilitation. This mandate is governed/regulated by 
the extant Acts and Rules of MoLE.” 
3.39 When asked about the Student Registry, the representative during 
evidence apprised the Committee as under: 
“The National Education Policy has provided that now there is a student 
registry i.e. we have to track every child who are in our system.  This year we 
are developing IT software for the rest of the children and will be completed 
by February 2023 and af ter that we will include states. Some states have 
developed their own student registry. There are 26 crore children in the data 
available with us. We collect data at the Unified District Information System 
for School Education annually. It includes total e nrollment of students, 
number of schools and teachers etc. According to the data collected in this 
regard, there are about 26 crore children in schools. We observed that 20 
states have created their student registry and about 200 million children 
are being tracked in the states. Right now, as I said, it will take some time to 
develop the IT portal and will be onboarding from next year. We will not 
demand student-wise data, but we will take aggregated data from the state 
and do tracking. We also have data fr om previous years, if you ask, we will 
share it state-wise." 
3.40 With regard to the State -wise data regarding ‘Student Registry’ being 
maintained by States/UTs, the DoSEL responded as under:  
 
Student Registry 
State/UT Government Govt. 
Aided 
Private 
& 
Others 
Total Enrolment 
 (I-XII) 
Number of 
Students 
covered 
% of 
Students 
covered 
Uttar Pradesh Y X X 4,53,62,059  1,68,48,709  37.1 
Kerala Y Y X 58,42,611  41,38,992  70.8 
Bihar Y Y X  2,46,75,490             1,97,66,100  80.1 
Tripura Y Y X                  7,03,132                   5,87,087  83.5 

111 
 
West Bengal Y X X            1,69,91,969             1,48,53,227  87.4 
Maharashtra Y Y Y            2,21,74,625             2,21,74,625  100 
Rajasthan Y Y Y 1,67,75,668  1,67,75,668  100 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Y Y Y 1,57,80,097  1,57,80,097  100 
Tamil Nadu Y Y Y            1,20,57,823             1,20,57,823  100 
Karnataka Y Y Y            1,15,44,885             1,15,44,885  100 
Gujarat Y Y Y            1,14,81,607             1,14,81,607  100 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Y Y Y                81,36,933                 81,36,933  100 
Odisha Y Y Y                76,86,894                 76,86,894  100 
Jharkhand Y Y Y                74,89,137                 74,89,137  100 
Assam Y Y Y                70,15,898                 70,15,898  100 
Telangana Y Y Y                66,65,475                 66,65,475  100 
Chhattisgarh Y Y Y                56,77,203                 56,77,203  100 
Haryana Y Y Y                56,53,992                 56,53,992  100 
Punjab Y Y Y                54,75,865                 54,75,865  100 
Delhi Y Y Y 41,80,617  41,80,617  100 
 
3.41 The DoSEL, subsequently stated that w.e.f. 2022 -23, they have 
started collecting child wise information under UDISE+ in order to track 
students to reduce dropouts and to track their Learning Outcomes. The 
State/UT wise number of enrolments reported in 2022-23 is as under:- 
Enrolment of students, 2022-23: All Management 
India/State/ UT Total (Pre-Primary to 
Higher Secondary) 
India 251791722 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands 75107 
Andhra Pradesh 8622192 
Arunachal Pradesh 325018 
Assam 7116900 
Bihar 24543698 
Chandigarh 270310 
Chhattisgarh 5764210 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu 139967 
Delhi 4628514 
Goa 309594 
Gujarat 11499580 
Haryana 5727319 
Himachal Pradesh 1419388 
Jammu and Kashmir 2614335 
Jharkhand 7209261 
Karnataka 12398654 
Kerala 6185360 
Ladakh 58841 
Lakshadweep 12587 
Madhya Pradesh 15241680 
Maharashtra 21150066 
Manipur 655620 
Meghalaya 1074966 

112 
 
Mizoram 293203 
Nagaland 415655 
Odisha 7649925 
Puducherry 251481 
Punjab 5915223 
Rajasthan 17707162 
Sikkim 128204 
Tamil Nadu 12880110 
Telangana 7027086 
Tripura 694539 
Uttar Pradesh 41672205 
Uttarakhand 2357204 
West Bengal 17756558 
      *UDISE+ 2022-23 (Provisional) 
 
(xv) Integration with Department of Women and Child Welfare 
3.42  The representative during evidence further stated as under: 
"I also want to mention that we have our own integration with Department of 
Women and Child Welfare. Adolescent girls come to the Anganwadi centre 
for nutrition like folic acid etc. They found that some of them were out of 
school. We have had meetings with all the States giving joint instructions, 
Take list from Anganwadi and mainstream them this  year. We are 
integrating them." 
(xvi) Role of elected public representatives 
3.43 When asked about the role of elected public representatives under 
SSA and whether there is any proposal to involve public representatives at 
the district level, the DoSEL replied as under:  
“Section 21 of the RTE Act provides for School Management 
Committee/School Management Development Committee consisting of the 
elected representatives of the local authority, parents or guardians of 
children admitted in such school and teachers.” 
(xvii) Awareness campaigns 
3.44 When asked about the concrete awareness camp aigns launched by 
the Department under SSA to educate the masses on the provisions of RTE 
Act, SSA and Schemes taken up for the prohibition of child labour, the 
DoSEL responded as under:  
 “Under Samagra Shiksha, financial assistance is provided to the 
States and UTs for Community Mobilization activities@ ₹ 1500 per school for 
Government Schools. The Community Mobilisation activities are held to 
enhance Community participation and monitoring for universal access, 
equity and quality. Workshops/Lectures/Progr ammes are done for creating 
Awareness on RTE Act, Learning Outcomes etc. Training to School 
Management Committee (SMC)/School Management and Development 
Committee (SMDC) is provided for their Capacity building. The financial 

113 
 
norms for the same are up to ₹ 3000 per school for Government schools. 
Department of School Education & Literacy, in coordination with State 
Governments and UT Administrations, has been observing Swachhata 
Pakhwada from the year 2016 f rom1st -15th September every year. The 
schools and students across all states and UTs have been participating 
whole-heartedly in the Swachhata Pakhwada every year. In Swachhata 
Pakhwada 2023, more than 5.9 lakh schools have participated with 7.32 
crore students pledging for cleanliness in the country. 
2. The Ministry regularly undertakes extensive print & audiovisual 
media campaigns, nation - wide awareness programmes including Kala 
Jathas, Road shows, Public meetings, Padayatras; advertisements on railway 
tickets and bus panels etc. to generate awareness. 
3. The Department organizes a teacher’s fest, ‘Shikshak Parv’ every year. 
In 2022 Shikshak Parv discussed various recommendations of National 
Education Policy (NEP)2020 and its implementation strategies. Suggestions 
received during the Parv were in the deve lopment of an indicative and 
suggestive NEP Implementation Plan for School Education, called ‘Students’ 
and Teachers’ Holistic Advancement through Quality Education (SARTHAQ)’. 
In 2021 ‘Shikshak Parv - generated awareness among teaching community 
about the implementation of the New Education Policy. Shikshak Parv 2022 
marked the NEP 2020 as a key initiative to help realise Prime Minister’s 
Panch Pran vision of developed India by 2047.  
4. A 2 years NEP 2020 Implementation booklet covering various 
initiatives undertaken across all levels of school education was released in 
November 2022. The booklet highlighted the efforts made by the Ministry for 
the implementation of NEP 2020 in a mission mode and accomplishment of 
some milestones with a view to transform the school education sector. 
5. A campaign with theme#NEP2020InAction, was run on Twitter from 
Dec 1, 2021 onwards. It highlighted Ministry’s various schemes/ initiatives 
including those targeted at the rural India. Posts with this hashtag reached 
55,67,126 people till 28th February, 2022. 
The Department launched a 100 days Nation Wide Reading Campaign called 
Padhe Bharat Badhe Bharat starting from 1st January 2022 so that each 
child learns to read with comprehension, in a joyful manner, as per the 
vision of National Education Policy (NEP) 2020. Social media posts with 
#100DaysReadingCampaign had reached 76,14,646 people and #Padhe 
Bharat reached 75,93,859 people. 
6. Coinciding with the 3rd anniversary of National Education Policy 
2020, Hon’ble Prime Minister inaugurated Akhil Bhartiya Shiksha Samagam 
at Bharat Mandapam on 29th July, 2023. This two -day Samagam event 
provided a platform for experts of schools, higher educational institutions, 
and skilling institutions to discuss, deliberate and share insights, s trategies, 
success stories and best practices in implementing the NEP 2020. 
7. A 75 days Bharatiya Bhasha Utsav was launched on 28th September 
2023 alongwith Technology & Bharatiya Bhasha Summit.” 
 

114 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
(i) Merger of National Child Labour Project (NCLP) with Samagra Shiksha 
Abhiyan (SSA) 
3.45 The Committee note that under the National Child Labour Project 
(NCLP) Scheme,  which was sanctioned in 324 Districts and operational in 59 
Districts as on 31.03.2021, the District Project Socie ty (DPS) at District level 
is required to conduct the baseline survey to identify child labour and based 
on the number of child labours identified and rescued from the survey, 
Special Training Centres (STCs) are opened for rehabilitation of the child 
labour in the age group of 9 -14 years, who are enrolled in these Centres for a 
maximum period of 2 years. These Centres are operated by NGOs, Civil 
Society Organisations, etc. or by the District Project Society directly 
themselves. Further, the onus of selectio n/identification of implementing 
agencies to operate the STC lies with District Project Society. These STCs 
provide bridge education to children before they mainstreamed into formal 
education system. As stated by the Ministry of Labour and Employment, afte r 
mainstreaming of the children enrolled in the STCs under NCLP, the NCLP 
STC will cease to be operational but District Project Society will continue to 
be functional for a period of six months after closure of STCs. The Committee 
further note that no new permission after 31.03.2021 has been given by the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for opening STCs under NCLP after its 
merger with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan Scheme. The children enrolled at the 
STCs of NCLP as on 31.03.2021 will be mainstreamed in accorda nce with 
NCLP guidelines. If any child has been enrolled after 31.03.2021 in any STC 
functional under NCLP, he/she be mainstreamed or shifted to STCs functional 
under SSA. 
The Committee also note that during 2022 -23, 282 STCs under NCLP 
were operational in 11 Districts of 5 States viz. Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, 
Assam, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu. The Committee further note that under 
Samagra Shiksha, 83,979 STCs are functional in 32 States/UTs and out of 
them, 228 STCs in 12 States/UTs have hostel facilities. The Committee feel 
that access to hostels will increase retention rate of children in schools, as 
many children engaged in child labour belong to migrant families/Nomadic 
Tribes having no permanent home. The Committee, therefore, impress upon 

115 
 
DoSEL to increase the number and capacity of their Special Training Centres 
across the country in a time bound manner especially at places where the 
concentration of child labour is very large. 
3.46 The Committee further note that the DoSEL has categorically stated 
that Samagra Shiksha will not be absorbing/taking over the District Project 
Society or any liability of NCLP Scheme as convergence of NCLP with Samagra 
Shiksha is only to the extent of providing special training and mainstreaming 
of students. The Committee  also take cognizance of the issues flagged by 
DoSEL with regard to closure of STCs under NCLP, utilization of human 
resources deployed and taking over/running STCs under NCLP , etc. with the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment and feel that comprehensive guidelines 
on running the STCs and mainstreaming the Out of School Children and other 
related issues need to be framed jointly by the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and DoSEL so as to amicably resolve the issues.  
3.47 Considering the fact that the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) had granted no objection to the proposal of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment for merger of NCLP with SSA on the ground that both 
Ministry of Labour and Employment and DoSEL had come to an agreement for 
merger of NCLP with SSA, the Committee desire that detailed 
guidelines/modalities/procedures to be observed by States/UTs/Stakeholders 
implementing agencies following the merger of two Schemes be worked out by 
both the Ministries on priority. 
3.48 Further, the Committee while acknowledging the fact that the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment do not have an independent mechanism to 
identify the child labour, impress upon the Ministry tha t prevention, 
identification, rescue, rehabilitation and reintegration of the rescued child is 
their overall responsibility assigned by an Act of Parliament and the Rules 
made thereunder. Simultaneously after merger of NCLP with SSA, DoSEL has 
now a very i mportant role as far as rehabilitation of the rescued child is 
concerned. During the course of extensive examination of the subject for a 
period exceeding two years, the Committee have attempted to sensitize some 
of the line Ministries, State Governments a nd Stakeholders about their 
direct/indirect role and further efforts to be made for elimination the social 
evil of child labour. It is now for the Ministry of Labour and Employment in 

116 
 
particular and other Ministries and State/UT Governments to ensure that 
observations/recommendations made by the Committee are implemented in 
letter and spirit. 
(ii) Financial support to States/ UTs for providing Special Training to Out 
of School Children. 
3.49 The Committee note that DoSEL, under the Samagra Shiksha Scheme, 
provides financial support to States and UTs for providing Special Training to 
Out of School Children. The Committee were apprised that the amount of Rs. 
6000 per child per annum and Rs. 20,000 per child per annum for non -
residential and residential course s (class 1 stto 8 th)respectively, which was 
available under the erstwhile centrally sponsored scheme of Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan, has been continued for non -residential and residential (upto class 
XIIth)  under the Samagra Shiksha also. The Committee were appr ised during 
oral evidence that when RTE Act, 2009 came into existence, Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan (SSA) Scheme was in operation implying that the amount of financial 
assistance was fixed prior to 2009. Considering the fact that the amount of 
financial assistanc e being  provided to States/ UTs for providing Special 
Training to Out of School Children, viz. Rs. 500 per child per month for non -
residential and Rs. 1667 per child per month for residential courses has not 
been increased for more than 14 years, the Comm ittee desire that this 
amount be suitably increased keeping in view the inflation as well as the 
interest of beneficiaries. 
(iii) Out of School Children 
3.50 The Committee note that the target group in Out of School Children 
(OOSC) is the ‘never enrolled’ and ‘drop out’ children. The National Education 
Policy, 2020, inter alia , lays emphasis on identification of OOSC, their 
mainstreaming and tracking. In this context, the Committee further note that 
DoSEL has developed an online module for compiling the dat a of Out of 
School Children identified by each State/UT and their mapping with Special 
Training Centres (STC) on the PRABANDH Portal (http://samagrashiksha.in). 
The concerned State/UT validates the child-wise information of the identified 
OOSC  uploaded by  the concerned Block Resource Centre of the State for 
monitoring the progress of mainstreaming of OOSC. 

117 
 
The Committee note that at present District -wise data of OOSC is not 
being maintained. The Committee desire that in addition to child -
wise/school-wise d ata, the District -wise details of OOSC be maintained and 
shared with the Ministry of Labour and Employment, as OOSC are the 
children at risk or vulnerable to child labour.  
3.51 The Committee were apprised by an NGO that one of the major causes 
of dropout of children especially girls in rural areas is that the schools are 
upto 8 th class whereas in urban areas, the schools are upto 12 th class. The 
Committee desire the DoSEL to examine this aspect with a view to 
maintaining the uniformity and also to ensure that the children in rural areas 
in particular do not have to travel long distance for getting secondary and 
senior secondary level of education.  
(iv) Dropout Rate  
3.52 The Committee note that the annual average drop out rate at the 
elementary level for 2 019-20, 2020 -21 and 2021 -222 was 1.9%, 1.3% and 
2.0% respectively, whereas at the secondary level, it was 16.1%, 14.0% and 
12.6% during the corresponding period implying that the number of children 
who dropped out at the secondary level were 8,11 & 6 times  more than those 
dropped out at the elementary level during 2019 -20, 2020-21 and 2021 -22 
respectively.The Committee also note that the Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009 mandates the Government to provide 
free and compulsory  elementary education to every child of the age 6 to 14 
years in a neighbourhood school. The Committee feel that one of the reasons 
for dropping out of a large number of children is that the provisions of RTE 
Act, 2009 do not cover the adolescent group of children due to which these 
children are not mobilized to attend school. In this context, the Committee 
further note that under ‘Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman’ (PM POSHAN), 
one hot cooked meal in Government and Government aided schools is 
provided to  students at the elementary level of education under Samagra 
Shiksha Abhiyan. The Committee desire that with a view to reducing drop out 
rate at secondary level, the adolescents be covered under the RTE, Act, 2009 
and the facility of providing hot cooked m eal be extended from elementary 
level of education to secondary/senior secondary levelso as to minimize drop 
out rate at secondary level. 

118 
 
(v) ‘Working Children’ and ‘Main Working Children’ 
3.53 The Committee note that the survey of ‘Out of School Children (OOSC) 
does not capture the data of ‘working children’ and ‘main working children’. 
The DoSEL have, however, stated that they propose to improvise the survey 
format of out of school children, in consultation with Ministry of Labour and 
Employment, to add n ew entries for identification of child labour as also to 
identify if the child is a ‘working child’ only or is the ‘main working child’ i.e. 
the sole earner. The Committee desire that the consultation process be 
expedited and the format for out of school children be revised so as to include 
these two categories of children, as committed by the representative of the 
Ministry during evidence.  The Committee also impress upon the DoSEL to 
ensure that the data, as per revised format, is captured during next ‘OOS C’ 
survey. 
(vi) Data of migrant children/Nomadic Tribes 
3.54 The Committee note that as per Section 4 of the RTE Act, 2009, special 
training is provided to Out of School Children (OOSC) in the age group of six 
to fourteen years so that they can be mainstreamed into the age -appropriate 
classes.The Committee further n ote that during the period 2018 -19 to 
30.09.2023, 25.04 lakh OOSC were provided special training at elementary 
level. The data, however, does not include the data of migrant 
children/Nomadic Tribes. As informed by the DoSEL, the residential facilities 
are also provided to child labour rescued, migrant children who belong to poor 
landless families, etc. The Committee desire that the data of migrant 
children/Nomadic Tribes provided special training be maintained as the 
possibility of such children being pushed to child labour is always very high. 
(vii) Door-to-Door Surveys 
3.55 The Committee note that teachers conduct door-to-door survey in rural 
as well as urban areas to identify Out of School Children (OOSC). The 
Committee feel that while it is comparatively  easier to conduct door -to-door 
surveys in rural areas, there are many places in the urban areas where 
homeless/migrant families alongwith their children including Nomadic Tribes 
live viz. under the flyovers, on roadside/slum areas or outskirts of the city , 
etc. The Committee, thus find that there is gap in identification of OOSC, 

119 
 
especially in urban areas, which needs to be filled in. The Committee , 
therefore, desire the DoSEL to devise suitable mechanism to cover such 
homeless children, who reside in urba n areas, so as to have correct data of 
OOSC. 
(viii) Special Training to Teachers 
3.56 The Committee note that 25.69 lakh, 7.73 lakh and 4.87 lakh teachers 
were trained during 2020-21, 2021-22 and upto 30.09.2023 respectively. The 
Committee further note tha t under Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan, door -to-door 
survey to identify the Out of School Children(OOSC) is conducted by the 
respective States/UTs Government through the teachers. The Committee 
were apprised that the teachers have neither the expertise nor mandat e to 
identify the child labour. The Committee are of the considered view that  
though identification of child labour is the mandate of Ministry of Labour and 
Employment/ State Governments, considering the fact that the teachers 
conduct door -to-door survey annually to identify OOSC, and are the only 
source of direct interaction with parents/guardians throughout the country, 
it is imperative on the part of DoSEL to sensitize teachers through Special 
Training about the international commitment of the country t owards 
elimination of child labour and to achieve the target stipulated in Sustainable 
Development Goal 8.7 to end all forms of child labour by 2025. As the 
services of teachers are also utilized at the time of preparation of electoral 
list and, for the pu rpose, training is also being imparted to them, the 
Committee desire that on the similar lines, DoSEL may devise an appropriate 
mechanism to include child labour related component in the training module 
of teachers so that the exposure so gained is gainful ly utilized by them while 
interacting with parents/guardians at the time of conducting OOSC surveys. 
The Committee wish to be apprised of the developments made in this regard. 
(ix) Student Registry 
3.57 The Committee note that to curtail dropout rate and ensuring universal 
access to education at all levels, National Education Policy, 2020 (NEP) 
recommends achieving universal participation in school by carefully tracking 
students, as well as their learning levels, Student Registry by the States. The 
Committee were apprised that child tracking at national level is yet to be 
rolled out, however, around 20 States/ UTs have prepared Student Registry 

120 
 
with all relevant details and around 20 crore children are being tracked at 
State level. The Committee urge the DoS EL to issue appropriate instructions 
to the remaining 16 States/UTs to prepare Student Registry and start 
tracking them. The Committee are happy to note that w.e.f. 2022 -23, DoSEL 
have started collecting child -wise information under UDISE+  Portal in order  
to track students to reduce dropouts and to track their Learning Outcomes 
and the number of enrolments of students from pre -primary to higher 
secondary level in 2022 -23 is 25.17 crore across all States/UTs. The 
Committee call upon the DoSEL to leave no st one unturned to ensure that 
child tracking at National level is undertaken as per norms so as to achieve 
the objectives of NEP, 2020.   
(x) Integration with Department of Women and Child Development 
3.58 The Committee were apprised that the Department of Women and Child 
Development had observed that some of the adolescent girls visiting 
Anganwadi Centres were ‘out of school’. The Committee were also apprised 
that the Department of School Education and Literacy(DoSEL) and  Women 
and Child Development had iss ued joint instructions to all the States with 
regard to mainstreaming of such children. The Committee appreciate the 
joint efforts made in this direction and desire that the process of integration 
with Department of Child Development be expedited and compl eted in a time 
bound manner.  
(xi) Role of Elected Representatives 
3.59 The Committee note that as per Section 21 of the RTE Act, 2009, the  
School Management Committee/School Management Development 
Committee consists of the elected representatives of the local authority, 
parents or guardians of children admitted and teachers.  The Committee 
further note that under the Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan, provisions exist for 
Governing Council/Body at National level; single Implementation Society at 
State level to facilitate better decision making; and District Project office at 
District Level headed by District Collector/Magistrate/Chief Executive Officer 
of the Zila Parishad. The Committee feel that the experience gained by MPs 
and MLAs through interactions with stakeholders at ground level and also 
through various other means can be gainf ully utilized by sharing their views 
and feedback. The Committee, therefore, desire that the local MPs and MLAs 

121 
 
be also invited at the meetings held at State/District level so as to strengthen 
the monitoring mechanism. 
(xii) Awareness Campaigns 
3.60 The Co mmittee appreciate the efforts made by the Department of 
School Education and Literacy(DoSEL) for generating awareness on RTE Act, 
2009; Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan; and NEP, 2020, etc. through print, 
electronic and social media platforms, road shows, Shikshak Parv, publication 
of NEP 2020 Implementation Booklet, launch of Nation wide reading 
campaign, organizing Akhil Bhartiya Shiksha Samagam, Bhartiya Bhasha 
Utsav, Swachhata Pakhwada, etc. As teachers have a very important role in 
eliminating the social evil of child labour from the country, the Committee 
desire the DoSEL to include this aspect also in the awareness campaigns to be 
launched in future. 
(xiii) Educating children about child labour and child protection issues 
3.61 The Committee note that the Sama gra Shiksha Scheme aims to ensure 
inclusive and equitable quality education at all levels of school education. The 
Scheme has also been aligned with the recommendations of the National 
Education Policy, 2020.The Committee further note that the scheme being an 
integrated scheme for school education also aims to ensure that all children 
have access to quality education with an equitable and inclusive classroom 
environment which should take care of their diverse background, multilingual 
needs and different aca demic abilities, thereby making them active 
participants in the learning process. The Committee have been apprised by 
NGOs that there is a need to include a Chapter on elimination of child labour 
in school curriculum and also to educate the children in und erstanding, 
recognizing and reporting any crimes against children and other child 
protection issues through   academic curriculum and in non-academic spaces. 
The Committee call upon the DoSEL to accord priority to these measures in 
the overall interest of the country and also in the interest of children in 
particular. 
 
 

122 
 
CHAPTER - FOUR 
 
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
 
I  Introduction 
4.1 As a nodal Ministry for the advancement of women and children, the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development is responsible for the formulation 
of plans, policies and programmes and legislation in this regard. It also 
guides and coordinates the efforts of bo th Governmental and Non -
Governmental organizations working in the field of Women and Child 
Development. In view of the above, the Committee decided to examine the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development because of its wide ambit in the 
realm of Child care,  protection, rehabilitation and reintegration. The 
Committee were apprised by the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
that they have administered the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of 
Children) Act, 2015 which is the primary legislation for chil dren in conflict 
with the law by providing rescue, rehabilitation and restoration services for 
such children by defining the standards of care and protection to secure the 
best interests of a Child. Further, all the other child related legislations such 
as the POCSO Act 2012, Child Marriage Act, Child Labour (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Act etc. have to be implemented in nexus with JJ Act, 2015.  
4.2 On the two categories of children in need of rehabilitative care, the 
representatives of the Ministry deposed as under: 
 
“One category comprises of children who are in need of care and protection 
and second category comprises of children who are in conflict with law. So, 
this Act provides the institutional set up as well as non -institutional 
framework for taking care of the children who are in either of the categories.”  
    
4.3 It was further brought to the notice of the Committee that the Juvenile 
Justice Act, 2015 and its Model Rules, 2016 have been recently amended in 
2021 & 2022, to make the provisions of the Act more stringent and 
procedures simpler. These amendments focus on overall rehabilitation 
process of children and ensure that rights of all children are protected. 
   
4.4  It was informed that the JJ Act, 2015 is applicable all over India and 
mandates se tting up of one or more Child Welfare Committees (CWC’s) in 
each District by the State/UT Government for the purpose of reporting of 
such Children to the CWC to ensure that the benefits under the Act reach 
the beneficiaries.               
 
4.5 The Ministry further apprised the Committee that they are 
implementing Mission Vatsalya (erstwhile Child Protection Services -CPS) 
which aims to pursue convergence of schemes to ensure desired outcomes 
in terms of child development while optimising investme nt, for care, 
protection, rehabilitation and reintegration of children in difficult 
circumstances. Under the Scheme, financial assistance was provided to 
State Governments/UT Administrations, for, inter-alia, setting up and 

123 
 
maintenance of various types of Child Care Institutions (CCIs) for providing 
various rehabilitative services through institutional and non -institutional 
care under the JJ Act, 2015. In these CCIs, children are provided age 
appropriate education either within the institution or outside in  a formal 
education system through convergence with other schemes and programmes 
of the Government or civil society. Under the non -institutional care 
component, support is extended for adoption, foster care and sponsorship.  
     
II. Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015  
 
(i) Provisions under JJ Act, 2015 for rehabilitation of Children 
 
4.6  The Ministry informed the Committee that under the JJ Act, 2015, a 
‘child’ is defined as a person who has not completed eighteen years of age. 
As per the Act, “a child in need of care and protection” means a child- who is 
found working in contravention of labour laws for the time being in force or 
is found begging, or living on the street and who is found vulnerable and 
has been or is being or is likely to be inducted into drug abuse or trafficking, 
among others.       
 
4.7  Asked specifically on how a Chil d is differentiated from an Adolescent 
in view of the definition of a child, the Ministry submitted as under:  
 
“The term ‘adolescent’ is not defined under the JJ Act, 2015. However, the 
Rashtriya  Kishore Swasthya Karyakram under Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare defines an adolescent as a person within 10 -19 years of age. 
It may be noted that the JJ Act, 2015 is applicable for care and protection of 
a child ( Children in need of Care and Protection and Children in Conflict 
with Law) i.e., a person who has not completed eighteen years of age.” 
 
4.8 On the rehabilitation measures envisaged for children in need of care 
and protection under the Act, the Ministry submitted as under:  
     
“(i) Institutional care through Childrens home, Open Shelter and Speci alised 
Adoption Agencies; where the Children are provided with various facilities 
including birth registration, assistance for obtaining the proof of identity 
where required; education, skill development; life skill education etc. 
(ii) Family based non-institutional care ie, Sponsorship, foster care, adoption 
(iii) Restoration 
(iv) Aftercare Programme: Financial support to Children leaving a child care 
institution on completion of eighteen years of age in order to facilitate childs 
re-integration into the mainstream of the society.” 
 
4.9 In this regard, the Committee during the course of their deposition 
elaborated as under: 
 
“Under the institutional care system, we have children’s home, open shelter, 
and specialized adoption agencies. Basically, these are three kinds of 5 
children’s homes. The children’s homes are basically for long -term 
rehabilitation of children. Open shelte rs are basically for children in street 
situation and where we keep the children for short periods. Specialized 

124 
 
adoption agencies are basically for the children in the age group of 0 to 5 
years and they also have abandoned, surrendered and orphaned childre n 
who basically come in the adoption process in the long -term… In family -
based non-institutional care, there is sponsorship. Under sponsorship, if one 
of the parents is missing or the child is orphan and if there is a near relative 
who is willing to take c are of the child, then in that case, -- if the CWC 
orders -- the Government pays Rs. 4000 per month as a sponsorship 
amount in such cases. ‘Foster care’ is the one where people do take children 
for protection and care for a particular period. Here also, ce rtain help is 
provided by the Government and adoption is a permanent care of the child 
by the adopted family. In case of restoration, the children who have been 
missing or who have been found at some other place and you know their 
place of natural residenc e, then you restore them to that particular place. 
‘Aftercare programme’ of the child care homes are for those children who 
after the age of 18 years need certain support for their financial wellbeing so 
that they can stand on their feet.” 
 
4.10 In this re gard, the Committee were informed that a total of 66965 
Children have benefitted through the Institutional care and 26431 Children 
through non-institutional care, respectively.     
  
4.11 Enquired about the extent to which the provisions under the Juvenile  
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 have been enforced. The 
Ministry, while stating that the primary responsibility for implementation of 
the Act lies with the State Governments, furnished the following data as 
under:     
 
Statutory structure Description Strength 
Child Welfare Committee Decides on matters relating to 
children in need of care and 
protection. 
 753  
 
Juvenile Justice Board Decides on matters relating to 
children in conflict with law 
727 in 740 districts 
District Child Protection 
Unit 
Set up at district level to ensure 
implementation of the JJ Act, 2015 
734 
State Child Protection 
Society 
Set up at State level to ensure 
implementation of the JJ Act, 2015 
35 
State Adoption Resource 
Agency (SARA) 
Set up at State Level for  dealing 
with adoptions and related matters 
in the State under the guidance of 
the Central Adoption Resource 
Authority. 
35 
Child Care Institutions 
(CCIs) 
 
Section 41(1) of the JJ Act, 2015 
mandates that all Child Care 
Institutions (CCIs) whether run by 
State Government or by voluntary 
or non-governmental organisations 
shall be registered under the Act. 
The primary responsibility of 
registrations as well as effective 
functioning of the CCIs vests with 
the State Governments/UT 
Administrations concerned. 
As on 31.03.2022 2245 CCIs 
are funded under Mission 
Vatsalya (erstwhile CPS) 
housing 76118 Children/ 
beneficiaries. 
 
Further, as per information 
from States/UTs, as on 15 th 
July, 2020, 7275 CCIs are 
registered for providing 
minimum standard of care as 
per JJ Act, 2015. 

125 
 
4.12 The Committee were further apprised by the Ministry that, under 
Section 27 of JJ Act, 2015, the State Government shall constitute one or 
more Child Welfare Committees for every district, for exercising the powers 
and to discharge the duties in relation to children. The Ministry also 
submitted that continuous efforts were made to ensure that the CWC is set 
up and is functional in every district.                                              
 
4.13 Insofar as the procedure laid down under the Act, a child in ne ed of 
care and protection is to be produced before the Child Welfare Committee 
(CWC) and CWC declares that child as a child in need of care and 
protection, on consideration of Social Investigation Report of the child and 
by taking into account the child’s wishes in case the child is sufficiently 
mature to take a view.          
  
4.14 In this regard, the Ministry informed the Committee that the 
procedure of the Social Investigation Report was being revised to address the 
different categories of children in need of care and protection so as to enable 
the implementing authorities to bette r understand the needs and 
requirements of the child including provisions for welfare and rehabilitation 
of children who are found working in contravention of the provisions of JJ 
Act or Labour Laws.”               
4.15 When asked to state their views on t he need for greater level of 
scrutiny for enforcing agencies to ensure effective implementation of JJ Act, 
the Ministry stated as under:                                                       
“The Ministry felt the need for constant supervision at a senior level in the 
District for implementation of the Act. As a result, they have notified the 
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2021, 
vide which the District Magistrate has been made the focal point with regard 
to implementation of the JJ Act, 2015. As per the Amendment, the District 
Magistrate shall conduct quarterly review of the functioning of the Child 
Welfare Committees at district level. The DM would be passing the adoption 
orders in future as soon as the rules under the new  amended Act are 
notified. a power which was being exercised by the Judiciary till now. DM 
would also be heading the District Child Protection Units and would 
coordinate all Child Protection, Welfare and Development related activities in 
the District.” 
4.16 The Ministry further elaborated on the coordination mechanism in 
place among different stakeholders viz, Juvenile Justice Board, Child 
Welfare Committee and the District Child Protection Units for seamless 
implementation of the JJ Act as under:                                                                          
“As per the JJ Act, 2015, the District Magistrates review the functioning of 
Juvenile Justice Board and the Child Welfare Committee, in the following 
manner: 
i. The Juvenile Justice Board is mand ated to furnish the quarterly 
report of pending cases to the District Magistrate. 

126 
 
ii. The District Magistrate may, as and when required, in the best 
interest of a child, call for any information from all the Stakeholders 
including the Board and the Committee. 
iii. The Child Welfare Committee has been mandated to send quarterly 
information about children in need of care and protection to the 
District Magistrate. 
iv. District Magistrate shall review the functioning of the Child Welfare 
Committee once every quarter.” 
4.17 Further, the Ministry during the course of their evidence, 
supplemented as under: 
“It may also be noted that the Juvenile Justice Board, based on 
inquiry, may pass orders to place a child in conflict with law in a 
observation home or special home or place of safety. Likewise, the 
Child Welfare Committee, based on inquiry, may pass orders to place 
a child in need of care and protection in children home or open 
Shelter or specialised adoption agency or fit facility. These Child Care 
Institutions (viz., observ ation home, special home, place of safety, 
children home, open Shelter, specialised adoption agency, fit facility) 
are periodically visited/inspected by the Child Welfare Committee or 
the Juvenile Justice Board, as the case may be and the Inspection 
Committees under the JJ Act, 2015 including the District Magistrate.”  
(ii) Provisions for Institutional care under the Act 
4.18 The Ministry informed the Committee that the JJ Act, 2015 provides 
that the State Government may establish and maintain, by itself or  through 
voluntary or non-governmental organisations, as many open shelters as may 
be required, which shall be registered under the Act. Open shelter functions 
as a community based facility for children in need of residential support, on 
short term basis, to children whose parents are poor and are working during 
the day with the objective of protecting them from abuse or weaning them, 
or keeping them, away from a life on the streets. Facilities in an Open 
shelter include food, supplementary education, sports etc. Open shelters are 
also for children in the street who are found begging. But these are short 
stay homes unlike the homes which are for permanent stay where you can 
stay up to the age of 18 years depending on the requirements. Most of these 
shelters are operated by NGOs and some shelters have the provision for 
night shelters also. The Ministry further submitted that under Mission 
Vatsalya, an amount of Rs.29,48,096/ - per year (recurring and non -
recurring) has been provisioned for an Open Shelter unit of 25 children. As 
on 31.03.2022, 241 Open shelters are assisted under the Mission Vatsalya 
Scheme which has benefitted 5048 children across the country.”  
4.19 When asked about the State wise data on the number of functional 
open shelters/temporary shelters, the Ministry furnished as under: 
 

127 
 
S. 
No. State 
No. Assisted under Mission 
Vatsalya as on 31.03.2022 (to 
be updated) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 5 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 0 
3 Assam 5 
4 Bihar 0 
5 Chhattisgarh 9 
6 Goa 2 
7 Gujarat 3 
8 Haryana 12 
9 Himachal Pradesh 4 
10 Jammu and Kashmir 0 
11 Jharkhand 2 
12 Karnataka 35 
13 Kerala 3 
14 Madhya Pradesh 9 
15 Maharashtra 13 
16 Manipur 17 
17 Meghalaya 4 
18 Mizoram 0 
19 Nagaland 2 
20 Orissa 12 
21 Punjab 0 
22 Rajasthan 20 
23 Sikkim 3 
24 Tamil Nadu 11 
25 Tripura 4 
26 Uttar Pradesh 13 
27 Uttarakhand 4 
28 West Bengal 38 
29 Telangana 0 
30 Andaman & Nicobar 0 
31 Chandigarh 0 
32 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
and Daman & Diu 
1 
33 Ladakh   
34 Lakshadweep 0 
35 Delhi 9 
36 Puducherry 1 
  Total 241 
                  
4.20 The Committee were also apprised of the Specialised Adoption 
Agencies (SAA) which are  institutions recognised by the State Government 
for housing orphans, abandoned and surrendered children, placed there by 
order of the Committee, for the pur pose of adoption and non -institutional 

128 
 
care. The children of the age group 0 -5 years are kept in SAAs. The 
Committee were informed that a total of 390 Specialised Adoption Agencies 
have been set up and 4105 Children have benefitted from these SAA’s.                 
4.21 With regard to the mechanism established for the monitoring and 
procedure for inspection of Specialized Adoption Agencies, the Ministry 
replied that the Act provides for inspection of the SAAs as under:                    
i. “The State Governme nt shall get every Specialised Adoption Agency 
inspected at least once in a year and take necessary remedial 
measures, if required. 
ii. Inspection committees are constituted at the State and district level, to 
mandatorily conduct visits to all facilities housing children (including 
SAAs) in the area allocated, at least once in three months. The 
Inspection Committee submit reports of the findings of such visits to 
the District Magistrate or State Government, which then takes 
appropriate action within a month. 
iii. Child Welfare Committee is also responsible for conducting at least two 
inspection visits per month of residential facilities for children in need 
of care and protection (which includes SAAs) and recommending action 
for improvement in quality of service s to the District Child Protection 
Unit and the State Government. 
In addition, the JJ Act, 2015 has mandated the National Commission for 
Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) to monitor the implementation of the 
provisions of the JJ Act, 2015.”  
 
(iii) Outreach services/Online Monitoring for Emergency Child Care 
 
4.22 Asked specifically about the outreach provisions in place/proposed to 
be put in place  to streamline and strengthen the reporting mechanism, pre 
and post rescue action, institutional and non -institutional care restoration, 
repatriation and rehabilitation of children, the Ministry submitted as under:                      
 
i. “Childline (short code 1098) Services, defined in Juvenile Justice (Care & 
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 under section 2(25) is a twenty -four 
hours emergency outreach service for children in crisis which links them 
to emergency or long-term care and rehabilitation service.  
 
ii. As per Mission Vatsalya guidelines, the Child Helpline shall be run in 
coordination with State and District functionaries and integrated with the 
Emergency Response Support System 112 (ERSS -112) h elpline of 
Ministry of Home Affairs.  
 
iii.  For real time monitoring of children in the Juvenile Justice system, the 
Mission Vatsalya portal is under development.”      
(iv) Provisions for Penal Offences against Children 
4.23 Asked to state the penal provisions in place for offences against 
Children under the Act, the Ministry highlighted as under:  

129 
 
“The JJ Act, 2015 provides penal provisions for offences committed against 
the children, which includes employment of child for be gging (under section 
76 of JJ Act 2015); using of child for vending, peddling, carrying supplying 
or smuggling any intoxicating liquor, narcotic drug or psychotropic 
substance (under sections 77 & 78 of JJ Act 2015); and exploitation of a 
child employee (under section 79 of  JJ Act 2015)”. 
4.24  The Ministry further added that the Act acknowledges several new 
forms of offences committed against children, which were not adequately 
covered under any other existing law, such as, sale and procurement of 
children for any purpose including illegal adoption, corporal punishment in 
child care institutions, use of children by militant groups, offences against 
disabled children and, kidnapping and abduction of children etc. JJ Model 
Rules, 2016 and Adoption Regulation s, 2017 have also been promulgated 
under the Act. For specific offences and penalty thereof  there are other laws 
such as the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act 2012, 2005, the 
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, the  Child Labour  (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986 etc.           
(v) Awareness Campaigns 
4.25 The Ministry informed the Committee about the concerted efforts 
undertaken by them to raise awareness for identifying and prohibiting Child 
labour as under:                                          
“The National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development 
(NIPCCD) under the Ministry of Women and Child Development regularly 
conducts training programmes for sensitization of the stakeholders, 
including the District Magistrates. During the year  2021-22, 115 training 
programmes were conducted by NIPCCD on Child Rights and Protection 
including on JJ Act, 2015”  
4.26 Asked about the periodicity of the awareness campaigns for proper 
enforcement of provisions under the JJ Act, 2015, the Ministry, whi le 
stating that they hold regular interactions with States/UTs, elaborated as 
under: 
“The Ministry has held Zonal and Sub -Zonal Meetings with the State/UT 
Governments in April and June -July, 2022 in various cities to deliberate 
upon the Mission Guidelines of the Mission Vatsalya and also the work done 
by the Ministry in the past 8 years. The Ministry does a comprehensive 
review of implementation of JJ Act in the Project Approval Board meetings 
with States. Apart from these, Ministry and NCPCR   hold workshops with 
States on various aspects of JJ Act.” 
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) 
4.27 The Committee were apprised of the mandate of the National 
Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) to ensure better 
protection of the rights of the child through monitoring of constitutional and 
legal rights of children, review of safeguards, rev iews of existing laws, look 
into violations of the constitutional and legal rights of children, and monitor 
programmes relating to the survival, protection, participation and 

130 
 
development of children. Further, NCPCR is also mandated for monitoring 
the implementation of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act 
(POCSO Act), Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act and Right 
of Children to Free & Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009.                           
4.28 The functions of NCPCR were stated to be as under: 
(a) Examine and review the safeguards provided by or under any law for the 
time being in force for the protection of child rights and recommend 
measures for their effective implementation;  
(b) Present to the Central Government, annually and at such other intervals, 
as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those 
safeguards;  
(c) Inquire into violation of child rights and recommend initiation of 
proceedings in such cases;  
(d) examine all factors that inhibit the  enjoyment of rights of children 
affected by terrorism, communal violence, riots, natural disaster, domestic 
violence, HIV/AIDS, trafficking, maltreatment, torture and exploitation, P a g 
e pornography and prostitution and recommend appropriate remedial 
measures; 
(e) look into the matters relating to children in need of special care and 
protection including children in distress, marginalized and disadvantaged 
children, children in conflict with law, juveniles, children without family and 
children of prisoners and recommend appropriate remedial measures;  
(f) study treaties and other international instruments and undertake 
periodical review of existing policies, programmes and other activities on 
child rights and make recommendations for their effective implementation in 
the best interest of children;  
(g) Undertake and promote research in the field of child rights;  
(h) spread child rights literacy among various sections of the society and 
promote awareness of the safeguards available for protection of these rights 
through publications, the media, seminars and other available means;  
(i) inspect or cause to be inspected any juvenile custodial home, or any other 
place of residence or institution meant for children, under the control of the 
Central Government or  any State Government or any other authority, 
including any institution run by a social organisation; where children are 
detained or lodged for the purpose of treatment, reformation or protection 
and take up with these authorities for remedial action, if found necessary;  
(j) Inquire into complaints and take suo motu notice of matters relating to, — 
(i) deprivation and violation of child rights; (ii) non -implementation of laws 
providing for protection and development of children; (iii) non -compliance of 
policy decisions, guidelines or instructions aimed at mitigating hardships to 
and ensuring welfare of the children and to provide relief to such children, or 
take up the issues arising out of such matters with appropriate authorities; 
and  

131 
 
(k) Such other funct ions as it may consider necessary for the promotion of 
child rights and any other matter incidental to the above functions. 
4.29 The Committee were apprised on the membership of the NCPCR as 
under:           
“The Commission consists of the following Member s, namely (a) a 
Chairperson who is a person of eminence and has done outstanding work for 
promoting the welfare of children; and (b) six Members, out of which at least 
two shall be women, from the following fields, to be appointed by the Central 
Government from amongst persons of eminence, ability, integrity, standing 
and experience in, — (i) Education; (ii) Child health, care, welfare or child 
development; (iii) Juvenile justice or care of neglected or marginalized 
children or children with disabilities; (i v) Elimination of child labour or 
children in distress; (v) Child psychology or sociology; and (vi) Laws relating 
to children.” 
4.30 Enquired specifically on the prevailing vacancies under the 
Commission, the Ministry replied that since December 2021, the posts of six 
posts for Members are lying vacant. The Ministry stated that the vacancies 
have to be advertised and unlike the National Commission for Women, 
where the procedure is not prescribed, in the case of NCPCR, necessary 
procedure has been laid down by Supreme Court.          
4.31 The Committee desired to enquire about the specific number of Child 
labour in the country. The representative of NCPCR, in response, replied as 
under: 
“As per Census, 2011, of the total child population of 259.6 million in t he 
age group of 5 -14 years, 10.1 million or 3.9% of the total child population 
are working, either as main workers or as marginal workers. However, the 
exact estimate of the total child labourers is not available.” 
4.32  The Committee were apprised of diff iculties faced by NCPCR during 
child rescue operations as under: 
"Every child who needs help and care is required to be presented before the 
Child Welfare Committee. This is the mandate given under Section 31 of the 
Juvenile Justice Act. Here, one of the a mbiguities that we get to see is that 
the child who is a child labourer is not covered by the CNCP (Children in 
need of care and protection) as per the definition of the Juvenile Justice Act 
and anyone can do the work of presenting them, but a task force h as been 
formed in the district, which has been formed in compliance with the Child 
Labour Prohibition Act. When we work in the field, it is often seen that 
without that task force i.e. SDM, it is not possible. Other authorities do not 
do the work of rescui ng children without the presence of him. This is a big 
problem in front of us. According to the NCRB data, only 613 cases are 
reported, while the Rajasthan government told us during a meeting that 
about 700 cases were registered by them alone.”    
4.33 It was further submitted that NCPCR has initiated several strategic 
interventions for effective monitoring of the children related Acts/child 
labour across various sectors. Specifically asked to elaborate on the key 

132 
 
interventions undertaken by NCPCR to addres s incidence of Child labour, 
the Committee were informed as under:      
“i. Redressal of grievances : Grievance redressal is one of the core 
functions and mainstay work of the Commission. In last one year through 
awareness generation and developing its capa bility, the Commission has 
dealt with 37652 complaints. 
ii. Suo-motu Cognizance: The Commission takes suo-motu cognizance 
on matters related to cases of violation of the child rights which appear in 
media including social media. 
iii. NCPCR Benches : As a quasi-judicial body, NCPCR is organizing 
grievance redressal benches in aspirational districts across the country. In 
the first phase, 55 benches were organized prior to the COVID -19 pandemic 
wherein the Commission received more than 27000 cases of complai nts of 
various nature. Many cases were sorted out on spot by the Bench benefiting 
thousands of children. Benches have been re -started from September 2022 
and so far 07 Benches have been organized by NCPCR 
iv. Inter-Departmental meetings: Inter-Departmental meetings with the 
States/UTs were organized in 2020 -21, wherein, various issues were 
discussed including inter -state child labour issues and children in street 
situations. Monthly meetings have been taken by NCPCR with the State 
departments to discuss var ious child related issues. On 07th July 2022, 
NCPCR organized a meeting with Department of WCD/Social Welfare, 
Labour and Education of all States/UTs to discuss the issues related to 
children in street situations including child labour issues. During the 
meeting, one of the key issues discussed regarding child labour was the less 
number of FIRs being registered in child labour cases. States/UTs were 
informed by NCPCR in the meeting that all child labour cases reported under 
the Child Labour Act are cognizab le offences and that States/UTs should 
register the FIRs in such cases immediately and promptly. 
v. Consultations: The Commission has organized thematic 
consultations with key stakeholders, authorities and duty bearers from 
States/UTs on child labour 
vi. Fact findings : The Commission conducts fact finding exercise 
whenever there are any issues or complaint of child labour in any 
industry/sector/region. 
vi. Coordination meetings with SCPCR : The Commission organizes 
coordination meetings with State Commissions on contemporary child rights 
issues wherein inter -state issues of child labour and other matters are also 
discussed for effective redressal” 
4.34 The various sectors where Child labour is prevalent and unregulated 
as observed by NCPCR were stated to be as under:  
 “Un-organized Sector - It is a reality that most of the 
industries/sectors have a distinct feature of having two facets i.e. 
“organized sector” which is well regulated and the “unorganized sector” 
which is unregulated, uninspected and not monitore d. Children are 
found working in these unorganized sectors. The experience of the 

133 
 
Commission points out that “when an industry or sector involves or 
depends upon unorganized activities in its entire supply chain that 
attracts child labour. 
 Automobile Indus try- There are various industries and sectors in 
India where it is observed that children are being engaged as child labour 
and Automobile Industry is one of them. It is one of the fastest growing 
industries now penetrated in almost all parts of the countr y. 
Interestingly, it is observed that this industry has a distinct feature of 
having two facets i.e. “organized sector” which is well regulated and the 
“unorganized sector” which is unregulated, uninspected and not 
monitored. It is also an undeniable fact that the automotive industry 
comprising the automobile and the auto component segments – is one of 
the key drivers of the economic growth in India. With its deep backward 
linkages and forward linkages, it is seen as a major driver and has been 
recognized as a sector with very high potential to increase the share of 
manufacturing in gross domestic product (GDP), exports and 
employment. Automobiles will continue to be critical for the functioning 
of various industries, sectors, societies and economy of our co untry. 
Therefore, it is more important to develop an in -depth understanding of 
the sector including the inherent reasons why this industry is attracting 
child labour. 
 E-waste management- Among the sectors where children are engaged 
as labour, electronic waste (e-waste) management is a rather overt sector 
that requires major reform. The Electronic Waste Management (EWM), 
Rules 2015 defines ‘e-waste’ as electrical and electronic equipment, whole 
or in part discarded as waste by the consumer or bulk consumer a s well 
as rejects from manufacturing, refurbishment and repair processes. 
These electronic items get recycled by dismantling motherboards, 
obtaining metals like copper and iron rods from discarded air -
conditioners, melting electronics from acids, segregati on etc. These all 
processes become dangerous practices if there are no precautionary 
measures taken. This e -waste contains heavy metals and many 
components that can be re-used by grey market even after its disposal. In 
DelhiNCR, children are found involved  in the informal sector of e -waste 
recycling processes. They are involved in collecting to dismantling of the 
e-waste without any standard operation systems. This exposes children 
to toxic gases and elements categorizing this as violence against children 
and impact their health, growth and development. 
 Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCGs) - Where a company is 
providing its products for sale and advertising on the roadside dhabas 
and stalls, the accountability of the company should be fixed in cases 
where the r oadside dhabas and stalls are engaging children as labour. 
These companies while publishing hoardings and banners at the 
roadside stalls and dhabas should maintain the list of such shops and 
dhabas. This would ensure that regular inspections and checks can  be 
made by these companies advertising and selling goods through the local 
shops and dhabas and the children engaged as labour can be identified. 
Where any child engaged as labour is found at such dhabas or shops, the 
accountability of the FMCG companies can be fixed. 

134 
 
 Placement Agencies in Metro Cities especially in Delhi - NCPCR 
has observed that one of the common issues prevalent in child labour is 
the unregulated placement agencies working in Metro Cities. The real 
reason behind trafficking of children i s that traffickers use tools of 
enticement and allurement. Traffickers promise the children and their 
families of providing the families with a good income and give false 
assurances that they will be able to secure their children good jobs and 
employment. These placement agencies then bring these children to 
metro cities like Delhi from various parts of India like Bihar, Jharkhand, 
West Bengal, Odisha, North -East. The agencies not only place these 
children as domestic help but also sell these children to ot her parts of 
India. These children who are brought by these unregulated agencies are 
vulnerable to abuse, exploitation and cruelty. NCPCR has observed that 
there are multiple placement agencies working in many parts of Delhi 
who are becoming a big contribu tor in trafficking of children as they are 
unregulated.” 
4.35 On the Rescue Operations undertaken by NCPCR to check incidence 
Child labour, it was submitted that the Commission has set up a Quick 
Response Cell (QRC)  which is an internal mechanism to addres s the 
complaints that require immediate action and rescue operation. 
Consequently, the Commission has conducted several rescue operations 
especially rescuing children from labour situations. In addition to quick 
response, pre-plan rescue operations on chil d labour are also being carried 
out as pilot initiatives to set examples so that State Commission and other 
authorities at State and district level can act in the same manner. Since 
2015-16, Commission has conducted around 471 visits for inspections, 
inquiry, or rescue across the country.  
4.36 The Committee were further informed that, as part of the 75th -
anniversary of India’s independence to celebrate ‘Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav’, 
NCPCR commemorated Child Labour Week in honour of World Day Against 
Child Labour from 12th to 20th June 22 to scrutinize the challenge of child 
labour and to identify the ways and means to eradicate it. Accordingly, it 
was stated that NCPCR undertook rescue operations in 75 places of 41 
districts across 18 States. A rescue team cons isting of a team from NCPCR, 
Labour Department officials and other local authorities reached 
predetermined areas and retrieved the minors being exploited as child 
labourers from various scrap and automobile markets. A total of 1025 
children were rescued during this drive.  
4.37 It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that NCPCR had set 
up an online Management Information System  where data from all 
States/UTs is being submitted with respect to the actions taken by them for 
ensuring protection to c hildren and implementation of various child rights 
laws.                                                                                      
4.38 Asked to provide the Information provided by Police and Labour 
Department of respective States/UTs as uploade d in the MIS Portal, NCPCR 
furnished as under: 
    

135 
 
 01.04.2021– 
31.03.2022 
01.04.2022- 
22.11.2022 
No. of child labour rescued 410 339 
No. of child labour 
produced before CWC 
330 113 
 
4.39 In this regard, the Committee were apprised that only 12 States/1UT 
viz, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Tripura and Uttar Pradesh have submitted information on the portal.  
4.40 The Committee were further apprised that a Draft SOP for Child 
Labour was prepared by NCPCR. Elaborating on the need for an SOP, it was 
submitted as under: 
“While inquiring into complaints in connection with child labour, it was 
observed that there are delays and lapses by the authorities in initiating 
investigation in such matters because of which there is a difficulty in 
identification and prosecution of offenders committing such contravention of 
labour laws. It is also noticed that due to the involvement of multiple 
authorities under the Child Labour Act, 1986 and Juvenile Justice Act, 
2015, there are difficulties faced by not only the concerned authorities  in 
dealing with such child labour matters but also by the child labour victims. 
Further, such delays and lapses on part of the authorities prevents the 
minor victims from receiving funds from the Child Labour Rehabilitation 
Fund constituted under Section 14B of the Child Labour Act, 1986 and any 
other compensation/fund that the minor is eligible for under any 
Government scheme and/or awarded by the Hon’ble Court. To curb such 
issues related to child labour and to streamline the role of multiple 
authorities to deal with a child who is a victim of contravention of labour 
laws, NCPCR has published a draft SOP for Child Labour. The draft SOP has 
been published online for comments and had been sent to district officials 
for pilot testing as well.”       
4.41 The Committee desired to be apprised of the status of the writ petition 
that was taken up suo-moto by the Supreme Court concerning children 
living in street conditions (and to which the National Commission for Child 
Rights is party). The Ministry, in response, submitted as under:  
“The Hon’ble Supreme Court in SMWP (C) No.6/2021 in response to 
Children in Street Situations had taken cognizance on the issue of children 
in street situations. During the course of hearings in this matter, the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court has directed the State Governments and district authorities 
to identify children who are in street situations and initiate the process of 
rescue and rehabilitation for them. The Hon’ble Supreme Court has directed 
the State Governments to implement the SOP 2.0 of National Commission for 
Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) for children in street situation, to upload 
the data of such children on the Baal Swaraj Portal -CiSS of NCPCR and to 
implement the suggestions made by NCPCR for developing a policy for 
rehabilitation of children in street situations till the time the State 
Governments do not implement their own policy. The case had last been 
listed on 09.05.2022 and is now listed for hearing on 01.08.2022. This case 
is still sub-judice and ongoing before the Hon’ble Supreme Court.” 

136 
 
4.42 On the aforementioned directions, the Committee were apprised on 
the following actions/developments inter-alia as under:  
“(i) While developing SOP 2.0, NCPCR had been informed by Save the 
Children – NGO that they had mapped a bout 2 lakh children in 4 
States/UTs namely Delhi, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court was also informed about this data in affidavit of 
NCPCR dated 12.11.2021 and the Hon’ble Court directed the State 
Governments to take necessary action for these children. 
(ii) Hon’ble Supreme Court in January 2022 expressed its concern 
regarding having a set policy for dealing with children in street situations 
and asked NCPCR to provide some suggestions which can help in framing a 
policy. NCPCR in its affidavit dated 17.02.2022 submitted suggestions for 
developing a policy for rehabilitation of children in street situations. The 
Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its order dated 09.05.2022 has asked all 
States/UTs to implement the policy ma de by NCPCR till they don’t frame 
their own policy for children in street situations. 
(iii)NCPCR through its affidavits has been informing the Hon’ble Court about 
the steps being taken by it to address the issues concerning street children 
and also submitt ing the data uploaded by the States/UTs on Baal Swaraj 
Portal- CiSS from time to time.”        
4.43 Further, on the Orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the context of 
appointment of Labour Officer under the Child Labour Rules, 2017 for care 
and protection of children /children who are victims of child labour and the 
action taken therewith, the Committee were informed as under:  
“The Hon’ble Supreme Court In SMWP (C) 4/2020, vide order dated 
09.05.2022 had observed that there is a significant role played by the 
Labour Officer appointed under Rule 17C (1) of the Child Labour Rules, 
2017. NCPCR has observed that the nodal officer to be appointed under the 
Child Labour Rules, 2017 is not appointed in many States/UTs and for 
information and compliance of the s ame. NCPCR had issued a letter to all 
States/UTs for appointment of the nodal officer. The Commission had also 
organized a review meeting on 16.07.2022 to discuss the orders of SMWP (C) 
No.4/2020 In Re Care and Protection of Children due to Loss of Parents  
during Covid-19 wherein the State Departments of Education, Labour and 
WCD had participated. During the meeting, the Labour Department of each 
State/UT was requested to provide information about the following: 
i.  Status of appointment of nodal officer of the Labour Department [Rule 
2B (2) of the Child Labour Rules] 
ii.  List of officers with their name and contact details.”   
  
4.44 In accordance to the above directives, the Committee were apprised of 
the status of appointment of a nodal officer for various States/UTs as under: 
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Sikkim, 
Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, U.T. 
of Delhi, Lakshadweep and Puducherry 
Yet to be appointed 

137 
 
Assam, Chhatisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Jharkand, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttarakhand, U.T. of 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, 
Chandigarh, J&K and Ladakh. 
Appointed 
 
4.45 The Committee were further apprised by the Ministry that in order to 
protect the best interests of the child, directions have been issued to the 
NCPCR to constitute a mediation Cell to resolve the cases of children who 
were taken away by one of the spouse without permis sion of the other 
spouse due to marital discord or domestic violence from other Countries to 
India or vice versa, for preparing a parental plan into account the best 
interest of the child.   
4.46 Elaborating further on the role of the Mediation Cell, the o fficials of 
the Ministry during the course of their evidence, deposed as under: 
“There are disputes between husband over the custody of child and all. 
People have brought their children and have come to India. Now, the 
husband is American citizens. So, the y file cases. There are a lot of such 
cases where husbands have detained the child in US and wife is here in 
India. All these cases of marital discord are there. There are 87 odd cases 
with US only. As per the request of the other Government, we have set a  
mediation cell where we try to work with both the parents whenever they are 
willing to come on board. Then, we try to make a plan so that chi ld can be 
safely taken care of…  Unfortunately, in countries like US, at times, we get 
complaints where the men are  in a better financial position. So, their legal 
system is such that the courts normally will give the custody to the person, I 
mean the parent, who is doing well in such cases. So, a lot of children are 
there where men have got the position of that child.  Unfortunately, the 
mother was not working. So, she will not get the position of the child. We get 
a lot of complaints where they want the children. We are trying but not 
much success is made in these cases. It is a regular problem which we keep 
facing… In fact, in several cases, our courts have not allowed children to go 
back. There are several cases where the mother has got the child here. From 
there, they say we have got the custody and all that. But then, our courts 
have said no to them. Mother is the n atural guardian in such cases. They 
have not allowed repatriation of the child in such cases.”  
4.47 The Ministry further highlighted the setting up of ‘POSCO e -box’, an 
online complaint management system by NCPCR for easy and direct 
reporting of sexual of fences against Children and timely action against the 
offenders under POSCO  Act, 2012.        
 
4.48 Further, the representative of the Ministry submitted that certain 
directives were being issued to Panchayats and Municipal bodies in the area 
of Child protection and welfare under Mission Vatsalya. Elaborating further 
in this matter, the Ministry during the course of deposed as under: 
"We have started 'Mission Vatsalya Yojana' on 5th July, 2022 to notify the 
topics of child protection and child welfare i n panchayat and municipal 
areas. Under 2.12 of 'Mission Vatslaya Yojana', the Child Welfare Protection 

138 
 
Committee should be notified in every Panchayati Raj Institution and every 
Municipal Urban/Local Body. Their existing Standing Committee could deal 
with women and children related topics. The work of this committee is to 
discuss these topics. Who is going to school, who is not going and who has 
to make plans and budgets according to the 15th Finance Commission. 
Thus, we have issued our existing guidelines.  We have to take a review from 
the State Governments and UT s… Secondly, you have asked whether there 
is only census data to calculate child labour, is there no other data. One of 
the major initiatives in our 'Mission Vatsalya Yojana' is to conduct a child 
survey. In future, a child index is also to be created, but first we will start 
with the child survey. At present it is under consultation with the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. We have had around two 
meetings. We are constructing th e different factors which we want to bring 
into the survey.” 
III. Integrated Child Development Services - Saksham Anganwadi/ 
Poshan 2.0 
4.49 The Committee were informed that the Integrated Child Development 
Services Scheme was approved on 16th November, 201 7 with a revised 
scope, structure and cost sharing ratio for continuation upto 30th 
November, 2018 and subsequently continued up to 2020 -21. Now, t he 
Government has approved `Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0’  scheme, 
which is a mission mode scheme to devel op practices that nurture health, 
wellness and immunity from malnutrition. The Committee were further 
apprised that the Anganwadi Services Scheme, Scheme for Adolescent Girls 
and Poshan Abhiyaan have been realigned under POSHAN 2.0 for 
maximizing nutritional outcomes.  (PPT9 WCD) 
 
4.50 The Ministry informed the Committee that under the Scheme, the 
primary focus is on practices that nurture health, wellness and immunity 
from malnutrition and organized under 3 verticals viz, Nutition Support for 
POSHAN and for Adolescent Girls; Early Childhood Care and Education (3 -6 
years); Anganwadi Infrastructure including modern, upgraded Saksham 
Anganwadis.  
 
4.51 Elaborating further, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“Anganwadi Services Scheme is a symbol of the country’s commitment to its 
children and nursing mothers, as a response to the challenge of providing 
pre-school non-formal education on one hand and breaking the vicious cycle 
of malnutrition, morbidity, reduced learning capacit y and mortality  on the 
other.  The beneficiaries under the Scheme are children in the age group of 
0-6 years, pregnant women and lactating mothers. The scheme has 
universal coverage and all children of the age group 6 months to Six 
years are entitled to su pplementary nutrition and early childhood care and 
education from AWCs. Any child of age group 6 months to 6 Years is entitled 
to a set of six services under the Scheme which are (i) Supplementary 
Nutrition (SNP), (ii) Pre-school Non-formal Education, (iii) Nutrition & Health 
Education, (iv) Immunization, (v) Health Check -up,  and (vi) Referral 
Services.  Immunization, Health check -up and Referral Services 
are  provided through NHM & Public Health Infrastructure.  (BN Pg 5). The 

139 
 
Committee were informed that the total beneficiaries (as on 31.12.2021) are 
9,50,18,684 comprising of 7.5 lakh children and 2 lakh women “  
        
4.52 The Committee were informed that the  Anganwadi Services team 
comprises of the Anganwadi Workers (AWWs), Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs), 
Supervisors, Child Development Project Officers (CDPOs) and District 
Programme Officers (DPOs). AWWs and AWHs are honorary workers and are 
paid a monthly honoraria as decided by the Government.   
 
4.53 On the functioning of Anganwadis and their role in ensur ing nutrition 
to the child , the officials of the Ministry deposed as under: 
 
“…the district level Anganwadi supervisor can see all the data of all her 
Anganwadi under her jurisdiction. Normally, there are 25 Anganwadis. 
CDPO will be able to see the block level. He can identify all the Anganwadis 
what level of problems are there and it is individual specific. So, also in that 
case, District Programme Officer and District Magistrate. This was not 
available. At the State level also, this data is collated and they can see for 
the entire State. The basic thing about Anganwadi is that this scheme 
though part funding is done by the Central Government, but the 
implementation is fully with the State Governments. So, this data is required 
by the State Governments. If  the State Governments work well, then we can 
see with the Poshan Tracker, we will see a substantive change in nutrition 
status of children over the next one or two years. We were travelling to a 
district called Nevada in Gujarat which is an aspirational d istrict and again 
where nutrition indicators do not do well. There I  saw in Tribal areas, the 
Anganwadi workers using this and they could tell that this child is mal -
nutritioned and what they are doing about it. ……..There will be one 
category where we do the appetite test. The child is kept hungry, say, for two 
hours and if he is able to eat after that means he does not need medical 
intervention. In that case you give twice the normal food to the child and he 
recovers within a month or so. The second case is where the child is not 
eating, in that case you will have to take him to the nearest Nutrition 
Rehabilitation Centre (NRC). Now, there are some States which have a large 
number of NRCs. Health Department will be able to tell this, but in every 
district, there is one NRC and many of the States have brought NRC to the 
block level.”       
 
4.54 In this regard, the Committee were informed that  there are 1089 
functional Nutrition Rehabilitation Centre ( NRCs) across the country as on 
31.03.2022.           
 
4.55 The Official further submitted that Even if NRC is not there, there are 
medicines which are given regularly but normally why we require NRCs is 
that the child has to be supervised over at least seven to fifteen days. One of 
the parents have to be with th e child. Some States are ensuring that they 
pay some kind of wage compensation to the parent who is accompanying the 
child.   
4.56 Asked to apprise the Committee about the number of 
sanctioned/operational Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) as of 31.12.2021, the 
Ministry furnished the data as under:   

140 
 
 S. No State/UTs No. of Anganwadi Centres 
Sanctioned Operational 
1 Andhra Pradesh  55607 55607 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 6225 6225 
3 Assam 62153 61715 
4 Bihar 115009 112094 
5 Chhatisgarh 52474 51605 
6 Goa 1262 1262 
7 Gujarat 53029 53029 
8 Haryana 25962 25962 
9 Himachal Pradesh 18925 18925 
10 Jharkhand 38432 38432 
11 Karnataka 65911 65911 
12 Kerala 33318 33115 
13 Madhya Pradesh  97135 97135 
14 Maharashtra 110486 110293 
15 Manipur# 11510 11510 
16 Meghalaya 5896 5896 
17 Mizoram 2244 2244 
18 Nagaland 3980 3980 
19 Odisha 74154 74096 
20 Punjab 27314 27304 
21 Rajasthan 62010 61655 
22 Sikkim 1308 1308 
23 Tamil Nadu 54439 54439 
24 Telangana  35700 35580 
25 Tripura 10145 9911 
26 Uttar Pradesh 190145 189432 
27 Uttrakhand 20067 20067 
28 West Bengal 119481 119481 
29 A & N Islands 720 719 
30 Chandigarh 450 450 
31 Dadra & N Haveli 
and Daman & Diu 
409 405 
32 Delhi 10897 10896 
33 Jammu & Kashmir 30765 28078 
34 Ladakh 1173 1137 
35 Lakshadweep 107 71 
36 Puducherry 855 855 
Total  1399697 1390824 
 
4.57 On the aspect of Anganwadi Workers and Anganwadi Helpers, the 
Committee were informed that Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) & Anganwadi 
Helpers (AWHs) were 'honorary workers' who come from the local 
community and volunteer to render their services, on part time ba sis, in the 

141 
 
area of child care and development. In this regard, it was submitted that 
Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) & Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs), being honorary 
workers, are paid a monthly honorarium as decided by the Government 
from time to time. The Government has enhanced the  honorarium given to 
Anganwadi Workers (AWW) and Anganwadi Helpers (AWH) w.e.f 
01.10.2018.  Further, the AWWs/ AWHs are appointed on fulfillment of 
certain eligibility conditions and therefore they cannot be strictly termed as 
beneficiaries under the Scheme.        
 
4.58 As regards the Scheme for Adolescent girls, the officials of the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
 
“We also have a scheme for adolescent girls but there have been some 
changes. Earlier, the adolescent girl scheme was for 11 -14 years age group 
and over a period of time with Right to Education scheme of Education 
Department, most of the girls in this age group have moved to the school 
and now, that mid-day meal is being provided in schools also. So, beginning 
from 1st April, this scheme has been changed. An adolescent girl now will be 
from 14-18 years and initially it will be in the aspirational districts of the 
country. There are 112 districts. It is because there, the nutritional support 
is not up to the desired level and also in  the North Eastern States. That is 
the basic change. It is because from 14 -18 years, there was no scheme for 
providing nutrition to the girls of that age group and normally, after that age 
group, they get married. So, at that time, if they are well -nourished, when 
the children are born, they are born healthy……….It is only for the 
aspirational districts and northeastern States.” 
         
4.59 The Ministry further informed the Committee about the recent 
initiatives  taken by them as under:  
 
“(i) Streamlining Guidelines issued on 13.01.2021 to ensure 
transparency, efficiency and accountability in delivery of 
Supplementary Nutrition, 
(ii) Poshan Tracker,  an important IT Governance Tool, has been rolled 
out to strengthen and bring about transparency in nutrition  delivery 
support systems. 
(iii) In keeping with the announcement made by the Prime Minister on 
15th August 2021, 100% fortified rice to States/UTs are allocated 
under the Supplementary Nutrition Programme to address the issue 
of malnutrition faced by women and children. 
(iv) States have been advised to incorporate millets in local recipes to 
enhance the nutritional quality of Supplementary Nutrition provided 
at the Anganwadi Centers. 
(v) Under the Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0, 2 lakh AWCs 
@40,000 AWCs per year would be strengthened, upgraded and 
rejuvenated. The Panchayati Raj Department through Poshan 
Panchayats shall play a very active rote for malnutrition free India 
through Jan Andolans. 
(vi) Under Poshan 2.0, Anganwadi Centres, which provide a plat form for 
convergence for nutrition delivery, health and early childhood care 
and education are being strengthened and rejuvenated as  Saksham 
Anganwadis to create robust platforms for delivery of nutrition and 

142 
 
ECCE services. Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 ’ will seek to 
optimize the quality and delivery of food under the Supplementary 
Nutrition Program by moving away from a calorie -focus to more 
balanced diets to address chronic  micro-nutrient 
malnutrition including by supply of fortified rice and nutri-cereals.  
(vii) Poshan Abhiyan will be the key pillar for Outreach and will cover 
innovations related to nutritional support, ICT interventions, Media 
Advocacy and Research, Community Outreach and Jan Andolan. 
(viii) More than 40 crore activities have been ca rried out under Poshan 
Maah and Poshan Pakhwada and 3.70 lakh CBEs have been 
conducted since the launch of the Abhiyaan. 
(ix) To encourage diet -diversity and consumption of wholesome local 
produce, around 4.35 lakhs poshan vatikas have been developed at 
AWCs. 
(x) Anganwadi workers have been provided with 11.13 lakh smart 
phones. Besides, to promote regular growth monitoring 11.94 lakh 
Growth Monitoring Devices have been procured by States/UTs under 
the Abhiyaan.” 
 
4.60 Asked to elaborate on the Poshan Track er specifically, the officials of 
the Ministry deposed as under:       
    
 
“Under Poshan Tracker, all the data relating to children, say their height, 
length and weight is kept there. This has been tabulated with the World 
Health Organization’s table on nutrition. So, the moment you put the data of 
length or height and weight, it will automatically give result whether the 
child is normal child, obese or is slightly mal -nourished and severely 
malnourished. This kind of information was not available till no w in our 
system. Neither District program Officer nor the District Magistrate or the 
CDPO had this data about how many children are kuposhan in their area. 
This tracker is now giving us real time information. This will tell as to which 
child in a particula r Anganwadi are mal -nourished and who needs support 
for improving their health……….. Tracker is monitored by district authorities 
at State level.” 
 
IV. Scheme for Empowerment of Girl Child/Beti Bachao Beti Padhao  
 
4.61 The Committee were informed by the Mi nistry that the Beti Bachao 
Beti Padhao scheme was envisaged to address the issue of decline in Child 
Sex ratio and related issues of empowerment of girls and women over a life 
cycle continuum. This scheme has a multi -sectoral intervention at district 
level. It was being run in 405 districts and through multi -media advocacy it 
was expanded to 640 districts of the country.  
 
4.62 The achievements of the scheme were stated to be as under: 
 
 Increase in 19 points in Sex Ratio at Birth at National level from 918  
(2014-15) to 937 (2020-21).  
 Percentage of 1st Trimester ANC Registration has shown improvement 
from 61% in 2014-15 to 73.9% in 2020-21. 

143 
 
 Percentage of Institutional Deliveries has also shown an improvement 
from 87% in 2014-15 to 94.8% in 2020-2 
 Gross Enrolment of Girls in secondary education at National Level has 
increased from 75.51% in 2014-15 to 77.83% in 2019-20.   
  
4.63 The Committee were apprised of the partner Ministries under these 
Scheme as under: 
 
 Ministry of Education - for concerted effort of the education of girl child, 
including out of school girls and school level implementation of BBBP 
activities and calendar 
 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare - for effective Implementation of 
Pre-Conception and Pre -Natal Diagnostic Techniques ( PC&PNDT Act, 
birth registration and promoting institutional delivery, Awareness for 
nutrition and health education, including importance of Iron & Folic Acid 
supplementation, awareness on menstrual hygiene maintenance 
 Ministry of Skill Development and Entr epreneurship- for encouraging 
skilling and vocational training of girls, prepare them for job 
opportunities and entrepreneurship. At least 15 -20% of the skilled girls 
may be from SC/ST group. 
 Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports - for promoting girls in all  sports, 
engaging youth groups for awareness generation and making BBBP 
champions at all levels 
V. Scheme for Prevention of trafficking   
(i) UJJAWALA: 
4.64 The Committee were informed that under the Scheme, a 
comprehensive scheme for prevention of traffic king, with five specific 
components – Prevention, Rescue, Rehabilitation, Re -Integration and 
Repatriation of victims of trafficking has been conceived primarily for the 
purpose of preventing trafficking on the one hand and rescue and 
rehabilitation of victims on the other.     
4.65. In this regard, the Official of the Ministry elaborated as under: 
“Under this scheme, these five components are there and not all the 
components are implemented everywhere. It depends on how the situation is 
developing at the pa rticular location and accordingly the component -wise 
grant is provided by the Government. So, we have provisions for 
rehabilitation where we provide rent for setting up UJJAWALA homes and 
then we provide assistance for recurring and non -recurring 
expenditures.……Basically, when such events take place and we have found 
out some victims obviously police and district administration is in touch 
with them. They only come through those channels. They are aware that 
such kind of facilities are there. So, they take them directly to Ujjwala 
homes. There are certain cases where a woman has been found who is 
destitute and who is not actually the victim of trafficking. There is nobody to 
take care of her. In that case, we shift her to something called ‘Swadhar 
Greh’. Under this Scheme, all the necessities of the victims are taken care of, 
for example, food, shelter and clothing, providing them psychological 
counselling, medical help etc. Through the vocational training, we try to 

144 
 
provide them some support so that they the mselves can start earning some 
bit and they are able to go back to their home. They are psychologically 
ready after having gone through the traumatic period and they are ready to 
get integrated with their families. In the 15th financial year cycle, we are 
going to integrate Ujjwala and Swadhar Greh Scheme. They are basically 
running parallel. We have given this option to the States, if possible, run 
them together. Wherever there are circumstances which do not permit for 
operating these two homes together, t hey may have common premises but 
separate buildings. We have made the changes in the sense that financial 
assistance for administrative set up management and maintenance cost has 
been increased for the coming 15th financial circle period. We are going to 
geotag in all the  houses so that anybody siting anywhere in this country can 
find out if some victim is there and she can be asked to go to these Homes. 
With the integration of these two Homes, we will be able to run them much 
more effectively…Sir, Shakti Sadan Scheme will be the integrated name of 
Ujjwala Scheme and Swadhar Greh Scheme. ….Sir, there are two aspects. 
One is for women who are coming out of trafficking and going to Ujjwala 
homes and the other is for women in distress. Both the situations are very 
different. If we mix them, some serious problems are going to be there” 
(ii) Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act (ITPA),1956: 
4.66 The Committee were informed that the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) 
Act, 1956 (ITPA) was enacted with the objective to prevent trafficking for 
commercial sexual exploitation. It is a gender neutral legislation which 
defines prostitution as the sexual exploit ation or abuse of persons for 
commercial purposes and penalises specific activities which leads to sexual 
exploitation of persons viz. Brothel keeping, Living on the earnings of 
prostitution, Procuring, inducing or detaining for prostitution (the penalties 
are higher where offences involve children (<16 yrs) & minors (< 18 yrs), 
Prostitution in areas notified & near public places, Soliciting.                                                             
 
4.67 The official of the Ministry further deposed as under: 
“If you see some of the provisions of this Act are now, as far as children are 
concerned, those are covered under the POCSO Act and they carry much 
higher sentence in such cases. If children are found in such situations, they 
are covered under JJ Ac t and POCSO Act, whereas for the women of theage 
group of more than 18, ITPA set -up provides that the court orders their 
rehabilitation. Then these women are taken to the Ujjwala home.” 
4.68 In this regard, the Committee were apprised that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs had issued an advisory dated 09.09.2009 whereby the law 
enforcement agencies were advised to adopt a victim centric approach and 
not to invoke soliciting (Section 8) and  removal of prostitutes from any place 
(Section 20) as it will lead to the re-victimization.                                                          
(iii) Scheme for Working Women Hostel: 
4.69 The Committee were informed of the Working women hostel scheme. 
The facilities under the Scheme were stated to be as under: 
 Safe and affordable accommodation to  working women,  

145 
 
 Accommodation to women under job training  
 Facility of Day Care Centre for Working mothers  
 
4.70 Elaborating further during evidence, the Ministry deposed as under: 
“We have located these hostels where job opportunities for women are there, 
but proper of facility for accommodation is not there for them. In order to 
enhance our labour force participation in respect of women, this scheme is 
working towards that objective. We have facility for day care centre f or 
working mothers who have small kids. As of now, we are providing Rs.50,000 
as rental per month in the metropolitan cities and Rs.35,000 per month for 
other places. As of now, 500 hostels are functional all over the country.” 
      
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
4.71 The Committee note that the Mission Vatsalya (erstwhile Child 
Protection Services -CPS) aims to pursue convergence of schemes to 
ensure desired outcomes in terms of child development while 
optimising investment,  for care, protection, rehabilitat ion and 
reintegration of children in difficult circumstances. As per the 
Ministry, under the Scheme, financial assistance is provided to State 
Governments/UT Administrations, for providing various rehabilitative 
services through institutional and non -institutional care under the JJ 
Act, 2015. In this regard, the Committee while lauding the efforts made 
under the Mission, are of the opinion that the efforts towards 
convergence should be taken at the three levels namely, District, State 
and National level, so  as to effectively forge convergence between 
States and services. In this regard, the Committee feel that synergy 
particularly with the Ministry of Labour and Employment and 
Departments of Labour in States is critical for prevention, 
identification, rescue and rehabilitation of Child labours and  urge upon 
the Ministry to consistently coordinate and work with other agencies 
at the District level such as District Child Protection Unit, District 
Magistrate, Child Welfare Committee and Village level Child Prot ection 
Committees under Mission Vatsalaya in order  to successfully mitigate 
incidence of Child labour. 

146 
 
4.72 The Committee note that under the JJ Act, 2015, a ‘Child’ is 
defined as a person who has not completed eighteen years of age. 
Further, all cases related to child labour are dealt solely under the Act, 
which provides for prosecution of those involved in child labour and 
rehabilitation of child labours. The Committee, however, find that the 
term ‘adolescent’ is not defined under the JJ Act, 2015. The 
Committee have also been given to understand that the Rashtriya 
Kishore Swasthya Karyakaram under the Ministry of Health of Family 
Welfare defines an adolescent as a person between 10 -19 years. 
Further, as per the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) A ct, 
1986, children between age group 14 -18 years are defined as 
adolescents. The Committee feel that, in the absence of any definition 
of ‘adolescent’ category of children, in cases related to adolescents, 
prosecuting someone under JJ Act will become diffi cult. In the 
considered opinion of the Committee, there is a lack of consistency in 
the definition of adolescents and there is a need for inclusion of a sub -
category of children under JJ Act to cater to Adolescents. Moreover, 
the Committee feel that the la ck of clarity in definition of 
Child/adolescents in Government policies is also bound to adversely 
affect laws governing their employability and prosecution. There is 
thus an urgent need to harmonize the various laws on the definition of 
Child/adolescents so as to effectively regulate and rehabilitate them. 
4.73 The Committee find that under the JJ Act, 2015, the State/UT 
Government is mandated to constitute one or more Child Welfare 
Committees (CWCs) in each District for the purpose of reporting of 
children in need of care and protection for exercising the powers and to 
discharge the duties in relation to Children. In this regard, it was 
informed that continuous efforts were made to ensure that the CWCs 
are set up and functional in all districts. The Committee find that as on 
31.03.2022, 753 CWCs have been set up across the country and urge 
the Ministry to immediately intervene in such States/districts where 
CWCs are yet to be set up or are dysfunctional owing to staff shortage, 

147 
 
lack of adequate monitoring and lack of timely review. The Committee 
are of the opinion  that unless timely interventions are undertaken to 
address any shortcomings, a robust welfare system will continue to be 
out of reach for vulnerable Children and they will have to bear the 
brunt of it.  
4.74 The Committee were informed that, as per proced ure laid down 
under the Act, a child in need of care and protection is to be produced 
before Child Welfare Committee(CWC) and CWC declares that child, as a 
child in need of care and protection on consideration of Social 
Investigation Report of the child and by taking into account the child’s 
wishes in case the child is sufficiently mature to take that view. The 
Committee have been given to understand that the procedure of Social 
Investgation Report was being revised to address the different 
categories of ch ildren in need of care and protection. The Committee 
are conscious of the fact that the Social investigation report is an 
important procedure regarding the antecedents of the child and is a 
vital link for assessing the requirements of the Child in need of care 
and protection  and helps in taking a clear decision regarding 
rehabilitation and their social re-integration. The Committee urge upon 
the Ministry to expedite revision of Social Investigation Report so as to 
enable the implementing authorities to bett er understand the needs 
and requirement of the child including provisions for welfare and 
rehabilitation of children who are found working in contravention of 
provisions of JJ Act or Labour laws.   The Committee may be updated 
regarding the progress in this regard. 
4.75 The Committee note the laudable initiatives taken by the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development (MWCD) to strengthen the 
implementation of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of 
Children) Act, 2015 (JJ Act). In this regard, the Ministry having felt the 
need for constant supervision at a senior level in the Districts for  
strict adherence of the Act, has notified the Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2021 which has made the  

148 
 
District Magistrate (DM) as the focal point for implementation of the JJ 
Act at the district level. The Committee find that now the DM will be 
responsible for conducting quarterly reviews of the functioning of the 
Child Welfare Committees (CWCs) and for passing adoption orders, 
which wa s previously being exercised by the Judiciary. However, the 
enabling rules need to be notified at the earliest for swift 
implementation of revision in the Act. Moreover, the DM will also head 
the District Child Protection Units (DCPUs), which are responsib le for 
coordinating all child protection, welfare, and development activities in 
the district. The Committee emphasize that the existing coordination 
mechanism among different stakeholders viz. Juvenile Justice Board, 
Child Welfare Committee and District Child Protection Units need to be 
monitored and reviewed by the DM at regular intervals for seamless 
implementation of JJ Act. The Committee view this as a significant 
step as it will provide constant supervision and leadership for child 
protection efforts in the district and these stakeholders play a critical 
role in the implementation of the JJ Act, the DM's oversight will help 
to ensure that they are functioning effectively. At the same time the 
Committee feel that the DM already has a wide range of respo nsibilities 
and adding the JJ Act to this could strain the DM's resources and time. 
To address this concern, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
of Women and Child Development (MWCD) should provide the DMs with 
the necessary support to effectively ca rry out their new 
responsibilities. The Ministry should also work closely with the State 
Governments to ensure that the DMs are given the authority and 
resources they need to do their job effectively. 
4.76 The Committee find that there are 241 Open shelters (as on 
31.03.2022) that are assisted under the Mission Vatsalya Scheme 
across the country which has benefitted only 5048 children across the 
country, which in the estimation of the Committee is inadequate . 
Moreover, it is also observed that the open shelters in some of the 
more populous states such as UP (13), MP(9), Bihar(0) and 

149 
 
Maharashtra(13) is a serious cause of concern for the Committee. 
According to the Ministry, the JJ Act, 2015 provides that the S tate 
Government may establish and maintain, by itself or through voluntary 
or non-governmental organisations, as many open shelters as may be 
required, which shall be registered under the Act. These shelters are to 
function as a community based facility fo r children in need of 
residential support, on short term basis, with the objective of 
protecting them from abuse or weaning them, or keeping them, away 
from a life on the streets. The Committee note with concern that the 
lack of adequate open shelters can have serious consequences for 
children, including through increased vulnerability to abuse and 
exploitation and also exposure to criminal activity. The Committee 
thus recommend that the Ministry urge the State Governments and 
their concerned departments to  increase their partnerships with non -
governmental organizations (NGOs) in order to establish and operate 
larger number of such open shelters.  The Ministry might devise 
suitable incentives to encourage the States towards this end. Efforts 
are also required for regular monitoring and evaluation of open shelters 
to ensure that they are meeting the needs of children. At the same 
time the Committee emphasize on the need for collection and analysis 
of data on the number of children utilizing open shelters, their  
backgrounds, and their outcomes to help policy decisions and resource 
allocation. 
4.77 The Committee note the provision of Specialised Adoption 
Agency (SSA) to house orphans, abandoned and surrendered Children, 
for the children under age group upto 5 years for the purpose of placing 
them under adoption and non -institutional care. The Committee have 
been informed that a total of 390 SSAs have been set up and 4105 
children have been benefitted from these SSAs. The Committee find 
that necessary monitoring/ins pection procedure is also laid down 
under the Act which postulate conducting visits to all facilities by the 
Inspection Committees and submit their findings to the District 

150 
 
Magistrate for necessary action within a month. Additionally under the 
Act, it is m andatory for the Child Welfare Committees to conduct 
inspections and recommend action for improvement in quality of 
services to the District Child Protection Unit/State Government. The 
Committee are of the opinion that the SAA’s are an essential 
refuge/link till a suitable means of rehabilitation is available for the 
Child. Further, in addition to according importance to timely 
inspection protocols, the Committee would like to impress upon the 
Child Welfare Committees to prioritise infrastructural upgradati on and 
extending essential services to the Children to ensure their wellbeing 
and to improve overall capacity of the institution for housing orphans, 
abandoned and surrendered Children in order to aid in their effective 
rehabilitation. The Committee recomm end that more number of SAAs 
need to be set up expanding the scope of larger beneficiaries. 
4.78 The Committee were informed about the Childline services which 
is a 24 hour emergency outreach service for children in crisis, linking 
them to long term care a nd rehabilitation service. As per the Ministry, 
in line with the Mission Vatsalya guidelines, the Child helpline shall be 
run in coordination with State and District functionaries and is to be 
integrated with the Emergency Response Support System 112 (ER -112) 
helpline of Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee commend the 
steps taken to integrate the child helpline with ERSS -112 for all child 
emergency cases so that immediate help can be provided to vulnerable 
children in distress conditions without any has sle. Moreover, the 
Committee further desire that a mechanism to ensure interoperability 
with other services like police, fire and ambulance may be devised 
which may be of help in distress situations. The Committee desire that 
the Ministry work in tandem wi th the Ministry of Home Affairs  in 
expediting the process of integration of  the emergency outreach 
service and activating the service in all the States/UTs along with a 
detailed SOP in this regard. Further, the Committee were informed that 
for the purpos e of real time monitoring of children in the Juvenile 

151 
 
Justice System, the Mission Vatsalya portal is under development. The 
Committee hope that the portal, when functional, will avoid 
duplication of work, ensure better monitoring through Management 
Information System (MIS) dashboard, better citizen participation, 
effective decision making and provide an evidence based roadmap for 
implementation of provisions under JJ Act  and specifically in tackling 
Child labour and their  rehabilitation. 
4.79 The Committe e note that necessary penal provisions have been 
incorporated under the JJ Act for offences committed against children, 
which include employment of child for begging, using of child for 
vending, peddling, carrying supplying or smuggling any intoxicating 
liquor, narcotic drug or psychotropic substance and exploitation of a 
child employee. According to the Ministry, the Act also acknowledges 
several new forms of offences committed against children, which were 
not adequately covered under any other existing la w, such as, sale and 
procurement of children for any purpose including illegal adoption, 
corporal punishment in child care institutions, use of children by 
militant groups, offences against disabled children and, kidnapping and 
abduction of children etc.  Taking note of the penal interventions in 
place under the Act, the Committee believe that only stringent 
conviction rates under these provisions can serve as a barometer to 
gauge the extent of effectiveness of the laws under the Act. Moreover, 
it is partic ularly important that those who violate the law are 
convicted and appropriately punished or else such a situation would 
pave way for perpetuation of the practice of exploitation of children 
and shield the perpetrators who are found working in contravention  of 
the provisions of the labour laws. Further, the Committee would also 
urge upon the Ministry to take a relook at the classification of serious 
offences against children so that there are no legal loopholes/let up 
available for employers to exploit which  will serve as one of the 
significant steps towards ending child labour. 

152 
 
4.80 The Committee note the efforts taken by the National Institute of 
Public Cooperation and Child Development (NIPCCD) under the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development in regularly  conducting 
training programmes for sensitization of the stakeholders, including 
the District Magistrates. As per the Ministry, during the year 2021 -22, 
115 training programmes were conducted by NIPCCD on Child Rights 
and Protection including on JJ Act, 20 15. Keeping in view, the multi -
dimensional challenges posed by the scourge of Child labour, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to further work in coordination with the 
State Governments to hold multi -city/zone awareness camps to 
emphasize on the effective imp lementation of the provisions under the 
JJ Act along with amplifying the frequency and coverage of 
sensitization/training programs for Child Labour related issues. The 
Committee also impress upon the Ministry to further expand the ambit 
of training programs so as to reach a wider range of officials, including 
police officers, labour inspectors and officials of the CWCs and CCIs.  
The Ministry may also consider identifying all the relevant institutions  
whose professionals play a role in addressing child labo ur and 
customize training modules on child labour to provide the officials 
practical hands-on training to prepare them for working in a sensitive 
manner with the affected children. At the same time support for 
research on child labour issues is crucial for  quantifying the 
prevalence, forms, and demographics of child labour. The Committee 
desire that adequate funds be allocated for these endeavours. 
4.81 The Committee note that the mandate of the National 
Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) to ensure better 
protection of the rights of the child through monitoring of 
constitutional and legal rights of children, review of safeguards, reviews 
of existing laws, look into violations of the constitutional and legal 
rights of children, and monitor prog rammes relating to the survival, 
protection, participation and development of children. Further, NCPCR 
is also mandated for monitoring the implementation of the Protection 

153 
 
of Children from Sexual Offences Act (POCSO Act), Juvenile Justice 
(Care & Protectio n of Children) Act and Right of Children to Free & 
Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009. It consists of a Chairperson 
and six members. It is a matter of deep concern that since December, 
2021, six posts for members are lying vacant.  As per the Ministry, 
procedure is laid down by the Supreme Court insofar as procedure for 
filing up of vacancies is concerned. The Committee are of the opinion 
that if the Commission is functioning below its mandated 
administrative capacity, it would be detrimental to the welfar e and 
well-being of children and exhort the Ministry to expedite the exercise 
to call for applications for filling up all the vacancies in NCPCR at the 
earliest in order to justify its mandate  as India's apex body for 
safeguarding children's rights. 
4.82 As per census 2011, of the total population of 259.6 million in 
the age group of 5-14 years, 10.1 million representing 3.9% of the total 
child population are working either as main workers or as marginal 
workers. However, according to NCPCR, the exact esti mate of the total 
child labourers is not available. The Committee are constrained to 
point out that in the absence of exact data about presence of child 
labours, it may be difficult to envisage an effective response for their 
rehabilitation. As a matter of  fact, the 2011 census serves the only 
authentic source of information and the data available is more than a 
decade old and is of limited utility and relevance insofar as 
implementation of specific schemes and their targeted beneficiaries in 
the present sc enario is concerned. In the wake of delay in Census 
2021, it becomes imperative on the part of the Ministry to devise an 
internal mechanism to independently conduct household survey/data 
collection exercises so that adequate allocation of resources may be 
directed towards effective rescue/repatriation and rehabilitation of 
child victims.  
4.83 The Committee note that under Section 31 of the JJ Act, 2015, it 
is mandated to produce a Child in need of care and protection before 

154 
 
the Child Welfare Committees (CW C). However, the Committee find 
that without the presence of District task force headed by the S.D.M, 
child rescue operations are not being undertaken. The Committee are 
given to understand that such a scenario is creating a hurdle for 
NCPCR during their c hild rescue operations as no other authorities of 
the District  would be willing to partake in such an exercise in the 
absence of SDM/District task force. Further, as illustrated by NCPCR to 
the  Committee, it was noted that NCRB data has reported only 613  
cases whereas Rajasthan Government had informed NCPCR that more 
than 700 cases were registered by them against Child labour. In this 
regard, the Committee are of the view that the remaining 87 cases 
have not been acted upon owing to the absence of the SDM /District 
task force during the Child rescue operations as mandated under 
Section 31 of the JJ Act. The Committee thus recommend for 
streamlining the procedures of Child labour rescue under the JJ Act so 
that all the cases are registered with NCPCR and follow up action taken 
for effectively tackling incidence of Child labour. 
 
4.84 The Committee note that most of the industries/sector have a 
distinct feature of having two facets, i.e., ‘organised sector’ which is 
well-regulated and the ‘urorganised secto r’ which is unregulated, 
uninspected and not monitored. Children are found working in these 
unorganized sectors. Sharing its experience, NCPCR pointed out that 
when an industry or sector involves or depends upon unorganized 
activities in its entire supply chain, that attracts child labour. The 
majority of the industries and sectors in India which attract child 
labour relate to automobile industry, e-waste management, Fast Moving 
Consumer Goods (FMCGs), placement agencies in the metro cities 
especially in De lhi etc. In this regard, the Committee find that 
whenever any Industry/Company involves/depends upon unorganized 
activities, its supply chain attracts child labour. The Committee feel 
that it is imperative to identify the real reasons behind the influx of 
Child labour in certain Industries. The Committee feel that any erring 

155 
 
Industry which employs child labour in the unorganized supply chain of 
products cannot be held accountable as it is discrete and unregulated. 
Further, accountability may be difficult to fix as it may be possible that 
several Industries outsource part of their responsibilities to the 
unorganized sector which are again unregulated. In the opinion of the 
Committee, a mechanism/principle of accountability of such Industries 
ought to be fixed  and only when they take responsibility for a supply 
chain free of unethical practices including Child labour, incidence of 
unregulated child labour in the unorganized sector will be difficult to 
tackle.  
4.85 In this regard, the Committee observe that the  Automobile 
Industry has a distinct feature of having two facets i.e. “organized 
sector” which is well regulated and the “unorganized sector” which is 
unregulated, uninspected and not monitored. The Committee while 
recognizing the significance of the secto r and its potential to increase 
the share of manufacturing in gross domestic product (GDP), exports 
and employment feel it is important to delve into the inherent reasons 
of attracting child labour. The Committee observe that there are cases 
of Automobile manufacturers regularly outsourcing the 
services/repairing work and these repairing and servicing of 
automobiles are carried out in unorganized sector without any 
monitoring. Further, the availability of spare parts in the grey market 
are also a cause of c oncern. The Committee find it interesting that 
despite the manufacturing and repairing process of any automobile is a 
confidential process of any automobile company, the spare parts of 
such automobiles and the labour mechanics having the skill and 
knowledge about such automobiles are available readily. The 
Committee feel that, it is time to ensure that the companies must take 
the responsibility of the repairing and servicing and not just outsource 
to any third party. Additionally, there is a need for a syst em of 
controlling/monitoring the supply chain of automobile spare parts in 
the market. Moreover, the Committee would like to impress upon the 

156 
 
Ministry to standardize road side repairing shops and list of vendors 
involved in repairing work must be approved and registered with the 
Road Transport Authority.  Once registered with the RTO and the 
respective automobile company, these small road side auto shops 
would come under regulation thereby ensuring that such activities are 
free of child labour and the accoun tability of the automobile company 
can thus be fixed. 
4.86 The Committee are deeply concerned over the precarious manner 
in which Children are employed as labour at e -waste sites. The process 
of electronic waste management process can become dangerous if 
necessary precautionary measures are not taken. The Committee find 
that e-waste contains heavy metals and many components that can be 
re-used by grey market even after its disposal. The Committee feel that 
such exercises exposes  children to toxic gases and  adversely impacts 
their health, growth and development. The Committee recommend that 
a third party monitoring mechanism for assessing the implementation 
of EWM Rules, 2015 should be established for end -to-end monitoring of 
the entire process beginning fro m e-waste generation to its disposal so 
as to ensure that children are not being used for such hazardous 
occupation. Further, strict penal provisions need to be enforced and 
stringently against violators of the EVM, Rules 2015. The Committee  
also call upo n all concerned stakeholder Ministries/Departments 
including Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Labour, Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Education for devising an action 
plan for eradicating child labour in this sector. 
4.87 In respect of FMCGs sector, the Committee find that that in 
cases where the roadside dhabas and stalls are engaging children as 
labour, it may be easier to ensure inspections if companies while 
publishing banners/hoardings maintain a list of such shops and dhabas. 
The Committee urge upon the Ministry to intensify efforts to ensure 
that Children should not be engaged or involved in entire supply chain 
as well as selling of these products . Further, the Committee are of the 

157 
 
view that FMCG companies need to take the socia l, ethical and legal 
responsibility to prohibit child labour in this segment of business.  Such 
a step in the opinion of the Committee will help in addressing child 
labour in this sector. 
4.88 The Committee observe that one of the common issues prevalent 
in child labour is the unregulated placement agencies working in 
Metropolitan Cities. The real reason behind trafficking of children is 
that traffickers use tools of enticement and allurement. The 
Committee find that these placement agencies then bring these  
children to metro cities like Delhi from various parts of India like 
Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Odisha, North -East. The agencies not 
only place these children as domestic help but also sell these children 
to other parts of India making them  vulnerabl e to abuse, exploitation 
and cruelty. While acknowledging that there are unregulated multiple 
placement agencies working in many parts of Delhi that are 
contributing in trafficking of children, it is vital that regulation of such 
placement agencies is done  by the Delhi Government so as to stop 
child trafficking by these agencies. Furthermore, as Delhi is an 
strategic destination as well as transit point for whole of north India, 
regulation and timely inspections  of these agencies would make the 
functioning of these agencies transparent. The Committee desire that 
all other States across the Country should also make regulations 
binding for placement agencies operating under their jurisdiction.  
4.89 The Committee are dismayed to note the anomalies which have 
come to the fore through the information uploaded in the MIS Portal 
(as provided by the Police and Labour Department of various 
States/UTs). The Committee observe that there is a gross mismatch 
between the number of child labour rescued and the number of child 
labour produced before Child Welfare Committees (CWC). The 
Committee find that this is in direct contravention of the JJ Act, 2015 
which provides (under Section 31) that every child in need o f care and 
protection should be produced before a CWC. Secondly, it was stated by 

158 
 
NCPCR that 1025 children who were employed as child labour were 
rescued as part of ‘Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav’ drive against Child labour 
in June 2022. However, it has been noticed that this is in variance with 
the number provided (no. of Child labours rescued is 339 between 
01.04.2022 – 22.11.2022) in the portal. The Committee thus urge upon 
the NCPCR to ascertain the credibility and authenticity of the data 
uploaded in the por tal by matching the information pertaining to their 
own data relating to rescue of child labours and issue necessary 
directions to the concerned labour/police departments in case of 
discrepancies. Thirdly, the Committee feel that it may be possible that 
in many cases, the Police and the Labour Department may not have 
filed FIRs in child labour cases which may be the reason for less 
number of child labour being reported than the actual number on the 
ground. Further, in this regard, the Committee were apprise d that on 
07th July 2022, NCPCR had organized a meeting with Department of 
WCD, Social Welfare, Labour and Education of all States/UTs and it was 
impressed upon that all child labour cases reported under the Child 
Labour Act are cognizable offences and tha t States/UTs should register 
the FIRs in such cases immediately and promptly. Moreover, filing of 
FIR and strong implementation of the law is bound to create deterrence 
in society. The Committee are of the considered opinion that such 
inaccuracies in data /lapses on the part of the authorities lead to 
flawed outcomes potentially hampering the tangible benefits of the 
Policy in ensuring care and protection as envisioned under the JJ Act.  
Further, emphasis may be placed on conducting training of Labour 
officers and police officers on the issue of Child Labour including a 
capsule training specifically on the various provisions of  JJ Act, 2015.   
4.90 The Committee expressed their concern on the submission made 
by NCPCR that the proper and timely updation of da ta, that is to be 
uploaded by the Labour Department and Police Department, is not 
being done on  the NCPCR’s portal. The Committee observe that the 
States/UTs are not prompt in uploading the information on the MIS 

159 
 
portal and that only 12  States/1UT viz, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, 
Assam, Chhattisgarh,  Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Manipur,  Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Uttar 
Pradesh have  submitted information on the portal. In the view of the 
Committee, if all States/UTs wou ld provide data to the Commission in 
a timely manner, the monitoring by the Commission would be more 
effective and the Commission would be able to identify issues where 
interventions can be made. Comprehensive data also provides a strong 
foundation for evi dence-based policy decisions at the national and 
state levels. The Committee would therefore urge the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development as well as the Ministry of Home Affairs 
to ask the State Governments and their respective Labour and Police 
Departments to take serious note of the issue highlighted by NCPCR 
and take urgent action to rectify the situation. The Ministry should 
ensure that necessary technical assistance is provided to the 
States/UTs on how to use the MIS portal and any difficulties bei ng 
reported in this regard be resolved expeditiously.  There is also a need 
to develop clear and concise reporting guidelines to ensure consistency 
and accuracy. 
4.91 The Committee note that NCPCR, while dealing with the cases of 
complaints relating to chil d labour, observed that there arose 
procedural delays in the process of rescue and rehabilitation of 
children due to lack of convergence in the implementation of various 
legislations and multiple authorities under the Child labour Act 1986 
and Juvenile Justice Act, 2015. As a result of which delays and lapses 
were observed by authorities in initiating investigation in matters 
leading to difficulty in identification and prosecution of offenders. In 
order to effectively strengthen the process of rescue and re habilitation 
of children involved in child labour, necessary steps were taken by the 
Commission in preparing a Draft SOP for Child Labour. It has been 
stated that the Draft SOP has been sent to district officials for pilot 
testing as well. The Committee are of the opinion that the endeavour of 

160 
 
the Draft SOP for the rescue and post rescue of child labour is to 
streamline the understanding of the process laid down for inquiry and 
rehabilitation of children who are victims of child labour. The 
Committee also hope that if the SOP is complied to, in letter and spirit 
by all States/UTs, it will aid in better integration with the various Child 
welfare legislations and effectively facilitate a concerted framework to 
tackle the scourge of Child labour. 
4.92 The Committee note that in a suo motu  writ petition (SMWP)(c) 
No. 6 of 2021, Hon'ble Supreme Court had taken cognizance on the 
issue of Children in street situations and to which NCPCR is party. The 
Committee find that while developing SOP 2.0 regarding rescue of 
children in street situation NCPCR had been informed by Save the 
Children-NGO that they had mapped about 2 lakh in 04 States/UTs 
namely Delhi, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The 
Hon’ble Supreme Court was also informed about this data in affidavit of 
NCPCR dated 12.11.2021 and the Hon’ble Court directed the State 
Governments to take necessary action for these children. At the same 
time, according to the Ministry, as on 31.03.2022, 2245 CCIs are 
funded under Mission Vatsalya Scheme (erstwhile Chil d Protection 
Services) housing 76118 Children/beneficiaries including children who 
have been rehabilitated from begging by concerned Child Welfare 
Committees. Thus the number of children in street situation being 
reported by Save the Children, for just fou r states, is more than double 
the total number of children being housed by the CCIs. Evidently, the 
obtaining situation calls for greater efforts on the part of the 
Government to consolidate the coordination mechanism to accumulate 
accurate data regarding children in street situation so that effective 
policy interventions can be made. The Committee thus urge the 
Ministry to conduct a comprehensive nationwide survey in 
collaboration with various stakeholders, including NGOs, social 
workers, and community rep resentatives to ensure a thorough and 
inclusive assessment so as to accurately determine the number of 

161 
 
children in street situation. At the same time, there is a need to 
establish a robust data management system to track the number and 
characteristics of c hildren in street situations and strengthen 
coordination and collaboration among various government agencies 
and non -governmental organizations working on child protection 
issues. 
4.93 The Committee note that the Hon’ble Supreme Court in January 
2022 expre ssed its concern regarding having a set policy for dealing 
with children in street situations and asked NCPCR to provide some 
suggestions which can help in framing a policy. NCPCR in its affidavit 
dated 17.02.2022 submitted suggestions for developing a pol icy for 
rehabilitation of children in street situations. The Hon’ble Supreme 
Court vide its order dated 09.05.2022 has asked all States/UTs to 
implement the policy made by NCPCR till they don’t frame their own 
policy for children in street situations. The Committee appreciate that 
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) has taken 
the initiative to develop a policy for the rehabilitation of children in 
street situations. The Committee believe that the NCPCR policy is a 
comprehensive docume nt that can provide a valuable framework for 
States/UTs to develop their own policies and programmes to address 
the issue of children in street situations. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to ensure that all States/UTs to give the NCPCR policy careful 
consideration and that they implement it effectively until they are able 
to formulate their own policies as per the directions of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court.  The Ministry can provide the necessary technical 
assistance to the State Governments so that they expedi te framing of 
their own policies based on the specific conditions prevalent in their 
States. 
4.94 The Committee note that the NCPCR through its affidavits has 
been informing the Hon’ble Court about the steps taken by it to 
address the issues concerning  st reet children and submitting its data 
uploaded by the States/UTs  on Baal Swaraj Portal -CiSS from time to 

162 
 
time. The Committee hope that the Children in Street Situations(CiSS) 
platform is effectively used, as envisioned, for receiving data of 
children in s treet situations from all the States and Union territories, 
to aid in their effective identification, tracking,  rescue and 
rehabilitation process. Further, the Committee are of the opinion that 
necessary steps may be put in place to explore the possibilit y of 
engaging/providing access through the application to private 
professionals and organizations who volunteer to provide help in the 
form of open shelters, counselling services, medical services, 
sponsorships, de-addiction services, education services, l egal/paralegal 
services, identification of street children hotspots or any other 
assistance that can be rendered to street children in need. Further, the 
Committee urge upon the Ministry to analyse the factors/socio -
economic compulsions for forcing childre n onto street situations and 
prepare an effective Standard Operating Procedure for Care and 
Protection of Children in Street Situations so as to wean them away 
from neglect, emotional abuse, sexual abuse, and exploitation. 
4.95 The Committee are deeply concerned to note the observation of 
NCPCR that nodal officers to be appointed under Rule 2B(2) of the 
Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Rules, 2017 have not been 
appointed at the district level in the majority of States/UTs (13 States 
and 3 UTs are yet to appoint nodal officers, according to the 
information furnished by the NCPCR in light of the  review meeting by 
NCPCR on 16.07.2022). The Committee feel that the appointment of 
nodal officers under Rule 2B(2) of the Child Lab our (Regulation & 
Prohibition Rules 2017) is crucial for the effective implementation of 
the Act and the protection of children from exploitation. The absence 
of nodal officers in these states hinders the coordination and 
monitoring of child labor -related activities, potentially leading to gaps 
in enforcement and protection. The Committee thus urge the Ministry 
and NCPCR to work with the State Governments to ensure that they 
expeditiously appoint nodal officers under Rule 2B(2) of the Child 

163 
 
Labour (Regulati on & Prohibition Rules 2017).  Moreover, there is an 
urgent need to establish a mechanism for regular monitoring and 
evaluation of the performance of nodal officers through periodic 
meetings and performance reviews. Efforts must also be taken for 
capacity-building and training for nodal officers to enhance their 
knowledge and skills in dealing with child labor issues and promote 
inter-state collaboration and knowledge sharing among nodal officers to 
encourage the exchange of best practices and effective stra tegies in 
this regard. 
4.96 The Committee were informed that under the Mission Vatsalaya 
Scheme, directives have been issued in July 2022 to notify Child 
welfare and Protection Committees in every Panchayat and Municipal 
Urban/local bodies under clause 2.12 of the Scheme.  The Committee 
find that the mandate of the Committee would be to deliberate on 
issues pertaining to women and Child welfare along with ascertaining 
the number of school going children, out of school children, etc. along 
with commensura te budgeting under the 15 th Finance Commission. 
Further, under the Scheme, the Committee are given to understand 
that proposal to conduct Child survey and a National child index is 
under active consideration with the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Im plementation. The Committee appreciate the efforts 
made by the Ministry to enagage Panchayats/Municipal bodies for 
conducting a National Child Survey and development of Child Index in 
convergence with the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI) to map the needs of children through a 
periodic child survey, so as to envisage a suitable response in terms of 
an effective policy to eliminate Child labour.  The Committee desire 
that the Ministry of Women and Child Development to expedite the 
process in coordination with the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
4.97 The Committee note that the Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 
2.0 scheme is an Integrated Nutrition Support Programme that seeks to 

164 
 
address the challenges of malnutrition in children, adolescent girls, 
pregnant women and lactating mothers through a shift in nutrition 
content and its delivery by creation of a convergent eco -system to 
develop and promote practices that nurture health, wellness and 
immunity. The Committee obse rve that with a view to address various 
gaps and shortcomings in the ongoing nutrition programme and to 
improve implementation as well as to accelerate improvement in 
nutrition and child development outcomes, the existing scheme 
components have been re -organized under Poshan 2.0 into the three 
primary verticals viz, Nutrition Support for POSHAN and for Adolescent 
Girls (14 -18), Early Childhood Care and Education [3 -6 years], 
Anganwadi Infrastructure including modern, upgraded Saksham 
Anganwadis. The Committee note that any child of age group 6 months 
to 6 years is entitled to a set of six services under the scheme viz, (i) 
Supplementary Nutrition (SNP), (ii) Pre -school Non -formal 
Education, (iii) Nutrition & Health Education,  (iv) Immunization, (v) 
Health Ch eck-up,  and (vi) Referral Services.   Immunization, Health 
check-up and Referral Services are   provided through NHM & Public 
Health Infrastructure. The Committee were informed that the total 
number of beneficiaries up to December, 2021 are 9,50,18,684 
comprising of 7.5 lakh children and 2 lakh women. The Committee 
urge that necessary awareness be created among public to avail the 
nutritional and health services provided to fulfill the commitment of 
ensuring holistic development of all children under the age  of 6 years, 
adolescent girls and pregnant/lactating mothers. 
 
4.98 The Committee find that Anganwadi Centres have been 
sanctioned to all States/UTs as of 31.12.2021 (to be updated). However 
it has been observed that in a  few States like Bihar, Rajasthan,  Uttar 
Pradesh and  Jammu and Kashmir, there appears to be a variance 
between the numbers of sanctioned and operational Anganwadi centres. 
The Committee urge upon the Ministry to issue necessary instructions 
to address the deficit so as to ensure that the Anganwadi centres that 

165 
 
have not been operationalised as yet be expeditiously functional. The 
Committee further also exhort the Ministry to direct the State 
Governments to re -visit the issue of availability of Anganwadi Centres 
(AWCs) at the habitation level and determine the actual requirement of 
AWCs vis-a-vis the population of the area, number of children actually 
attending the AWCs and the number of AWCs available.  Further, the 
Committee feel that the recent initiative to provide 2 lakh AWCs Rs 
40,000 per year towards their upgradation by the respective Panchayat 
Raj departments/Poshan Panchayats, is a step in the right direction. 
The Committee feel that modernizati on/ upgradation is a continuous 
process and the Ministry issue directions to various States/UTs to 
intensify their efforts through the Poshan Panchayats in rejuvenating 
the Anganwadi Centres under their jurisdiction in order to effectively 
function towards achieving the  goal of a malnutrition free India. 
 
4.99 Anganwadi Services Scheme is a symbol of the country’s 
commitment to its children and nourishing mothers, as a response to 
the challenge of providing pre -school non -formal education on one 
hand and b reaking the vicious cycle of malnutrition, morbidity, 
reduced learning capacity and mortality on the other. The Committee 
appreciate the recent initiatives taken by the Ministry to achieve the 
enshrined objective. The major initiatives, inter-alia, include issuance 
of guidelines on January, 2021  to ensure transparency, efficiency and 
accountability in delivery of nutrition delivery support systems. In 
keeping with the announcement made by the Prime Minister on 15 
August, 2021, 100% fortified rice to all Sta te/UTs are allocated to 
address the issue of malnutrition faced by women and children. States 
have been advised to incorporate millets to enhance quality of 
supplementary nutrition. Further, introduction of diet diversity and 
consumption of wholesome local  produce through 4.35 lakh Poshan 
vatikas, improving digital infrastructure support for last -mile tracking 
and monitoring of nutrition delivery through 'Poshan Tracker' for 
transparency, efficiency and accountability in delivery of 

166 
 
Supplementary Nutrition,  providing Anganwadi workers with 11.13 
lakh smartphones and 11.94 lakh growth monitoring services, 40 crore 
activities under Poshan Maah and Poshan Pakhwada, Community 
outreach services, Media advocacy are all steps in the right direction. 
All these measu res provide the necessary direction towards improving 
the nutritional norms and standards of children, women and lactating 
mothers. For all these schemes to effectively synergise, the Committee 
urge upon the Ministry to issue directions to all States/UTs t o ensure 
Aadhar seeding of all beneficiaries so as to ensure good governance 
through last -mile delivery of services including Supplementary 
Nutrition under Poshan 2.0. 
 
4.100  The Committee observe that, in response to a rapidly 
deteriorating child sex ratio and related issues of empowerment of girls 
and women over a life cycle continuum, the ‘Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao’ 
programme was launched in 2014, aiming to provide survival, safety 
and education to the girl child. This Scheme has a multi -sectoral 
intervention at district level. It was initially being run in 405 districts 
and through multi-media advocacy, it was expanded to 640 districts of 
the country. The Committee were given to understand  that there has 
been a increase in 19 points in Sex ratio at birt h at National level from 
918 (2014-15) to 937 (2020 -21). Also, enrolment of girls in Secondary 
education at National level has increased from 75.51% in 2014 -15 to 
7.83% in 2019 -20. Appreciating the efforts taken in this regard, the 
Committee feel that cont inuing convergence with partner Ministries 
viz, Ministry of Education, Health and Family Welfare, Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship and Youth Affairs and Sports at all 
levels will ensure holistic empowerment of the girl child. Further, the 
Committee urge upon the Ministry to devise a mechanism to evaluate 
the performance of various States/districts to create an environment 
of healthy competition. 
 

167 
 
4.101  The Committee note that Ujjawala scheme was launched for 
the prevention of illicit trafficking, wit h five specific components viz. 
prevention, rescue, rehabilitation, re -integration and repatriation of 
victims who were trafficked for commercial sexual exploitation. The 
Committee were apprised of the difference between Swadhar Greh 
which caters to the pr imary needs of women in difficult circumstances 
and Ujjawala homes which  is a scheme for prevention of trafficking 
and rescue and rehabilitation of survivors. As per the Ministry, during 
the 15th Financial year cycle, both these schemes are being integrat ed 
under the name ‘Shakti Sadan’ so as to effectively run them.  
 Further, the Committee were also apprised of the Immoral Traffic 
(Prevention) Act (ITPA), 1956 which was also enacted with the objective 
to prevent trafficking for commercial sexual exploita tion. Further, the 
Committee were informed that, if Children are involved in these 
situations, they are covered under JJ Act/POCSO Act, whereas women 
above 18 years, are rehabilitated and taken to Ujjawala homes, under 
provisions of ITPA. Commending the Mi nistry for the initiatives taken 
by them under Ujjawala and Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 to 
effectively aid in checking trafficking in women and children, the 
Committee desire that endeavour of the Ministry to effectively provide 
shelter and reha bilitate the victims and lead a life of dignity would be  
effectively served if the three pillars of anti -trafficking efforts —
prevention, protection and prosecution are enforced. The Committee 
urge upon the Ministry to intensify their efforts towards rais ing 
awareness, shelters for protection and rehabilitation of victims, law 
enforcement and prosecution in order to bolster the effectiveness of 
these legislations. 
  

168 
 
CHAPTER - FIVE 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
Introduction 
5.1 Ministry of Home Affairs plays a crucial role in addressing and 
combating child labour due to its extensive responsibilities and resources in 
maintaining law and order, national security, and border control. Effective 
law enforcement plays a vital role in deterring future offenses and pen alizing 
those who exploit children. Evaluation of functioning of the Ministry in this 
regard can help assess the effectiveness of existing rescue strategies and 
interventions. This evaluation can reveal whether current approaches are 
achieving desired outc omes and whether they are reaching their target 
beneficiaries effectively. In view of the above, the Committee decided to 
examine the Ministry of Home Affairs because of its wide ambit in the realm 
of Child trafficking and repatriation.  The Committee were informed by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs that globalization and the search for better 
opportunities have increased the movement of people thereby making them 
vulnerable to trafficking and prone to exploitation. While recognizing that 
human trafficking is a  grave crime, the Ministry have been making 
continuous and concerted efforts to prevent and counter the crime of 
trafficking. The victims of trafficking often endure physical violence, sexual 
abuse, harassment, threat and coercion. In this regard, the Mini stry 
apprised the Committee on the steps taken by them to check child labour, 
particularly human trafficking and use of children in illicit activities, role of 
National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) in documenting incidence of crimes 
against Children and oth er additional measures taken to alleviate the 
menace of Child labour.          
Constitutional and Statutory Provisions 
5.2 The Ministry while stating that Article 23 of the Constitution of India 
prohibits trafficking in any form, submitted that Police and Public Order are 
state subjects under the Seventh Schedule and that the State Governments 
are competent to take appropriate steps to address and counter the crime of 
human trafficking, under the extant provisions of the law.    
5.3 It was also brought to t he notice of the Committee about the new 
legislative enactment whereby Section 370 of the IPC was substituted with a 
modified Section 370 along with a new Section 370A which provided strict 
punishment to be awarded to the offenders for exploitation of a tr afficked 
person.Elaborating on the new provisions, the Ministry submitted that that 
Section 370 has been strengthened so as to enlarge the scope of the offence 
and include within its purview not just slavery, but trafficking in general – of 
minors, adults, forced labour, prostitution, organ transplant etc. thereby not 
only providing a comprehensive definition of human trafficking but also 
provide stricter punishment to be awarded to the offenders for exploitation 
of trafficked person          

169 
 
5.4 Highlighting the penal provisions under Section 370A relating to 
exploitation of trafficked persons, the Ministry submitted as under:   
“i. Whoever, knowingly or having reason to believe that a minor has been 
trafficked, engages such minor for sexual exploitation in  any manner, shall 
be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than five years, but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
ii. Whoever, knowingly by or having reason to believe that a person has 
been trafficked, engages such person for sexual exploitation in any manner, 
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than three years, but which may extend to five years and shall also be 
liable to fine.” 
Census 
5.5 The C ommittee were apprised by the Ministry that the Census is 
conducted under the Census Act, 1948 and during the exercise, no specific 
data on child labour is collected, however data on workers (main and 
marginal) and non -workers are collected and published. The Committee 
were informed that Main Workers were workers who worked for more than 6 
months during the year and Marginal Workers were workers who worked for 
0-6 months. The last Census was conducted in 2011 for which the data has 
been released. It was fur ther stated that due to Covid -19, Census 2021 and 
related field activities have been postponed until further orders.   
5.6 Asked to furnish the data pertaining related to Main and Marginal 
workers in the age -groups 5-9 years & 10 -14 years, the Ministry fur nished 
the data, as per Census 2011, as under:        
Workers Age-group (5-9) Age-group (10-14) 
Persons Males Females %age to 
all ages 
Persons Males Females 
Main 
workers 
1108800 630875 477933 0.31 3244439 2033172 1211267 
Marginal 
workers 
(<3 
months) 
357920 180532 177388 1.61 1542262 779362 762900 
Marginal 
workers 
(3-6 
months) 
1066910 554665 512245 1.10 2808324 1450309 1358015 
Total 
workers 
2533638 1366072 1167566 0.53 7595025 4262843 3332182 
 
 
 
 

170 
 
5.7 Asked to provide the data pertaining to main/marginal workers in age 
group 15-19, the Ministry furnished the fo llowing data as per Census 2011 
as under: 
A1: Main workers, Marginal workers in age-groups 15-19, 15-18 & 15-17 by sex as per 
Census 2011 at India level 
Wor
kers 
Age-group (15-19) *Age-group (15-18) *Age-group (15-17) All ages 
Pers
ons 
Male
s 
Fem
ales 
%
ag
e 
to 
all 
ag
es 
Pers
ons 
Male
s 
Fem
ales 
%
ag
e 
to 
all 
ag
es 
Pers
ons 
Mal
es 
Fem
ales 
%
ag
e 
to 
all 
ag
es 
Perso
ns 
Male
s 
Fema
les 
Mai
n 
wor
kers 
 
1770
3310 
1272
1891 
4981
419 
4.8
8 
9821
829 
5522
664 
429
916
5 
8.2
3 
7439
007 
525
042
4 
2188583 2.05 3625
6557
1 
2732
0997
6 
3625
6557
1 
Tota
l 
Mar
ginal 
wor
kers 
 
1251
3070 
6975
789 
5537
281 
10.
49 
1305
0079 
9364
791 
368
528
8 
3.6
0 
6211
813 
346
802
8 
2743785 5.21 1193
2329
7 
5872
9899 
1193
2329
7 
Mar
ginal 
wor
kers 
(<3 
mon
ths) 
 
3054
963 
1645
507 
1409
456 
13.
72 
NA NA NA - NA NA NA - 2225
8849 
1014
0318 
2225
8849 
Mar
ginal 
wor
kers 
(3-6 
mon
ths) 
 
9458
107 
5330
282 
4127
825 
9.7
4 
NA NA NA - NA NA NA - 9706
4448 
4858
9581 
9706
4448 
Tota
l 
wor
kers 
 
3021
6380 
1969
7680 
1051
8700 
6.2
7 
2287
1908 
1488
7455 
798
445
3 
4.7
5 
1365
0820 
871
845
2 
932368 2.83 4818
8886
8 
3319
3987
5 
4818
8886
8 
* The data is compiled from single year age group data for which categories of marginal 
workers is not available. 
5.8 On being asked about the method adopted for estimating the number of 
Labour in India, the representative of the Ministry stated that data collected 
by census enumerators are respondent based and that individual data 
collected in Census is kept confiden tial and are not open to inspection nor 
admissible. In this respect, the representative of the Ministry deposed as 
under:      
“During census, the data is collected from the head of the household 
and whatever he says is taken on record and based on that we  release 
the data. We also collectthe age of the persons as well as the data 

171 
 
about main workers … We also collect age as well as occupation and 
industry data. Till last census because it was being done manually, it 
was not possible to release all the data, which we collected for 
occupation and industry. It is because the data was not in a format. 
In the last census they used around 27 lakh enumerators and we 
conducted census in 18 different languages. So, reading all those 
handwritings was quite cumbersome, but this time because we will be 
doing digital census and we will be covering occupation and industry 
for all the persons along with their age, and in that sense when we 
release the data we will be covering what you were expecting us to 
cover.”           
 
5.9 The Committee then enquired about the survey of the ‘houseless 
population’ as part of the Census exercise. The Ministry during their post 
evidence replies, submitted as under: 
“The enumeration of the houseless population is traditionally carried 
out on the last night of the Population Census. In the 2011 context, 
the enumeration of the houseless was conducted in the night of the 
28th February, 2011. In order to ensure complete coverage of 
houseless population, the first and foremost, an estimation of th e 
places where such population resides is made in advance to have a 
fair idea of the number of people who are present in any particular 
location, so that adequate manpower planning is undertaken. For this 
purpose, the enumerators list down all the houseles s households 
through the period of enumeration in the Section -4 of the Abridged 
Houselist. In other words, the enumerator has a fair idea of the places 
where such houseless population resides and an appropriate number 
of such persons during rounds in her/h is enumeration block. This 
helps in assessing the number of enumerators that are required for 
this specific purpose. The local officials, including the Police, are 
alerted well in advance and teams of enumerators are accompanied by 
officials and police on the night of the enumeration. A circular is 
issued on Enumeration of Houseless population during Census of 
India before the census giving the detailed instructions for their 
coverage.” 
 
5.10 The official of the Census Department, during the course of his 
evidence further elaborated as under:      
“On the last day of the Census operation, we conduct census only for 
the houseless population. It is done for those who are living below the 
bridges and flyovers, in the pipes, etc. Somewhere at flyovers jhuggis 
and temporary shades has been made. All these are marked at last. It 
is done from 9 February to 28 February. It is counted at last on 28 
February. Sir, we publish it separately or not, we have to check this.” 
 

172 
 
5.11 The Committee then desired to be apprised o f the data pertaining to 
the ‘houseless’ population including children in age -group 0 -6 years. In 
response, the representative of the Census Department, furnished as under:  
Population/Workers Persons %age to total 
population 
Males Females 
Population 1773040 100.00 1046871 726169 
Population in age-group(0-6) 270605 15.26 140044 130561 
Literate population 588392 - 404475 183917 
Literacy rate among population of 
age group 7+ 
 
39.16 - 44.60 30.88 
Main workers 654877 36.94 478792 176085 
Marginal workers 
(<3 months) 
 
59673 - 38917 20756 
Marginal workers 
(3-6 months) 
 
205020 - 124202 80818 
Total Marginal Workers 264693 14.93 163119 101574 
Total workers 919570 51.86 641911 277659 
 
NCRB and Data on Human Trafficking 
5.12 The Committee were informed that National Crime Records Bureau 
(NCRB) compiles crime statistics reported to it by States and UTs and 
publishes the same in its annual publication ‘Crime in India’. As per the 
report (2020), it was stated that 4680 victims rescued under human 
trafficking during the year. 
5.13 The official of NCRB, during the course of his evidence further 
apprised the Committee on the collaborative efforts with the Railway 
Protection Force (RPF) as under:  
“I would like to bring two small facts to your focus. We  mentioned about the 
support of RPF. We have developed some tools like unify tool and automatic 
alerts where a child on the basis of details published from one police station 
and the child is traced in another police station, then the data is 
automatically matched and a response goes to both the police stations that 
your missing child has been traced in this police station. So, this response is 
system based, and this helps in tracing the children. We also have given a 
facility to the general public. They ca n log into our website and check 
whether their missing person has been traced anywhere. Then, there is 
another tool whereby missing person’s photograph can be tallied and a 
report can be given. The RPF is working on this and they are getting good 
results o n this. So, these are the facilities extended by the NCRB in 
recording the data and tracing of our missing children. We collect category -

173 
 
wise data of the reasons for trafficking, as reported by States and UTs, and 
they are on record.” 
5.14 Asked to provide  the State/UT wise data of Children under 18 years 
along with the purpose of trafficking in 2020, the representative of NCRB 
furnished as under:      
 
5.15 On the analysis derived from the data collated by NCRB with regard to 
category-wise data of the reasons/purposes for trafficking, as reported by 
States and UTs, the Officials of NCRB, during the course of their evidence, 
deposed as under:- 
“Out of 2,151 cases analysed and reported during 2020, the purpose of 
human trafficking as reported by States an d UTs, in 630 cases it is because 
of forced labour; in 166 cases it is for sexual exploitation; in 780 cases it is 
for domestic servitude; in 132 cases it is for forced marriage. There is a new 
developing field of cybercrime, where the children are exploit ed. So, we are 
taking data on that basis also. We are recording crimes against children 


174 
 
under cybercrime for the entire country so that we can bring a sharper focus 
on this. The formation of a separate chapter is the outcome of discussions 
with the MHA and this analysis.”   
      
5.16 Asked to furnish the State/UT wise details of rehabilitation of rescued 
children (under 18 years) from trafficking during 2020, the Ministry 
furnished as under:  
   
 
 
5.17 Specifically asked to provide the data pertaining to offenders 
prosecuted under the Child Labour (Regulation and Prohibition) Act, the 
official of NCRB furnished the following as under:    
      


175 
 
 
Role of National Investigative Agency (NIA) 
5.18 Taking cognizance to the need for effective handling of investi gation of 
human trafficking cases having Inter -State and national/International 
ramifications, the Committee were apprised by the Ministry that the 
National Investigative Agency (NIA) was amended in 2019 whereby a 
significant amendment was added under whic h NIA has been authorized to 
investigate the offence of human trafficking by bringing in sections 370 and 
370 A of chapter XVI of the Indian Penal Code in its ambit.   
5.19 The Officials during the course of their evidence further elaborated on 
the ambit of NIA as under:          
“Now NIA is empowered to investigate cases which have inter -State and 
international ramifications pertaining to human trafficking, especially under 
Section 370 and Section 370A of IPC. Based on this change in law, now all 
the States are mandated to report cases of human trafficking to the Central 
Government. The Central Government, as per NIA Act Section 6, where it 


176 
 
feels the case is of such an importance that it needs a thorough investigation 
by NIA, entrusted such cases for investigation to NIA. Since 2019, as of now, 
NIA has been entrusted 12 cases for investigation which have inter -State 
and international ramifications of which 53 accused persons have been 
charge sheeted in 7 cases.. These cases are being currently 
investigated...The analysis of these cases primarily we conduct to the extent 
that we register cases under NIA Act and investigate. The victims of these 
cases have been primarily promised by the headhunters for providing better 
jobs in the country and that is how they w ere lured to be brought into the 
country from Bangladesh and Sri Lanka. In one of the cases, they were 
using it as a standpost with a promise to further send them to another 
foreign country. Primarily, these kinds of investigations which have further 
linkages and where the groups are based in neighbouring countries also, we 
are investigating, and we do it through the evidence collection mode that we 
have in the foreign countries, through MLAT etc. We adopt that route for 
getting evidence……..Nepal and Myanma r are also there.……….There are 
formal ways. We coordinate through the Ministry of Home Affairs, the 
Internal Security Division. Whenever we require assistance in terms of 
evidence collection, we write through the Government to the concerned 
country’s Gover nment through the route of mutual legal assistance 
arrangements (MLAT), that is where we have mutual legal assistance treaties 
or mutual legal assistance arrangements. So, through that, we obtain the 
requisite evidence. For conducting investigations abroad , we also send our 
teams with the consent of the concerned countries and they conduct 
requisite investigation there….further in case of Inter -State cases, we deal 
with prosecutions. In terms of registration of these companies, it is a State 
subject. But we do write to them once we identify that a company has been 
found to be involved. As per the UAPA also and other legal provisions within 
the ambit of it, we write to the State Government to take appropriate action 
against them.” 
5.20 The Committee were also  apprised that the NIA has the mandate to 
take up cases which have inter -State and international ramifications. 
Presently, there are 18 Branch Offices in India including its Headquarters in 
New Delhi (per 5) and that the sanctioning of a separate vertical of Anti 
Human Trafficking Cell in NIA is under active consideration of the 
Government.   
5.21 On the coordination mechanism between NIA and the respective 
State/UT Governments for cases of trafficking, it was submitted that 
trafficking adolescents and chil dren are the subject matter of investigation 
of State Police. However NIA remain in touch with other Central agencies 
and take over investigation of human trafficking cases if such offences come 
under scheduled offences within the mandate of NIA. 
 5.22 The Ministry further furnished the data pertaining to State/UT wise 
persons arrested, chargesheeted, convicted and the overall conviction rate 
under Sections 370/370A IPC for crimes against Children during 2018-2020 
as under:           
  

177 
 
 
Steps taken by Ministry of Home Affairs 
(i) Anti Trafficking Cell (ATC)/Anti-Human Trafficking Units (AHTUs) 
5.23 Asked about the measures envisaged to address human trafficking, 
the Committee were apprised on the steps put in place by the Ministry, as 
under: 
“The Ministry established a Anti Trafficking Cell in 2006 to deal with matters 
relating to law enforcement response on human trafficking. It acts as an 
interface with Ministry of Women and Child Development, Ministry of 
External Affairs, Ministry of Labour  & Employment and also engages with 
State/UT authorities, etc. to address the issue of human trafficking. It 


178 
 
provides guidelines, Standard Operating Procedure(SOP)and advisories to 
States/UTs from time to time.             
Further, financial assistance has  also been provided to States and UTs for 
holding ’Judicial Colloquiums’ and ’State level conferences’ on periodic basis 
for sensitizing judicial and police officials and to make available to them 
updated information on latest provisions of law relating to  trafficking. For 
addressing transnational issues of human trafficking, the Anti Trafficking 
Cell has also assisted in signing of bilateral Memorandums of Understanding 
with Bangladesh, UAE, Cambodia and Myanmar; and multilateral 
instruments on human trafficking. 
 Funds were also provided to State Governments for setting up Anti -
Human Trafficking Units (AHTUs) in 50 percent Police Districts(15) of States 
and amount of Rs. 25.16 crore was released to the States during the period 
2010 to 2019 for setting up AHTUs in 332 Districts of States besides AHTUs 
being set up by some States/UTs on their own.”    
  
5.24 Specifically asked to elaborate on the AHTU’s, the Committee were 
informed as under: 
“AHTU’s are integrated task forces to prevent and combat traffickin g in 
persons and comprise of a group of trained sensitive officials of Police, 
Women and Child Welfare Department and other relevant Departments of 
the State. AHTUs function as coherent units to prevent and combat 
trafficking. Objectives and responsibiliti es of AHTUs include conducting 
rescue operations whenever they receive information about trafficking 
activities; ensuring victim -centric approach; functioning as a grass root 
unitfor collection and development of database or all aspects of the crime, 
helping in investigation of trafficking cases, collecting information on 
traffickers and trafficking gangs etc. AHTUs attend to all three aspects of 
trafficking viz. prevention, protection andassistance in prosecution and are 
thus the field level functionalunits to address human trafficking in a holistic 
manner. AHTUs have proved to be useful in coordinating timely action at the 
ground level to curb the menace of human trafficking.”  
5.25 In order to further fortify the law enforcement response against 
trafficking, the Ministry supplemented on the institutional mechanism at 
the State/District/Police Station level as under: 
“Anti-Human Trafficking Units were established in each State and UT. These 
are generally headed by an Additional DG level officer, who address es 
human trafficking issue in a holistic manner. In each district also, AHTUs 
have been established which will function under the supervision of a 
Superintendent of Police/Deputy Superintendent of Police level officer. We 
also have established AHTUs in bor der areas under BSF and SSB to check 
and curb trans -national trafficking. A total of 696 AHTUs have been 
established in various States and UTs as per National Crime Records 
Bureau’s annual publication “Crime in India 2020. 
As a result of this, the Ministry  submitted that by establishing the above 
arrangement, each State will havea Unit for preventingand countering 
human trafficking at all levels of the State/UT -Headquarters of the 

179 
 
State/UT, District level and Police Station level, thus dealing with the 
problem of human trafficking in a comprehensive manner.” 
 
5.26 The Ministry further apprised the Committee that Rs. 100 crore were 
allocated from Nirbhaya Fund for setting up new AHTUs as well as 
strengthening the existing AHTUs covering all districts of State s/UTs 
whereby funds were provided to States/UTs to establish infrastructure. 
   
5.27 When asked about the extent to which the fund allocated from the 
Nirbhaya Fund has been utilized towards setting up of AHTUs and whether 
it is proposed to achieve comprehe nsive coverage of such Units across all 
the Districts in the country, the Ministry in their post evidence reply stated 
as under: 
“The Ministry of Home Affairs has provided financial assistance of Rs98.86 
crore to all States and UTs for strengthening existing Anti Human Trafficking 
Units (AHTUs) and setting up new AHTUs, covering all districts of the 
country.”  
 
5.28 On the mechanism available to monitor the functioning of AHTUs, the 
Ministry replied as under: 
“Engagement with States and UTs is a continuous and ongoing process. 
MHA engages with the States and UTs in the matter of human trafficking 
from time to time. MHA reviews the progress of implementation of various 
Women Safety projects, including the scheme of setting up/strengthening 
Anti-Human Traffick ing Units (AHTUs) through virtual meetings with 
State/UT functionaries. MHA has also established an online monitoring 
portal for the States and UTs to update the progress of AHTUs and for 
sharing their best practices and success stories.”     
 
5.29 The Com mittee were informed that an Institutional mechanism to 
counter human trafficking in a focused and effective manner at the level of 
State Governments was devised and shared with all States and UTs in 
December, 2020. Subsequently, the States have been asked  to establish 
appropriate Bureau/Units at State -Headquarter level, District level and 
Police Station level to address the issues of trafficking in a comprehensive 
manner. In this regard, the Committee desired to know whether Anti Human 
Trafficking Bureau (ATHB) were established in all States/UTs and details of 
the Officer heading such units. The Ministry, while stating that details of 
Officers heading Anti Human Trafficking Bureau are not maintained 
Centrally, furnished the number of State/UT -wise AHTUs dur ing 2020 are 
as under:           
    

180 
 
 
 


181 
 
5.30 Enquired about the coordination mechanism between AHTUs and 
AHTBs, the Ministry responded that the States have been asked to notify a 
State-Headquarter level Anti -Human Trafficking Bureau at State -
Headquarter le vel to oversee and coordinate all trafficking related issues 
within the State and for coordination with other States/UTs. Further, the  
States have also been asked that each AHTU will report to the State -
Headquarter level AHTB.   
(ii) Advisories/SOPs to States and UTs 
5.31 The Committee were informed that the Ministry have issued 
advisories/SOPs to States and UTs on 6.7.2020 to check incidence of 
trafficking during the pandemic. (b/n pg 6). The Ministry further submitted 
that a specific SOP to handle traffi cking of children for Child labour and 
measures to be taken for trafficked child labour and penal action against 
employers/traffickers has also been issued. All States /UTs have been 
vigourously advised to enforce all existing legislations relating to crim es 
against children under the Prohibition of Child Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986. 
5.32 Further, the Committee were apprised that the MHA have advised the 
States that they should set up exclusive ’Crime against Women/Children’ 
Desks in each Police Station and that there should be no delay in 
registration of FIRs in all cases of crime against children and has released 
an amountof more than Rs. 100 crore under Nirbhaya Fund in 2020 for 
establishing Women Help Desks in Police Stations.  
5.33 It was further submitted that the State Governments were advised 
that crimes against children should be thoroughly investigated and speedy 
investigation should be conducted. They have also been advised to increase 
the number of beat constables, police help ki osks, increase patrolling, etc. 
States have also been advised that all efforts should be made to prevent 
child labour and exploitation of children in all forms and that law 
enforcement agencies must extend necessary cooperation to State Labour 
Department. Additionally, it was stated that necessary financial assistance 
is also provided to all States and UTs to hold State Level Conference on 
Human Trafficking on a regular basis to sensitize and bring awareness 
among the various law enforcement agencies and ot her stakeholder 
Departments of the States in the matter of trafficking.     
(iii) Sensitization/Awareness Campaigns 
5.34 On the steps taken by the Ministry to generate awareness to check 
incidence of human trafficking, the Committee were informed as under: 
“The Ministry engages with the States and UTs to generate awareness about 
human trafficking. Financial assistance is provided by MHA to all State 
Governments and UT Administrations on regular basis to hold Judicial 
Colloquiums on human trafficking. This i s aimed at sensitizing the judicial 
officers to focus on measures for speedy disposal of trafficking cases and 
taking stringent action against traffickers and exercise discretion as 
provided under the law.”  

182 
 
5.35 On the measures taken to create awareness a mong police personnel 
on the perils of trafficking and the need to sensitise them in order to 
facilitate early detection and apprehension of child traffickers, the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
“Financial assistance to States and UTs was provided for holding ‘State level 
conferences' on periodic basis for sensitizing police officials and to make 
available to them updated information on latest provisions of law relating to 
trafficking. Bureau of Police Research and Development has been regularly 
conducting training courses pertaining to Anti -Human Trafficking. MHA 
have also issued an Advisory dated 6.7.2020 to all States and UTs inter -alia 
advising the Police Officers to undertake preventive steps such as 
identification of children in distress, watching out for suspicious persons, 
keeping special vigil at transit points and identify vulnerable population and 
susceptible pockets in the State.”        
5.36 Additionally, the Ministry have also advised the States to sensitise 
police personnel deployed at bus depots, Inter-State Check posts and State 
borders to keep a close watch on suspicious activities of those transporting 
victims especially women and children.       
(iv) Inter-Ministerial Coordination/Sensitisation 
5.37 The Ministry further submitted that the Ministry of Railways have 
been advised to involve Railway Protection Force(RPF) and Government 
Railway Police(GRP) personnel deployed at Railway stations in detecting 
trafficking incidents and apprehending the traffickers in coordination with 
local police.It was further brought to the notice of the Committee that the 
Ministry of Railways in collaboration with the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development and National Commission for Protection of Child Rights have 
issued a SOP for ensuring care and protect ion of children in contact with 
Railways, which also includes a protocol for rescue for children found 
abandoned at rail stations or trafficked through trains.     
5.38 Specifically drawing the attention of the Ministry of Home Affairs to 
reported incidenc e of child labourers brought by middlemen or placement 
agencies among the migrant workers, the Committee sought to enquire 
whether the Ministry have issued any instructions/advisory to State Labour 
Departments or any other Department to take action on this  issue. The 
Ministry in this regard, submitted as under: 
“This point concerns Ministry of Labour& Employment and they have been 
asked to respond to it. In 2017, Ministry of Home Affairs had also requested 
the Ministry of Labour& Employment to sensitize off icers of the Labour 
Department in all States and UTs to keep a close vigil and watch on the 
activities of placement agencies in States with a view to addressing the crime 
of human trafficking and render all necessary assistance to the law 
enforcement agencies to check the crime.”      
5.39 Additionally, the Ministry of Women and Child Development were also 
urged to advise their respective State level officers of the Dept of Women and 
Child Development to extend full cooperation and assistance in 

183 
 
rehabilitation of victims in close coordination with local enforcement 
agencies.  
5.40 When asked whether the Ministry issued any instructions/guidelines 
to the police authorities for regular inspection of establishments with high 
incidence of child labour such as br ick kilns and construction sites, the 
Ministry submitted that the query pertains to the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment.           
(v) Inter- State Coordination – Technology sharing 
5.41 On the significance of Inter -State coordination, the Ministry infor med 
the Committee that they have urged upon the respective State Governments 
to evolve Inter - State coordination mechanisms by means of technology 
information sharing about victims in apprehending traffickers and rescuing 
victims.           
5.42 In this re gard, the Committee were apprised of a national level 
communication platform- Crime Multi Agency Centre (Cri-MAC) launched by 
MHA in 2020 which facilitates dissemination of information about 
significant crimes including human trafficking cases across the c ountry on 
real time basis and enables inter State coordination for online sharing of 
information on crime and criminals on 24x7 basis between various law 
enforcement agencies and ensure seamless flow of information in 
prevention, detection and investigation of crimes.     
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
5.43 The Committee are concerned to note that during the Census 
exercise, no specific data on child Iabour is documented. However, data 
on workers (main and marginal) and non -workers are collected and 
published. The Committee were informed that Main Workers were 
workers who worked for more than 6months during the year and 
Marginal Workers were workers who worked for 0 -6 months. Further, the 
Committee find that traditionally the enumeration of the housel ess 
population is carried out on the last night of the population Census and 
the Census department has a well established protocol to ensure the 
complete coverage of the houseless population. According to the last 
Census conducted in 2011, out of the total  population of houseless 
persons, 270605 are children aged between 0 -6 years, which, in the 
opinion of the Committee, is a cause of great concern. The Committee 
observe that the houseless population comprise of the most 
underprivileged and disadvantaged se ctions of the society and thus 

184 
 
there is a dire need to target the welfare efforts of the Government 
towards them. The Committee observe that the Census exercise 
provides an opportunity to map the areas where the homeless 
populations are concentrated partic ularly in metropolitan areas where 
such groups tend to settle down in certain parts over the years. The 
Committee further recommend that the publication of the data 
pertaining to the houseless population be expedited after the next 
Census so that urgent in terventionist measures can be undertaken by 
departments such as the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, 
Ministry of Labour and Ministry of Women and Child Development for 
the welfare of the houseless population. 
5.44 The Committee while acknowledging th e link between human 
trafficking and the engagement of trafficked children as child labour,  
appreciate the efforts of the Government in bringing the offence of 
human trafficking, as envisaged under section 370 and 370 A of IPC, 
under the mandate of Nation al Investigation Agency (NIA). The 
Committee also laud the work done by NIA under its new mandate 
where out of the 12 cases of Human trafficking entrusted to NIA, it has 
submitted charge sheet in 7 cases against 53 accused. The Committee 
also find that in order to strengthen the efforts of NIA against 
traffickers, the Ministry have sanctioned 6 new Branch offices (18 
total) while a separate vertical of Anti - Human Trafficking is under 
consideration of the Government. The Committee observe that NIA, 
being a National level investigative agency which has the mandate and 
the expertise to take up cases having inter -State and International 
ramifications, the steps taken by the Government to strengthen the 
agency are in the right direction and may be earnestly pur sued.In this 
regard, the Committee recommend that the process of creation of a 
separate vertical of Anti- Human Trafficking in NIA be expedited. 
5.45 The Committee note that in order to address the law enforcement 
response to human trafficking, the Anti -Trafficking Cell(ATCs) was 
established in 2006. An amount of Rs. 25.16 crore was released to the 

185 
 
states during the period 2010 to 2019 for setting up Anti -Human 
Trafficking Units (AHTUs) in 332 districts of States besides AHTUs 
being set up by some states on  their own. These  ATCs act as an 
interface with Ministry of Women and Child Development, Ministry of 
External Affairs, Ministry of Labour & Employment and State/UT 
authorities by issuing guidelines, Standard Operating Procedure(SOP) 
and advisories from time to time. Moreover, the Committee were given 
to understand that in order to address transnational/cross border 
issues of human trafficking, the ATC has also assisted in signing of 
Bilateral Memorandums of Understanding with Bangladesh, UAE, 
Cambodia and Myanmar and other Multilateral treaties on human 
trafficking. The Committee are of the view that Inter -State/ Inter -
Ministerial/International cooperation is a prerequisite for envisaging 
any response against human trafficking and without a collective 
framework, feel that human trafficking cannot be addressed 
comprehensively.  Specifically with regard to the bilateral and 
multilateral agreements, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
periodically review the progress in anti -human trafficking efforts in 
order to  hold Member States/Countries accountable and embark on 
interventionist measures, if need be. 
5.46 The Committee note that Anti -Human Trafficking Units(AHTUs) 
are integrated task forces to prevent and combat trafficking in persons 
and comprise of a group o f trained sensitive officials of Police, Women 
and Child Welfare Department and other relevant Departments of the 
State. The Committee were given to understand that AHTUs function 
as coherent units to prevent and combat trafficking and attend to all 
three aspects of trafficking viz. prevention, protection and assistance 
in prosecution and are thus the field level functionalunits to address 
human trafficking in a holistic manner.The Committee were given to 
understand that pursuant to the decision of the Mini stry of Home 
Affairs (MHA) to set up Anti -Human Trafficking Units(AHTUs) in all the 
districts, 696 AHTUs have been established across various States and 

186 
 
Union Territories. While the MHA have also issued advisories to all 
States and UTs, inter-alia advising them to immediately set up new 
AHTUs and upgrade the infrastructure of the existing AHTUs with the 
financial assistance provided to them and make the AHTUs functional 
on urgent basis. The Committee find that there are still districts where 
AHTUs have not been established and urge the Ministry to ensure that 
the remaining districts are covered at the earliest. The Committee also 
desire that the AHTUs established in States with greater prevalence of 
trafficking related activities be provided additio nal funds for 
strengthening infrastructure and other capabilities. The Committee 
feel that special attention, in this regard, needs to be paid towards 
states sharing border with Bangladesh, Nepal and Myanmar from where 
cross border trafficking takes place. 
5.47 The Committee laud the steps taken by the Ministry to 
periodically engage with the States and UTs in the matter of human 
trafficking from time to time. The Committee find that the progress of 
implementation of various Women Safety projects, including  the 
scheme of setting up/strengthening Anti -Human Trafficking Units 
(AHTUs) through virtual meetings with State/UT functionaries are 
reviewed regularly by the Ministry. In this regard, the Committee were 
informed that an online monitoring portal for the S tates and UTs to 
update the progress of AHTUs and for sharing their best practices and 
success stories has been established by the Ministry. The Committee 
hope that the web portal would serve as a vital IT tool for 
dissemination of information across all s takeholders, States/UTs and 
civil society organizations for effective implementation of Anti Human 
Trafficking measures and would serve as a repository on issues relating 
to trafficking including details of Anti -Human Trafficking Units 
(AHTUs), their locat ions, contact details of Anti -Human Trafficking 
Nodal Officers so as to supplement the efforts of the Ministry in 
tackling human trafficking. 

187 
 
5.48 The Committee were given to understand that an Institutional 
mechanism to counter human trafficking in a focu ssed and effective 
manner at the level of State Governments was devised and shared with 
all States and UTs in December, 2020. Subsequently, the States had 
been asked to establish appropriate Bureau/Units at State -Headquarter 
level, District level and Polic e Station level to address the issues of 
trafficking in a comprehensive manner. In this regard, the Committee 
note that as a way of strengthening the Anti Human Trafficking efforts, 
States were asked to notify a State -Headquarter level Anti -Human 
Trafficking Bureau. However, the Committee were informed that the 
details of the Officer heading such Anti -Human Trafficking Bureaus 
were not maintained Centrally by the Ministry. The Committee, in this 
regard, urge the Ministry to ensure that all the States setup t he Anti-
Human Trafficking Bureaus at State -Headquarter level and made 
functional in every State along with maintaining the details of the 
Officer heading such a unit. The Committee also urge upon the 
Ministry to devise a mechanism for effective coordinatio n between the 
different AHTBs and the nodal Ministry for timely dissemination of 
intelligence. 
5.49 The Committee are concerned to note that human trafficking 
especially, of women and children for various purposes such as 
commercial sexual exploitation (CSE), forced labour, domestic 
servitude etc. is a crime that gravely violates basic human rights. In 
this regard, the Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Ministry 
towards issuance of a SOP/Advisory to handle trafficking in Children 
for Child labour and penal action against employers/traffickers. 
Additionally, advisories have been issued to the Sta tes/UTs to set up 
exclusive ‘Crime aginst Women/Children Desks and that there should 
not be any delay in registration in FIRs in all cases of crime against 
Children and has released 100 crores under Nirbhaya Fund in 2020 for 
establishing Women Help Desks i n Police Stations. While lauding the 
initiatives taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs to check the 

188 
 
incidence of human trafficking especially among women and children, 
the Committee urge the Ministry to issue and reiterate directions to 
the States/UTs to p lace utmost priority to cases of child 
trafficking/registration of FIRs in cases of crime against Children in 
order to preempt instances of according low priority  to cases of 
trafficking due to the preoccupation of police with other crimes. The 
Committee thus recommend further strengthening the institutional 
response for the law enforcement officers viz, police and prosecutors, 
against trafficking through training and capacity building to better 
investigate and prosecute offenders perpetrating this crime.  
5.50 The Committee find that measures were taken to create 
awareness among police personnel on the perils of trafficking and the 
need to sensitise them in order to facilitate early detection and 
apprehension of child traffickers. In this regard, Ministry of Home 
Affairs (MHA) provide financial assistance to States and UTs for holding 
‘State level conferences’ on periodic basis for police officials and to 
make available to them, updated information on latest provisions of 
law relating to trafficking. The Co mmittee were also informed that 
Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPRD) has been regularly 
conducting training courses pertaining to Anti -Human Trafficking. 
MHA has also issued an Advisory dated 6.7.2020 to all States and UTs 
inter-alia advising t hem that Police Officers should be advised to 
undertake preventive steps such as identification of children in 
distress, watching out for suspicious persons, keeping special vigil at 
transit points and identify vulnerable population and susceptible 
pockets in the State. The Committee appreciate the various steps 
taken for tackling the issue of trafficking and urge the Ministry to 
continue with its efforts and at the same time seek inputs from the 
States with regard to the impediments being faced and the way s and 
means to remove them. In the above context, the Committee also 
recommend that all the measures that are being taken by the Ministry 
for the sensitization of police departments regarding the issue of 

189 
 
trafficking, may suitably be replicated for addressing the issue of child 
labour. The Committee thus recommend that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs collaborate with the Ministry of Labour and Employment and 
take similar measures, including organising trai ning short courses of 
training and sensitising p olice personnel to keep vigil on identified 
areas such as eateries and small shops, so as to strengthen  the 
awareness of police personnel with regard to the issue of child labour. 
5.51 The Committee were informed that the Ministry of Railways have 
been adv ised to involve Railway Protection Force (RPF) and 
Government Railway Police (GRP) personnel deployed at Railway 
Stations in detecting trafficking incidents and apprehending the 
traffickers in coordination with the local police. Further, it was brought 
to the notice of the Committee that the Ministry of Railways in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Women and Child Development and 
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights has issued a 
Standard operating procedure (SOP) for ensuring care and protect ion of 
children in contact with Railways, which also includes a protocol for 
rescue for children found abandoned at rail stations or trafficked 
through trains. Appreciating the multi -sectoral efforts taken by the 
Ministry in collaboration with other Minist ries/agencies, the 
Committee feel that, in addition to discharging its responsibility as 
mandated by the Standard operating procedure(SOP) for the rescue of 
children issued by the Ministry of Railways, the Committee in their 
considered opinion feel that ac tive involvement and engagement of 
other stakeholders like NGOs/Voluntary associations with domain 
expertise in field of action of child trafficking will enhance the scale, 
reach and efforts of the Ministry in addressing trafficking. 
5.52 The Committee’s attention was drawn to reported incidence of 
child labourers brought by middlemen or placement agencies with the 
promise of better future but are subject to exploitation and have to 
endure violence, sexual abuse, harassment, threat and coe rcion. The 
Committee feel that it is important to keep a check on the various 

190 
 
placement agencies that might traffick children for the purpose of 
employing them in domestic labour, particularly in metropolitan cities. 
However, the Ministry of Home Affairs i n this regard, have stated that 
it is the sole responsibility of the Ministry of Labour to address these 
concerns.In this regard, the Committee observe that, i n 2017, Ministry 
of Home Affairs had also requested the Ministry of Labour& 
Employment to sensiti ze officers of the Labour Department in all 
States and UTs to keep a close vigil and watch on the activities of 
placement agencies in States with a view to addressing the crime of 
human trafficking and render all necessary assistance to the law 
enforcement agencies to check the crime. Further, i n this context, the 
Committee are of the opinion that, given the multi -dimensional 
complexity in addressing the problem of child labour, unless various 
departments recognize the magnitude of the problem, accept colle ctive 
responsibility and devise internal mechanism to address the incidence 
of child labour, child labour will continue to persist unabated. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that since such placement 
agencies and other similar establishments have an inte rface with the 
police authorities, the Ministry should take robust steps to ensure that 
the police departments keep a periodic check on the functioning of 
these placement agencies. 
5.53 The Committee find that the prevalence of child labour is high in 
establishments such as brick kilns and construction sites. However, the 
Committee were dismayed with the response of the Ministry when 
enquired whether guidelines had been issued to the local police 
authorities in the States for regular inspection of such esta blishments 
with high incidence of child labour. The Ministry had evaded 
responsibility by stating that the issue concerned the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment. Although the Committee while recognising 
the differing mandate of both the Ministries, however urge the Ministry 
of Home Affairs, that even though law and order might be a State 
subject and the inspections of work sites may qualify to be the primary 

191 
 
responsibility of the Ministry of Labour, the Ministry of Home Affairs 
may still issue certain instr uctions/guidelines to the police 
departments to devise a mechanism of coordination with the labour 
departments and ensure that even the police authorities keep a 
vigil/check on establishments that are prone to employ 
children/adolescents, particularly in d istricts identified as hotspots of 
child labour. 
5.54 The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs towards establishing a National level communication 
platform- Crime Multi Agency Centre (Cri -MAC) which facilitates 
dissemination of information about significant crimes including human 
trafficking cases across the country on real time basis. The Committee 
observe that by effectively leveraging technology for real -time 
information sharing between States, the platform can help variou s law 
enforcement agencies with seamless flow of information in prevention, 
detection and investigation of crime. The Committee while recognizing 
that trafficking is a grave crime, urge the Ministry to issue directives 
to all the States/UTs to actively participate in uploading of information 
about incidence of crime and criminals and continue to accord highest 
priority to the efforts directed at preventing and countering the 
scourge of trafficking. 
  

192 
 
CHAPTER - SIX 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
Introduction 
6.1 The Committee decided to examine the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment because they felt that the Ministry have a greater role to play 
in addressing the issue of Child Labour.  Initially, the Ministry took a plea 
that they do not have any role in this regard having the understanding that 
the entire policy on child labour was vested with  the Ministry of Labour. 
When the representatives of the Ministry were called for evidence and 
deliberated with the Committee, the Secretary thereafter admitted tha t the 
Ministry needed to come out with a very clear -cut action plan and a policy 
on child labour.  The Ministry subsequently informed the Committee that 
Child labour is a multi -dimensional phenomenon requiring a multitude of 
solutions to be planned and del ivered in harmony by a range of 
stakeholders. The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment while 
recognizing the inextricable link between the abolition of child labour and 
the subsequent welfare of such children, submitted before the Committee 
that vulnerable children and those involved in child labour are among the 
target beneficiaries of welfare protection programs and schemes run by 
them. 
6.2 The Ministry briefed the Committee on the various verticals under 
which schemes were formulated for the vulnerab le and marginalised 
sections of the society, as under: 
"Education has been one of our major interventions for the SC's and 
OBC's…Our schemes cover providing of scholarships so as to make 
education affordable..Most of our initiatives are focused on providin g quality 
education affordable to the SC's and OBC's...70 percent of our budget goes 
in this scheme...Secondly, we have a scheme for the implementation of the 
Protection of Civil Rights Act and the Prevention of Atrocities Act...Thirdly, 
we have a corporation which lends to the SC's and to the OBC's...So we have 
been undertaking these three things, educational empowerment on one side, 
protection on the other side and economic empowerment."    
6.3 Asked about the mechanism in place to identify the targetted 
beneficiaries viz, marginalised and disadvantaged sections of the society, the 
Ministry submitted that that they use the data reported in Census 2011 and 
they do not have any internal/independent mechanism for survey/collection 
of data.             
II.(i) Rehabilitation of persons engaged in Beggary under SMILE 
Scheme 
6.4 On the welfare measures taken to rehabilitate persons engaged in 
beggary including child beggars, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“We have recently launched an umbrella scheme “SMILE - Support for 
Marginalized Individuals for Livelihood and Enterprise” on 12.02.2022, 
which includes a sub -scheme – ‘Central Sector Scheme for Comprehensive 

193 
 
Rehabilitation of persons engaged in the act of Begging’. This sub -scheme 
covers several comprehensive m easures including welfare measures for 
persons who are engaged in the act of begging with focus extensively on 
rehabilitation, provision of medical facilities, counseling, education, skill 
development, economic linkages etc. with the support of State 
Governments/UTs/Local Urban Bodies, Voluntary Organizations, 
Community Based Organizations (CBOs) and institutions and others.  The 
Ministry has also launched a pilot project on Comprehensive Rehabilitation 
of the persons engaged in the act of Begging in major seven cities of the 
country including Delhi, Patna, Nagpur, Indore, Hyderabad, Bengaluru and 
Lucknow. These pilots are being implemented in these cities by State 
Governments/UTs/Local Urban Bodies and Voluntary Organizations. The 
budget allocation for the sub-scheme ‘Comprehensive Rehabilitation of 
persons engaged in the act of Begging’ under the ‘SMILE’ scheme for the 
financial year 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 is Rs. 100.00 Crore.  Expenditure as on 
08.03.2022 was 1.94 Crore.”  
 
6.5 When specifically asked on the is sue of rehabilitation of children, 
identified as beggars at traffic signals in urban areas, the Ministry 
submitted that, under the SMILE scheme, shelter homes will facilitate for 
education for child engaged in the act of Begging and children of persons 
engaged in the act of Begging. In the case of orphan children engaged in 
Begging, they will be referred to Child Care Institutions (CCIs) of Ministry of 
Women and Child Development.”         
6.6 Noting that identification of persons engaged in begging and the ir 
profiling on the basis of gender and age is the responsibility of the Ministry, 
the Committee were apprised that one of the main components of the sub -
scheme ‘Comprehensive Rehabilitation of the persons engaged in the act of 
Begging’ under the ‘SMILE’ s cheme is ‘Survey/ Identification’ and that 
Survey of persons engaged in the act of Begging will be conducted by the 
implementing agencies in their area.       
6.7 Elaborating on the status of various pilot projects/campaigns 
conducted across the Country to  check the prevalence of beggars, the 
officials of the Ministry during the course of their evidence deposed as 
under:    
"We started 10 pilots in 10 major cities. Indore has been our first success. 
Then, we have launched it in Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Bangl ore, Lucknow 
and Patna. In all these cities, we have taken up this campaign. 
Unfortunately, for about one and half to two years, the Municipal 
corporations were completely engaged in fighting Covid....In this year's plan 
of action, what we have done is tha t we have opened it for NGOs. We have a 
huge response. Nearly about 1300 NGOs have come forward saying that they 
want to take up beggary rehabilitation. So there is a lot of NGO interest in 
this. We will take up those cities which are fully tied up with a plan of action 
and which have the support of municipal corporations. I feel in this year, 
under the SMILE's beggary component we will be able to make a good 
progress. As far as Delhi is concerned, all the 9 districts of Delhi have shown 
a lot of interest. The NGOs have also come onboard. So I think Delhi will be 
one major success. We have allocated funds for this year. We have called for 

194 
 
applications and the selection process is underway. We will know soon 
which are the towns we will be working on comprehen sive rehabilitation and 
who are our partners. we will also know who are our NGO partners and 
Municipal Corporations. On Beggary, thanks to this scheme we have a clear 
perception on how we should go about the Action Plan.” 
 
6.8 In this context, the Ministry  submitted that clear -cut guidelines have 
been administered in order to guide/assist NGOs and other organizations 
for implementation of beggary rehabilitation scheme and other schemes for 
targetted social groups. In addition, regular directions/instruction s have 
been issued on specific issues raised by these organizations as applicable.  
 
(ii) Rehabilitation of Transgenders under SMILE Scheme 
6.9 The Ministry during the course of their evidence on the other sub -
scheme under SMILE component relating to rehabilitation of transgenders, 
deposed as under: 
 
“Under the SMILE -Support for Marginalised Individuals for Livelihood and 
Enterprise, the mandate of the sub -scheme on ‘Comprehensive 
Rehabilitation for Welfare of Transgender Persons’ is to ensure them a l ife of 
dignity. Under this, we have given a charter of assurances to the transgender 
community. One is providing them identity; second is providing them 
education; third is providing them skill; fourth is providing them access to 
cashless medical facilitie s; and fifth is providing them other livelihoods. So, 
on all these components we are working. This particular scheme provides for 
specific interventions. All of them have taken off. The Minister has launched 
a number of Garima Grihas. These are the safe places for them. Transgender 
children are removed from the house the moment the person is found to be a 
transgender. The identity of the transgender comes only after adolescence. 
Once the parents find that the person is transgender, they think it is bad 
luck for the house and then they are taken out of the house. It is an 
unfortunate thing. While we fight that, we also provide a safe place for them. 
These Garima Grihas will be set up in every State. We have already set up 
eight Garima Grihas. We are going to sanction five more. So, about 13 States 
will be covered in this process.”       
 
II. Rehabilitation Measures for Children of De -notified, Nomadic and 
Semi-nomadic Communities 
6.10 On the measures taken for the welfare of the children of Nomadic and 
migratory tribes, the Ministry informed as under:    
“The Hon’ble Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment has launched the 
scheme on “ Scheme for Economic Empowerment of DNT Communities 
(SEED)”  on 16.02.2022  with total outlay of Rs. 200 Crore for next five 
years, having following four components:- 
(i) To provide coaching of good quality for DNT candidates to enable 
them to appear in competitive examinations,   
(ii) To provide Health Insurance to them,  
(iii) To facilitate livelihood initiative at community level and  
(iv) To provide financial assistance for construction of houses for 
members of these communities.” 

195 
 
6.11 The Committee were further informed that in order to implement the 
scheme components, NIC has developed the online portal with the help of 
technical study group (TSG) which is open for seeking benefit under the 
scheme components. As of June 2022, under Coaching components 03, 
Health Insurance 12, Livelihood 01 and Housing 20 totalling to 36 
beneficiaries has been applied for seeking benefits alon g with a fund 
allocation under SEED Scheme for FY 2022-23 is Rs.28.00 Crores. 
  
III. Rehabilitation measures for Children of Manual scavengers 
 
6.12 On the rehabilitation measures for Children of manual scavengers, the 
Ministry during the course of their evidence deposed as under: 
 
“Dealing with manual scavenging is one of our main tasks. You are aware 
that the Act banning manual scavenging was passed in 2013. This Act is in 
implementation. One big campaign which has been taken up since 2014 has 
almost eliminated the lifting of night soil. That problem has been solved after 
the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan was taken to every nook and corner of the 
country. Of course, as you have mentioned, still people are going into the 
sewer holes and manholes. They go inside the septic tanks also to clean  
them. This is a very hazardous sort of operation. I am happy to inform you 
that, after a lot of consultation with the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs, we have now come up with a programme called ‘National Action for 
Mechanised Sanitation Ecosystem(N AMASTE)’. It basically talks about the 
national action for mechanical cleaning of sewers and others. Under this we 
are taking up three things. One is that we want to fund local bodies. We 
want to provide machines to the persons who are currently engaged in  this 
work. We have a programme called Swachhta Udyami Yojana (SUY) under 
which we provide up to 50 per cent subsidy to purchase vehicles which can 
clean the sewers. So, they do not need to go in. Hundreds of vehicles have 
been purchased, but our requireme nt may be in thousands across the 
country. So, we have made a step forward and we have a long way to go. 
Swachhta Udyami Yojana has been a very popular scheme because a large 
number of municipal corporations have taken benefit out of this. For 
example, one  municipality has taken almost 200 vehicles, and then they 
have completely converted all their operations from manual to mechanical. 
Municipal Corporation can directly apply. The State Government is not 
involved because what we do is that we provide this s ubsidy and we link it 
with the bank loan. So, there is no contribution of the State Government in 
this. But the Municipal Corporation has to give an assurance that they will 
take this vehicle. Whenever they require, they will give work to them. 
Otherwise, it will become a non -productive asset. We are coordinating with 
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and NITI Aayog in order to fund 
those startups which come up with new technologies for cleaning the sewers 
and septic tanks without any manual interve ntion. So, this is one area 
where there is a lot of startup activity. As you have rightly pointed out, we 
have the National Safai Karamchari Finance and Development Corporation. 
In that, we fund about 30,000 to 50,000 people every year to cover their 
livelihoods, that means loans to take alternative occupations and skill 
development training programmes. We have developed a portal called PM -
Daksh. So, this is a portal which is an end-to-end automated one. So, people 
who want a particular skill from the reput ed skill providers, they can simply 

196 
 
express their interest and it is provided free of cost followed by placement in 
the jobs or self -employment. The children of the scavengers are also eligible 
to take this skill programme. So, this is a modification which  we have made. 
We also have a National Commission for Safai Karamcharis which look into 
the complaints of any violations of the Act.” 
 
6.13 The Committee then desired to know the specific measures taken for 
the welfare of Manual Scavengers particularly tho se affecting their children. 
In response, the Ministry submitted as under:      
 
“The Central Sector Self Employment Scheme for Rehabilitation of Manual 
Scavengers (SRMS) was revised in November, 2013, in consonance with the 
provisions of the “Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and 
their Rehabilitation Act, 2013” (MS Act, 2013). The scheme has been 
thereafter provided in 2017 -18, 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 to provide more 
benefits to the identified manual scavengers and their dependants. The main 
provisions under the Scheme were stated to be as under: 
(i) One Time Cash Assistance of Rs. 40,000/ - to identified manual 
scavengers (one per family) 
(ii) Skill Development Training upto two years with stipend @ Rs. 3,000/- 
per month 
(iii) Capital Subsidy up to  Rs. 5.00 lakh for Self -Employment Projects up 
to Rs. 15.00 lakh. 
(iv) Sanitation Workers and their dependents are provided capital subsidy 
up to Rs. 5.00 lakh and interest subsidy for sanitation related 
projects. 
(v) Coverage of Manual Scavengers for Heal th Insurance under 
Ayushman Bharat (PM-JAY) Yojana 
 
During the two surveys initiated by the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment in the year 2013 and 2018, for identification of manual 
scavengers, 58,098 manual scavengers have been identified. All th ese 
eligible manual scavengers have been provided One Time Cash Assistance of 
Rs. 40,000/-“ 
 
6.14 Highlighting the achievements under the Scheme, the Ministry 
submitted as under:         
  
“(i)  One Time Cash Assistance of Rs. 40,000/ - provided to all identified 
eligible 58,098 manual scavengers  
(ii) Covered 18,880 manual scavengers and their dependents under 
various Skill Development Training Programmes with stipend @ Rs. 
3,000/- per month 
(iii) Capital Subsidy up to Rs. 5.00 lakh for Self -Employment Projects 
provided for 2095 beneficiaries.” 
 
6.15 The Ministry further apprised the Committee on the other significant 
developments as under:        
 

197 
 
(i)  988 workshops have been organized in various ULBs since 2017 -18 
for spreading awareness about prevention of ‘Hazardous Cleaning of 
Sewers and Septic Tanks”. 
(ii)  270 Health -cum-Awareness Camps have been organized in the 
basties/work place of manual scavengers/sanitation workers. 
(iii)  Covered over 10,000 sanitation workers under RPL/upskilling 
training programmes. 
(iv)  Programme to provide Health Insurance cover of Rs. 5.00 lakh to the 
family of the identified manual scavengers under Ayushman Bharat is 
in advance stage of implementation. 
 
6.16 The Committee were further informed that the National Safai 
Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation (NSKFDC) is the nodal 
agency of the Government for implementation of SRMS.  For the National 
Survey of manual scavengers conducted in 194 districts of 1 8 States, 
NSKFDC was the nodal agency of the Centre. It coordinated the whole 
survey in all these districts and also digitized all the survey forms received 
from the concerned districts/States. NSKFDC has been successfully 
implementing SRMS for the rehabil itation of manual scavengers. With its 
special efforts and coordination, National Survey of Manual Scavengers 
started in 2018, yielded good results and 44,217 manual scavengers were 
identified. No adolescent has been identified as manual scavenger.  
     
IV. Rehabilitation measures for drug Addicts 
 
6.17 On the measures in place to counter drug demand and rehabilitate 
drug addicts, the Ministry deposed as under:     
 
“As far as the drug victims are concerned, we have a national programme, 
Nasha Mukt Bharat Abhiyan (NMBA) for drug demand reduction. Under this 
we are funding a large number of de -addiction centres. We have about 600 
deaddiction centres, which are funded by us 100 per cent. These are run by 
the NGOs, but funded by the Government. Yes, they go di rectly from the 
Ministry to the NGOs. About seven lakh people are getting de -addicted every 
year. Seven lakh is the capacity of these institutions……They are all above 
18. This is one question which we have constantly deliberated on. As per our 
action plan we are only focussing on above 18 years victims.” 
 
6.18 Enquired whether the Ministry were contemplating covering 
adolescents (14years  and above), the Ministry responded as under: 
 
“In fact, this point has been mentioned in the past also. We have worked 
with our sister Ministry, that is the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development. They are having large number of child homes, which they are 
fully funding. We said that we will be able to first work with them by 
bringing in de -addiction medication and then the modalities in these 
institutions. It is because a large number of children who are brought there 
are already addicted... So, we want to work with the Ministry of Women and 
Child Development. We want to coordinate with them so that we can extend 
this de-addiction campaign to children and also women. Of course, it is a 
huge issue for victims who are above 18. We have got six crore people who  
are substance abuse victims as per our sur vey. So, we are working on 

198 
 
expanding this reach to as many people as possible. As of now, we have got 
the capacity to treat seven lakh people.” 
 
6.19 The Committee then desired to enquire on the funding pattern and the 
capacity of the de -addiction centres. In this regard, the Ministry submitted 
as under:          
“As per revised guidelines of NAPDDR (effective from 01.04.2021), for 
Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts (IRCAs)/ District De -Addiction 
Centres (DDACs) being run by NGOs/VOs financial ass istance will be given 
up to 90 percent of the approved cost on recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure (95% in -case of NE States, J&K, Ladakh and Sikkim). 10% of 
the expenditure would be borne by the organizations themselves (5% in -case 
of NE States, J&K, Ladakh and Sikkim). In case of IRCAs being run by State 
Governments, the financial assistance will be given up to 100 percent of the 
approved cost on recurring and non -recurring expenditure. 10% of the 
expenditure (5% in-case of NE States, J&K, Ladakh and Sikkim) to be borne 
by the organizations themselves will be raised through donations, 
contributions etc. and no fee will be charged from the beneficiaries. The 
Ministry provides 100% of grants in aid to NGOs for running of Outreach 
and Drop -In Centres (ODI Cs), Community based Peer Led Intervention 
(CPLIs) and State Level Coordinating Agencies (SLCAs). Further, there are 15 
bedded, 30 bedded and 50 bedded Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for 
Addicts (IRCA) or de -addiction centres are being supported by the M inistry 
in the country under NAPDDR. Presently, 350 IRCAs are being supported by 
the Ministry.” 
 
6.20 When asked about any proposal to cover adolescents/children in need 
of care in the eligibility criteria under de -addiction centres, the Ministry 
replied as under:           
“Yes, as per revised guidelines of National Action Plan for Drug Demand 
Reduction ( NAPDDR), establishing and assisting counseling/de -addiction 
centres or facilities in closed settings such as Juvenile Homes, for special 
groups such as women and children in need for care and protection/conflict 
with law or any other special group etc. by this Ministry or in convergence 
with other Central Ministries and implemented  through various 
organizations/ Government Departments.” 
6.21 Asked whether any survey was conducted to identify the addicts 
alongwith the number of persons identified vis-a-vis de-addicted annually 
during the last three years, the Ministry responded as under:   
  
“The first Comprehensive National Survey on Extent and Pattern of 
Substance Use in India was conducted between December 2017 and October 
2018 by Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment through National Drug 
Dependence Treatment Centre (NDDTC), All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi. The Report was published in 2019. 
 
As per the National survey, the substance-wise details of estimated users are 
as under: 
 

199 
 
Sl. Name of the Substance Prevalence of use 
(%) 
Estimated no. of 
Users 
1. Alcohol 17.10 15,01,16,000 
2. Cannabis 3.31 2,90,18,000 
3. Opioids 2.12 1,86,44,000 
4. Sedatives 1.21 1,05,80,000 
5. Inhalant 0.58 51,25,000 
6. Cocaine 0.11 9,40,000 
7. Amphetamines Type 
Stiulants (ATS) 0.18 15,47,000 
8. Hallucinogens 0.13 11,01,000 
 
6.22 The Committee were informed that the Ministry are presently  
supporting various NGOs for running of 514 Centres (to be updated) 
including 350 IRCAs, 73 ODICs, 53 CPLIs and 38 Addiction Treatment 
Facilities (ATFs) under NAPDDR throughout the country. These centres 
provide for a whole range of community -based services for identification, 
motivation, counselling, de -addiction treatment, after care and 
rehabilitation of affected persons.         
         
6.23 The Ministry submitted that during the last three ye ars, 93,364 
beneficiaries in 2019 -20, 2,08,415 beneficiaries in 2020 -21 and 2,86,402 
beneficiaries in 2021 -22 taken treatment in aforesaid Centres in the 
country.  
 
V. Educational Empowerment - Scholarships for Scheduled 
Castes/Other Backward Classes 
 
6.24 The Ministry apprised the Committee during the course of their evidence as 
under: 
“Education has been one of our major interventions for the SCs and OBCs. 
These are the two categories that we are looking at very intensely. So, our 
scheme cover providing of  scholarships so as to make the education 
affordable. We have just started a scheme in which we are identifying 
meritorious SC boys and OBC boys and then putting them in very good 
schools. We also a scholarship scheme which will allow them to go abroad 
and study. We have schemes which provide them entry into the best 
institutions. So, all these interventions are focused on providing quality 
education affordable to the SCs and OBCs. Sir, 70 per cent of our Budget 
goes in this scheme.”        
    
6.25 The Min istry apprised the Committee about the Pre-matric 
Scholarship Scheme for SC Students & Others’ which has two component, 
one for SC student studying in classes IX and X (Component 1), and the 
other for the children studying in Classes I to X, of parents/gua rdians 
engaged in unclean and hazardous occupations (Component 2). The Pre -
matric Scholarship for SC Students is a Centrally sponsored scheme and 
implemented through States/UTs to support parents of SC Children for 
education of their wards studying in clas ses IX and X in order to improve 

200 
 
their participation and chance of progressing to the post -matric stage of 
education.   
 
6.26 Specifically asked to state the measures undertaken for the welfare of 
Children of those engaged in hazardous occupations, the Ministry in 
response, submitted thatfor the welfare of children of those engaged in 
hazardous occupations, they run a Scholarship Scheme as 'Component 2: 
Pre-matric Scholarship for children of parents/guardians engaged in 
Unclean and hazardous Occupation’ whose brief is as under:   
  
A. “The students should be studying in classes I to X on a full time basis 
B. Scholarship will be admissible to the children/wards of 
parents/guardians who, irrespective of their caste/religion belong to one 
of the following categories: 
a.  Persons who are Manual Scavengers as defined under section 2(I) (g) 
of  Manual Scavengers Act 2013;                  
b.  Tanners & Flayers; 
c.  Waste pickers; and 
d.  Persons engaged in hazardous cleaning as defined in Section 2(I) (d) of 
Manual Scavengers Act 2013.           
C. There is no family income ceiling under this component of the Scheme.” 
 
 6.27 The major features under the Scheme were stated to be as under: 
 
(i)  This Schem e is based on fixed sharing pattern of 60:40 between 
Centre a nd States (90:10 in case of NE states, Uttarakhand and 
Himachal Pradesh) 
(ii)  Under this revised Scheme, the Central assistance shall be released 
directly into the account of beneficiaries only after ensuring that the 
concerned State Government has released their share; 
(iii)  The Central share would be paid directly to the account of 
beneficiary/ guardian through DBT w.e.f 2021-22. 
 
6.28 Further, in order to strengthen the implementation of the Scheme, the 
following steps have been taken by the Ministry as under:  
   
i. “Online end to end processing, verification of eligibility credentials 
through online transaction to ensure greater transparency, control 
duplicity and wrongful claims by institutions  
ii. All verification process of the students should be done using the 
above authenticated databases automatically using the digital process 
with little or no manual intervention; 
iii. A performance module to monitor the progress of student as well as 
performance of the institution should be suitably designed a nd 
incorporated. 
iv. Coverage of poorest households would be focused. 
v. Quality education should be ensured to the target group.” 
 
6.29 Asked to furnish the State wise details with regard to the Pre -matric 
Scholarship Scheme for SC Students & Others(Component 1 &2), the 
Ministry furnished  as under: 
       

201 
 
 
SI.No
. 
Name of the State No of Beneficiaries under “Post Matric 
Scholarship scheme for SC students” (in
 lakhs) 
 
No of Beneficiaries under “Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme for SC and Ot
hers” (in lakhs) 
No of Beneficiaries under Component -I No of Beneficiaries under Comp
onent-II 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
1. Andhra Pradesh 369316 469000 333884 223722 236337 231340 0 0 39420 
2. Assam 6668 17944 8439 720 912 0 0 0 0 
3. Bihar 109869 153787 82895 0 531536 558113 0 0 0 
4. Chandigarh 0 0 1126 1500 1000 1634 0 0 0 
5. Chhattisgarh 96362 105994 109047 88138 0 0 0 0 0 
6. Daman & Diu 0 0 93 119 46 51 0 0 0 
7. Delhi 19508 22500 4653 14643 16500 55000 0 0 0 
8. Goa 0 0 0 0 200 100 0 0 0 
9. Gujarat 131284 140000 133659 61052 56684 63000 200846 234592 240000 
10. Haryana 91438 0 49624 147104 0 0 0 0 0 
11. Himachal Pradesh 20758 22836 21119 20665 15458 18641 0 0 0 
12. Jammu & Kashmi
r 
11995 0 9696 
4978 
891 6000 0 0 0 
13. Jharkhand 24038 28010 30542 44352 38015 47720 0 0 0 
14. Karnataka 330000 152311 298983 260732 323332 339499 0 0 0 
15. Kerala 0 119575 118935 75728 59312 74527 0 0 1000 
16. Madhya Pradesh 339676 476050 226331 323545 31863 341082 0 0 14668 
17. Maharashtra 325856 346330 68576 74365 0 0 0 0 0 
18. Manipur 8163 8255 5910 1379 485 2099 0 0 0 
19. Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
20. Odisha 169666 174756 199631 171450 153073 168385 0 0 306 
21. Puducherry 0 7177 3420 2693 4000 4550 0 0 0 
22. Punjab 0 186354 173192 0 217729 196843 0 0 0 
23. Rajasthan 457915 503707 307020 168095 203083 240500 0 0 0 
24. Sikkim 464 442 406 152 118 131 0 0 0 
25. Tamil Nadu 611434 825000 648056 257855 278838 305073 0 0 37239 
26. Telangana 220381 286495 0 15423 9051 41350 0 0 0 
27. Tripura 17992 17672 21059 3585 4592 10222 0 0 0 
28. Uttar Pradesh 1360376 1450000 1032499 541551 362511 500000 0 0 0 
29. Uttarakhand 38077 45692 27178 22492 26990 17363 0 0 0 
30. West Bengal 518953 677932 536524 283504 209552 256746 0 0 339 
Total 5280189 6237819 4452497 2809542 3068876 3479969 200846 234592 332969 
 
6.30 On the Scholarship schemes for students of Other Backward 
Communities, the Committee were informed that the vision of Ministry of 
Social Justice & Empowerment is to build an inclusive society wherein 
members of OBC community can lead productive, safe and d ignified lives 
with adequate support for their Socio Economic Development through 
programmes of educational, economic and social development. Pursuant 
thereto, the Government of India has taken number of initiatives through 
various Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored scholarship schemes for the 
vulnerable sections viz., OBCs/EBCs/DNTs, as under:    
  
1.  Pre Matric Scholarship Schemes for OBCs/EBCs/DNTs 
2.  Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for OBCs/EBCs/DNTs 
3.  Construction of Hostels for OBC Boys & Girls 
4.  National Fellowship for OBCs 
5.  Dr. Ambedkar Interest Subsidy Schemes for OBC/EBC 
6.  Dr. Ambedkar Post Matric Scholarship for EBC Students 
7.  Dr. Ambedkar Pre -Matric and Post -Matric Scholarship for DNT 
Students 
 
6.31 The Ministry furnished the information relating to scholarship 
released to the State of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu under the scheme of Dr 

202 
 
Ambedkar Pre and Post Matric Scholarship for DNTS Students, as on 31-03-
2021, are as under:- 
 
SNo. State 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Funds 
released 
(in 
Lakh) 
No. 
of 
Ben. 
Funds 
released 
No. 
of 
Ben. 
Funds 
released 
NO. 
of 
Ben. 
Funds 
released 
No. of 
Ben. 
Funds 
released 
No.of 
Ben. 
1. Gujarat 539.25 0.42 900.00 0.53 780.00 0.50 470.53 Ben. 
Awaited 
from 
the 
States 
Merged with 
 PM YASASVI 2. Tamil 
Nadu 
    120.00 0.06 429.47 
 
VI. Economic Empowerment - Skill development Initiatives/PM -
Daksh 
 
6.32 The Committee desired to know if the Ministry was conducting any 
Skill development programmes for the deprived/marginalised sections. In 
response, t he Ministry submitted that it caters for empowerment of the 
socially, educationally and economically marginalized sections of the society 
including SCs, OBCs, De -notified Tribes (DNTs), EBCs, Safai Karamcharis 
including Waste Pickers. Most of the persons of target group are having 
minimal economic assets; therefore, provision of training and enhancing 
their competencies is essential for economic empowerment/upliftment of 
these marginalized target groups.  
 
6.33 The Ministry further submitted that, i n 2020 -21, the Ministry 
modified the existing Scheme of Assistance to skilling for OBCs/EBCs/DNTs 
with inclusion of SCs and Safai karamcharis including Waste pickers and 
renamed it as PM DAKSH Yojana as a Central Secto r Scheme, with a target 
to skill around 2, 71,000 SC/OBC/EBC/DNT persons, Safai Karamcharis 
including Waste Pickers during next five years (2021 -22 to 2025 -26) with a 
budget outlay of Rs.450.25 crore.  
 
6.34 Asked to elaborate on the provisions of PM-DAKSH, the Ministry 
stated as under:  
“The main objective of the Scheme is to enhance competency level of the 
target groups to make them employable both in self - employment and wage-
employment for their socio -economic development. A multi-pronged strategy 
to improve the all-round competency and adeptness of the following sections 
of the target groups namely: 
i. artisans may improve their revenue generation capacities within their 
practicing vocations,  
ii. women may enter into self -employment thereby fin ancially empowering 
themselves without neglecting their domestic activities; and  
iii. youth may acquire long -term training and specialization in employable 
vocations giving them better standing in the job market.” 
 
6.35 The Committee were informed that t here are three Implementing 
Agencies viz. NSFDC, NBCFDC and NSKFDC for their respective target 
groups 

203 
 
 National Scheduled Caste  Finance and Development Corporation 
 National Backward Classes Finance and Development Corporation 
 National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation 
6.36 The funding pattern under the Scheme was stated to be as under: 
 Fund is released on milestone basis.  
 In case of Upskilling and EDP, 50% (on commencement of course) and 
50% (on completion and certification of course) is released.  
 In case of Short Term and Long Term course, 30% (on commencement of 
course), 40% (on completion and certification of course) and 30% (on 
placement) is released” 
 
6.37 The Ministry submitted that funds have been allocated in separate 
budget heads as under:  
 
“Although an amount of Rs.84.00 crores has been allocated under PM -
DAKSH scheme for FY 2022 -23, the amount has been bifurcated into PM 
DAKSH SC Component and PM DAKSH OBC and others components by 
allocating Rs.40.00 crores and Rs.44.00 cr ores respectively in separate 
budget heads. The amount being released for safai karamcharis is from the 
budget allocation of PM-DAKSH Yojana (OBC component).  
 
 The target Group under the PM -DAKSH scheme was stated to be as 
under:  The target groups of the scheme are Scheduled Castes, Other 
Backward Classes, Economically Backward Classes, De -Notified Tribes, 
Safai Karamcharis including Waste Pickers in the age group of 18 -45. In 
order to cater to the specific target group under Scheme, three 
Corporations wer e set up, viz. National Scheduled Caste  Finance and 
Development Corporation (NSFDC) for SCs, National Backward Classes 
Finance and Development Corporation (NBCFDC) for OBCs, EBCs & 
DNTs  and National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development 
Corporation(NSKFDC) for Safai Karamcharis including Waste Pickers.” 
 
6.38 The Committee were apprised of the criteria for short -listing of 
training Providers as under:         
 
“The list of training institutes will be finalized on year to year basis with the 
recommendation of the committee consisting of the officials from the three 
corporations (Implementing Agencies) and Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment including Integrated Finance Division (lFD). Further, the selection of 
training institutes (mostly Government training institutes and some Private training 
institutes but not NGOs) is made based on following conditions:    
   
i. Empanelled with Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) scheme 
of Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE);  
ii. Past performance including placement record; and 
iii. Recommendations/observations of PMU team in their report during 
surprise inspection” 
 
6.39 Asked to state the key initiatives under PM DAKSH during the period 
of 2020 -21 to 2021 -22, the Ministry submitted before the Committee as 
under:  

204 
 
(a) PM-DAKSH Portal and Mobile App were launched on 07.08.2021 to make 
end to end digitization of the programme starting with registration of the 
candidates to their placements.  
(b) The scheme has been made trainee centri c providing the facilities for 
online registration, selection of course, training institutes and place of 
training. In addition, the Portal has the facilities for submission of bills 
and uploading the documents by Training Institutes, payment to Training 
Institutes by integrating the Portal with PFMS portal through EAT 
(Expenditure Advance Transfer) module (in process), release of Stipend to 
the candidates through DBT (Direct Benefit Transfer), etc. 
(c) Artificial Intelligence (AI) based Biometric Attendance Sy stem has been 
integrated with PM -DAKSH portal to monitor the attendance of the 
candidates with facial recognition. It works both in online and offline 
mode. 
(d) The four interventions such Up-skilling/Re-skilling, Short Term Training, 
Long term training and En trepreneurship Development Programmes 
(EDP) are introduced for enhancing skill on them. 
(i) Up skilling ( 35 to 60 hours/ 5 days to 35 days) 
(ii) Short Term Training (300 hours/3 months)  
(iii) Entrepreneurship Development Programme ( 90 hours/15 days) 
(iv) Long Term Training ( 650 hours/7 months)” 
6.40 When asked about the key benefits under the scheme, the Ministry 
listed as under:          
 Free of cost training  
 Stipend @Rs. 1500 per month for SC and Safai Karamchari candidates 
and @Rs. 1000 per month for OBC, EBC and DNT candidates in case of 
non- residential short term and long term training.  
 Certification after completion of Training Programme. 
 Placement facilitation after completion of training  
 Assistance in starting own enterprise 
 Convergence with loan scheme of Corporation and assistance provided to 
beneficiaries who start their own work/self-employment. 
 
6.41 The Ministry submitted that the salient Features of PM-DAKSH Portal 
(End to end Digitalisation) is  a  unified online application with role based 
access to various stakeholders, supplemented by a mobile application for 
covering the entire skill lifecycle (from sanction of training to rehabilitati on) 
and strengthening the existing monitoring mechanisms.   
 
6.42 Asked to state the main benefits being addressed through PM -DAKSH 
Portal, the Ministry highlighted as under:  
 The Scheme has been made trainee centric by launching PM -DAKSH 
Portal and PM-DAKSH Mobile App on 07.08.2021. 
 Registration on PM-DAKSH portal. 
● Integrated with UMANG Portal.   
● Sanction of numbers to various training institutes. 

205 
 
● Opening of registration window on PM -DAKSH portal online registration 
by beneficiaries. 
● The portal provides th e facilities for online registration, selection of job 
roles, selection of training institutes and place of training to the trainees.  
 
6.43 The following features have also been made/are being made in the 
Portal to ensure transparency under the PM-DAKSH scheme, as under:  
 Psychometric test of the candidates, 
 Biometric attendance of the candidates  using artificial intelligence (AI) 
 Submission of bills and uploading the documents by the training 
institutes in the portal. 
 Payment to the training institutes  by integrating PM -DAKSH  portal  
with PFMS portal  (PFMS integration is still under development) 
 Assessment certificate after completion of trainee. 
 Release of Stipend for eligible beneficiaries as post training support to 
beneficiaries via DBT 
 
VII. Rehabilitation Measures for Senior Citizens 
 
6.44 The Committee were informed about the measures in place to 
rehabilitate senior citizens as under:       
           
“About the senior citizens, about which hon. Members made a mention, we 
have the Atal Vayo Abhyuday Yojana (AVYAY) . That Act provides for 
maintenance of the senior citizens in case they are not taken care of by the 
family. As part of the Act, we have brought in a provision, according to which 
there must be at least one old age home in every district, which is fully 
funded by the Government. In pursuance of this, about 600 old age homes 
are being run by the NGOs. But they are not cove ring all the districts. 
Around 250 districts do not have any old age home which is funded by the 
Government. So, our aim is to cover these districts in the next two years so 
that in every district if there is any destitute or elderly person, he should 
find accommodation in these old age homes. We also have a policy for the 
elderly. We are taking up several interventions for the elderly persons for 
providing them with re -skilling if they want to seek re -employment. That is 
something we want to assist. We are also forming them into self-help groups, 
and then providing them with productive occupation so that they will not be 
dependent on others, and they could live with dignity.” 
VIII. Awareness Campaigns 
6.45 The Committee then desired to be apprised of the ca mpaigns 
undertaken to raise awareness about the welfare measures for the various 
marginalised sections.  The Ministry, in response, submitted that they were  
taking various steps to spread awareness among the people. Advertisements 
are published in print me dia and electronic media. Information about the 
Scheme is spread through various social media platforms like Twitter, 
Facebook etc.  
 
 

206 
 
IX. Inter-Ministry Convergence 
6.46 The Committee desired to enquire whether any convergence strategy 
has been contemplated with the Ministry of Labour and Employment and 
other Ministries to deter engagement of Child Labour and promote their 
socio-economic rehabilitation. The Ministry, in response, replied in the 
negative.  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS: 
6.47 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment recognized 
their role in prohibition of child labour as late as in June, 2022 when 
the Committee decided to examine the Ministry and took evidence of 
their representatives. The Committee are of the considered view that 
the Ministry have a greater role to play not only in the prohibition of 
child labour but also in their rescue and rehabilitation.  In evidence, 
the Secretary conceded that the Ministry needed to come out with a 
clear-cut action plan and a policy on child labour, which hitherto had 
not been one of the focus areas.  The Committee undertook a 
comprehensive review of the schemes run by the Ministry for 
marginalized and disadvantaged sections of the society aimed at 
educational empowerment on the one side, protection on the other and 
overall economic empowerment.   The Committee firmly believe that 
efficacy in successful implementation of these schemes would 
ultimately ensure economic upliftment of households thereby 
preventing child labour. In the succ eeding  paragraphs, the Committee  
have reviewed implementation of individual schemes and identified 
areas where the Ministry need to focus for prevention, rescue, 
rehabilitation and mainstreaming of vulnerable  children.  
6.48 The Committee note that in o rder to identify and frame policies 
for the targeted beneficiaries viz, marginalized and disadvantaged 
sections of the society under the various schemes run by the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment, the data relating in Census 2011 
has been used a nd as per the Ministry, no mechanism for 
internal/independent survey/collection of data to ascertain the latest 
data is available. The Committee are constrained to point out that in 

207 
 
the absence of up to date data on vulnerable children, beyond Census 
2011, envisaging a targeted welfare protection programme for their 
rehabilitation will be adversely impacted. Further, as a matter of fact, 
the 2011 census serves the only authentic source of information and 
the data available is more than a decade old and is o f limited utility 
and relevance insofar as implementation of specific schemes and their 
targeted beneficiaries in the present scenario is concerned. In the wake 
of delay in Census 2021, it becomes imperative on the part of the 
Ministry to devise an interna l mechanism to independently conduct 
household survey/data collection exercises in order to guage the latest 
data and trends, so that targeted allocation of resources may be 
directed towards Policies aimed at effective rescue/repatriation and 
rehabilitation of vulnerable/marginalized sections. 
6.49 The Ministry had launched a scheme ‘SMILE’ – Support for 
Marginalised Individuals for Livelihood and Enterprise on 12.02.2022 
which includes two sub -schemes, out of which one pertains to Central 
Sector Scheme for Comprehensive Rehabilitation of persons eng aged in 
begging. The Committee were given to understand that the scheme was 
aimed at making places begging free and cover identification, 
rehabilitation, provision of medical facilities, counselling, education, 
skill development with the support of State G overnments/UTs/Local 
Urban bodies and Voluntary Organisations etc. Further, the budget 
allocation under the Scheme for the financial year 2021 -22 to 2025-26 
is Rs.100 crore and expenditure, as on March 2022 was Rs.1.94 crore.  
According to the Ministry, se veral pilot projects in this regard, are 
being implemented in major cities of New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, 
Banglore, Lucknow, Indore and Patna. One of the significant 
developments in the implementation of this scheme has been the 
interest evinced by about 1 300 NGOs in taking up the responsibility of 
beggary rehabilitation. The Committee appreciate the Ministry's efforts 
in roping in NGO's/Community based Organisations (CBO’s) for pilot 
projects on beggary rehabilitation under the SMILE sub -scheme  and 

208 
 
consider it to be a step in the right direction. More importantly, these 
NGO's would be required to be working in close coordination with the 
respective Municipal Corporations of various Cities in identifying, 
monitoring, rehabilitating, skilling and sustainable  settlement of 
persons engaged in beggary. The Committee therefore desire that the 
CBO's/NGO's need to be strengthened and equipped to perform the role 
of local pressure groups to check and combat beggary and also act as 
catalysts in effective formulation and implementation of anti -beggary 
framework. The Committee also desire that in the course of 
rehabilitation, necessary skills training may be imparted to Adolescent 
Children rescued from Beggary under the SMILE scheme by mapping 
them for age appropriate w orks/occupation in coordination with 
Ministry of Skill development and Entrepreneurship. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of concrete measures taken in this direction.    
6.50 The Committee appreciate the welfare measures for Transgender 
persons under t he SMILE supported sub -scheme on ‘Central Sector 
Scheme for Comprehensive Rehabilitation for Welfare of Transgender 
Persons’ which focuses extensively on providing them identity, 
provision of medical facilities, education, skill development, access to 
cashless medical facilities and livelihood. The Committee were also 
given to understand that the Ministry have set up housing facilities 
namely, ‘Garima Greh’ for transgender persons. As of June 2022, eight 
‘Garima Grihas’ have already been set up across the c ountry, five more 
have been sanctioned recently and about 13 States would be covered 
gradually. The Ministry have further assured the Committee that the 
housing facilities will be set up in each State. The Committee, in this 
regard are of the opinion that a huge section of the transgender 
community do not have access to safe housing facilities and consider 
the setting up of safe shelters to the needy and homeless transgenders 
as a step in the right direction towards mainstreaming them. The 
Committee urge up on the Ministry to expedite setting up of the 
shelters at the earliest as they constitute the basic step in empowering 

209 
 
the transgender community and desire that adequate finances be 
allocated for operationalizing these shelters and their upkeep. The 
Committee further feel that subsequent steps may be taken under the 
scheme for empowering the transgenders by providing access to 
interest subvention, sanction of loans in order to improve their socio -
economic conditions and capacity development /skilling with a  view to 
upgrade their skills to enable them to start income generating 
activities on their own or get gainfully employed in due course. The 
Committee are of the view that adequate efforts be channelized 
towards generating awareness of the various schemes aimed at 
rehabilitating the transgender community so as to help them in leading 
a life of dignity by prohibiting discrimination and ensuring equitable 
access to social and public places and benefits at par with the other 
genders. 
6.51 The Committee laud th e steps taken by the Ministry towards 
providing free competitive exam coaching, health insurance, housing 
assistance, and livelihood initiatives to the De -notified, Nomadic and 
Semi Nomadic (DNT) communities in the country by empowering them 
through the Scheme for Economic Empowerment of DNTs  (SEED) 
launched in February 2022 with a total outlay of Rs.200 crores for five 
years. The Committee further observe that in order to implement the 
scheme components, National Informatics Centre (NIC) has developed 
the online portal with the help of a technical Study group which is 
open for seeking benefit under the scheme components. According to 
the data provided by the Ministry, Rs 28 Crores had been allocated 
under the Scheme for FY 2022 -23 and as on June 2022, a tot al of 36 
beneficiaries had applied for seeking benefits. In the view of the 
Committee, the De -notified, Nomadic and Semi -Nomadic Tribes are 
among the most neglected and economically/socially deprived 
communities and feel there is an urgent need to take steps to 
mainstream them. While appreciating the initiatives undertaken under 
the SEED Scheme, the Committee would further urge the Ministry to 

210 
 
assess and identify/review gaps in accessing the effectiveness of 
existing schemes for the DNT Communities and t o collaborate with 
various Ministries/Implementing agencies in order to identify the 
locations/areas where these communities are densely populated so that 
the DNT Communities can be comprehensively rehabilitated and 
mainstreamed. In the opinion of the Comm ittee, successful 
implementation of SEED would largely help in mitigating the incidence 
of child labour among vulnerable De -notified, nomadic and semi -
nomadic communities.  
6.52 The Committee note that the Central Sector Self Employment 
Scheme for Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers (SRMS) was revised in 
November, 2013, in consonance with the provisions of the “Prohibition 
of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 
2013” (MS Act, 2013). The scheme has been thereafter provided in 
2017-18, 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 to provide more benefits to the 
identified manual scavengers and their dependants. It was brought to 
the notice of the Committee that the main provisions inter-alia under 
the Scheme include (i) One Time Cash Assistance of Rs. 40,000/ - to 
identified manual scavengers (one per family); (ii) Skill Development 
Training up to two years with stipend @ Rs. 3,000/ - per month; (iii) 
Capital Subsidy up to Rs. 5.00 lakh for Self -Employment Projects up to 
Rs. 15.00 lakh; (iv)Sanitation Workers an d their dependents are 
provided capital subsidy up to Rs. 5.00 lakh and interest subsidy for 
sanitation related projects; (v)Coverage of Manual Scavengers for 
Health Insurance under Ayushman Bharat (PM -JAY) Yojana. Further, 
the Committee were given to unde rstand that two surveys were 
conducted by the Ministry in the year 2013 and 2018 for identification 
of manual scavengers during which 58,098 manual scavengers were 
identified. The Committee in this regard laud the Ministry that all 
eligible manual scavenge rs had been timely provided with a One Time 
Cash Assistance of 40,000 rupees as stipulated under the provisions of 
the scheme. Also, 18,880 manual scavengers and their dependants 

211 
 
were covered under various skill development  training programmes 
with stipen d of @ Rs.300/ - per month.  The Ministry also provided 
capital subsidy up to Rs.5.0 lakh for self -employment projects covering 
2095 beneficiaries.  Further, it was brought to the notice of the 
Committee that the National Safai Karamcharis Finance and 
Development Corporation (NSKFDC) is the nodal agency for 
implementation of SRMS for the rehabilitation of manual scavengers 
under which a National Survey of Manual Scavengers was started in 
2018 and 44,217 manual scavengers were identified and no adolescent 
was identified as manual scavenger. Appreciating the fact that no 
adolescent was identified as a manual scavenger as a testimony to 
effective policy intervention, the Committee exhort the Ministry to 
further elicit information/confirmation from the concerned Chief 
Secretaries/Administrators to ascertain whether their States/UTs are 
free from the scourge of manual scavenging and whether any Child 
labour/Adolescent labour are engaged as manual scavenger currently. 
The Committee wish to be apprised of the developments in this regard. 
6.53 The Committee observe that in addition to the steps taken to 
eliminate and rehabilitate identified manual scavengers, a lot needs to 
be done for full mechanization of cleaning of sewers and septic tanks 
and rehabilitation of the sanitation workers engaged therein. The 
Committee are concerned to find  that despite the provisions of Manual 
Scavenging Act, 2013, persons are still being engaged for manual 
cleaning of sewers, drains containing sewage and septic tanks without 
proper gea r and safety precautions which is a sort of hazardous 
occupation.  In this regard, the Committee were informed that the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs have proposed the ‘ National Action for Mechanised 
Sanitation Ecosystem (NAMASTE)’ scheme to make sanitation work 
safer. Under this scheme, a programme called Swachhta Udyami Yogna 
(SUY) is being run in which the Ministry provide up to 50 per cent 
subsidy to purchase vehicles which can clean the sewers.  Th e 

212 
 
Committee have been given  to understand that hundreds of vehicles 
have been purchased benefiting number of municipal corporations.  
Considering the huge requirement of  such vehicles in the country,  the 
Committee feel that the Ministry have to go a lon g way for successful 
implementation of these schemes. The Committee also recommend 
that the Ministry should coordinate with the Ministry of Housing  and 
Urban Affairs and Niti Ayog in order to fund those startups  which come 
up with new technology for clea ning sewers and septic tanks without 
any manual intervention.  The Committee also desire that National 
Karmachari and Finance Development Corporation should provide 
loans to households of scavenging community to take alternate 
occupations and skill develop ment training programmes. The 
Committee recommend the ministry to institute a robust monitoring 
mechanism for successful implementation of schemes in operation, in 
order to break the intergenerationality in sanitation work and thus 
prohibit incidence of child labour in their families. 
6.54 The Committee note that insofar as the drug victims and de -
addiction efforts are concerned, the Ministry run a  National 
programme, Nasha Mukt Bharat Abhiyan (NMBA) for drug demand 
reduction under which 600 de -addiction c entres are currently 
operational, which are fully funded by them. The Committee were given 
to understand that these centres are run by the NGOs wherein around 
seven lakh people were getting de -addicted every year. According to 
the Ministry, 2,86,402 benefi ciaries in 2021 -22 had been treated in 
aforesaid Centres across the country. The Committee find that t he 
total capacity of these centres are about seven lakhs and so far, only 
victims over 18 years are currently enrolled at these centres. The 
Ministry further submitted that they are considering a proposal to work 
together with the Ministry of Women and Child Development towards 
bringing in a de-addiction medication and other modalities in the Child 
Care institutions (CCIs) in order to extend this de -addiction campaign 
to children and women. Additionally, as per the Ministry, the  revised 

213 
 
guidelines of National Action Plan for Drug Demand Reduction 
(NAPDDR) provides for establishing and assisting counseling/de -
addiction centres or facilities in closed sett ings such as Juvenile 
Homes, for special groups such as women and children in need for care 
and protection/conflict with law or any other special group etc. by 
them or in convergence with other Central Ministries and implemented 
through various organizatio ns/Government Departments. The 
Committee recommend that the initiatives taken by the ministry 
should be taken to its logical conclusion to curb drug menace among 
children.   
6.55 The Committee  note that the ministry are presently supporting 
various NGOs f or running 514 centers including 350 Integrated 
Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts (IRCAs), 73 outreach and Drop in 
Centres (ODICs), 53 Community based Peer Lead Intervention (CPLIs) 
and 38 Addiction Treatment Facilities (ATFs) under NAPDDR 
throughout  the country.  These centres provide counseling, de -
addiction, treatment, after care, and rehabilitation of affected persons.  
The Committee have been informed that during the last three years, 
93,364 beneficiaries in 2019 -20, 2,08,415 beneficiaries in 2020 -21 and 
2,86,402 beneficiaries in 2021 -22 have taken treatment in aforesaid 
centres in the country.  Considering that nearly six crore people are 
found to be substance abuse victims, in the absence of adequate 
capacity to treat such a huge population, it seems  to be a daunting 
task to tackle and rehabilitate drug/substance abuse victims. In this 
regard, the Committee find that NGOs are provided with financial 
assistance up to 90 percent of the approved expenditure  and State 
Governments  are provide 100 per cent for setting up of IRCAs. Despite 
this, the Committee lament the lack of adequate de -addiction facilities 
to treat victims of drug abuse and recommend more pro -active 
participation on the part of the Ministry and call upon Voluntary 
organization/NGOs inte rvention, including participation of State 
Governments.  The  focus needs to be on preventive education, 
awareness generation, counseling, treatment and rehabilitation of 

214 
 
individuals with substance abuse along with training and capacity 
building of the ser vice providers through collaborative efforts of 
Central/State Governments, NGOs  and Civil Society to create 
awareness about the ill -effects of substance dependence, reduce 
stigmatization and integrate individuals with substance abuse, back 
into society. 
 
6.56 The Committee note that the Pre-matric Scholarship Scheme for 
SC Students & Others’ is an Umbrella scheme that has two sub 
schemes, one of which is a Centrally sponsored scheme and 
implemented through States/UTs to support parents of SC Children for 
education of their wards studying in classes IX and X.  In this regard, 
the Committee are pleased to take note of the efforts made by the 
Ministry  to ensure the continued increase of coverage in targeted 
Scheduled Caste beneficiaries studying in classes IX and X under the 
pre-matric Scholarship scheme (Compon ent 1) viz, 3479969 
beneficiaries during 2021 -22 as ag ainst 3068876 beneficiaries in    
2020-21 and 2809542 in 2019-20 respectively. The Committee feel this 
is indicative of a healthy trend and is of the view that such scholarship 
schemes help tackle the i ncidence of drop out especially in the 
transition from the elementary to the Secondary stage and to improve 
their participation and facilitate in enabling them to progress to the 
post-matric stage of education . Further, the Committee feel that the 
measures like scholarship/fee waiver serve as an incentive for parents 
to enroll their children in Schools. The Committee thus recommend 
that adequate policy measures should be directed at providing financial 
incentives to families which would continue to encourag e retention of 
their wards in schools so as to incentivize them and aid in providing 
families with avenues for supplementary income so that the vicious 
trap of poverty which often compel families to send their 
children/adolescent to work can be offset. 
 

215 
 
6.57 The Committee note the steps envisaged by the Ministry for the 
welfare of children of those engaged in hazardous occupations viz, 
'Component 2: Pre-Matric Scholarship for children of parents/guardians 
engaged in Unclean and hazardous Occupation’ under t he "Pre -Matric 
Scholarships Scheme for Scheduled Castes and Others". Under the 
Scholarship Scheme, children/wards studying classes I to X of 
parents/guardians engaged in Unclean and hazardous Occupation are 
eligible to pursue pre -matric education provided they belong to one of 
the following categories namely, Persons who are Manual Scavengers as 
defined under section 2(I) (g) of  Manual Scavengers Act 2013; Tanners 
& Flayers; Waste pickers; and Persons engaged in hazardous cleaning as 
defined in Section 2(I ) (d)  of Manual Scavengers Act 2013. The 
Committee were given to understand that , in order to strengthen the 
implementation of the Scheme, several steps have been taken viz., 
Online end to end processing, verification of eligibility credentials 
through on line transaction to ensure greater transparency, control 
duplicity and wrongful claims by institutions, automated verification 
process of the students using the digital process; a performance 
module to monitor the progress of student as well as performance  of 
the institution; focus on coverage of poorest households; ensuring 
quality education to the target group etc. Appreciating the steps taken 
by the Ministry to further the endeavour of providing access to 
vulnerable children whose parents/guardians are employed in 
hazardous occupations, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
periodically review the functioning of the sc heme and strengthen the 
institutional mechanism  so that more Children are provided a platform 
to pursue literacy and uninterrupted pre -matric education, lower the 
incidence of drop -out and have a better chance of progressing to the 
Post-matric stage of ed ucation. Further, the Committee recommend 
that necessary public awareness drives shall be undertaken by the 
State Governments/UTs about the scheme at the local level through 
the Municipalities/Gram Panchayats in order to extend its coverage by 

216 
 
encouraging pupils who have dropped out to bring them back into the 
fold of education. 
6.58 The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Dakshta Aur 
Kushalta Sampann Hitgrahi (PM -DAKSH) had been launched as a 
Central sector scheme during 2020 -21 for five years (2021 -22 to 2025-
26) for the marginalized persons of SC/OBC/EBC/DNT/Safai 
Karamchari including waste -pickers in the age group of 18 -45 years 
with a budget outlay of Rs. 450.25 crores to enhance the skills 
available that could aid in economic upliftment of these mar ginalized 
sections. The Committee have been given to understand that the 
scheme is implemented through three apex corporations, i.e., National 
Scheduled Caste Finance and Development Corporation (NSFDC), 
National Backward Classes Finance and Development Co rporation 
(NBCFDC) and National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development 
Corporation (NSKFDC) for their respective target groups with an 
objective to make them employable both in self -employment and wage 
employment for their respective socio -economic deve lopment. The 
Committee find that, under the Scheme, a multipronged approach to 
improve all -round competency by focusing on revenue generation 
capacities of artisans, self -employment of women and long -term 
training and specialization in employable vocations  among youth. 
According to the Ministry, a PM -DAKSH portal and Mobile App were 
launched to make end -to-end digitization of the programme starting 
from registration of candidates to their placements. The Committee 
also observe that the scheme has been made trainee centric providing 
facilities for online registration, selection of course, training institutes 
and place of training as per the convenience of the candidate. Further, 
AI based biometric system has been integrated with PM DAKSH portal 
to monitor the attendance of candidates with facial recognition.  
 The Ministry further stated that the four core interventions 
under the Scheme viz., Up -skilling/Re-skilling, Short term training, 
Long term training and Entrepreneurship Development Programmes 

217 
 
(EDP) have been introduced under the Scheme to enhance the skill of 
candidates. The Committee find that the key benefits under the 
scheme are inter -alia free cost of training, stipend of Rs1500 per 
month for SC and Safai Karamcharis and Rs.1000 per month for 
OBC/EBC/DNT candidates, Certification, Placement facilitation and 
assistance in starting own enterprise and convergence with loan 
scheme of Corporation and assistance for beneficiaries in starting own 
work/self employment. The Committee appreciate the various ste ps 
taken by the Ministry in order to meet the deadline of skilling the 
target beneficiaries viz., 71,000 SC/OBC/EBC/DNT persons/ Safai 
Karamcharis including waste pickers by 2025 -26. Further, in the view 
of the Committee, the process of registration has been hastened due to 
the presence of a dedicated portal and mobile application for 
candidates to choose the training course and the training 
institute/centre as per their requirement/interest. The Committee 
would urge the Ministry to look into areas which ma y limit the 
effectiveness of the PM -DAKSH scheme, viz., lack of infrastructure,  
especially in rural areas which may not have adequate training 
facilities and need for robust industry/placement partnerships to 
provide job opportunities to the trained indiv iduals,  particularly in 
sectors where there is limited demand for skilled labor. The Committee 
are of the opinion that the success of the scheme is directly 
proportional to the number of candidate registrations on the  PM -
DAKSH portal and hence urge the M inistry to popularize and create 
awareness about the tangible benefits under the scheme among the 
potential candidates through electronic and print/social media. Public 
information campaigns in this regard in regional dialects would help in 
reaching out to candidates who are not well versed in English or Hindi. 
The Committee desire that adequate finances be allocated towards this 
endeavour. 
6.59 The Committee appreciate the initiatives of the Ministry under 
the Atal Vayo Abhyuday Yojana (AVYAY) for the main tenance of senior 

218 
 
citizens. As part of the Yojana, at least one old age home must be set 
up in every district, fully funded by the Government. In accordance to 
the guidelines, the Committee  were informed that about 600 old age 
homes were being run by the NGOs in various parts of the Country. 
However around 250 districts do not yet have any old age home. The 
Ministry assured the Committee that within the next two years, the 
target of coverage of all the 250 districts is likely to be achieved so as 
to facilitate any destitute/elderly person in finding accommodation in 
these old age homes in every district. The Committee desire that the 
deadline be adhered to scrupulously. Further, the Committee are of the 
view that ensuring that senior citizens lead a secure,  dignified and 
productive life is a major challenge and urge the Ministry to formulate 
proposals to re -skill them if they want to seek re -employment. The 
Committee also exhort the Ministry to set up a national helpline for 
the welfare of senior citizens an d sensitise youth and other sections of 
the society towards issues of the elderly. The Committee also desire 
that steps be taken to encourage senior citizens to form Self -help 
Groups in order to provide them with productive occupation and share 
time constructively with each other. 
6.60 The Committee observe that the eradication of Child labour is a 
multidimensional problem and addressing it in its entirety would 
require a holistic inter -Ministerial legislative convergence involving a 
range of stakeholders t o effectively formulate and collaborate on 
targeted policies and  review measures for identification, rescue and 
socio-economic rehabilitation of child labour. However, the Committee 
are deeply perturbed at the admission on the part of the Ministry on 
the absence of any convergence strategy either with the Ministry of 
Labour or other Ministries of the Government of India on a critical 
issue of Child labour. The Committee feel that inadequate synergy and 
lack of coordination at grass -root levels and Minister ial level between 
Child labour policies and interventions between various agencies of the 
Ministries of the GoI has hampered the anti -Child labour framework. 

219 
 
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Social Justice have 
an important role not only in prohibition of Child labour but also in its 
rescue and rehabilitation.  The Committee therefore exhort the 
Ministry to devise a coherent convergence strategy wherever possible 
among various stakeholders involved in standardizing SOPs on 
identification, r escue, trafficking, repatriation, reintegration and 
rehabilitation for Children or those found vulnerable to child labour in 
order to address them effectively and the benefits of convergence can 
be targeted towards areas of high incidence of child labour b y 
leveraging the strengths of different Ministries to achieve the desired 
outcomes so as to effectively tackle Child labour in all its 
manifestation. 
  

220 
 
CHAPTER - SEVEN 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
INTRODUCTION 
7.1 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs is not directly related with the 
implementation of the National Policy on Child Labour. The main focus of 
the Ministry is to elevate the socio -economic status of the tribal people by 
providing them better livelihood opportunities better prospects of quality 
education and accessible health care. The main issue with the tribal 
children is that they do not work with any employers but work with their 
own families who are mainly engaged in agriculture business and gathering 
of Minor Forest Produce (MFP) which is season al in nature. Therefore the 
tribal children work as a help to their families and are marked as child 
workers instead of child labours. However, there are remarkable number of 
children working as child workers throughout the country according to 2011 
Census. Due to less employment opportunities in the tribal areas seasonal 
migration of tribal people takes place and children accompany their families 
and hence do not take admission in schools which also adds upto out of 
school children. Therefore, the Committe e considered it to be relevant to 
examine the Ministry of Tribal Affairs as they have a role to play in 
eradication of child labour in tribal areas. 
7.2  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have a unique funding pattern under 
which 41 Central Ministries apart f rom Ministry of Tribal Affairs earmark 
their funds in the range from 4.3% to 17.5% of their total TSP Scheme 
allocation every year as Tribal Sub Plan/Scheduled Tribes Component (STC) 
also knows as Development Action Plan for STs (DAPST) for various schemes 
for Tribal development. These funds are spent by different Central 
Ministries/ Departments under their schemes for various development 
projects for accelerated socio -economic development of Tribal population. 
Besides State Governments are also supposed to  earmark TSP funds in 
proportion to ST population in the States. Apart from this there is a 
statutory provision under Article 275(1) under which 100% financial 
assistance is provided to enable the States to meet the cost of their schemes 
of development for promoting welfare of Scheduled Tribes. 
7.3  Ministry of Labour is the nodal Ministry for welfare of Labour which 
includes prevention of child labour. Ministry of Women and Child 
Development is the nodal ministry for women and child welfare and for co -
ordination of activities with other Ministries and organizations in connection 
with women and child development and for welfare of the family. 
7.4  Same was corroborated by one of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs in their deposition before  the Committee during the course of 
oral evidence as under: 
 "We do not have any direct scheme on the child labour per se in the 
tribal habitations. But by focussing our attention on education, health and 
livelihood aspects, we have tried to ameliorate the  condition of tribal 

221 
 
families.  We think that if we succeed in providing quality education and 
accessible health care to tribal population and if we can create sustainable 
employment opportunities in the areas of tribal habitations, then tribal 
children will be able to study in a healthy atmosphere thus decreasing the 
incidence of child labour. Also, tribal workforce will not need to migrate." 
7.5  Asked about the specific measures adopted by the Ministry to improve 
literacy and prevent child labour amongst  the tribal population, it was 
replied as under: 
"The Ministry of Tribal Affairs implements programmes and schemes for 
development and welfare of the Scheduled Tribe communities.”  
7.6  Besides other Schemes run by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Tribal 
Sub Plan (TSP), also known as Special Training Centres (STC) which has 
now been renamed as Development Action Plan for STs (DAPST) is a 
planning concept that aims to improve the socio -economic development of 
tribal people across the country. Besides, States Governments are supposed 
to earmark TSP funds in proportion to ST population in the States w.r.t. 
total State Plan (Census, 2011) State Welfare Departments are the 
implementing Agencies of this Plan (STC Monitoring – Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs website tribal.nic.in). The Ministry further informed the Committee as 
under: 
“Besides Ministry of Tribal Affairs, 41 Central Ministries / Departments have 
been obligated for earmarking in the range of 4.3 to 17.5 percent of their 
total Scheme allocation every year as  TSP/STC/DAPST funds for tribal 
development. TSP/STC/DAPST funds are spent by different Central 
Ministries / Departments under their schemes for various development 
projects relating to education, health, agriculture, irrigation, roads, housing, 
drinking w ater, electrification, employment generation, skill development, 
etc. for accelerated socio-economic development of STs.  
7.7  In this context, a representative of the Ministry deposed before the 
Committee explaining the TSP further during the oral evidenc e deposed as 
under: 
“…since 1974-75 a tribal sub-plan with dedicated mechanism was developed 
where all the relevant Ministries are required to allocate specific amount of 
their Budget exclusively for the welfare of the Tribals.  It has two 
components.  One  is the Central component. Since 2015, there are 41 
Ministries which are required to allocate a specific amount of their Budget 
and likewise in the States, all the States which have tribal population are 
required to spend their Budget in proportion to the tribal population.” 
7.8  When asked about the budget allocation under TSP/Scheduled Tribe 
Component (STC) by the nodal Ministries, the Ministry stated as under: 
S. No. Ministry STC Budget Allocation (%) 
1. Ministry of Labour & 
Employment 
8.57 
2. Ministry of Women & 
Child Development 
8.60 
3. Ministry Tribal Affairs 100 

222 
 
Under Scheduled Tribe Component, STC funds are dedicated source 
of funds for tribal development. Ministry of Labour and Ministry of WCD is 
required to spend 8.57% of their budget allocation and 8.60% respectively as 
STC." As regards School Education, Department of School Education & 
Literacy (DoSE&L) has allocated Rs. 6093.66 Cr. under STC in FY 2022 -23 
with major allocation under the schemes - Samagra Shiksha and National 
Programme of Mid-Day Meal in Schools. 
… WCD which is the relevant Ministry and is required to coordinate 
with the other line Ministries including the Ministry of Tribal Affairs for the 
welfare of the Tribal children." 
 ROLE OF MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS IN PREVENTION OF CHILD LABOUR 
7.9  When the Committee enquired the Ministry about measures adopted 
for prevention of child labour in the tribal areas and for ensuring education 
of tribal children and their all round development, the Ministry stated that 
the Ministry of Educa tion (Department of School Education and Literacy) is 
the nodal Ministry which work to provide education to all the children under 
Right to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009. However, as far as the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs is concerned there are se veral schemes 
implemented by the Ministry which are as under: 
“(i) Pre- Matric Scholarship: Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme is a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme under which financial assistance is provided to ST 
students studying in classes IX and X. 
(ii) Post Matric Scholarship: Post -Matric Scholarship Scheme is a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme under which financial assistance is 
provided to ST students studying beyond class X. 
(iii) Eklavya Model Residential School (EMRS): It is a Central Sector 
Scheme to provide quality education to Scheduled Tribes (ST) 
students (Class 6th to 12th) in remote areas through residential 
schools. As on date, 684 schools have been sanctioned by the 
Ministry, out of which 378 are reported to be functional. 
(iv) Grants to NGOs: Ministry of Tribal Affairs is administering the scheme 
of “Grant-in-Aid to Voluntary Organizations working for the welfare of 
Scheduled Tribes” under which grants are provided to NGOs working 
in the health and education sectors. While in the Education Sector, 
the beneficiaries are ST children, in Health Sector, the beneficiaries 
are from ST population. In remote, hilly, forested and border areas 
where there are infrastructural gaps, the Ministry gives grants for 
more than 200 projects implemented by NGOs for runnin g of 
residential and nonresidential schools and hostels. 
(v) Grants under Article 275(1) of the Constitution: Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs is implementing scheme of Grants under Article 275(1) of the 
Constitution. It is a 100% grant from Government of India.  Funding 
under this programme is to enable the States to meet the cost of such 
schemes of development as may be undertaken by the State for the 
purpose of promoting welfare of Scheduled Tribes in that State or 
raising the level of administration of Schedul ed Areas therein to that 
of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State." 

223 
 
7.10  Elaborating the various schemes run by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, 
a representative of the Ministry deposed before the Committee as under: 
“…we have four dedicated schemes which are relevant for the children.   
First is the pre-matric scholarship and post-matric scholarship. These 
two schemes are implemented by the States. Any child whose family income 
is less than Rs. 2,50,000 is entitled for this scholarship in 9th and 10th 
class and for post -matric scholarship, all the children are entitled for 
scholarship for studying in any course.  Other than these, the Ministry has 
three Central Sector Schemes which are for higher education, that is top 
class scholarship scheme where we have 246 top class institutes like IITs, 
IIMs, NITs where children can study with the Ministry’s fund. Then, we have 
National Fellowship Scheme where every year, we provide scholarship to 750 
students for doing Ph.D and we also have Nationa l Overseas Scholarship 
Scheme where every year 20 scholars can study abroad and the Ministry 
provide funding for their boarding and lodging including fee.” 
7.11  On a pointed query regarding inclusion of tribal children into the 
mainstream, how many Ashram  and Eklavya Model Residential Schools 
have been sanctioned and how many have started operations, the Ministry 
replied to the Committee as under: 
“Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) was running a separate scheme 
“Establishment of Ashram Schools in Tribal Su b-Plan Areas” under which 
funds were provided to State Governments for construction of Ashram 
schools. State-wise list of Ashram Schools sanctioned by Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs (MoTA) under the erstwhile scheme of “Establishment of Ashram 
Schools in Tribal Sub-Plan Areas” is as under: 
 
State/UT Number of Ashram Schools 
Sanctioned 
Andhra Pradesh 
including Telangana 188 
Assam 3 
Chhattisgarh 134 
Goa 1 
Gujarat 164 
Jharkhand 24 
Karnataka 28 
Kerala 14 
Madhya Pradesh 404 
Maharashtra 95 
Odisha 97 
Rajasthan 9 
Sikkim 1 
Tripura 24 
Uttar Pradesh 7 
Uttarakhand 12 
Total 1205 
 

224 
 
As part of rationalization of schemes of the Ministry, the intervention of 
‘Ashram Schools’ was subsumed under the Schemes of ‘Special Central 
Assistance to Tribal Sub -Scheme (SCA to TSS) and Grants under Article 
275(1) of the Constitution from 2018 -19 onwards. During 2021 -22, the 
scheme of ‘SCA to TSS’ has been transformed into scheme of ‘Pradhaan 
Mantri Aadi Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAAGY) with the aim of transf orming 
villages with significant tribal population into model village (Adarsh Gram) In 
the first phase of five years, 36428 tribal dominated villages with at least 
50% tribal population and 500 STs will be taken up under the scheme all 
over the country. Th erefore, the interventions of ‘Ashram Schools’ are now 
considered for financial assistance under Grants under Article 275(1) of the 
Constitution of India. 
 
The Ministry provided financial support to the State Government only for 
construction of Ashram scho ols. The responsibility for running and overall 
maintenance of schools constructed with the financial support provided to 
states by MoTA. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs has advised states to give top 
priority to improving the infrastructure of Ashram schoo ls, and has also 
financially supported renovation works as well as provision of equipment. 
 
Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRS): 
As on date,  685 EMRSs have been sanctioned by the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs. The summary of building status pertaining to  the same has been 
tabulated below: 
Total Targeted 
EMRS 
Total EMRS 
Sanctioned 
Building Status 
Completed Under 
Construction Yet to Start 
740 685 230 234 221 
  
The state -wise summary of sanctioned and functional EMRSs with 
enrolment figures for the academic year 2021-22 are as under: 
 States Sanctioned 
EMRS 
Functional 
EMRS 
Enrollment 
(2021-22) 
Andhra Pradesh 28 28 5795 
Arunachal Pradesh 10 2 220 
Assam 12 1 480 
Bihar 3 - - 
Chhattisgarh 73 71 15581 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & 
Diu 
1 1 179 
Gujarat 41 35 10973 
Himachal Pradesh 4 4 552 
Jammu & Kashmir 6 6 - 
Jharkhand 88 7 3051 
Karnataka 12 12 4027 
Kerala 4 4 560 
Ladakh 3 - - 
Madhya Pradesh 69 63 23393 
Maharashtra 37 33 7062 

225 
 
Manipur 21 3 1431 
Meghalaya 27 - - 
Mizoram 17 6 1061 
Nagaland 22 3 671 
Odisha 104 27 7317 
Rajasthan 31 30 7224 
Sikkim 4 4 1008 
Tamil Nadu 8 8 2867 
Telangana 23 23 6795 
Tripura 21 5 1899 
Uttar Pradesh 4 2 480 
Uttarakhand 4 3 765 
West Bengal 8 7 2072 
Grand Total 685 388 105463 
 
It may be noted that the data regarding functional Ashram Schools and 
enrolments therein is maintained by the respective states.” 
  
7.12  Further, the Committee were informed during the course of evidence 
by a representative of the Ministry as follows: 
“…the Ministry provides grants to the States for developing hostels in remote 
areas and Ashram schools also.  We funded 1200 Ashram schools under 
SCA to TSS under Article 275(1).  Still, there are remote areas.  As you are 
aware, there are some hilly areas and border areas where the Government 
has not been able to open schools. So, in those areas, to fill the gaps, there 
are more than 200 projects which we have implemented through NGOs.  You 
must have heard of RK Mission. It is providing education to more than 
10,000 students in S ohra, in Meghalaya. Similarly, in Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam and in many remote areas, they are doing this thing. Our NGOs, RK 
Mission, Bharat Seva Ashram, Linga institute and many more institutes are 
providing education in remote areas.” 
 7.13  In this conn ection, one of the representatives of the Ministry of 
deposed before the Committee as under: 
“Sir, I think you must be aware about the Ekalavya Residential Model 
Schools.  This scheme was started in 1997 -98 under Article 275(1) of the 
Constitution.  The gr ants were given to the States for developing these 
schools.  On the success of this scheme, in 2018 -19, the Cabinet took a 
decision for every tribal block which has a population of 20,000 and fifty per 
cent of the them are tribals.  So, there were 452 blocks which were identified 
by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and it is developing Ekalavya Residential 
Model School. So, in this Cabinet meeting of 2021 -22, every school which is 
there in the hilly areas, the cost of construction has increased to Rs. 48 
crore and in plain areas, Rs. 38 crore is the cost of construction. So, annual 
expenditure on every student is rupees one lakh nine thousand.  
 Sir, presently, one lakh five thousand students are studying and we 
are hopeful that by 2025 -26 when the schools are  constructed and run on 

226 
 
hundred per cent enrolment that three lakh fifty thousand students will get 
free education and quality education in the remotest areas.” 
7.14  Elaborating another Scheme of “Grant -in-Aid to Voluntary 
Organisations Working for the We lfare of Scheduled Tribes” which aims at 
strengthening education among ST girls, Ministry of Tribal Affairs informed 
the Committee as under: 
"The Scheme Grant -in-Aid to Voluntary Organisations Working for the 
Welfare of Scheduled Tribe’ provides funds inte r-alia for strengthening 
Education among ST Girls in Low Literacy Districts. The scheme is being 
implemented through Voluntary Organisations/ Non -Governmental 
Organisations and aims at enhancing the literacy rate of tribal girls, bridging 
the gap in litera cy levels between the general female population and tribal 
women and reducing drop -outs at the elementary and secondary level by 
creating the required ambiance for education." 
7.15  The Ministry further apprised the Committee of the role of Samagra 
Shiksha Scheme in reaching out to children especially girls belonging to 
Scheduled Tribes: 
"Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSE&L), Ministry of 
Education is implementing Samagra Shiksha scheme, effective from 2018 -
19. Bridging gender and social category gaps at all levels of school education 
is one of the major objectives of the scheme. The Scheme reaches out to 
girls, and children belonging to SC, ST, Minority communities and 
transgender. The Scheme also focuses on the identified Special Focus 
Districts (SFDs) on the basis of adverse performance on various indicators of 
enrolment, retention, and gender parity, as well as concentration of SC, ST 
and minority communities. " 
7.16  The Committee were further informed that Netaji Subhash Chandra 
Bose Awas iya Vidyalays and Hostels under Samagra Shiksha Scheme are 
set up for children in sparsely populated, or hilly and densely forested areas 
with difficult geographical terrain and border areas. Under Samagra Shiksha 
Scheme, there is also a provision of Kastu rba Gandhi Balika Vidyalays 
(KGBVs), which are residential schools from classes VI to XII for girls 
belonging to SC, ST, OBC, Minority and Below Poverty Line (BPL). 
7.17  The Ministry further expressed in detail of the role of abovementioned 
Schools and Hostels in preventing child labour as under: 
"Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Residential Schools and Hostels provide the 
residential facilities to child labour rescued, migrant children who belong to 
poor landless families, children without adult protection, se parated from 
their families, internally displaced persons, and children from the areas of 
social and armed conflict and natural calamities.  In this regard, preference 
is given to Educational Backward Blocks (EBBs), Left Wing Extremism (LWE) 
affected distr icts Special Focus Districts (SFDs) and the 115 Aspirational 
districts identified by NITI Aayog." 
 
 

227 
 
7.18  The Committee were further informed by the Ministry as under: 
"Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti also has a mandate for opening of 01 Jawahar 
Navodaya Vidyalaya in each district of the Country to provide good quality 
modern education with boarding and lodging facilities, free of cost to all the 
students including Scheduled Tribe Students." 
7.19  When the Committee wanted to know about the school drop -out rate 
of children of tribal population vis-à-vis school children in general, the 
Ministry informed as under:  
"Unified District Information System for Education (UDISE) Plus, Ministry of 
Education report, dropout rates of Scheduled Tribes students and all 
Students are given below for Primary, Upper Primary and Secondary stages 
for the last 5 years. It may be seen that dropout rates have been showing 
decreasing trend over the years, but there still exists a gap between ST 
students and All categories. 
Drop-Out Rates in School Education for Scheduled Tribe 
Students  
Year / Class 
Primary Upper Primary Secondary 
Girls Boys Overall Girls Boys Overall Girls Boys Overall 
2016-
17 8.52 8.57 8.54 9.70 9.46 9.58 28.11 28.93 28.53 
2017-
18 3.48 3.82 3.66 6.14 5.95 6.04 21.36 22.90 22.14 
2018-
19 5.23 5.72 5.48 6.46 6.89 6.69 23.38 26.40 24.93 
2019-
20 3.61 4.06 3.85 5.81 6.30 6.06 22.65 25.64 24.18 
2020-21 2.31 2.72 2.52 4.69 5.36 5.02 19.65 22.14 20.91 
    Source: UDISE Plus, M/o Education 
Drop-Out Rates in School Education for All Students  
Year / Class 
Primary Upper Primary Secondary 
Girls Boys Overall Girls Boys Overall Girls Boys Overall 
2016-17 6.30 6.40 6.35 6.42 4.97 5.68 22.15 22.11 22.13 
2017-18 3.33 3.68 3.51 5.57 4.49 5.02 18.66 19.16 18.93 
2018-19 4.30 4.59 4.45 5.14 4.26 4.68 17.05 18.68 17.90 
2019-20 1.24 1.70 1.48 2.98 2.24 2.60 15.07 17.02 16.09 
2020-21 0.69 0.83 0.76 2.61 1.95 2.27 13.71 14.34 14.04 
     Source: UDISE Plus, M/o Education" 
7.20 Explaining the reason for this high drop -out rates of the tribal boys 
and girls, the Ministry forwarded the following inputs given by the States to 
the Committee: 

228 
 
"The main concentration of the tribal population is more in the rural area, 
the people of the tribal society are mainly engaged in agricul tural business, 
minor forest produce, forest produce, various types of materials are made 
mainly from forest produce, because this work is done by family. Therefore, 
along with the family, their children have also been working as a help in 
these. Although they are not engaged with any employer, they are marked as 
child workers and not child laborers. The number of such child workers has 
been found mostly in the 2011 census. 
Secondly, due to relatively less employment opportunities in areas where 
tribes are local, people go outside the area with their families for livelihood, 
due to which the children of this area do not take admission in the school, 
and are included in the definition of child worker. And due to the 
involvement of a large number of such child ren with self -employment, they 
also get defined in the number of child workers." 
7.21  When the Committee enquired about the action taken with regard to 
developmental programmes including those pertaining to child rights and 
child protection that were undertaken under the aegis of NITI Working 
Group (Standing Committee on Civil Society Organisations of NITI Aayog), it 
was submitted by the Ministry as under: 
"The sub -group was constituted on Child Rights and Child Protection under 
Niti Central Statistics Office (CSO) standing Committee.   However, the Sub-
Group was discontinued later.  
Some States have informed about their initiatives.  
Govt. of Goa stated that the provisions in the RTE Act have been notified for 
the information of general public. 
Govt. of Sikkim conducted awareness programmes on: 
1.       Child protection & Rehabilitation 
2.       POCSO Act 2012 
3.       Child marriage 
4.       Child labour 
5.       Adoption" 
7.22  When the Committee enquired about the estimated number of working 
tribal children and adolescents, the Ministry replied as under: 
"Ministry of Tribal Affairs does not compile data about the number of 
working tribal children, as Ministry of Labour & Employment is the nodal 
ministry for welfare of Labour, including child labour. M inistry of Tribal 
Affairs obtains the required figures, whenever needed to know the estimated 
numbers, from the census figures. Ministry of Tribal Affairs also coordinates 
with the Ministry of Labour and the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development in this regard." 
7.23  When the Committee asked the Ministry about the number of child 
labours/workers, State-wise, the Ministry provided the following statement 
on Scheduled Tribes Main Workers in 5 -14 years age group as per Census 
2011 as the Ministry do not maintain this data: 

229 
 
Table: State/UT wise ST main workers in  5-14 years  age group 
State /UT ST Main workers (5-14) years 
 ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS 41 
 ANDHRA PRADESH 66,191 
 ARUNACHAL PRADESH 3,711 
 ASSAM 13,773 
 BIHAR 8,354 
 CHHATTISGARH 25,977 
 DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 660 
 DAMAN & DIU 54 
 GOA 813 
 GUJARAT 50,832 
 HIMACHAL PRADESH 1,093 
 JAMMU & KASHMIR 4,625 
 JHARKHAND 34,529 
 KARNATAKA 30,779 
 KERALA 737 
 LAKSHADWEEP 26 
 MADHYA PRADESH 110,736 
 MAHARASHTRA 102,430 
 MANIPUR 8,237 
 MEGHALAYA 17,313 
 MIZORAM 2,474 
 NAGALAND 9,802 
 ODISHA 34,854 
 RAJASTHAN 47,030 
 SIKKIM 912 
 TAMIL NADU 4,967 
 TRIPURA 2,052 
 UTTAR PRADESH 4,881 
 UTTARAKHAND 1,216 
 WEST BENGAL 16,064 
Source: Census, 2011   
 7.24  On being asked about the reasons for high concentration of workers of 
the age 05 to 14 years in the States of Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat, the Ministry replied as under: 
"The State of Madhya Pradesh has got ever 1.5 crore of ST population which 
is about  15% of the ST population of the entire country. Similarly, 
Maharashtra also has got over one crore of ST population as per 2011 
census. Such States with large tribal populations are likely to have relatively 
higher numbers of working children." 
Measures f or providing employment and better livelihood to STs for 
curbing migration 
7.25  On a pointed query to the Committee regarding steps taken for 
preventing migration of tribal population, representative of the Ministry 
deposed before the Committee as under: 
“Sir, migration is directly linked to the livelihood also. We had earlier two 
schemes. One is institutional support to States and the other is procurement 
of MFPs that is, minor forest produce. So, there are 87 Minor Forest Produce 
for which the Ministry and TRIFED have fixed minimum support price. So, if 

230 
 
the tribals want to sell that item, they do through these things.  But these 
two schemes were implemented through the States. In this Cabinet, the 
Ministry had taken decision after a lot of deliberations w ith NITI Aayog and 
with the Group of Ministers.  So, Pradhan Mantri Janjatiya Vikas Mission 
has been approved.  This year, approximately Rs. 450 crore has been 
earmarked for this.  So, under this scheme, not only minimum support price 
will be provided to t he minor forest produce but for value addition also, we 
are establishing Van Dhan Vikas Kendra.  Each Kendra has 300 members.   
So, as you know, the tribals go to the forest. They pick up the minor forest 
produce but earlier, they used to sell directly to the middlemen like honey, 
mahua and 87 such products. Other than 87 products also, for example, 
they also grow hill bloom grass in north east. From that, they are making 
these brooms. So, value addition is the major component. Under this 
Scheme, Rs. 15 lak h is given to every Van Dhan Vikas Kendra. So, ten lakh 
members are there presently and about 3500 Van Dhan Vikas Kendras have 
been already established.” 
7.26  When the Ministry were asked about the steps taken by them to 
reduce unemployment and generate l ivelihood opportunities in order to 
check migration of tribal population and ensure that participation of 
children in the traditional livelihood activities such as agriculture and 
gathering of forest produce does not affect their education, the Ministry of  
Tribal Affairs replied that the following schemes are run by the Ministry 
which are aimed at providing sustainable livelihood and improving 
Infrastructure in rural area to prevent migration and exploitation of tribal 
population: 
“i.  Pradhan Mantri Janjatiya Vikas Mission (PMJVM) 
ii. Marketing and Logistics Development for Promoting Tribal Products 
from North-Eastern Region 
iii. Equity Support to National Scheduled Tribes Finance and 
Development Corporation (NSTFDC)/State Scheduled Tribes Finance 
and Development Corporations (STFDCs) 
iv. Venture Capital Funds for STs 
v. Funds under Article 275(1) to States 
vi. Pradhan Mantri Adi Adarsh Gram Yojna” 
7.27  Further, elaborating Pradhan Mantri Adi Adarsh Gram Yojana 
(PMAAGY), the Ministry forwarded the following  information to the 
Committee: 
“Pradhan Mantri Adi Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAAGY) aims at providing basic 
infrastructure in 36,428 villages with significant tribal population having at 
least 50% tribal population and 500 STs in convergence with Central STC 
and State TSP funds.” 
7.28  When the Ministry were asked regarding role of Tribal Co -Operative 
Marketing Development Federation of India (TRIFED), and National Scheduled 
Tribes Finance and Development Corporation (NSTFDC) in providing competitive 

231 
 
markets and  subsidized finances to the tribal people, it was informed to the 
Committee as under: 
“With regard to the steps taken for reducing unemployment and generating 
livelihood opportunities in the Tribal Areas, the Ministry, through Tribal Co -
Operative Marketing  Development Federation of India (TRIFED), an 
autonomous organization and National Scheduled Tribes Finance and 
Development Corporation (NSTFDC), a CPSE, is involved in some way or the 
other- 
• To supplement the livelihood of tribal people, TRIFED under th e 
scheme of PMJVM provides Minimum Support Price (MSP) to Minor 
Forest Produce (MFPs) gatherers the market price of their MFPs, if it 
falls below MSP. 
• Funds are also provided for setting up Van Dhan Vikas Kendras, 
comprising of upto 300 members each, whe rein, value addition 
training is being provided to tribal population which ultimately act as 
value addition centres for State Agencies and as suppliers of tribal 
produce / products. 
• Further, empanelment for sale and purchase of tribal products from 
tribal artisans are done which helps them to generate employment 
and augment their income. 
• In addition, National Scheduled Tribes Finance and Development 
Corporation (NSTFDC) provides concessional loans to the eligible 
Scheduled Tribe persons for any income g eneration/self-employment 
activities through its implementing agencies. 
Ensuring the above activities will also result in keeping the drop -out rate of 
tribal children from school at a low level." 
7.29 In this context a representative of the Ministry inform ed the 
Committee during evidence as follows: 
“Now, our plan in the next phase in these five years is not only for the value 
addition but also branding of their products and their marketing is also very 
important because this is very competitive market. As our products are 
mostly organic, there is a lot of market but there has to be a dedicated 
mechanism which we are providing under this scheme from this year 
onwards as Van Dhan enterprises which will be a next level under TRIFED. 
So, now, TRIFED will be a d edicated agency. It will be the nodal agency 
where tribal haats will be set up and then, warehouses will also be set up. 
Depending upon the requirement of each area, this scheme will be 
implemented. Secondly, exclusively for north east for next two years, for 
development of their products and providing marketing and logistics, this 
scheme has been approved by the Department of Expenditure.  
 Thirdly Sir, we have National Scheduled Tribe Finance Development 
Corporation (NSTFDC).  Under this scheme, we provid e subsidized loans to 
our beneficiaries. The loan rate is as low as 3 -4 per cent.  This scheme is 
implemented through State nodal agencies. In addition to this, from this 
year, we have also started on the line of Ministry of Social Justice, a venture 

232 
 
capital fund for Scheduled Tribes and to start that, Rs. 50 crore has been 
given. So, we will be implementing this scheme through IFCI”  
7.30  For the livelihood activities in the North Eastern Region following 
submission was made by the Ministry during the course of evidence: 
“…under article 275(1) of the States, we give a lot of funds to the States for 
development of livelihood activities. Especially, in the North East, a lot of 
projects are given. For example, there is development of pine apple or elaichi.  
These types of projects are given in the North East.  As I said in the 
beginning, we have 41 Ministries but many times, you must have also seen 
that many Ministries were not able to spend the amount in a dedicated 
manner for the development of tribals and t ribal areas. So, the Pradhan 
Mantri Adi Adarsh Gram Yojna is a new scheme which has been revamped 
from the earlier SCA to TSS.  Under this scheme, based on gap analysis in 
one lakh seventeen villages on the basis of Antyodaya Mission data, there 
were 18 pa rameters fixed like whether the road is there or not, school or 
water facility is there or not, electricity, banks, post office, etc.  So, we 
identified 18 parameters and, on that basis, we further analysed the data 
and we found 36,428 villages which have a population of 500 and more than 
50 per cent.  In each of these villages, we will be giving Rs. 20 lakhs but all 
the concerned Ministries, like the Ministry of Rural Development, Panchayati 
Raj, Water Resources have been asked to dedicate their funds exclusively for 
these villages in the next five years.  Under the Amrit Mahotsav, every year, 
we will be taking 7500 villages.  All these schemes are basically providing 
sustainable livelihood and providing infrastructure in the remote tribal areas 
depending upon the requirement of each area so that they do not migrate 
and because natural resources are abundantly available in forest areas, they 
can utilise their resources in their own areas.” 
7.31  On a pointed query regarding Research Projects undertaken by th e 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs, to check migration amongst tribal population, the 
Ministry furnished the following information during the course of evidence 
before the Committee: 
“We have 27 tribal research institutes and we have also recently set up a 
National Tribal Research Institute.  Migration is one of the key areas of 
concern. We have given multiple projects not only to the States but we have 
also a scheme of funding a reputed organisation under Centre of Excellence.  
There, in the last few years, we h ave conducted several studies.  One of the 
studies was conducted by DISHA Foundation in which seven States were 
taken.  Four States were originating States namely Jharkhand, Odisha, 
Chhattisgarh from where migration was happening and the destination 
States were Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa and Andhra Pradesh.  The findings 
of these reports were that migration mainly takes because of two reasons.  
One is pull factor.  For example, in Goa, the fishermen get a very high per 
day remuneration.  Secondly, as tribals  are dependent on a lot of natural 
resources, if they are not able to properly utilise the natural resources, they 
prefer to migrate to the neighbouring the States or within the State or 
outside States.  Based on these findings, in Goa, we have a pilot pro ject with 
the Ministry of Labour in Goa and our Ministry.  It is to look into the welfare 
of all the tribals who are migrating to Goa.  If they face any problem, like 
legal problems, that also is provided jointly through this.   

233 
 
 Similarly in Maharashtra, through DISHA Foundation, we are working 
in Nasik and we are mainly working on labour which is coming from 
different States.  These are the other States which have been given these 
research projects in the last one year.” 
7.32  On being asked about any mig rant labour support programme being 
implemented by the Ministry, it was informed to the Committee as under: 
"The Ministry has sanctioned pilot project to State of Goa for migrant labour 
support program.   This program is being implemented by the State 
Government and it will take some more time to conclude the study." 
7.33  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs also apprised the Committee of the major 
findings of the various studies sanctioned by the Ministry on issues related 
to Tribal migration as under: 
i. "Tribal migrants face issues like difficult working conditions, lack 
of documentation and identity issue, inadequate social security 
coverage 
ii. Lack of awareness about Government Schemes. 
iii. Lack of support at destination level for migrants. 
iv. Difficulty in communicating in language of the host State. 
v. Difficulty in obtaining education and health services in destination 
State." 
Awareness Campaigns 
7.34  The Committee enquired about the specific measures undertaken by 
the Ministry to raise awareness about the welfare measures and various 
schemes run by the Ministry for the tribal children, the Ministry stated as 
under: 
"TRI & Media Division extends support to the State Governments through 
centrally sponsored Scheme ‘Support to Tribal Research Institutes (TRIs)’ to 
strengthen  Tribal Research Institutes (TRIs) in their infrastructural needs, 
research & documentation activities and training &capacity building 
programmes, organization of tribal festivals, exchange visits etc. Under the 
scheme, funds are also provided for awareness programmes." 
7.35  Further, a representative of the Ministry provided following details 
about the awareness campaigns run by the Ministry during evidence:  
“With the help of DISHA Foundation and TRI, these two awareness 
campaigns and sensitisation  of child labour happens to be a regular 
phenomenon.  About the welfare programmes of the Ministry, I would like to 
point out that we have developed several portals so that a dedicated 
mechanism is there so that people are aware about our schemes. There is  
one portal called adiprasaran.  It gives details of all the schemes of the 
Ministry and the best practices, the initiatives of the Ministry and how that 
scheme is performing. We have also developed a performance dashboard 
where all the portals of the Mini stry are included.  It shows how the States 
are performing like the utilisation certificates, how much they have utilised.  
This mechanism is there on the performance dashboard. Our Ministry won 

234 
 
the SKOCH Award for these portals and in data governance qual ity index 
which is a mechanism developed by NITI Aayog, our Ministry is third on 
digital governance also.” 
7.36 Further, the Committee were apprised during the evidence of the 
State-wise approach of the Ministry as follows: 
“These activities in the States are depending upon their requirements. We 
have also started one pilot project in Odisha where the Panchayati raj 
institutions are represented. They are being trained about the schemes of 
the Ministry.  Similarly, through the Art of Living Foundation, a pro ject was 
taken in Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh.  TRIs are also taking these projects 
and under the Pradhan Mantri Adi Adarsh Yojna, our main focus is that we 
should develop a family wise data of all the tribals and the different 
schemes. There are two types of schemes.  One is infrastructure and the 
other is direct beneficiary scheme.  Whether the benefits of all the schemes 
are going to the tribals or not are being looked into.  These are some of the 
projects which have been given to different States.” 
7.37 On being enquired by the Committee about the engagement of the 
tribal leaders and public representatives towards creating awareness for 
eradication of child labour in tribal areas, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“The Ministry has launched program of awar eness of Panchayati Raj 
Institutes in Odisha in January 2020. All states have been asked to 
undertake training activities of the Members of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions.  In Jharkhand, Chattisgarh and Odisha, with the help of UNDP 
and TRIs, a course curricu lum has  been designed for PRI representatives. 
The   community leaders are made aware about various schemes of Central 
and State Government and employment opportunities available in rural 
areas. 
 
Further Ministry provides funds to State TRIs for conducting Awareness 
programmes. The projects sanctioned under 'Support to TRIs' during 
2019-20 to 2021-22 are as under. 
 
 S.No. State Activity 
  2019-20 
1 Manipur Awareness cum Training on Forest Rights Act (FRA) -Training of 
Elected Representatives/State Officials/Village Chiefs/Headmen, 
Leaders of CSOs. Students Leaders, NGOs and other 
stakeholders -To be conducted in each of the 6 (six) Autonomous 
District Councils/Districts and 1 (one) Programme at TRI 
Imphal. 
2 Odisha Off campus awareness and sensitization training programme on 
POA Act and Rules for STs in ITDAs and Micro Projects 
3 Off campus awareness and sensitization training programme on 
ongoing Development programmes for STs in ITDAs and Micro 
Projects 
4 Tripura Awareness Programme against alcoholism and drug addiction 
for the ST youths. 
5 West Bengal Training cum Awareness Programme on POA 
6 Training cum Awareness Programme on Hand wash practices 
among the Tribal School Children of West Bengal 

235 
 
  2020-21 
1 Karnataka Training on Awareness Programme on Health and Hygiene 
including hand Wash Practices to school children of ST Ashrama 
Schools and Hostels. 
2 Awareness Camp in tribal areas on (a) Drinking Water , (b) 
Sanitation, Hygiene and Communicable Diseases. 
3 Odisha Awareness and Capacity Building of SMC Members on School 
Management, their role and how to adopt the Covid 19 
precautionary measures for children (one day duration in one 
batch) 
4 Capacity Building Training for all the ST PRI Members and Key 
Stakeholders on Tribal  Development Schemes and Programs 
(More than 30,000 ST PRI Members (Sarpanches and 
NayebSarpaneh and Ward Members/ SET community members 
will undergo this awareness program) 
5 Uttarakhand Training Programme for creating awareness among PRI, 
Departmental officers and Tribal Community 
  2021-22 
1 Rajasthan Social Awareness Activity for Sickle Cell Disease (in association 
with AIIMS Jodhpur) 
2 Tamil Nadu FRA Awareness for Tribal communities in 16 Tribal popoulated 
districts 
  
 
7.38 When the Committee enquired about the research projects 
undertaken by TRIs under the Scheme of Support to TRIs, the Ministry 
during their oral evidence on the subject submitted as under: 
 
State 
Name 
Financial 
year 
Project name Amount 
(in 
lakh) 
Goa 2020-21 Traibal Livelihood  Migration in Goa -Situational 
Analysis, Gap Assessment and Future Direction 
in Two regions of Goa  
60 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2019-20 Ethnography of marginalized Tribes – Tribal 
Migration among Pangwala Tribe of Himachal 
Pradesh 
15 
Karnataka 2020-21 Research Stu dy on Migration among forest based 
tribes in Mysore and Kodagu districts in Karnataka 
5 
Odisha 2021-22 Tribal Migration – Trends, Issues, factors (Push and 
Pull), Good Practices adopted by States or UTs to 
addres s the issues and way forward (National) 
5 
Odisha 2020-21 Base Line Survey of Tribal Migrant Labourers and an 
indicative Action Plan for Livelihood Restoration 
60 
Sikkim 2020-21 A study on tribal migration in the State of Sikkim. 
(Duration – 4 months) 
15 
Jharkhan 2020-21 Labour History of Jharkhand to South Pacific, 
Caribbean, South East Asia and within the country 
in various sectors. 
10 
  
 

236 
 
Convergence and Monitoring Mechanism 
7.39 On a specific query about convergence and co -ordination amongst 
different Ministries which are implementing v arious schemes run by the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs, the Ministry elaborated the following convergence 
strategy with the concerned Ministries to deter deployment of Child labour 
and promote their socio-economic rehabilitation: 
S. 
No. 
Ministry/Department Earmarking 
Percentage 
Prescribed by 
NITI Aayog 
Total Schemes 
(CS+CSS) 
allocation 
Budget 
Estimates 
2021-22 for 
Welfare of 
STs 
Percentage of 
allocation by 
Ministries/ 
Departments for the 
welfare of STs 
1 Ministry of Labour & 
Employment  
8.60 12651.00 1084.12 8.57 
2 Ministry of Women 
and Child 
Development 
8.60 24162.00 2077.93 8.60 
"Each Central Ministry/Department will be the nodal Ministry or 
Department concerning its sector. Out of total STC funds (Central and State 
both) about 70 -85% rests with th e State Government,15 -25 % of with the 
(41) Central Ministries and Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) share 2 -4 %. 
Majority of STC Central funds rests with line Ministries/Departments. The 
Ministries/ Departments should do gap analysis and based on the anal ysis 
funds may be allocated under STC to the States which are lagging behind 
and special focus may also be given   for  accelerated socio economic 
development of STs. 
A coordinated approach is required for welfare of children among concerned 
line Ministries/Departments. Ministry of Women & Child Development 
(MoWCD), Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Department of School 
Education & Literacy and Ministry of Labour & Employment (MoL&E) can 
play a proactive role for development from the early child hood. Nutrition is 
critical for healthy life and overall development of a child, wherein MoWCD, 
MoHFW, MoTA need to coordinate more closely for improving nutrition 
deficiencies amongst pregnant mothers and children under the age of 5.  
Ministry of Tribal A ffairs has identified 36,428 villages which have tribal 
population of 50 % or more and have at least 500 tribal population having 
infrastructure gaps. The sectoral Ministries like Department of School 
Education and Literacy, MoHFW, Jal Shakti, MoRD, Minist ry of Power, 
Ministry of WCD have been requested to fill up the infrastructure gaps in 
these villages and have special focus in these villages while implementing the 
scheme. On the similar line, other concerned Ministries/Departments have 
been requested." 
7.40  In this connection, a representative of the Ministry deposed before the 
Committee as under: 
“As I already said, Ministry of Labour have in 2021 -22 a budget of about Rs. 
1000 crore and WCD had a budget of about Rs. 2000 crore which they were 
require to spend for the welfare of the tribals and tribal areas.  The Ministry 
of Labour have developed eSHRAM portal which is a national data base on 
unorganised labour. The Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs regularly 
monitors all the Ministries including the  Ministry of Labour.  Last time, 
when their team had come, we saw the presentation of eSHRAM portal and 

237 
 
State wise details also. Likewise also, NITI Aayog is also monitoring the 
functioning of different Schemes.  Since last month, under the 
Chairmanship of Member, NITI Aayog all the Secretaries are presenting to 
NITI Aayog on how their schemes are relevant for the tribal welfare and if 
there is scope of changes in any Scheme, that process is under way.  So, we 
have also developed STC MIS where we have linke d the fund utilisation of 
each Ministry with PFMS and directly, the budget utilisation and the fund 
utilisation and how much that Ministry has utilised the fund in a particular 
scheme and other data is available in public domain.  So, through 
stcmis.gov.in, and through the mechanism the Joint Secretary or the 
concerned nodal officer of that Ministry comes and Secretary takes the 
review. This is the mechanism through which we examine how the 
concerned Ministries are utilising their budget.”  
7.41  The Commit tee were further informed during their deposition 
regarding convergence mechanism, as under: 
“…NITI Aayog had constituted a Committee in which different members 
including NGOs were called.  There also, we are members.  We had 
suggested about the concerned Ministries like the Rural Development, 
Panchayati Raj.  These are the two Ministries who can register at the 
panchayat level the migration of families.  Regarding health and family 
welfare, Ayushman cards are there.  There 75 lakh tribal families who now 
have Ayushman cards.  So, the facility of Ayushman card is available at the 
destination place also.  This is the role of health and family welfare. 
Sir, you must be aware that the migrating families get one nation one ration 
card. National Legal Services Authority can also provide the legal facilities to 
the tribal migrant people.” 
7.42  When the Committee asked about the monitoring mechanism set up 
by the Ministry for effective utilisation of funds, the Ministry replied as 
under: 
"For effective utilization of the funds, The NGOs/VOs funded under the 
scheme are monitored as per the following schematic procedures: 
1.  Annual inspection by District Authorities 
2. Scrutiny and recommendation by multi -disciplinary State Level 
Committee. 
3. Mandatory submission of  annual audited accounts and utilization 
certificate by NGOs/VOs. 
4. Inspection by officers of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs from time to 
time. 
5. Filing of expenditure by aided NGOs/VOs on PFMS Expenditure 
Advance Transfer (EAT) module. 
6. Third-party mo nitoring by an independent agency appointed by the 
Ministry." 
 
7.43  When the Committee raised the issue of creation of a special provision 
of admitting rescued tribal children and adolescents into the Eklavya Model. 
Residential Schools, the Ministry stated in their deposition as under: 
“Sir, you rightly said that it cannot be implemented in all the Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools. Our target is that after four -five years, there will be 

238 
 
around three lakh students in EMRS. Besides, a lot of emphasis is being laid 
on strengthening Ashram Schools. I believe that the children of the sixth 
class should also be strengthened on similar lines because when they reach 
6th class under CBSE education system,  if they directly go, and if they are 
not properly prepared in primary classes, then they will face difficulty in 
CBSE curriculum.       
That is also one of our objectives. That is why we are asking all the states to 
give priority to all the Ashram Schools   under the Grant Scheme. Our 
Eklavya Model Schools are running very successfully.   I admit, there are 
some limitations but improvements are being done.” 
7.44 To deal with the issue of reducing the instances of child workers who 
work with their parents, the Ministry submitted during the oral evidence 
that prop er implementation of Forest Rights Act would lead to raise the 
family income which would subsequently give way to better and continuous 
schooling of tribal children. A representative of the Ministry admitted as 
under: 
“A point was made about implementing t he Forest Rights Act. We have 
implemented the Forest Rights Act through the states.   We have been doing 
it. As I could recollect, about 19 to 20 lakh individual pattashave been given. 
The total land distributed is about 42 lakh acres. It roughly comes to about 
two acres of land which would normally be a dry land.        There is less 
chance of getting much income from it. As you said that tribal children also 
participate in gathering forest produce .So we can increase the income level 
of the family.   what  we have done is this. So far, we have focused on giving 
the pattaunder the Forest Rights Act.  
 Now, Sir, we are trying to build up on the already given pattasso that 
those pattaholders can also get benefit of agriculture, seeds, inputs, credit, 
irrigation, and various other schemes. As we have also shown in the 
presentation, there are so many departments related to agriculture and 
horticulture which have got STC component.    Now we are working to link 
them with our FRA database, so that livelihood is ensured.” 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
7.45  The Committee find that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs aim at 
elevating the socio -economic status of the tribal people by providing 
them better livelihood opportunities better prospects of quality 
education and acc essible health care. The Ministry are not directly 
related with the implementation of National Policy on Child Labour. 
The Ministry have a unique funding pattern under which 41 Central 
Ministries apart from Ministry of Tribal Affairs earmark their funds in  
the range from 4.3% to 17.5% of their total Tribal Sub -Plan (TSP) 
Scheme allocation every year as Tribal Sub Plan/Scheduled Tribes 
Component (STC) also known as Development Action Plan for STs 

239 
 
(DAPST) for various schemes for Tribal development. These fund s are 
spent by different Central Ministries/ Departments under their 
schemes for various development projects for accelerated socio -
economic development of Tribal population. Besides State 
Governments are also supposed to earmark TSP funds in proportion to  
ST population in the States. Apart from this there is a statutory 
provision under Article 275(1) under which 100% financial assistance is 
provided to enable the States to meet the cost of their schemes of 
development for promoting welfare of Scheduled Tri bes. The 
Committee find that the scheme of Eklavya Model Residential Schools 
(EMRS) receives grants under the Article 275(1) for setting up of these 
schools. The Ministry have identified 452 blocks under tribal areas 
where there is a population of 20 thousand and above and 50 percent of 
them are tribals where a decision have been made to establish an 
EMRS. The Committee also find that Ministry have set up the target of 
establishing of 740 EMRS out of which 685 have been sanctioned, yet 
only 230 have been completed, 234 are under construction and 221 are 
yet to start. The Committee believe that there is no dearth of funds for 
making these schools functional. Only the Ministry are required to take 
policy decision and issue directions to the concerned States to leave no 
stone unturned and expedite the procedure of creating proper 
infrastructure to enroll more and more tribal students.  The Committee 
advise the Ministry to come up with a suitable roadmap for proper 
consultation with the Ministry of Education (Depa rtment of School 
Education and Literacy) to establish and monitor schools for tribal 
children. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should come up 
with a robust monitoring mechanism to conduct regular inspections of 
these EMRS sites and pursue with State Governments to make these 
Schools functional at the earliest.  The Committee further desire that 
the Ministry should also explore the possibility of mandatory 
enrolment of those children and adolescents in these residential 
schools whose parents migra te to other States seasonally on the lines 
of setting up of ‘Seasonal Homes’ by State Government of Odisha. 

240 
 
7.46  Tribal children are the most vulnerable section of our society. 
Their socio-economic conditions are responsible for higher incidences 
of child and adolescent labour amongst the tribal population. Although 
the Ministry have been implementing a number of Schemes for their 
socio-cultural and economic development and to provide them with 
better employment opportunities and raise their economic condi tions, 
the Committee are of the considered view that more concerted efforts 
of the Ministry are extremely imperative for genuinely bringing down 
the incidences of child labours. The Committee desire that the Ministry 
should pursue with the State Government s with majority of tribal 
population such as Chhatisgarh, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, etc. more 
vigorously to implement the tribal welfare schemes at grass root level 
more effectively and efficiently.  The Ministry should advise State 
Governments to conduct periodic surprise inspections. In addition, top 
management of the Ministry should pursue this matter at regular 
intervals with the Secretaries of the State Welfare Department 
especially with the North-Eastern States. 
7.47 The Committee are dismayed to note th at there is a huge gap 
existing between Scheduled Tribe students and remaining all students 
at Upper Primary and Secondary levels in school educations. Under 
Primary, Upper Primary and Secondary levels of education in 2019 -20, 
there are dropout rates of 3. 85%, 6.06% and 24.18% respectively, for 
overall ST students (including girls and boys) in comparison to that of 
1.48%, 2.60% and 16.09 respectively, for remaining All Students 
(including girls and boys). In 2020 -21, it was 2.52%, 5.02% and 20.91% 
in Primar y, Upper Primary and Secondary levels of education 
respectively, for overall ST students (including girls and boys) vis-à-vis 
0.76%, 2.27% and 14.04% for remaining All Students (including girls 
and boys). The Committee find that although the dropout rates 
amongst the Tribal students have been showing decreasing trend over 
the years but still additional endeavour is imperative from the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs to achieve the objective of containing the students in 

241 
 
schools so that our ultimate goal of ‘No C hild Labour’ is achieved. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should dovetail their 
efforts with the Ministry of Education (Department of School Education 
& Literacy) and formulate more comprehensive schemes/programmes 
to achieve this goal.  
7.48  The Committee find that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs do not 
compile any data about the number of working tribal children and 
depend totally on Ministry of Labour & Employment for maintaining 
this data and the census figures which are more than 11 years old. The 
Committee feel that the welfare of tribal population including children 
is the main objective of the Ministry around which all the major 
schemes and programmes of the Ministry run. The Committee taking 
note of the fact that the Ministry rely  entirely on the data maintained 
by the Ministry of Labour & Employment and the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development which is not satisfactory, urge the Ministry to 
conduct district -wise surveys in atleast tribal majority States to 
prepare a database of  tribal children/adolescents who are enrolled in 
school and those households where the children/adolescents are out of 
school/dropouts and are engaged in the child labour in any form.  This 
may include separate columns for the children engaged who work as 
child workers with their parents seasonally and the children who 
migrate with their parents. The Committee may be apprised of the 
action taken in the regard. 
7.49 The Committee find that there are 1,10,736 Scheduled Tribes 
Main Workers in 5 -14 years age gro up in Madhya Pradesh; 1,02,430 
workers in Maharashtra; 66,191 workers in Andhra Pradesh; 50,832 
workers in Gujarat; 47,030 workers in Rajasthan; similarly more than 
30,000 workers in Jharkhand, Karnataka and Odisha. The Ministry also 
admitted that these St ates are with larger tribal population as 
compared to other States and are likely to have relatively higher 
numbers of working children. The Committee observe that the people 
of the tribal society are mainly engaged in agricultural business, minor 

242 
 
forest produce, various other forest produce. This work is done by the 
entire family, therefore, alongwith the family their children have also 
been working as a help in these tasks. Although they are not engaged 
with any employer, they are marked as child workers and not as child 
labours. The Committee are concerned to find that even children of the 
age 5 years are also engaged in child labour. The Committee are not 
happy with the current state of affairs prevalent in the tribal majority 
areas and exhort the Ministry to issue proper directions to these State 
Governments specifically to Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra 
Pradesh and chalk out a robust strategy to deal with this problem.  The 
Committee also desire that sensitization/ awareness programmes 
should be org anized in the interiors of these tribal areas to sensitize 
the parents of the children of age group of 5 -14 about hazards of 
bringing their small children into labour. Efforts should also be made to 
make them aware of the different Clauses as well as Rules  and 
Regulations mentioned under the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986.  
7.50 The Committee find that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs have taken 
commendable steps for reducing unemployment and generating 
livelihood opportunities in the tribal areas through Tribal Co -Operative 
Marketing Development Federation of India (TRIFED), an autonomous 
organization and National Scheduled Tribes Finance and Development 
Corporation (NSTFDC). TRIFED under the scheme of PMJVM provides 
Minimum Support Price (MSP) to Minor Forest Produce (MFPs) 
gatherers to supplement the livelihood of tribal people. All these efforts 
are being made by the Ministry to prevent tribal people to migrate to 
other places in search of better employment opportunities. T he 
Committee note that despite taking all these measures the tribal 
population are still fleeing to other States and they face many 
problems in these destination States such as difficult working 
conditions, lack of documentation and identity issue, inadequate social 
security coverage, lack of awareness about Government Schemes, lack 

243 
 
of support at destination level for migrants, difficulty in 
communicating in language of the host State, difficulty in obtaining 
education and health services, etc. The Committe e feel that the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs should take immediate steps to pursue the 
destination State Governments to issue directions to the State Welfare 
Department for STs to frame specific guidelines to deal with the 
abovementioned problems faced by the tribal migrant workers. 
7.51  The Committee find that the Ministry have sanctioned a pilot 
project to State of Goa for migrant labour support program.   This 
program is under implementation by the State Government of Goa and 
it was yet to be concluded. The Committee desire that the Ministry 
should pursue the State Government of Goa to expeditiously conclude 
this pilot project  and come up with the findings/recommendations so 
that they can be applied to other destination States also where tribal 
population m igrate. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
same.  
7.52  The Committee observe that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs are one 
and only Ministry with the mandate of implementing Welfare Schemes 
for the tribal population across the Country. The Minis try are 
implementing a number of schemes and programmes for building 
education opportunities as well as creating employment prospects for 
the tribal population in the tribal areas of the Country. Taking note of 
the fact that raising of socio -economic status of the tribal population 
and providing them with ample employment opportunities is the only 
means to curb engaging small children and adolescents as workers, the 
Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry should also commence 
schemes or programmes fo r the skill development of the tribal 
adolescents and youth.  For this purpose, Ministry should issue proper 
directions to the State Governments to formulate and initiate such 
schemes/programmes. 

244 
 
CHAPTER - EIGHT 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
8.1 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs inter-alia oversee the 
operations of two important construction entities in the country, Central 
Public Work Department (CPWD) and National Building Construction 
Corporation (NBCC). These bodies have the role of th e Principal Employer in 
a very large scale with pan India presence. Further, the Ministry also have 
under their purview the Urban Local Bodies and is in charge of a host of 
activities of the Government in the urban areas of the country.  In this 
backdrop, the Committee considered the Ministry to have a role in the 
efforts to tackle child labour. 
8.2 The Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of service) Act, 1996 administered   by the 
Ministry of Labour and Employmen t provides for regulation of the 
employment and conditions of service of building and other construction 
workers and also provides for their safety, health and welfare measures etc. 
8.3 According to the Ministry of Housing and Urban affairs, Act/rules as 
laid down by the Ministry of Labour and Employment are followed by all the 
executing agencies under the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. 
Further, provision regarding prohibition of Child Labour already exists in 
Clause Nos. 19 and 19 -A of CPWD’s Gener al Conditions of Contract – 2020 
for Construction Works which are being followed at construction sites of 
CPWD through its field officers. 
8.4 It was further submitted that for construction works executed by 
CPWD, compliance of the provisions of various ac ts related to the Labour is 
ensured through Labour Welfare Commissioners specifically posted in 
CPWD by the Ministry of Labour and Employment. In addition, the 
organisation of the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) under the Ministry 
of Labour and Employm ent is charged with duties of enforcement of Labour 
Laws falling within the sphere of the Central Government.  
8.5 When the Committee desired to know about the specific 
inputs/feedback provided by MoHUA to the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment after the Inter- Ministerial meeting held in January 2022, the 
Ministry submitted as under:-  
‘Urban Development is a State subject. As such all related matters fall within 
the domain of the respective State and Union Territory Governments. The 
responsibility of ensuring enforcement of various Central and State Laws on 
Child Labour lies with the respective State Governments/UTs. So far as 
MoHUA is concerned, provisions already exist in CPWD Standard Bidding 
document regarding prohibition of Child Labour.’  
 

245 
 
8.6 Pointing out Clause(s) 19 & 19A of CPWD’s General Conditions of 
Contract – 2020 for construction works that make it mandatory for the 
contractor to abide by the provisions of the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 and bar them fr om employing any 
labourer below the age of 14 years, the Committee desired to know the 
number of instances where violations of the above mentioned provisions 
were noticed in the past five years and the monitoring mechanism for 
ensuring the scrupulous adher ence to the provisions mentioned in the 
above Clause(s). In reply, the Ministry submitted as under:-  
‘(i)  For the construction works undertaken by CPWD, no such instances 
of violation have come to notice in the last five years. 
(ii) Adequate monitoring mechanisms exist in CPWD for adherence to the 
provisions of the Child & Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 
1986. Site engineers of CPWD ensure adherence to the relevant provisions. 
Labour Welfare Commissioners are also posted in CPWD for the  purpose by 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment. The Organisation of Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central) under the Ministry of Labour & Employment 
ensures enforcement of labour laws in the industrial establishments falling 
within the sphere of Central Government.’ 
8.7 The Committee wanted to know about the steps taken by the Ministry 
to check the incidence of child labour in various public works. In response, 
the Ministry stated as under:- 
‘Executing agencies of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(CPWD/NBCC) strictly follow the provisions of the Child & Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 in the public works being 
undertaken by them. CPWD/NBCC have necessary provisions in the General 
Conditions of Contract (GCC).’ 
8.8 During the del iberations of the Committee with representatives of the 
Census Department, it was informed that surveys relating to children in 
urban areas viz., children living under the bridges, flyovers, pipes, etc are 
being conducted by the Census Department while the  Department of School 
Education and Literacy (DoSEL) conduct door - to-door surveys for 
identification of out of school children. In this regard, the Committee desired 
to know whether MoHUA proposes to involve the urban local bodies in the 
exercise so that homeless ‘out of school children' living in urban areas can 
be accurately quantified and subsequently mainstreamed. In their reply, the 
Ministry stated as follows:- 
‘The Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSEL) conduct a door -
to- door survey for identification of out of school children, Urban local bodies 
shall provide required assistance for this survey.’ 
8.9 The Committee desired to know whether the Ministry maintain data 
regarding the number of Child labourers working in brick kilns, 
construction sites, etc. and whether any specific instructions/guidelines 
have been issued to the Police authorities for regular inspection in similar 
areas of high incidence. In reply, the Ministry stated as under:- 

246 
 
‘The Subject of Labour does not fall within the domain of the Ministry of 
Housing & Urban Affairs. Such data is not maintained by CPWD/MoHUA’. 
8.10 The Committee wanted to know the mechanism put in place to ensure 
that children are not deployed by the Contractors at construction sites and 
whether any in spection is carried out by MoHUA/CPWD in this regard and 
also whether any nodal Officer has been appointed for the purpose. In 
response, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
‘Site engineers of CPWD ensure prohibition on deployment of child labour at 
construction sites of CPWD in accordance with provision of the Child & 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986. For this, 
inspections are carried out by CPWD site Engineers. In the works being 
undertaken by CPWD, no instance of deployment of child la bour have been 
reported in the last 5 years. The Executive Engineer  concerned is the nodal 
officer. The Executive Engineer in-charge of the project can interact with the 
State government officials, if required’. 
8.11 The Committee desired to know whether i n view of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs, there was a need for the laws to be made more 
stringent to fulfill the mandated requirements of Contractors with respect to 
the provisions for abolition of Child labour and their specific suggestions for  
the same. In reply, the Ministry submitted as follows:- 
‘Existing laws on the subject notified by the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment appear to be adequate.’ 
8.12 Asked about the mechanism put in place to effectively implement the 
directions/instructions as laid down under various Acts/Rules for 
identification and prohibition of Child labour, the Ministry submitted as 
under:- 
‘In CPWD works, site engineers of CPWD ensure effective implementation of 
the directions/instructions as laid down under various Acts/Rules issued by 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment. Labour Welfare Commissioners 
posted in CPWD by the Ministry of Labour & Employment also ensure 
compliance of labour laws.’ 
8.13 On being asked about the surprise visits undertaken by CPWD 
officials alo ng with the officials of Labour Departments of States/UTs 
concerned to prohibit deployment of child labours at construction sites and 
details of such exercises undertaken in the past three years, the Ministry 
submitted as under:- 
‘(i) CPWD site engineers r egularly monitor compliance of Child & 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 in CPWD works. The 
labour officers concerned also carry out visits to the construction sites of 
CPWD. 
(ii) Such data is not maintained by CPWD/MoHUA.’ 
8.14 With r egard to the provisions under the Building and other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1996, administered by the Ministry of Labour and Employment, which 

247 
 
regulates the employment and service conditions of buildi ng and 
construction workers, the Committee sought suggestions of MoHUA for 
effective implementation of these Rules so as to prohibit the engagement of 
Child labour in such works. In response, the Ministry stated as follows:- 
‘General Conditions of Contract  (GCC) of CPWD prohibit the engagement of 
Child labour  in the CPWD works. These provisions are strictly implemented 
in CPWD.’ 
8.15 The Committee also sought information about the steps taken to 
ensure effective compliance of Contractors with the various l abour laws and 
specifically with provisions of the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Act, 1986 between the commencement and completion of work undertaken 
by the Ministry. In reply, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
‘CPWD General Conditions of Contr act have provision that “The contractor 
shall also abide by the provisions of the Child and Adolescent labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986”. Adequate mechanism exists in 
CPWD to ensure strict compliance by the contractor regarding various 
labour laws and specifically provisions of the Child Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986.’ 
8.16 The Committee desired to know the monitoring mechanism in place to 
ensure deduction of Building and Other Construction Workers’ Cess 
(BOCWW Cess) at notified  rates to provide health and welfare measures for 
the workers engaged in building and other construction works and its 
transfer to Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Boards 
constituted by the Government (Centre/States/UTs). In reply, the Mini stry 
submitted as under:- 
‘Required deduction and its transfer to Building and Other Construction 
Workers' Welfare Boards is ensured by the Executive Engineers concerned 
during payment of bills to the contractors.’ 
8.17 The Committee also wanted to know whether the Ministry had taken 
any initiatives to provide créches/facilities for small children whose parents 
are engaged in labour activities at the construction site, especially where the 
period between commencement of work and its completion is long. In  
response, the Ministry stated as under:- 
‘General Conditions of Contract (GCC) of CPWD have provision for the 
contractor to provide required facilities at CPWD works sites as per Building 
and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Condit ions 
of Service) Act, 1996.’ 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
8.18 The Committee note that the construction industry is one of the 
biggest employers of migrant labourers in the country. The workers 
coming from rural areas are accompanied by their families that may 

248 
 
include small children. They work under hazardous and diff icult 
working conditions and live in makeshift accommodations near 
construction sites which usually lack even basic amenities. The 
Committee note with concern that since these migrant labourers 
belong to the lower economic strata of the society and do not have 
adequate resources or other means to access them, there is increased 
probability of these children being engaged as Child Labour to support 
meagre family incomes. The Committee desire that the primary 
method through which the incidence of child labour  can be brought 
down among the construction workers is by strengthening the efforts 
towards their welfare - social and economic. In this regard, the 
Committee recommend that the executive agencies under the Ministry 
of Housing & Urban affairs, CPWD and NBC C, being principal employers 
in the case of a large number of projects, should take robust measures 
to ensure that workers get the benefits that they are entitled to under 
various statutory schemes and laws such as the Building And Other 
Construction Worke rs (Regulation Of Employment And Conditions Of 
Service) Act, 1996.  Effective steps should also be taken to check that 
the contractors or the project management companies ensure that the 
accommodation and other basic necessities required by the workers are 
adequately addressed. It is the considered opinion of the Committee 
that such activities and welfare measures should not just be considered 
as activities falling under the responsibility of the respective labour 
departments and other related agencies.  
8.19 The Committee observe that the children of migrant 
labourers may be enrolled in village schools near the locations of 
projects/work, but drop out when they move with their parents to 
other locations. This makes migrant workers a highly vulnerable group 
in respect of child labour with a high probability of their children being 
compelled to leave education due to inherent nature of their parents’ 
occupation. Keeping this in perspective, the Committee strongly urge 
the Ministry to take proactive steps to ens ure that the children of the 

249 
 
migrant construction workers can continue their education when 
moving with their parents . In this regard the Ministry should 
coordinate with the Ministry of Education to facilitate the enrollment 
of these children in schools lo cated in the proximity to the 
construction/project sites. An arrangement for smooth enrolment of 
children of migrant labourers in schools wherever their parents find 
work has as well as access to mid day meals and other similar 
encouragements be facilitated through suitable measures.    
8.20 With regard to Building and Other Construction Workers, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry shall devise a mechanism to 
provide a single social security identification to each registered worker. 
The card or other document(s) issued by the State Building and Other 
Construction Workers Welfare Board should bear this unique identity, 
which could be a number,  and the data/information on this identity 
shall be made available on a shared platform accessible to all the St ate 
Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Boards so as to allow 
the workers to avail all the social security benefits to which they are 
entitled across all the States/UTs seamlessly. The Committee also feel 
that the data regarding the immediate f amily of the worker can also be 
captured as part of the registration since the same would be helpful in 
the endeavours towards creating a data bank of one set of children 
vulnerable to child labour.  The Committee also recommend that 
necessary rules should be framed that place the responsibility on the 
Contractor/Sub-contractors to ensure that all the workers employed 
are in possession of such a card and in case of non -availability, the 
Contractor has to provide assistance for registration and issuance of 
the card to the worker. 
8.21 The Committee are at unease to note the lack of data concerning 
Child Labour in urban areas and want the Ministry to issue requisite 
guidelines to the urban local bodies  to establish a mechanism, with the 
assistance from the loc al Labour department, to survey and enumerate 
the number of Child Labourers, Children living in Street conditions and 

250 
 
those engaged in beggary. In the opinion of the Committee, collection 
of data at regular intervals, even in a limited scale, will be the a ll 
important precursor to formulation of suitable policy directives at any 
level. Further, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
consider issuing guidelines to place responsibility upon the Urban Local 
Bodies to keep a check on employment of chi ld labour in small 
construction works in their areas.  The guidelines can also direct the 
ULBs to seek mandatory self certification concerning non -engagement 
of child labour from the builder/house owner undertaking construction 
activity. Surprise preventive  checks can be carried out at various 
stages by officials of the Urban Local Bodies and provisions for 
penalizing the delinquent builder/contractor should also be 
incorporated suitably so as to provide a credible disincentive in respect 
of engagement of child labour. 
8.22 The Committee observe that many children can be found engaged 
in work on roadsides and small shops. The Committee recognize that in 
many cases these children may not be engaged in any hazardous 
activity but are participating in work to con tribute towards supporting 
the meager family income. It is important to ensure that these children 
do not drop out from education while helping their families with their 
work and later deviate towards working for non-family employers. Since 
they can serve as cheap labour, it needs to be ensured that these 
children are not being exploited and are forced to carry out any activity 
that can be detrimental to their physical and mental well being. In the 
considered view of the Committee, particular attention shou ld be paid 
to street vendors who might be employing Child Labour so as to ensure 
that children are not exploited and assistance from the local Police 
Department should be taken in this regard.  The Ministry had launched 
the PM SVANidhi Scheme to provide credit for working capital to street 
vendors. The Street vendors to be assisted through the Scheme were 
identified through Certificate of Vending/Identity Card issued by Urban 
Local Bodies (ULBs). The Committee recommend that the Ministry 

251 
 
should issue guideli nes to all Urban Local Bodies to ensure that every 
street vendor has valid Certificate of Vending and seek an undertaking 
from the vendor to not employ/engage child labour in their work. Penal 
provisions like revocation of benefits under the PM SVANidhi Sc heme 
can also be made applicable to secure adherence. 
 
  

252 
 
CHAPTER - NINE 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
INTRODUCTION 
9.1  As the parents migrate from rural areas to the urban areas in search 
of better livelihood and employment opportunities, their children also 
migrate with them and hence are not able to complete their primary 
education. Besides, children/adolescents are also  engaged in certain 
activities with their parents to improve their socio -economic status and earn 
livelihood in villages/blocks. The Committee, therefore, thought it to be 
relevant to examine Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development) as they have a role to play in eradication of child labour.  
 
9.2  On 7 th January, 2022, the Ministry of Labour and Employment had 
invited several line Ministries to chalk out an action plan for eradication of 
child labour in the context of implementation of National policy on Child 
Labour. Pursuant to the directions given by the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment to all the Ministries concerned and the State Governments, the 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) 
communicated the comm ents of the Department vide OM  dated 10.3.2022 
as follows:  
 
“So far as Rural Skills Division, Ministry of Rural Development is concerned, 
following two welfare schemes in the field of skill development for rural poor 
youth are being implemented in the country:- 
  
“i. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) which 
is a placement linked skill development program for wage employment. 
ii. Skill development through Rural Self Employment Training Institutes 
(RSETIs) enabling a trainee to take Ban k credit and start his/her own 
Micro-enterprise. Some of such trainees may also seek regular salaried 
jobs. 
DDU-GKY has unambiguous focus on rural youth from poor families 
in the age group of 15 to 35 years with social inclusion in its composition 
(SC/STs 50%, Women 33%, Minorities 15% and Persons with Disabilities 
3%) along with preference to vulnerable groups. 
The adolescent in the age group of 15 to 18 years rescued from 
hazardous occupation which otherwise belongs to target group i.e. rural poor 
is covered under the skill development training programmes under DDUGKY 
and RSETI schemes.” 
9.3 In this connection, the Secretary of the Department deposed before 
the Committee during the oral evidence as under: 
“…the Rural Development Department  of the Ministry of Rural Development 
Ministry is tasked with the promotion of rural development, specifically 

253 
 
carrying out anti -poverty alleviation programmes. In our Ministry, there is 
no specific data maintained regard ing child labour. We do maintain data 
about the families that are in need of support. The latest data base on the 
basis of which we draw upon and implement our programmes is the socio -
economic caste census, which forms the basis of all the programmes of th e 
Department of Rural Development.” 
9.4  The programmes run by the Department of Rural Development were 
described in detail by a representative of the Department during the course 
of evidence as follows: 
“I will take up three programmes which could be of r elevance to the 
Committee. One is the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme. Under this scheme, households are guaranteed 100 
days of wage employment for adult members who do take up and are willing 
to take up unskilled work. All the me mbers are registered; only when they 
are adult members can they be involved in or mobilised for the works 
undertaken under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. So, here is no scope for 
engagement of   childlabour in the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme. 
We have another intervention by way of a scheme known as the 
National Rural Livelihood Mission; this is also taken up on a saturation 
basis. We had identified about 9 crore families which had been suffering 
from depravation and automatically inc luded households. In addition to 
that, if the Committee identifies certain households, they may also be 
included within the scope of this programme. In all, we aim to cover around 
10 crore families, of which we have been able to cover 8.3 crore such 
families. This will be achieved in one and a half years.  
In the NRLM programme, the scope of intervention is institution and 
capacity building and their financial inclusion activities, livelihood activities, 
social inclusion and social development activities. We work on different 
aspects of social issues, which include gender issues and issues arising out 
of disability. Child labour is another issue which is taken up by the NRLM 
programme but not in a very specific and focused manner but generally 
encourages fa milies to send their children to schools and improve the 
economic conditions of the families. By these means, the families' incentive 
is changed; we disincentivise families to send their children for child labour. 
We have a scheme called Deen Dayal Upadhya ya Grameen Kaushalya 
Yojana where the children of 15 -35 are skilled; similarly, another scheme 
known as Rural Self Employment Training Institutions, where youth of 18 -
45 are trained in taking up self -employment schemes. These are the 
schemes in which we intervene.” 
9.5  On the issue of devising an independent mechanism for identification 
of child labour working in organized as well as unorganized sector through 
the NGOs engaged by the Department, it was submitted before the 
Committee as under: 
“DoRD does no t directly engage NGOs. Hence it may not be possible to 
devise an independent mechanism for identification of child labour in 

254 
 
organized as well as unorganized sector. Moreover, most of the organized 
sectors are in Urban Areas.” 
9.6  When the Committee aske d about the mechanism adopted by the 
Department to effectively implement the directions/instructions as laid 
down under various works performed under the Department, it was replied 
by the Department of Rural Development as under: 
"As per the para 3.1.1 of Programme Guidelines of DDU -GKY, the target 
group for DDU-GKY are poor rural youth in the age group 15 -35.  However, 
the upper -age limit for women candidates, and candidates belonging 
to   Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs), Persons with Disabil ities 
(PwDs), Transgender and other Special Groups like rehabilitated bonded 
labour, victims of trafficking, manual scavengers, trans -genders, HIV 
positive persons,   etc shall be 45 years. Further, there is provision of 
verification of documents of registe red candidates applying for training 
under both schemes.  
 As per PMGSY guidelines, Rural Road is a State subject and the 
responsibility of execution of road works and their maintenance under 
PMGSY lies with the State Governments, who are the implementing 
authorities of the scheme. Selection and construction of roads and its 
maintenance/repair is done by the State Government. Hence it is duty of the 
respective State Governments  to put a robust mechanism  in place to 
effectively implement the direction/ ins tructions as laid down under various 
Acts/ Rules for identification and prohibition of Child Labour under various 
works performed under the PMGSY. 
 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage emp loyment Scheme 
which provide for the enhancement of livelihood security of the households 
in rural areas of the country by providing at least one hundred days of 
guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every household 
whose adult members (mea ns a person who has completed his eighteenth 
year of age) volunteer to do unskilled manual work. There is no provision for 
Child Labour under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA)." 
9.7  The Committee were inform ed that there are two skill development 
programmes for self employmentation viz. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen 
Kaushalya Yojana (DDU -GKY) for wage employment and Rural Self 
Employment and Training Institutes (RSETIs) for self employment for poor 
rural youths. When the Committee desired to know about the steps taken by 
the Department for self -effective implementation of these Schemes so that 
rescued child labour are mainstreamed into these Schemes, the Department 
apprised the Committee as under: 
"As per the p ara 3.1.1 of Programme Guidelines of DDU -GKY, the Special 
Groups like rehabilitated bonded labour, victims of trafficking in the age 
group 15 -45 years may take benefit of the Scheme. All employers are 
employing only skilled candidates who are   minimum 18 y ears old.  Hence, 
child labour freed and eligible under the scheme may take benefit of this 

255 
 
scheme. Necessary relaxations would be arranged for accommodating such 
persons." 
9.8  On being asked by the Committee about the monitoring mechanism 
and sensitizati on programmes for the employed adult members to ensure 
that no child is employed under such works such as MNREGA, the Ministry 
submitted as follows: 
"Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage e mployment 
programme. The core objective of the Scheme is to provide not less than 100 
days of unskilled manual work as a guaranteed employment in a financial 
year to every household in rural areas as per demand, resulting in creation 
of productive assets of prescribed quality and durability. 
  
The Ministry have a comprehensive system of monitoring and review 
mechanism for Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. Some of the important elements of 
the above framework are listed below: 
i. The Ministry regularly reviews the performa nce of the implementation 
of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in States/UTs through various fora viz., 
Mid-Term Review, Labour Budget meetings, Labour Budget Revision 
meetings, Programme Review meetings. Central Employment 
Guarantee Council and State Employment Guaran tee Councils 
periodically monitor implementation of the programme. 
ii. National Level Monitors, Common Review Missions and Officers of the 
Ministry visit States/UTs at regular interval to review implementation 
of the programme. After the field visits, the find ings/shortcomings 
and recommendations are shared with the States/UTs for appropriate 
action at their end. 
iii. Auditing Standards for Social Audit have been issued and States/UTs 
have been advised to establish independent Social Audit Units, 
conduct Social Audit as per Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011 and training 
of village resource persons for conducting Social Audit etc. Internal 
Audit Teams of the Department also conduct regular audit. 
iv. Steps have been taken to strengthen transparency and accountability 
which include geo -tagging of assets, Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT), 
National electronic Fund Management System (NeFMS), Aadhar Based 
Payment System (ABPS), Software for Estimate Calculation using 
rural rates for Employment (SECURE) and appointment of 
Ombudsperson in every district of States/UTs. 
v. Steps have been taken for establishment of State Technical Cell at 
various level for qualitative monitoring and supervision of works 
under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
vi. In order to ensure higher level of monitoring and oversight,  National 
Mobile Monitoring System and Area Officer App have been introduced. 
In the former, attendance of workers on a particular work, where 
more than 20 workers are employed is taken daily along with a geo -
tagged & time stamped photograph of theirs. The  latter has been 
designed to ensure that field officials do conduct inspections in the 
requisite numbers and look into all the relevant aspects of the 
scheme. 

256 
 
In addition Central and State Employment Guarantee Councils, District 
Development Coordination and Monitoring Committees (DISHA) as also PRIs 
do also take up the monitoring and oversight of the Programme." 
9.9 When the Department were asked about the steps taken to ensure 
effective compliance of contractors in charge of public works with the 
various l abour laws and specifically with provisions of the Child Labour 
(Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986, the Department furnished the 
following information: 
"There are  two skill development programmes for rural poor youth for 
employment viz. Deen Dayal Upadhy aya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU -
GKY) for wage employment and Rural Self Employment and Training 
Institutes (RSETIs) for self -employment. The program as such does not 
involve contractors in its operations. 
Every implementing agency working under PMGSY is bound to ensure the 
effective compliance of various labour laws. In this regard, State 
governments will be instructed to    ensure that provision of child labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 are strictly complied with by the 
Contractors who are executing the construction of roads. 
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, contractor is not allowed for 
implementation of work." 
9.10  When the Department was consulted on the matter of making the 
laws more stringent for effective engagement of child labour in variou s 
schemes, it was stated by the Department of Rural Development as under: 
"… rural development schemes do not permit engagement of child labour in 
them. It may be mentioned that child labourers are mostly invisible, 
therefore, it is only through triangulat ion of data that they could be found 
out. Panchayats, School Management Committee, Village Organisations 
could from the data of children missing from schools, identify vulnerable 
families and therefater, conducting verification of such Households, identify  
child labour and further, take up action in this regard. Maintaining of 
community based surveillance (GPs, CLFs, VOs, extension workers etc) 
through migration mapping (source and destination) for at -risk children and 
their families may also be employed." 
9.11  When the Committee asked specifically about sensitizing of parents of 
the child labours, the representative of the Department submitted during 
the course of evidence as follows: 
“You have mentioned about sensitization of parents as one of the 
responsibilities which this Ministry should take up. I would like to submit 
that we have a very strong network of women organisation starting from the 
SHGs to the village organisations. There are also cluster -level federations. 
We have a series of instructional/orientation material for them and we would 
include the issue of child labour also in addition to efforts that we make for 
working on the households that are compelled by economic necessity to send 
their children away for child labour.” 

257 
 
9.12  On a pointed qu ery of the Committee regarding policy intervention 
suggested to effectively prevent child labour and carry out their rescue and 
rehabilitation, the Department submitted as follows during the evidence:  
“As we come to the issue of how we can best intervene in this manner, we 
should identify potentially two issues that drive families to offer their 
children for child labour. One is the poor economic condition. Second, the 
disasters like droughts, floods, etc., also potentially disempower families, 
encourage them or force them to send their children for child labour. In a 
general way, we act on the poor conditions of families. However, if the 
Labour Department and the NGOs who are working in this sector, who 
combined their efforts, we could, in high priority ar eas, and areas where 
children are more vulnerable to child labour, we could devise specific, 
focused projects to act upon the issues of child labour, and maybe, achieve 
greater success.” 
9.13  On the issue assessing the number of children out of school and  
prepare a proper data on it, the Secretary of the Department suggested as 
under: 
“…You can do this kind of a survey where you are able to assess the families 
and the households whose children are irregular in schools. You have a list 
of vulnerable families and those families can then be surveyed and you can 
find out as to which are the households from where children have been sent 
away for child labour. There is another possible area where we could also 
look at. I think, there is some degree of commonality . This is the area where 
the families migrate. We can have a set of data there also. Doing a 
triangulation of this kind of a data would provide us with some degree of 
better assessment of child labour. The Ministry of Rural Development is 
serious on the ta sk of working in the area of child labour. In fact, we will 
work along with the Ministry of Labour and Employment to see if we could 
draw up an action plan in this regard which would not only help us but 
would also help the Ministry of Labour and Employmen t in terms of what 
should be done in specific situations.” 
9.14  When the Committee enquired about the awareness campaigns/ 
programmes undertaken to raise awareness in identifying and prohibiting 
child labour in rural and semi -urban development sector, for  sensitizing 
parents about non -engagement of children, the Department submitted as 
under: 
"On the occasion of ‘World Day Against Child Labour’, the Department of 
Rural Development has executed a social media campaign on 12th June, 
2022 with the key message  “It’s World Day Against Child Labour!   Today, 
let’s be reminded of the many children who still remain trapped in labour 
and modern day slavery.  Child protection is our collective duty”.   
As part of its Gender Strategy, DAY -NRLM has been creating awarene ss on 
issue of importance of children's education. It has formed   Social Action 
Sub-committees at Village Organisation and CLF level.   The SHGs and its 
federations have been providing credit to SHG members for sending children 
to schools and investing in c hildren's education. Also, DAY -NRLM has been 
providing vulnerability reduction funds to reduce vulnerabilities. 

258 
 
Vulnerability reduction plan is undertaken by the Village organisations to 
understand vulnerabilities related  to food, nutrition, gender, issues  of the 
elderly, PWD, child labour, migrants and the marginalised." 
 Convergence Strategy with other Ministries/Departments 
9.15 When the Department were asked regarding their plan of action to 
interact/co-ordinate with the other line Ministries for collec tion of data of 
child labour in the sectors falling under the purview of the Department and 
chalking out strategy to deter deployment of child labour, the Committee 
were informed as under: 
"This Ministry does not focus on any specific occupational group or  
economic activity. Rather, it focuses on the rural area as a whole, therefore, 
does not independently collect such data independently. It seeks data from 
the domain departments to arrive at the details in this regard. Further, the 
programs do focus on all  poverty stricken and vulnerable families. However, 
it will work with Ministry of Labour to identify such families and work out a 
targeted program for those families from its ongoing programs." 
9.16  On being asked about a mechanism for ensuring enrolment of 
children of migrant workers at Aanganwadi Centres of Ministry of Women 
and Child Development in respect of sectors falling under the purview of the 
Department, the following reply was forwarded to the Committee: 
"Construction of Anganwadi Centres is per missible activity under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS.   It may be taken up in convergence with Department of 
Women & Child Development with a maximum allocation of Rs. 5.00 lakh 
per AMC." 
9.17  When the Department was asked about mechanisation of jobs 
undertaken by children in the sectors falling under the Department, it was 
informed to the Committee as follows: 
"… Mechanisation of jobs undertaken by children would have long term 
consequences on availability of employment in rural areas, therefore, 
requires a careful thought before acting upon this as a strategy."   
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
9.18  The Committee note that the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development) are not directly related with the 
implementation of the National Policy on Ch ild Labour per se. The 
main objective of the Department of Rural Development is to promote 
Rural Development specifically carrying out anti -poverty alleviation 
programmes. The Department, therefore, do not maintain any data 
regarding child labour persistin g in the rural areas. The Department 
maintain data about the families that are in the need of support, on the 

259 
 
basis of the data based on the socio -economic caste census. Various 
schemes and programmes are drawn upon and implemented by the 
Department of Rur al Development for the upliftment of socio -
economically backward target group. The Committee understand that 
the Department of Rural Development are not involved directly with 
the eradication of the child labour but nevertheless they are of the 
opinion that there are potential areas where they can coordinate with 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment being the nodal Ministry and 
other line Ministries for identification and rehabilitation of child labour 
with the larger objective of eliminating child labour . Therefore, the 
Department of Rural Development should also play their role by 
making concerted efforts in proper coordination and consultation with 
the nodal Ministries and respective State Governments to devise a 
mechanism to identify child labour in the rural areas.  
9.19 The Committee note that the Department of Rural Development 
runs three major programmes viz. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS); National Rural Livelihood 
Mission (NRLM); and Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya 
Yojana. Under NRLM 9 crore families have been identified as suffering 
from deprivation out of which the Department had been able to cover 
8.3 crore families. The Committee note that the target set was to cover 
10 crore families under NRLM. As the  issue of child labour is not taken 
up specifically by the Department of Rural Development, the 
Committee desire that the Department should explore the possibility to 
take this issue in a focused manner under NRLM and by improving the 
economic conditions o f the families encourage them to send their 
children to schools. For this purpose, the Department may come up 
with the specific clause under the Scheme which can provide 
incentives in the form of additional benefits to those families which 
were previously engaged in child labour but have now started to send 
their children to schools. 

260 
 
9.20 The Committee further desire the Department of Rural 
Development to collect data on those villages where all the children 
and adolescents up to 18 years of age are enrolle d in schools and they 
are regularly attending it too and there are no out of school children. 
The Department may declare those villages as ‘Child Labour Free 
Villages’ and provide monetary incentives to the Gram Panchayats of 
these villages/Blocks. 
9.21  The Committee note that there is no independent mechanism for 
identification of child labour with the Department of Rural 
Development in any of their major Schemes viz. Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS); National 
Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM); and Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen 
Kaushalya Yojana. The Department have declared that there is no 
provision for child labour under any of these Schemes, however, the 
Committee fail to fathom that without any data being maintained 
regarding number of children engaged in child labour, how the 
Department could come up with such a declaration. The Committee are 
given to understand that under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
(PMGSY) which falls under the purview of the Department of Rural 
Development, the construction and maintenance of rural roads is taken 
up by the Department in coordination with the respective State 
Governments who are the implementing authorities of the Scheme. The 
Committee note that there is a scope for engagement of a dolescent 
labours under this scheme. The Committee, therefore, impress upon 
the Department to issue proper directions to the State/UTs 
Governments to layout a stringent mechanism for effective 
implementation of the directions/instructions as laid down unde r 
various Acts/Rules for identification and prohibition of child labour 
and maintain a proper database for it. The Committee desire the 
Department to chalk out a robust action plan by taking up surveys to 
assess the families and the households where childr en are irregular in 
schools. In this way the households from where children are being sent 

261 
 
for child labour can be ascertained. The Committee urge the 
Department to seek the cooperation of the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment and the respective State Govern ments and explore the 
possibility of engaging Non -Governmental Organisations (NGOs) in this 
process so that the purpose may be achieved.  
9.22  The Committee find that under the Scheme of Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY), the target group are 
poor rural youth in the age group 15 -35.  Under this Scheme they are 
given Skill Development Training by Department of Rural Development. 
The Department apprised the Committee that the employers are 
employing only those candidates who are skilled  and are minimum 18 
years old.  The Committee are glad to find that the scope of 
employment of the rescued child/adolescent labour is being created in 
this process. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Department should create necessary relaxations for such rescued 
children/adolescents who are below 18 years of age and accommodate 
them in the above mentioned Scheme of DDU -GKY for imparting Skill 
Development Training  so that they can be brought under the 
mainstream of the society and a sustainable sou rce of their income is 
created for them. 
9.23  The Committee find that in order to prevent children to dropout 
from their schools and curb child labour, sensitization of parents is 
extremely imperative. According to the Department of Rural 
Development, there are majorly two issues that drive families to offer 
their children for child labour. One is the poor economic condition. 
Second, the disasters like droughts, floods, cyclones etc. The 
Committee are of the considered view that the Ministry could best 
intervene to deal with these two potential issues with their focused and 
well coordinated efforts. Recognising that there is strong network of 
women organizations including Self Help Groups (SHGs) in the rural 
areas at village/block level,  the Committee are o f the considered 
opinion that the Ministry of Rural Development should take the 

262 
 
initiative for organizing sensitization/ awareness programmes for 
families in rural and extremely remote areas at regular intervals. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should include these SHGs, other 
village women organizations and cluster level federations and take 
their help and cooperation for creating awareness amongst the parents,  
specifically mothers of children upto 14 years, at grass root level. As 
admitted by the M inistry, the Committee further urge upon the 
Ministry to include the issue of child labour in the instructional/ 
orientation curriculum disseminated to create sensitization amongst 
the economically backward households so that they do not send their 
children to work despite the economic necessity. In addition to it the 
Committee further recommend the Department to devise specific, 
focused projects and actionable models to act upon the issue of child 
labour, in proper coordination with Labour Departments of t he 
respective States/UTs and NGOs who are working in this sector. 
9.24 The Committee find that under MGNREGS, construction of 
Aanganwadi Centres (AWCs) is permissible with a maximum allocation 
of Rs. 5.00 lakh per AWC. Under Aanganwadi Services Scheme of 
Ministry of Women and Child Development under which AWCs are 
developed, all children of the age group of six months to six years are 
entitled to supplementary nutrition and early childhood care and 
education from AWCs. The Committee urge upon the Ministry t o make 
concerted efforts with the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
and set up more AWCs as promised by the Department  during their 
deposition before the Committee and also devise a mechanism for 
ensuring enrolment of children of migrant workers in A WCs. The 
Committee further desire that surveys should be taken up with all 
seriousness to identify economically backward families which are 
vulnerable enough to migrate to other places or the families which 
migrate to other places seasonally.  The Departmen t may also create 
and maintain this data which can be further shared with the Ministry 
of Labour & Employment for taking further action on it at PAN -India 

263 
 
basis for better and effective implementation of the National Policy on 
Child Labour.  
  

264 
 
CHAPTER - TEN 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS' WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS' WELFARE) 
10.1  The Committee were informed that according to the Census 2011, the 
agriculture sector is one of the largest categories of employing children in 
crop production, livestock, forestry, fisheries, etc. in both rural and urban 
areas. The Committee therefore thought it to be relevant to examine the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare (Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers' Welfare) as this Departmen t has a role to play in eradication of 
child labour. 
10.2 According to the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, as per 
Schedule VII (Article 246) of Constitution of India, Agriculture being a State 
Subject, the State Governments take appropriate me asures for development 
of agriculture in the State. However, Government of India supplements the 
efforts of States through appropriate policy measures and budgetary support 
and various schemes/ programmes. The mandate of the Ministry is the 
welfare of the farmers of the country by increasing production, remunerative 
returns and income support to farmers. Various concessions/ incentives are 
being provided to the farmers under various schemes/programmes, run by 
the Ministry. 
10.3 The Committee were further informed on the issue of child labour that 
the onus of enforcement of the provisions of the Child Labour (Prohibition 
and Regulation) Act lies with the State Governments as envisaged in Section 
2 of the Act. In the Central Government, the subject ma tter has been 
allocated to the Ministry of Labour & Employment.  The Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare do not have any data with regard to this. 
However, the following employment indicators are available with the 
Directorate of Economics & Statistics (DES)  within the Department in 
respect of agriculture as an occupation as per the Population Census 2011: 
i. Total number of cultivators – 118.8 million 
ii. Total number of agricultural labourers – 144.3 million 
iii. Percentage share of agricultural workers (cu ltivators and agricultural 
labourers) in total workforce – 54.6% 
 
10.4 In this connection, the Secretary of the Department admitted before 
the Committee during oral evidence as under: 
"... Sir, in our Ministry, data is not taken from the angle of child lab our, but 
I have a suggestion, because this is the mandate of the Ministry of Labour. 
We have an institution that calculates the cost of cultivation, when the MSP 
is fully assessed, family labour is taken into account in the cost of 
cultivation. It has an exact return line, ‘family labour is the imputed value of 
the work done by the family members in their own fields’. My suggestion 
would be that apart from this, there are many other censuses. We do 
agriculture census, NSSO also does a census and there is a population 
census. If the Labour Ministry wants, it should send its suggestions to the 

265 
 
CACP that, if children are working in family labour, and there is no 
exploitation, for this there are no acts and provisions in child labour, we 
want the ministry to examine it and that recommendation can be sent to the 
CACP." 
10.5 The Committee desired to know whether the Department has devised 
any mechanism for identification of child labour working in organised as 
well as unorganised sector, the Department replied as under: 
"The DA&FW does not have any mechanism to receive complaints on the 
issue of child labour in agriculture.  
 
There is already an existing mechanism under the District Magistrates for 
identification of child labour under the Child Labour (Prohibition a nd 
Regulation) Act, 1986. As per Section 17A of the said Act, the District 
Magistrate is required to ensure proper implementation of provisions of this 
Act. Further, as per Section 17B of the Act, State Governments are required 
to ensure periodic inspectio n and monitoring of the places at which the 
employment of children is prohibited and where hazardous occupations or 
processes are carried out, as mentioned in the schedule to the Act.  
 
The Department will take up the issue with the State Governments for 
sensitizing the officials about child labour. Focus will be where migrant 
labour is involved or specific areas where child labour is engaged and to 
coordinate with the State Labour Departments and District Administration 
for further action." 
10.6 As there i s no latest survey of child labour engaged in agricultural 
operations, the Committee asked the Department about the mechanism 
proposed or set up to check the prevalence of rampant cases of child labour 
in the agriculture sector, it was informed to the Committee as under: 
"The last large scale survey with data on child labour was the 2011 Census 
survey. DA&FW will advise the State Governments to sensitize their field 
officials and raise awareness on child labour in agriculture, and work in 
coordination with the Labour Department and District Administration." 
10.7 When the Committee asked about the collection of latest date on child 
labour, it was deposed by the representative of the Ministry during evidence 
as under: 
"... Our ministry is currently creating an  IT platform in the name of Digital 
AgriStack, which will not be only in the Ministry of Agriculture of the 
Government of India. There is talk of federated data in coordination with the 
state, work is going on for it. 
For the data, you are talking about, which we have to source from the states 
and we will also consult with the Ministry of Labour, we will try to 
understand how to further strengthen that data collection in the digital agri -
stack. ..." 
10.8 When asked about the suo -motu steps taken by the Depa rtment to 
ensure compliance with provisions of Child Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986, as amended, the Department forwarded the following 
information to the Committee: 

266 
 
"The DA&FW does not have any mechanism to take suo motu action in the 
matter. The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 is 
administered by the MoLE at the centre and implemented in the field by the 
State / UT Governments. The compliance of the provisions of the Act entirely 
rests with the District Magistrate. DA&FW would coordinate with and 
support the efforts of the MoLE and the State / UT Governments in effective 
implementation of the Act for elimination of child labour in agriculture."  
 
10.9 On being asked about the action plan regarding changing the 
traditional attitudes towards children's participation in agricultural 
activities, the Department informed the Committee as under: 
"Since the MoLE is entrusted with overall administration of the Child Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 through the mechanism  of District 
Magistrates in the State / UT Governments as provided for in the Act. The 
DA&FW would support their efforts in that regard. The DA&FW would also 
write to the State / UT Governments to effectively sensitize the agricultural 
households through I EC (Information, Education and Communication) 
campaigns for changing the traditional attitudes towards participation of 
children in agricultural activities." 
 
10.10 When the Committee asked the Department about the methodology 
adopted by the Department to sensitize the employed adults about not 
engaging their own children in child labour and send them to schools, the 
following reply was furnished to the Committee: 
"The DA&FW would support the efforts of MoLE and the State / UT 
Governments to sensitize the a gricultural households about the legal 
provisions about child labour and in creating awareness on the subject." 
 
10.11 Regarding sensitization of the families who are engaged in child labour 
specially in rural areas, it was deposed by a representative of the Ministry as 
under: 
"... Whether it is related to food, 'Right to Food' or education, wherever there 
are schemes of the Ministry of Agriculture, wherever the component of IEC 
and especially I would like to add a big scheme to it, which has now been 
launched. Through the ten thousand farmer groups, farmer producer 
organizations, I commit that we will make a complete action plan and involve 
the Farmer Producer Organization. Where sensitization has to be done, right 
to food comes under the Department of Food and Public Distribution, but we 
can also be involved in sensitization. As far as education is concerned, which 
involves the role of children and families in it, we will take forward the entire 
process through FPOs..." 
 
10.12 The Department further informed the Committee regarding sensitizing 
parents about non -engagement of children alongwith the alternatives 
available to them as under: 
The DA&FW would extend full cooperation to the MoLE and the State / UT 
Governments in respect of conduct of awareness and sensitization 
campaigns to make farmers aware of the legal provisions and advise them 

267 
 
not to engage their children in farming activities.  It would also write to State 
/ UT Governments in this regard. 
 
10.13 When the Department was asked about any proposal  to have a 
convergence strategy with the Ministry of Labour & Employment to address 
the issue of child labour, they forwarded the following information to the 
Committee: 
Yes, Sir. Since MoLE is the administrative Ministry in respect of the Child 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 the DA&FW would work 
together with them in respect of all activities being contemplated on the 
subject. 
10.14 The Department further apprised the Committee that "the DA&FW 
does not have any mechanism of its own for co llecting data in respect of 
prevalence of child labour. The Department is dependent on census data. 
10.15 When the Department was asked to state that how the positive 
changes in agriculture ecosystem has had a great impact on the income of 
the farmers' fam ilies preempting the dependence on child labour, the 
following information was forwarded to the Committee: 
It is a general understanding that improvement in agriculture eco -system in 
terms of higher incomes and better livelihoods reduces the engagement of 
child labour. The involvement of child labour by agricultural households 
may only occur in case of non -availability of labour for agricultural activities 
and lack of sufficient income to sustain household expenditure. Under its 
farmers’ welfare approach, the DA&FW is implementing various schemes like 
PM-KISAN, KCC, PMFBY, etc for income support and improving the 
livelihood of farmers. 
10.16 Considering the issue of prevalence of child labour amongst the 
migrant labours/workers, the Committee asked the Depar tment about the 
mechanism to ensure enrollment of children of migrant workers at 
Aanganwadi Centres of the Ministry of Women and Child Development in 
the sectors falling under the purview of DA&FW, it was submitted by the 
Department as under: 
The Anganwadi Centres do not fall within the purview of DA&FW. However, 
in areas where there are migrant workers, DA&FW will engage with the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development. 
10.17 On being asked about a mechanism devised by the Department to 
categorise/segregate the children working with the family vis-à-vis working 
on hired basis, the Committee were informed as under: 
"As per the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2016, 
prohibition of children in any occupations and processes is not applic able to 
children helping their family or family enterprises, other than any hazardous 
occupations or processes after their school hours or during vacations. It 
could be considered by the Ministry of Statistics & Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI) to include such categorization in their questionnaire 
for census to collect such information." 

268 
 
10.18 Elaborating the efforts of the Department for identifying those areas 
where children are deployed as family labour or otherwise, the Department 
submitted as under: 
"Children helping their family or family enterprises, other than any 
hazardous occupations or processes, after their school hours or during 
vacations are not covered under the definition of child labour as per the 
provisions of the Act. DA&FW would support the efforts of the MoLE and the 
State / UT Governments for making farmers aware of the legal provisions 
and advise them not to engage their children in farming activities." 
10.19 Regarding their specific suggestions for eradication/prohibition of 
child labour, the Department forwarded the following submission: 
"MoLE would need to draw a well thought out convergence action plan at the 
district level involving Ministries / Departments of Rural Development, 
Panchayati Raj, Labour, Women and Child Development, E ducation, 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Food and other allied departments.  The 
State / UT Governments need to further strengthen their monitoring 
mechanism for checking child labour in agriculture. There is also need for 
correct data collection on the part of the RGI or NSSO so as to assess actual 
existence / prevalence of child labour in agriculture. Schemes / programs 
may be devised for providing livelihood / income support to poor farmers’ 
families. Strict implementation of Right to Education (RTE) Act  need to be 
enforced so that all children of school going age from 5 to 14 should be 
enrolled in schools and no child should be outside the schools." 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
10.20  The Committee are gravely concerned to note that the 
Department of Agr iculture and Farmers' Welfare neither have any data 
regarding number of children engaged in child labour nor do they have 
any mechanism to receive complaints on the issue of child labour in 
agriculture sector. The Committee also note that the last large sc ale 
survey with data on child labour was the 2011 Census data and there is 
no latest survey of children engaged in child labour conducted by the 
Department or State Agriculture Departments. The Committee further 
note that the Ministry of Labour & Employmen t at the Centre is 
responsible for administering and State/UT Governments are involved 
at implementation stage of the Child Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986. Taking note of the above facts, the Committee 
are of the considered view that albeit the Department of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare are not directly involved in the implementation of 
the 'Act', the Department should not turn a blind eye towards the 

269 
 
problem. The Committee are dismayed to find that the latest available 
data with the Government is on the basis of Census 2011 which is more 
than ten years old and therefore, desire that the Department should at 
least issue directives to the State/UT  Agriculture Departments to 
conduct survey on child labour and collect fresh data district -wise 
every two years for better and effective implementation of the Act . The 
Committee are glad to note that an IT platform is under consideration 
under the name of 'Digital Agri Stack' which would work in co -
ordination with the State/UT Governments. The Committee desire that 
the Ministry should leave no stone unturned to finalise it and make it 
functional at the earliest. 
10.21  The Committee observe that there are different issues 
related with different Ministries other than the Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare such as issue of prevalence of child 
labour amongst the migrant agricultural workers and the enrolment of 
their children in Aanganwadi Centres which pertains to the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development. Further, collection of latest data  
regarding children working with the family vis-à-vis working on hired 
basis which pertains to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI); proper implementation of Child Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 is with the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment and respective State/UT Gove rnments. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to set up a well designed and 
well researched action plan in convergence with all the related 
Ministries/Departments of the Central Government  which are directly 
or indirectly involved in eradicat ion of child labour such as Ministry of 
Labour & Employment, Department of Rural Development, Ministry of 
Women and Child Development in order to implement the Act more 
effectively at District and village level in every State/UT with the help 
of concerned State/UT Agriculture Departments, District Magistrates, 
Local Institutions/ Panchayats at village level to effectively execute 
the action plan at the very grass-root level. 

270 
 
10.22  The Committee note that improvement in agriculture eco -
system in terms of hi gher incomes and better livelihoods reduces the 
engagement of child labour. The involvement of the child labour by 
agricultural households may only result in case of non -availability of 
labour in agricultural activities and lack of sufficient income to sus tain 
household expenditure. The Committee also find that for this, the 
Department of Agriculture have already been implementing various 
schemes for farmers' welfare. The Committee are constrained to find 
that these already existing Schemes are found to be inadequate to 
fulfill the above purpose of non -engagement of child labour in 
agriculture sector as child labour still persists in agriculture sector . 
The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to come up with 
several other new initiatives which would  aid in a more positive way in 
achieving the goal of income support and improvement of livelihood of 
farmers. The Committee desire that the Ministry should design a 
strong mechanism in consultation with the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry 
of Labour & Employme nt in implementing NCLP and other line 
Ministries for providing better employment opportunities and improved 
livelihood which would emerge as a base for non -engagement of child 
labour in agriculture sector. 
  

271 
 
CHAPTER - ELEVEN 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY & DAIRYING 
 
11.1 India has a vast agriculture sector and is a predominant contributor 
to the economy of the country. The sector also employs the largest number 
of people. Animal Husbandry, Fisheries and Dairying have emerged as 
standalone components of the agriculture sector and employment of child 
labour is quite discretely prevalent in these areas. Considering this, the 
Committee decided to delve into these sectors also as part of its examination 
of the subject. 
11.2 The Committee were informed that the Fisheries sector provides 
livelihood to about 28 million fishers and fish farmers at the primary level 
and almost twice the number along the value chain. The Fisheries sector of 
India has made notable strides and has sustained an impressi ve average 
annual growth rate of 8.81% from FY 2014-15 to FY 2019-20.  The growth of 
this sector is higher than that of agriculture and promises higher income to 
the farmers and substantial generation of gainful employment in the rural 
areas. The sector not only helps in providing affordable animal protein to the 
nation, but also in fostering growth of a diverse range of subsidiary and 
allied industries  in the area of logistics, processing and marketing. 
11.3 Further, with regard to the issue of Child Labo ur in the Fisheries 
sector the Committee were informed that Provisions of Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act 1986 completely prohibits child 
labour of below 14 years of age where as children of age group above 14 
years to 17 years  are allowed to work with restrictions in certain 
occupations which fall under non -hazardous categories. In the Schedule 
(related to Section 3) to the Act,   Part A refers to the list of hazardous 
occupation for children and at serial No 16 it includes Divi ng and in Part B, 
which refers to Processes, serial No.59 mentions mechanized fishing as a 
hazardous activity for children. The Act does not allow to engage 
child labour in these activities which are directly linked with fisheries and 
aqua culture operations. 
11.4 Possibility of child labour in various supporting activities such as 
sorting, segregation,   cleaning and packing of fish, peeling, sun 
drying,  loading and unloading of fish, fish marketing activities, cleaning 
and mending of fishing nets,   cleaning and repairs of fishing boats, and 
other service related activities etc. can not be ruled out. Enforcement, 
implementation and follow up of Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Act-1986 is the mandate of Labour Department of the States concerned and, 
therefore, in general, Fisheries Departments of respective States have not set 
up any system to collect data in respect of prevalence of child labour in the 
fishing and aquaculture sector. However, as the Department of Fisheries, 
Ministry of Fisheries, A nimal Husbandry and Dairying supports the State 
Government/UTs for development and management of fisheries through 
various Schemes and policies, it has taken up the matter relating to 
involvement of child labour in fishing and aquaculture activities. The 

272 
 
respective Departments of most States have confirmed that no child labour 
is involved in these activities. 
11.5 The Secretary, Department of Fisheries submitted as under during the 
oral in evidence- 
“Coming to the child labour part, normally this data has never been collected 
in the erstwhile Division and the Department. After we received the notice for 
the Committee meeting, we collected some figures from the States. Most of 
the States have said that they do not have child labour. Generally, the 
District Collector oversees the implementation of The Child Labour Act.   I 
am quite sure that there would not be any child labour when they go out to 
the sea in boats. They go out for five or six days. But in the individual fish 
farms, there are possibilities that there could be child labour. In homes also, 
there are possibilities of engagement of children to help their parents. In 
supporting activities, like sorting, segregation, cleaning, packing, fish drying, 
marketing, mending fishing nets, there are possibilitie s of children being 
engaged by their parents, especially when it is a family business. But in the 
organised sector, we have not got any report of engagement of child labour.” 
11.6 With regard to the Livestock and Dairy Sector, the Committee was 
informed th at Animal Husbandry and Dairy Sector is one of the primary 
drivers of growth in rural incomes and Livestock Sector in our country, has 
been continuously growing at   a  Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 
7.93% (at constant prices) from 2014 -15 to 2020 -21. Dairying has become 
an important secondary source of income for millions of rural families and 
has assumed the most important role in providing employment and income 
generating opportunities particularly for women and marginal farmers. 
11.7 The Committee was further informed that in India, about 46% of the 
milk produced is either consumed at the producer level or sold to non -
producers in the rural area, the balance 54% of the milk is available for sale 
to organised and unorganised players. Organised secto r comprises 
Government, Producers’ Owned Institutions (Milk Cooperatives & Producer 
Companies) and Private players which provide a fair and transparent system 
of milk collection round the year at the Village level. Unorganized/informal 
sector involves loca l milkmen, dudhias, contractors, etc.  Organized Dairy 
Industry is functioning under various regulatory legislations including 
Indian Factory Act, 1948 (Sec 67: No child who has not completed his 
fourteenth year shall be required or allowed to work in any f actory) & Child  
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986. There is no 
information/report on involvement of child labour in organised dairy 
processing industry. 
11.8 With regard to Poultry production in India, the Committee were 
informed that it  has taken a quantum leap in the last four decades, 
emerging from conventional farming practices to commercial production 
systems with state-of-the-art technological interventions.  
11.9 Under the Scheme National Livestock Mission being implemented by 
Government of India, the main focus is on  the farming of Poultry, Goat, 
Sheep and Pig. The majority of the population is with the rural households 

273 
 
and the farmers are putting their own family labour to rear their animals. In 
the commercial production of Poultry, ch ild labourers are not allowed and 
not put into it by the producers as the production of poultry products is a 
highly technology based production system. Hence, there is no report on 
involvement of child labour in this sector. 
11.10 The Committee desired to  know whether the Ministry had a 
mechanism to estimate the number of child labourers in the fisheries sector 
or whether it has proposed to devise any such independent mechanism for 
identification of child labour working in organized as well as unorganized 
sectors through the NGOs engaged by the Department of Fisheries. In 
response, the Department of Fisheries submitted as under:- 
 
‘As the Fisheries is a State subject under the Seventh Schedule of 
Constitution of India, the Department of Fisheries, Government of India does 
not have any mechanism presently to estimate the number of child labour 
engaged in the fisheries sector. The Department of Fisheries supplements 
the efforts of the States/UTs through implementing Central Sector/Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes towards the development of Fisheries sector and welfare 
of fishermen. The Department of Fisheries is also issuing various 
Guidelines/Advisories, policies for enhancement of fish production & 
productivity and upliftment of Livelihood status of fishermen/fish  farmers. 
The Department of Fisheries in consultation with State Governments will 
assist the Ministry of Labour in formulation of rules/guidelines to address 
the engagement of child labour in fisheries sector as may be required.’ 
11.11 Responding to the Committee in the matter, the Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying submitted as follows:- 
‘Organized Dairy Industry is functioning under various regulatory 
legislations including Indian Factory Act 1948 (Sec 67: No child who has not 
completed his fourt eenth year shall be required or allowed to work in any 
factory) & Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986. In the 
Poultry Commercial production, the child labour are not allowed and not put 
into by the producer as the production of poultry prod ucts is highly 
technology-based production system. Small ruminant and piggery is largely 
unorganized sector where the majority of the population is with the rural 
house hold and the farmers are putting their own family labour to rear their 
animals. There i s no information/report on involvement of child labour in 
poultry and livestock sector. At present, there is no proposal of the 
Department to engage NGOs to collect the information on child labour 
engaged in this sector.’ 
11.12 The Committee further wanted  to know how the Ministry proposed to 
identify those areas where children are deployed as family labour or 
otherwise and also to mechanise the jobs undertaken by such children. The 
Department of Fisheries replied as under:- 
‘The Department with assistance of States/UTs will identify areas such as 
aquaculture farms, fish feed mills, fish markets, fish wholesale/retail shops 
including fish aquaria sale, fishing harbours and landing centres, fish pre -
processing and fish processing centres where children are li kely to be 
deployed as family labour. Technology infusion and mechanisation of 

274 
 
identified activities in fisheries wherever feasible are continuous efforts both 
by centre/state government and by private sector. While these efforts are in 
general agnostic to engagement or other wise of child labour, they do have a 
positive impact towards mitigation or elimination of child labour. Automatic 
feeders, ice crushing machines, washing, sorting and peeling machines etc. 
are gradually making inroads in production, pr ocessing and marketing of 
fish.’ 
11.13 The Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying submitted as 
follows on the issue:- 
‘So far, the Department has not received any reported cases of child labour 
in the sector. However, the Department is promoting mecha nization of all 
relevant animal husbandry and dairying activities which may be prone to 
engagement of child labour.’ 
11.14 The Committee wanted to know whether the Department provided any 
financial support to NGOs/ other organizations working towards the w elfare 
of children of the marginalized workers in the fisheries sector. In response, 
the Department of Fisheries stated as under:- 
‘No Sir. Insofar, the Department of Fisheries has not received any proposal 
to provide any financial support to NGOs/ other private organizations 
working towards the welfare of children of the marginalized workers in the 
fisheries sector.   As such, Fisheries Sector in India remains an important 
source of food, nutrition, employment and income generation sector. 
Recognizing the potentials of this sector, the Government of India has been 
taking up various initiatives, reforms, policies and schemes to unfold the 
fisheries potential in a sustainable manner.’ 
11.15 The Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying placed the 
following on record in this regard:- 
‘The Department provides financial assistance to the States/UTs/ State 
implementing agencies to enhance production and productivity of the 
livestock sector. No financial support is given to NGOs/other organizations 
for welfare o f children of the marginalized workers engaged in the Animal 
Husbandry and Dairy sector.’ 
11.16 When asked whether the Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying had any mechanism to estimate the number of Child Labour in the 
Animal Husbandry and the Live stock Sectors, the Department submitted as 
under:- 
‘There is no data on child supporting the family to rear their animals. So, 
estimation of number of Child Labour in the Animal Husbandry and the 
Livestock Sectors is not plausible.’  
11.17 The Committee ob served that ILO considers fishing a potentially 
hazardous occupation (Fishing Convention 88). In this regard, the 
Committee desired to know the stand of the Department and how the 
Department sought to ensure prohibition of Child labour in this hazardous 
occupation. In reply the Department stated as follows:- 

275 
 
‘The marine capture fishing is considered as a hazardous occupation and no 
fisherman below the age of 18 years is allowed to venture into sea for fishing. 
Fishermen ID cards and fishing license are issu ed to fishers only after 
completion of 18 years of age. They can become a member of fisheries 
cooperative society after attaining the age of 18.’ 
11.18 On being asked about the concrete measures taken to eliminate Child 
labour from the supply chain of fish eries sector, the Department submitted 
as under:- 
‘State Governments are taking up various measures through respective 
labour departments to bear with the responsibility in ensuring the 
promotion and protection of child rights including prohibiting the children 
for engagement to any occupation for children below 18 years of age and 
implementing Right to Education (RTE) Act to provide free and compulsory 
education policy for children below 14 years of age.  
For execution of all schemes/programs the age cr iterion of above 18 years is 
being strictly followed by the Department of Fisheries in all the States. This 
includes enrolling for membership in Cooperative Societies, insurance 
coverage, subsidy availing etc. Fishing tokens are issued to fishing labours 
of above 18 years only at harbours, fish landing centres etc.’ 
11.19 The Committee pointed out that Child labour in the fisheries sector 
was reportedly most common and rampant in informal and small scale 
operations and desired to know the specific steps hav e been taken to 
address this issue. In reply the Department of Fisheries stated as follows:- 
‘Awareness and sensitisation programmes are being conducted to avoid child 
labour in Fishing and Fisheries related activities among fishers by the State 
fisheries departments as well as Federations.’ 
11.20 The Committee wanted to know about the mechanism available to 
ensure enrolment of children of migrant workers at Anganwadi Centres of 
Ministry of Women and Child Development in respect of sectors falling 
under the  purview of the Departments. In reply, Department of Fisheries 
stated as under:- 
‘For enrolment of children of migrant workers, the Department of Fisheries 
can mobilize fishermen through organizing awareness on entrepreneurship 
in the fisheries sector in o rder to mould them for future prospects in all the 
States/ UTs.’ 
11.21 The Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying submitted as 
follows in this connection:- 
‘There is no separate mechanism for enrollment of children of migrant 
animal husbandry and dairying workers at Anganwadi Centres of Ministry of 
Women and Child Development.’ 
11.22 On being asked as to how the Department identified areas where 
children are deployed as family labour or otherwise and also to mechanise 
the jobs undertaken by such childr en, the Department of Fisheries 
submitted as under:- 

276 
 
‘The Department with assistance of States/UTs will identify areas such as 
aquaculture farms, fish feed mills, fish markets, fish wholesale/retail shops 
including fish aquaria sale, fishing harbours and l anding centres, fish pre -
processing and fish processing centres where children are likely to be 
deployed as family labour. Technology infusion and mechanisation of 
identified activities in fisheries wherever feasible are continuous efforts both 
by centre/state government and by the private sector. While these efforts are 
in general agnostic to engagement or other wise of child labour, they do have 
a positive impact towards mitigation or elimination of child labour. 
Automatic feeders, ice crushing machines, washing, sorting and peeling 
machines etc. are gradually making inroads in production, processing and 
marketing of fish.’ 
11.23 The views of Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying in this 
regard were as follows:- 
‘So far, the Department has not receiv ed any reported cases of child labour 
in the sector. However, the Department is promoting mechanization of all 
relevant animal husbandry and dairying activities which may be prone to 
engagement of child labour.’ 
11.24 The Committee wanted to know the plan of action of the Ministry with 
to interact/coordinate with the line Ministries for collection of data relating 
to child labour in respect of Fisheries and Livestock sector. The Department 
of Fisheries responded as under:- 
‘The Department will closely engag e with the Ministry of Labour and the 
State Governments/ UT administrations to deal with the Child labour in 
fisheries sector issues and its data collection from the concerned States/UTs 
in collaboration with line Ministries/Departments such as Ministry of  
Labour, Ministry of Education, and Ministry of Women and Child 
Development.’ 
11.25 The Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying submitted as 
follows:- 
‘Taking into view the non -availability of data under the organized and 
unorganized sectors, the dept.  may coordinate with MoSPI, Labour Bureau 
and other relevant line Ministries/Depts. to collect data on child labour in 
respect of this sector.’ 
11.26 When the Committee desired to know about the Department specific 
suggestions for prohibition/ eradication of child labour and also for 
increasing productivity as well as better livelihood to those households who 
are compelled by economic necessity to engage their children for various 
types of works, the Department of Fisheries stated as follows. 
‘To increase p roductivity and provide better livelihood of poor fishers, they 
should educate the poor fisher families on entrepreneurship in fisheries 
sector and financial assistance could be provided under various government 
schemes. Model coastal villages will be deve loped to provide better facilities 
to improve their livelihood and provide education to their children.’ 

277 
 
11.27 The response of Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying was 
as follows:- 
‘India is a rural agrarian society which witnesses household activit ies where 
children are also supporting their parents because of economic compulsion 
for sustenance and livelihood. Therefore, in a way forward to prohibit 
/eradicate child labour and to increase productivity, mechanization of all 
relevant activities of each sector of the economy is essentially required.’ 
11.28 Further, the Committee desired to know whether the Ministry had 
undertaken any campaigns to raise awareness for prohibition of Child 
labour in the Fisheries and Livestock Sector, particularly those ca mpaigns 
to sensitive parents about non -engagement of children along with the 
alternatives available to them. In response, the Department of Fisheries 
submitted as under:- 
‘The Department of Fisheries, Government of India has not taken any 
campaign/awareness programme for prohibition of child labour in the 
Country. 
The Department of Fisheries has the same opinion to conduct more and 
more awareness campaigns to sensitize the parents about non -engagement 
of children any kind of Fisheries and allied activities in collaboration with 
Ministry of Labour and Ministry of Women and Child Development.’ 
11.29 While the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying submitted 
as follows:- 
‘The Department advises the States/UTs to create awareness among public 
for prohibitio n of Child Labour in the Animal Husbandry and the Dairy 
Sectors.’ 
11.30 Thereafter, the Committee wanted to know whether in the view of the 
Ministry there was a need for the laws to be made more stringent to 
effectively prohibit engagement of Child labour under various schemes and 
their concrete suggestions in this regard. In reply, the Department of 
Fisheries submitted as under:- 
‘Yes, the Department agree that there is a need for the laws to be made more 
stringent to effectively prohibit engagement of Chi ld labour in various 
schemes. An undertaking may be obtained from the beneficiaries under 
various schemes that they will not engage child labour in fisheries activities, 
in case of violation; they are liable for punishment as per child labour act.’ 
11.31 The views of Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying were as 
follows:- 
‘Engagement of Child labour in any sector of the economy is an illegal 
practice. Thus, laws against child labour must be very stringent. The law 
enforcement agencies should take suo-motu action immediately on the 
reported cases. Field level law enforcement should be further strengthened 
for strict regulation the child labour laws.’ 
  

278 
 
Observations/Recommendations- 
11.32  The Committee note with concern that neither the 
Department of Fisheries nor the Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying have any provision to extend any financial support to NGOs/ 
other organizations working towards the welfare of children of the 
marginalized workers in their respective sectors.   Both the 
Departments have informed that in the organised sectors coming under 
the purview, engagement of Child Labour has not been reported. In the 
studied opinion of the Committee, Child labour in   agriculture, 
particularly in the its sub sectors such as fisheries and livestock sector, 
can be invisible and most often goes unreported particularly in the 
unorganised sector, especially in family work. The Committee do 
recognize that all the activities and household work performed by 
children may not necessarily be Child Labour and that there are certain 
tasks that are not harmful to children and could be necessary for their 
social and cultural development in their community. The Committee 
note that in the view of the ILO, Child Labour is work that interferes 
with compulsor y education and damages health and personal 
development of a child. Due to lack of data and non -reporting of 
instances of Child Labour, the Government finds it difficult to device 
suitable policy interventions. 
 Under the circumstances, the Committee recom mend that the 
Ministry may identify NGOs and similar entities working for the 
development of women and children belonging to communities engaged 
in the livestock and fisheries sectors and extend the financial and 
other necessary support. Such organizations  can work at the ground 
level for sensitisation of families and education of Children thereby 
ensuring/encouraging their non -participation in activities detrimental 
to their development . NGOs may collaborate with organizations of 
fishers, fish farmers, fis h workers and employers and other groups to 
bring change in the attitude towards Child Labour. 

279 
 
11.33       The Committee find that the mechanisation of tasks in the 
Fisheries and Animal Husbandry and Dairying sectors can boost 
production leading to an increase in income of households and small 
scale enterprises while at the same time have an indirec t positive 
impact on addressing the issue of Child Labour by reducing the need 
and cost of labour. The Department of Fisheries have informed that the 
Department will, with assistance of States/UTs, identify areas such as 
aquaculture farms, fish feed mills,  fish markets, fish wholesale/retail 
shops including fish aquaria sale, fishing harbours and landing centres, 
fish pre -processing and fish processing centres where children are 
likely to be deployed as family labour. There is a continuous endeavour 
by both  the Central and State Governments as well as the Private 
players towards technology infusion and mechanisation of identified 
activities in fisheries, wherever feasible. In line with the view of the 
Committee, the Department of Fisheries have informed that  such 
efforts are in general agnostic to engagement or other wise of Child 
Labour, but they do have a positive impact towards mitigation or 
elimination of Child Labour. The Department of Animal husbandry and 
dairying has also stated that it is promoting me chanization of all 
relevant animal husbandry and dairying activities which may be prone 
to engagement of Child Labour.  
The Committee while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry in 
this regard recommend that the Ministry may further augment its 
efforts towards the mechanisation of these sectors, with particular 
attention paid towards development and popularisation of affordable 
technologies that can be adopted at scale with a focus on making it 
accessible for small producers and other small scale enterpr ises. Only 
then can the same simultaneously address the employment of children 
which such sectors are prone to.  
  
  

280 
 
11.34       The Committee find that both the Departments of the 
Ministry have not initiated any substantial awareness campaigns to 
sensitize parents about non -engagement of children along with the 
alternatives available to them. The Committee are not satisfied with 
the response of the Department of Animal Husbandry and the Dairying, 
in this regard,  wherein they have submitted that the Departm ent 
advises the States/UTs to create awareness among public for 
prohibition of Child Labour in the Animal Husbandry and the Dairy 
Sectors. In the view of the Committee the Ministry should take a 
proactive role in this regard, and this should begin with ini tiating 
measures to secure/generate data related to child labour.   The lack of 
such data pertaining to these sub sectors of agriculture would make it 
difficult to design any suitable policy initiative.  The Ministry may 
consult State departments of fisherie s to ascertain areas/communities 
prone to Child Labour like small scale operations, family work and even 
in illegal activities. Institutional and financial support shall be 
provided to field offices in such areas for initiation of campaigns for 
creating awareness against Child Labour, with active participation from 
community leaders and other stakeholders.  
11.35    The Committee appreciate the Ministry for ensuring that for 
execution of all schemes/programs the age criterion of above 18 years 
is being strictly followed in all the States including for membership in 
Cooperative Societies, insurance coverage, subsidy availing, etc. At the 
same time, in the considered opinion of the Committee, the 
engagement of children in family work is an undocumented reality  and 
the Ministry also recognise the same when they inform that India is a 
rural agrarian society which witnesses household activities where 
children are also supporting their parents because of economic 
compulsion for sustenance and livelihood. Such a sce nario implies that 
children are entwined in the production process in these sectors and 
are at risk of being engaged in hazardous, exploitative and 
illegal activities, perhaps not at the level of the household, but in small 

281 
 
scale enterprises which form the  largest part of the informal economy 
of these sectors. Both the Departments have submitted that sectors 
under their purview are witnessing substantial growth rates with India 
being a leading exporter in both these spheres. Further, the Committee 
find that these sectors are dominated by unorganised, small -scale and 
informal work where Child Labour is engaged in the lower levels of the 
supply chain such as aquaculture farms, repairing equipment and 
processing, landing centres, etc., in the case of fisheries and herding, 
rearing and meat processing in the case of the livestock sector. At the 
same time these sectors are also characterised by the presence of a 
large number of Cooperatives, particularly in the Dairy industry, which 
procure their produce from small family units.  The Committee observe 
that the Cooperatives play a major role in the economy of rural areas, 
where the fisheries and livestock sector are predominantly located, and 
can thus play an instrumental role in elimination of Child Labour at the 
grass root level.  
The Committee recommend that the Ministry work in tandem 
with the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and the Ministry 
of Cooperation to issue specific guidelines for the Cooperatives to 
ensure that exploitation of children in hazardous activity does not take 
place in the lower levels of the supply chain and their engagement is 
limited to assistance in minor tasks at the level of the family.  
Cooperatives working at the grass root level are formed through 
participation of community members which also gives them the 
opportunity to restrict Child Labour through social coercion. The 
various benefits extended by Cooperatives to its members can also be 
made dependent on the parents certifying enrollment and attendance 
of children in schoo ls. Further, assistance/facilitation extended 
through all the Schemes of the Government should be dovetailed with 
penalties for engagement of Child Labour, be it at the institutional or 
individual level. 
  

282 
 
CHAPTER - TWELVE 
MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL & MEDIUM ENTERPRISES  
INTRODUCTION 
12.1 The Committee were informed that the Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises (MSME) sector, with more than six crore enterprises, has 
emerged as a highly vibrant and dynamic sector of the Indian economy. It 
contributes to around 30% of India’s GDP, over 48% of India’s exports and 
provides employment to over 11 crore people. The MSME sector is also 
important for fostering entrepreneurship and generating self -employment 
opportunities at comparativel y lower capital cost, next only to agriculture. 
MSMEs are complementary to large industries as ancillary units and this 
sector contribute significantly in the inclusive development of the country. 
MSMEs are widening their domain across sectors of the econo my, producing 
diverse range of products and services to meet demands of domestic as well 
as global markets. 
 Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises has made a 
provision for the MSMEs while their registration with the Ministry’s website. 
In the pro cess of their registration the entrepreneurs have to mandatorily 
self-declare that there are no child labours engaged with them. As there is a 
possibility of engagement of children/adolescents in some of these MSMEs 
and the Ministry has not set up any infallible mechanism for checking it, the 
Committee considered it to be relevant to examine the Ministry of Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises as they have a role to play in eradication of 
child labour. 
12.2 The Committee were informed during the course of ev idence that 
following organizations come under the purview of Ministry of MSME: 
i. Office of Development Commissioner; 
ii. Khadi and Village Industries Commission; 
iii. National Small Industries Corporation; 
iv. National Institute for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises; and 
v. Coir Board and Mahatama Gandhi Institute for Rural 
Industrialization. 
12.3 Elaborating the oragnisational structure of the Ministry, during the 
course of the evidence the Committee were informed as under: 
“Sir, there are also fie ld offices under the Office of Development 
Commissioner, which include 32 Development and Facilitation Offices, 27 
Branch Offices, 4 Testing Centers, 7 Testing Stations and 23 Technology 
Centers. The primary mandate of the Ministry of MSME is growth and 
development of MSME. On 7th January, 2022, a meeting was held under the 
chairmanship of the Secretary, Labour.” 

283 
 
Role and Responsibility of Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium 
Enterprises in curbing Child Labour 
12.4 When the Committee asked about steps taken b y the Ministry for 
eliminating child labour in the country, it was replied as under: 
“Ministry of MSME’s primary role is growth and development of MSMEs in 
the country. The Ministry does not have direct role in elimination of child 
labour in the country. H owever, in order to help eradicate child labour in 
MSMEs, Field Offices of the Ministry spread across the country have been 
advised to sensitize MSMEs for following the directions/instructions as laid 
down under various Acts/Rules for identification and pr ohibition of child 
labour.” 
12.5 The Ministry further informed as under: 
"Ministry of Labour & Employment, as the nodal Ministry,has the primary 
responsibility for implementing schemes and initiatives for elimination of 
child labour in the country. 
Ministry of MSME’s primary role is growth and development of MSMEs in 
the country. The Ministry does not have direct role in elimination of child 
labour in the country.  
On the issue of elimination of child labour, a meeting was held under the 
Chairmanship of Sec retary, M/o Labour & Employment on 07.01.2022, in 
which representative of M/o MSME was also present. Consequently, an 
action plan was communicated by M/o MSME vide O.M. No. 10/10(1)/2022-
CDN-Min.Others dated 11.01.2022." 
12.6 On being enquired about the ac tion plan towards prohibition of child 
& adolescent labour in MSMEs, the Ministry forwarded the following 
information: 
"Udyam Registration  
 Ministry of MSME launched a new portal – Udyam Registration Portal 
(https://udyamregistration.gov.in/), on 01.07.20 20 for registration of 
MSMEs, which is free of cost, paperless and digital. 
 To ensure that MSMEs do not employ child and adolescent labour in 
their firms, a Mandatory self -declaration option has been provided on the 
Udyam Registration portal with the entr epreneur stating that “I hereby 
declare that I am fully aware of the provisions of Child & Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 and no child is employed in my 
enterprise." 
Awareness programmes 
 Our Field Offices viz. MSME DIs, KVIC, NSI C, MGIRI, Coir Board, Ni -
MSME have been instructed to sensitize MSMEs on prohibition of child & 
adolescent labour during awareness programmes conducted for MSMEs. 
Displaying provisions of Child labour Act on Websites   
 To sensitize MSMEs,Provisions of ‘Ch ild Labour& Adolescent 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act’ have been displayed on the Websites of 
Ministry of MSME (https://msme.gov.in/) and Office of Development 

284 
 
Commissioner (MSME)(http://dcmsme.gov.in/) 
 
Window for Complaints Redressal  
 Field offices have been instructed to take appropriate action on 
complaints received regarding employment of child/adolescent labour in 
MSMEs. 
Celebration of UN “World Day Against Child Labour”  
 Field offices have been instructed to celebrate UN “World Day Against 
Child Labour”. 
Vocational Training for rescued Adolescent Labour  
 Tool Rooms & Training Institutions under the Ministry have been 
instructed to explore the possibilities to include rescued adolescent labour in 
vocational training courses offered by them, in c oordination with Ministry of 
Labour& Employment." 
12.7 On a pointed query regarding data of the number of MSMEs registered 
with the Ministry of MSME and the employment created through them, the 
Committee were informed by one of the representatives of the M inistry 
during the course of evidence as under: 
“Sir, according to the National Sample Survey, there are 6 crore 33 lakh 
MSMEs in our country, which provide employment to 11 crore people. Among 
them, the micro enterprises are largest in number and the medium 
enterprises are lowest in number. MSME sector contributes about 30 percent 
of GDP. The registration process of MSMEs has been made simplified. 
Earlier there were separate definitions for manufacturing sector and services 
sector, now there are common definitions for both. According to the new 
definition, if the turnover of an enterprise is Rs 250 crore and the investment 
is upto Rs 50 crore, then it comes under the purview o f the new definition. 
For registering as per the new definition, 'Udyam Registration Portal' has 
been launched and it is fully operational from 1st July, 2020. It is very easy to 
register on it and there is also no need to attach any documents on it. Online 
registration on the portal can be done while sitting at home and online 
registration certificate can also be obtained at home. So far, about 1 crore 
registrations have been made on this portal. All the MSMEs registered on 
this portal have told us that they have employed 7 crore and 60 lakh people, 
out of which 1 crore and 70 lakh are women.” 
12.8 When the Committee pointed out the discrepancy in the figures 
provided in the NSS data and the data provided by the Ministry during the 
oral evidence held on 22. 08.2022, that as per National Sample Survey (NSS) 
73rd round, conducted during 2015 -16 by the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation, there are 6.33 crore MSMEs responsible for 
generating 11.09 crore employment. The Ministry further informed t he 
Committee that there were 1 crore MSMEs registered on the Udyam Portal 
till August, 2022 employing 7.6 crore people. When the Committee asked 
the Ministry about these contradictions in the statistical data, one of the 
officials of the Ministry deposed as under: 
"Sir, the census mentioned earlier in the slide was based on a sample 
survey. That is done by the employees of the Ministry of Statistics. That 
practice existed some time back. The Udyam Portal has been launched from 

285 
 
1st July, 2020. In a span of a bout two years, one crore people have done 
registration. This registration is voluntary. In one of the columns for 
registration, they are required to give the number of people being employed 
by them in a unit. It comes to a figure of about seven to eight p ersons. They 
are giving this figure voluntarily. We have not checked it, but per MSME, an 
average of seven to eight persons per unit seems to be good. However, there 
is definitely a discrepancy in the figure of 6.33 crore MSMEs and 11.33 crore 
jobs, because our Udyam portal does not have that kind of thing." 
UDYAM PORTAL 
12.9 When the Ministry were enquired about the number of MSMEs that 
have registered on Udyam Portal and have also provided the self -declaration 
regarding not employing child labour, it was stated as under: 
"On 20.06.2022, the Ministry of MSME made it mandatory for MSMEs to 
make a declaration regarding the non -employment of child labour while 
registering on the Udyam Registration Portal. Since then, 1,16,05,294 
MSMEs registered on the Udyam P ortal have provided self -declaration 
regarding not employing Child Labour in the enterprise concerned upto 
16.11.2023. State/UT-wise data is as below: 
 
State-wise total number of MSMEs who have given declaration regarding non-employment 
of Child Labour on Udyam registration as on 16.11.2023 
 
Name of the State/UT Number of Enterprises  who have 
given declaration  regarding non-
employment of Child Labour 
ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS  5,354  
ANDHRA PRADESH  4,09,488  
ARUNACHAL PRADESH  6,365  
ASSAM  2,42,246  
BIHAR  4,94,474  
CHANDIGARH  15,940  
CHHATTISGARH  1,69,691  
DELHI  2,62,773  
GOA  25,251  
GUJARAT  7,74,764  
HARYANA  3,73,115  
HIMACHAL PRADESH  74,369  
JAMMU AND KASHMIR  2,26,740  
JHARKHAND  2,07,105  
KARNATAKA  6,33,875  
KERALA  2,70,819  
LADAKH  5,403  
LAKSHADWEEP  419  
MADHYA PRADESH  5,62,752  
MAHARASHTRA  17,85,293  
MANIPUR  26,268  
MEGHALAYA  12,048  
MIZORAM  12,553  
NAGALAND  13,568  
ODISHA  2,65,221  
PUDUCHERRY  17,140  
PUNJAB  4,48,107  

286 
 
RAJASTHAN  8,00,212  
SIKKIM  5,664  
TAMIL NADU  11,27,308  
TELANGANA  4,13,066  
THE DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI AND 
DAMAN AND DIU 
 7,740  
TRIPURA  31,881  
UTTAR PRADESH  12,25,702  
UTTARAKHAND  1,15,615  
WEST BENGAL  5,36,965  
TOTAL  1,16,05,294  
  
12.10 When the Committee  asked about the mechanism to check the 
veracity of such claims on Udyam Portal, it was submitted by the Ministry 
as under: 
"In case of any discrepancy or complaint, the General Manager of the District 
Industries Centre (DIC) of the district concerned shall undertake an enquiry 
for verification of the details of Udyam Registration submitted by the 
enterprise and thereafter forward the matter with necessary remarks to the 
Director or Commissioner or Industry Secretary concerned of the State 
Government, who after issuing a notice to the enterprise and after giving an 
opportunity to present its case and based on the findings, may amend the 
details or recommend to the Ministry of MSME, Government of India, for 
cancellation of the Udyam Registration Certificate." 
12.11 When the Committee asked about the action taken by the Ministry on 
receiving complaint/information regarding employment of child labour in 
semi-urban and rural areas in the past three years, the Ministry informed 
the Committee as under: 
"As per the information received from Field formations of the Ministry of 
MSME viz., MSME - Development and Facilitation Offices (DFOs) and its 
Branch Offices, Testing Centres, Tool Rooms/Technology Centres, Khadi and 
Village Industries Commission (KVIC), National Small Industries Corporation 
(NSIC), Coir Board, Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Rural Industrialization 
(MGIRI) and National Institute for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  (ni-
msme), no complaints have been received so far. 
 All the field formations of t he Ministry have been instructed to take 
appropriate action,(For example informing concerned State Government 
Authority to take action as per the provisions of the Act and informing the 
DIC for enquiry and further necessary action), when a complaint is rec eived 
concerning employment of child labour at any MSME unit." 
12.12 When the Committee desired to know about the MSMEs, which had 
been penalised by the Ministry on account of employment of child labour, 
the Ministry submitted as under: 
"No complaint of em ployment of child labour by any MSME has been 
received in the Ministry of MSME in the past three years. Hence, no MSME 
has been penalized by the Ministry of MSME till 29.08.2022.Ministry of 
MSME made it mandatory on 20.06.2022 for MSMEs to make a declarati on 
regarding the non -employment of child labour while registering on the 

287 
 
Udyam Registration Portal. Moreover, the subject matter comes under the 
purview of Ministry of Labour& Employment, Govt. of India and Labour 
Departments of States/UTs concerned." 
12.13 The Committee are given to understand on the basis of a report of 
International Labour Office (ILO) on ‘Using Small Enterprise Development to 
Reduce Child Labour, 2004’ about one -fifth of child labour is concentrated 
in small, usually family -run, enterpr ises. A much greater proportion is 
engaged as unpaid family farm workers. Much of this activity occurs in the 
informal economy and therefore operates outside of national systems of 
enterprise registration and labour regulation. 
12.14 On being enquired abou t the inspections of enterprises to check any 
instance of child labour in semi -urban and rural areas carried out by the 
Ministry in the past three years, the Ministry informed the Committee as 
under: 
"Government has taken several measures to minimize regul atory compliance 
burden for businesses and citizens with a view to promote ease of doing 
business. Ministry introduced online registration of MSMEs through Udyam 
Registration portal on self -declaration basis and currently there is no such 
mechanism put in place for inspection of enterprises to check child labour 
including in the semi-urban and rural areas. 
Inspection of enterprises to check child labour comes under the purview of 
Ministry of Labour& Employment, Govt. of India and Labour Department of 
the St ates/UTs concerned. However, Ministry of MSME will provide 
necessary support to Ministry of Labour & Employment in this regard, 
whenever required." 
12.15 During evidence, the Committee raised the issue regarding veracity of 
data provided through Udyam Portal and conducting surprise inspections by 
the Ministry of such enterprises as the data provided is a "voluntary data" 
and therefore it would never reflect any instance of child labours in that 
enterprise. In this connection, an official of the Ministry adm itted this before 
the Committee as under: 
"Sir, child labour is not reflected in the details provided. They give a 
declaration in it, if they do not give it, then they cannot even register. This 
arrangement has been put in place from this January after a m eeting was 
held in the Labour Ministry. Therefore, the registrations that were done 
before January will not reflect the same thing, but the registration that were 
made thereafter, could not be done without that declaration.  
Sir, we can do some tests check." 
12.16 When the Committee asked the Ministry about the details of any 
assessment Study undertaken by the Ministry on occurrence and prevalence 
of child labour in MSMEs throughout the Country, it was submitted by the 
Ministry that: 
"So far, no such study has been undertaken by the Ministry on the 
occurrence and prevalence of Child Labour in MSMEs in the country. 
However, if any specific proposal is received from Ministry of Labour & 

288 
 
Employment, the Ministry of MSME will examine the proposal for necessary 
action." 
Rescue and Rehabilitation 
12.17 When the Committee desired to know about the details of initiatives 
taken by the Ministry for development of rescued children and adolescents, 
the Ministry forwarded the following information: 
"All Technology Centres have been directed to explore free vocational training 
for rescued adolescent labour in consultation with NGOs, industries by 
utilizing their CSR fund etc.  
Training Centers under KVIC have also been encouraged to identify courses 
for the benefit of rescued adolescent labour and conduct special batch for 
rescued adolescent labour, in coordination with local District administrative 
departments." 
12.18 Regarding different areas  or sectors in which the Ministry are 
providing vocational training, the Ministry furnished following information to 
the Committee: 
"These Technology Centres are conducting training in various areas like 
tools, moulds, dies, precision components in General Engineering sector and 
other relevant sectors like Glass,  Sports Goods, Electronics, Electrical, 
Footwear, Automotive, Electronic System Design & Manufacturing (ESDM) 
and Fragrances & Flavors Sector." 
12.19 On being enquired about relaxation in the criteria for admission to 
various vocational institutes under th e jurisdiction of the Ministry of Micro, 
Small & Medium Enterprises so as to directly admit rescued adolescents 
and child labours in such institutes, the Ministry stated as under: 
"Technology Centres are conducting training as per the needs of industry in 
various areas like tools, moulds, dyes, precision components of General 
Engineering sector and other relevant sectors on the basis of criteria like 
candidate qualification etc. Designing of training programmes can be 
explored on the basis of capability, qu alification etc. for the rescued 
adolescent child labour. No specific course has been designed so far for 
rescued adolescent labour. 
Training Centers under Khadi & Village Industries Commissioner (KVIC) 
have been encouraged to identify courses for the benefit of adolescent labour 
and conduct special batch for rescued adolescent labour, in coordination 
with local District administrative departments. 
National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) will consider giving relaxation 
on case to case basis, on receipt of such proposals." 
12.20 In this connection, the representative of the Ministry candidly 
admitted before the Committee during evidence as under: 
“With regard to our vocational training, it is true that the main purpose of 
our tool rooms is to support the  ecosystem of MSMEs. They provide tooling 
facilities and provide technology consultancy. Along with this, people are 

289 
 
trained on various technologies available in the tool rooms of the technology 
centers. This training is imparted for supporting MSMEs. As t he hon. 
Member has pointed out, there are criteria for admission in it. We can 
definitely make this arrangement in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Labour. We can create some special categories for the adolescent labourers. 
Admission criteria can also be  relaxed for them, so that they could avail its 
benefit.” 
12.21 On being asked about the awareness programmes/campaigns 
concerning child labour, undertaken by the Ministry and the other 
institutions under their jurisdiction, in the last six months, the Min istry 
replied as under: 
"Details of the Awareness programmes organized by the field 
formations of the Ministry viz., MSME - Development and Facilitation 
Offices (DFOs), Coir Board, Technology Centres, National Small 
Industries Corporation (NSIC) and Nation al Institute for Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises (ni-msme) are given as follows: 
Details of Awareness programmes organized by Field formations under 
the Ministry of MSME 
 
1. MSME- Development and Facilitation Offices (DFOs)  
S.No. Name of DFO Number of Awareness 
Programmes conducted 
1.  Prayagraj 41 
2.  Kolkata 41 
3.  Karnal 33 
4.  Raipur 27 
5.  Ludhiana 20 
6.  Agartala 20 
7.  Cuttack 15 
8.  Kanpur 10 
9.  Patna 6 
10.  Ahmedabad 6 
11.  Delhi 6 
12.  Gangtok 1 
13.  Muzzafarpur 1 
14.  Hyderabad 1 
15.  Haldwani 1 
16.  Jaipur 1 
17.  Ranchi 1 
18.  Jammu 1 
Total 232 
 
12.22 Similarly, Coir Board imparted 27 training sessions upto November, 
2023; Central tool Room & Training Centre (CTTC),  Kolkata has organized a 
workshop-cum-awareness session on 15.07.2022 and New Technology 
Centres under TCSP have organised 15 awarenes s programmes for 906 
participants; National Technical Service Centre (NTSC) under NSIC, Rajpura 
organised an awareness programme on 22.07.2022 for 10 industry 
representatives; National Institute - MSME (NI -MSME) has conducted 82 

290 
 
programs and awareness camp aigns for 2905 participants from different 
States and different sectors like MSMEs, clusters, NGOs, Ministry and DIC 
Officials. 
 
OBSEVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
12.23  The Committee note that there were one crore Micro, Small 
& Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) registered on the Udyam Portal of the 
Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises under which 7.6 crore 
people are reported to have been employed. Udyam Registration Portal 
was launched by the Ministry of MSME on 7 th July, 2020 for 
registration of MSMEs which is free of cost. The Committee have been 
given to understand that in the Udyam Registration Portal, there is an 
option of registering of small and medium enterprises by the 
entrepreneur which is solely voluntary in nature. The Committee were 
also inf ormed in evidence that as per National Sample Survey (NSS) 
conducted during 2015-16 by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation, there are 6.33 crore MSMEs responsible for generating 
11.09 crore employment. It is disquieting to find that des pite 
accepting the fact that there is a categorical discrepancy in the data 
collected by Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation and 
those reported in the Registration Portal regarding total number of 
MSMEs and total employment generated, there  is no inquiry or 
monitoring done by the Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
to ensure that the declaration done by the MSMEs are absolutely 
correct. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to make 
all concerted efforts to set up a monit oring mechanism without any 
further lapse of time to verify the data provided by the entrepreneurs 
in their declaration.  For this purpose, if need be, the Ministry should 
also conduct surprise inspections of these MSMEs in co-ordination with 
the State/UT Governments and at the same time issue directives to the 
State/UT Governments to organise periodic inspections of some of 
these enterprises in a given period of time,  so that the data base of 
Udyam Portal gets corroborated by the State/UT Governments. 

291 
 
Moreover, it is imperative that in the absence of the authentic data, 
any policy intervention would have no tangible effect.  
12.24  The Committee observe that pursuant to a meeting 
conducted by the Ministry of Labour & Employment on 7 th January, 
2022 on the is sue of elimination of child labour, an action plan was 
envisaged by the Ministry of MSME. The main components of this 
action plan consisted of inclusion of a ‘mandatory self declaration 
provision’ on the Udyam Registration Portal that the entrepreneur is 
not employing child labour in his MSME which came into effect from 
01.07.2022; organizing awareness programmes to sensitize MSMEs on 
prohibition of child and adolescent labour; displaying provisions of 
Child Labour Act on websites; window for complaints red ressal; 
vocational training for rescued adolescent labour; etc. The Committee 
note that till November, 2023, 1,16,05,294  MSMEs have provided ‘self 
declaration’ regarding not employing child labour in the enterprise 
concerned, out of one crore MSMEs registe red in the Udyan Portal. The 
Committee have been given to understand that no complaint of 
employment of child labour by any MSME has been received in the 
Ministry in the past three years. According to a Report of ILO, about 
one-fifth of child labour is con centrated in small, usually family run 
enterprises. Much of this activity occurs in informal economy and 
therefore operates outside of n otional systems of enterprise 
registration and labour regulation. This vindicates the fact that self 
declaration by MSMEs can hardly act as a deterrent to check and curb 
child labour. In the given scenario, the Committee are constrained to 
print out that still there are no inspections or checks conducted by the 
Ministry to ensure that there is no child labour engaged in the  
registered enterprises through Udyam Portal. The Committee, 
therefore, exhort the Ministry to strengthen their inspection 
mechanism and formulate special guidelines for the State/UT 
Governments to deal with this problem and implement them with 
immediate effect.  

292 
 
12.25  The Committee note that if any discrepancy or complaint is 
found in the claims regarding mandatory declaration about the child 
labour in MSMEs on Udyam Portal, the General Manager of the District 
Industries Centre (DIC) of the concerned district undertakes an enquiry 
for verification of the details of Udyam Registration submitted by the 
enterprise and thereafter forward the matter to the Director or 
Commissioner or Industry Secretary concerned of the State 
Government. After issuing a notice to the enterprise and after giving an 
opportunity to present its case, the case is recommended to the 
Ministry of MSME for cancellation of the Udyam Registration 
Certificate of that enterprise. The Committee are of the opinion that in 
the cases where the de claration is false, children working in these 
MSMEs are absent from the education which can help them to acquire 
the knowledge and skills they need to gain productive employment in 
the future which in turn negatively impacts the development of civil 
societies, therefore, the guilty enterprises should not be left with only 
cancellation of registration but should be penalised according to the 
provisions of the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986. 
The Committee desire that this action should be t aken by the Ministry 
in collaboration with the Ministry of Labour & Employment with 
immediate effect.  For this, if need be, co -operation from other line 
Ministries and State/UT Governments that are involved in eradication 
of child labour may also be taken.  The Committee further recommend 
the Ministry to incentivize the enterprises where child labour are not 
engaged by printing disclaimers on their products like "this MSME 
(name) does not engage child labour in any form". This will discourage 
other enterprises which are engaging child labour in a clandestine way. 
12.26  The Committee note that there are certain training centres 
under Khadi & Village Industries Commission (KVIC) and National 
Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) for the benefit of rescued 
adolescent labour. For all these courses of General Engineering Sector 
and other relevant sectors these are set criteria like candidate 

293 
 
qualification etc. As the rigid admission criteria would restrict the 
opportunities of vocational training for the rescued ado lescent labours 
who have already missed their school education, the Committee exhort 
the Ministry to review their existing admission criteria and desire that 
the admission criteria for the rescued adolescent labours should be 
significantly relaxed on case to case basis so that they are also eligible 
for the number of courses and can also be benefitted by the courses run 
by the Ministry. As there are no specific courses designed so far for 
them, the Committee believe that in order to provide livelihood skill s 
for their better future, the Ministry would explore the possibility to 
relax the admission criteria or create few courses specifically for them 
only. 
12.27  The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry of 
MSME have not received any complaint on employment of child labour 
by any MSME in the past three years i.e. from 2019 till August, 2022. 
As a consequence there was no MSME penalized by the Ministry of 
MSME till 29.08.2022. The Committee observe that the mandatory 
declaration regarding the non -employment of child labour on the 
Udyam Registration Portal was introduced from 01.07.2022. Before 
that there was no concrete measure to ascertain the presence of child 
labour in the registered MSMEs. The Committee, therefore, exhort the 
Ministry to make con certed efforts to prepare an action plan to 
ascertain the presence of child labour in those MSMEs which had 
registered themselves on Udyam Registration Portal before 01.07.2022 
as currently there is no information on employment of child labour in 
these MSMEs with the Ministry. 
  

294 
 
 
CHAPTER - THIRTEEN 
STATE GOVERNMENT OF ODISHA 
INTRODUCTION 
13.1 The Government of Odisha forwarded the following information 
regarding implementation of National Policy on Child Labour in Odisha: 
“The Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Amendment Act, 2016 has 
been passed by the Parliament to amend the Child Labour (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Act, 1986. After amendment, the Act is now read as Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 and has come into 
force from 01.09.2016. As this act has been amended in Parliament and a 
new Act has come into force since 01.09.2017, the changes in the State 
Rules formulated in the year 1994 have been modified and gazette 
notification is made. 
During last four years (2018 -2022), 6789 inspections have been conducted 
and 126 prosecutions have been filed.” 
Implementation of NCLP in Odisha 
13.2  The NCLP Scheme came into force in 1988. The scheme seeks to 
adopt a sequential approach with focus on rehabilitation of children working 
in hazardous occupations and processes. Under the scheme, a survey is to 
be conducted to identify children engaged in hazardous occupations and 
processes in a district or a specified area. 809 NCLP Special Schools were 
functioning in 24 districts of Od isha till July 2014. In these 24 districts, 
173508 students have been mainstreamed since inception. However, survey 
of child labour was taken up in 2016 -17 for running of NCLP Schools. Post -
survey, 111 STCs were operational which had enrolled 2882 rescued 
children. Out of 111 STCs, 71 STCs were closed by 31st March, 2022. 
Implementation of State Action Plan for Elimination of Child Labour 
13.3  The Committee have further been informed that a State Action Plan 
has been approved by Govt. of Odisha and is unde r Implementation since 
2015 in collaboration with various stakeholders. The objective of the Plan is 
providing universal education for all children under the Right of Children to 
free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 and prohibition & regulation of 
child labour in different occupations and processes, as provided for under 
existing statutes. 
13.4  The State Action Plan for Elimination of Child Labour envisages the 
following key components:- 
“A. Prevention 
B. Enforcement 
C. Awareness Generation 
D. Education & Skill development 
E. Rescue & Rehabilitation 

295 
 
F. Convergence of activities of different Departments 
G. Monitoring & Review Mechanism 
 
The following initiatives under State Action Plan have been initiated:- 
 Odisha State Child & Adolescent Labour Rules hav e been notified in 2018 
after amendment of Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986. 
 In view of Covid pandemic and subsequent pressure on livelihood of parents 
due to lockdown and closure of schools for a long time, the District 
Administration hav e been instructed for taking appropriate actions for 
preventing child labour. 
 District Nodal Officers have been notified for coordinating activities under 
PENCIL (Platform for Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour) as 
instructed by Govt. of India. 
 District Level Child and Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation Fund has been 
constituted in all districts under the chairmanship of District Collectors. 
 Funds have been placed with District Administration for conducting IEC/ 
Orientation programmes for implement ation of Child & Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986. 
 District Level Orientation -cum-IEC Training Programme on Child & 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 for enforcing officers 
have been conducted at district level in collaboration with Odisha State 
Commission for Protection of Child Rights (OSCPCR).” 
 Exclusive campaign in regular intervals are conducted in association with 
other stakeholders in the State, for spreading awareness against child labour 
and promote chil d rights. Soft copies of leaflets, posters and wall paintings 
on elimination of child labour have been circulated to District Administration 
for IEC activities. 
 Interactive Seminar with employers and Employers' Organisations was 
conducted on 18.11.2021 on provisions of Child & Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 with focus on no child labour. 
13.5  During the course of oral evidence of the Government of Odisha, on 
the subject ‘National Policy on Child Labour’, Principal Secreary, Labour and 
ESI Department deposed before the Committee regarding specific measures 
taken by the Labour, ESI Deptt, Government of Odisha for prevention, 
tracking, rescue, rehabilitation and reintegration of child labour in Odisha 
as under: 
“On an average, in the last 2020 -21, 2021 -22, 2022 -23, which were also 
Covid years, in term of actual rescue, it has been in the range of 100 and 
above children from the field.  But we know that the figures are much, much 
more than this.  We have also, in the last few years, mai nstreamed about 
1,73,000 children into regular schools… 
…This issue is not a single Department issue; it is a multi -Department 
issue.  Just like in other spheres, we are trying convergence.  Here, a 
convergence mechanism has to be put in… 
…“So, at the GP a nd Block level, we need institutional mechanism, task 
forces who will meet on a fixed date. So, on a fixed date, four to five people 
will come together to share what was found out during that time.” 
13.6  Further, the Committee were informed during the evidence as under: 

296 
 
“Second, at the Gram Panchayat level, we have, every month, a Gram 
Panchayat meeting by the Gram Panchayat with all the Ward Members. 
There, we must keep ‘child labour’ as one compulsory agenda.  Initially, we 
can give any three questions t o them.  These three question, they would 
discuss, answer and put into their proceedings.  So, we could get an idea.” 
13.7. Further, the attention of the Committee was drawn to other peripheral 
issues such as availability of adequate funds connected with t he proper 
implementation of National Child Labour Policy in the State. In order to 
ensure that all the children upto the age of 18 years are enrolled in the 
school, representative of the state Government of Odisha deposed before the 
Committee as under: 
“One part of it is the child labour, but the other part is: are all our children 
in our Gram Panchayat in school? If not, where is the fund to dovetail 
whatever they require.  That is the second thing.” 
13.8  The representative also deposed as under during oral evidence:  
“Lastly, we need a special budget provision. We need something for 
counselling. We need a counselling component in all of this. A whole 
Government approach is required with counselling in all of this.” 
13.9 During their deposition, representa tive of the State Government of 
Odisha suggested to involve Self Help Groups in curbing child labour in 
rural as well as urban/semi-urban areas and deposed as under: 
“The third thing is that we have a social catalyst.  For instance, in Odisha, 
we have a very strong SHG movement.  Today, we are saying that we are not 
able to identify the child labour, where this child labour is.  We do not know 
how diffused and desperate they are.  But if we can engage, may be in a 
village one SHG or in GP2 or 3 nodal SHGs a nd use them, it would be 
appreciating.  We may first train them as to what the philosophy and 
practical things behind the child labour is, and go house to house and 
identify whether children are in child labour or in schools, and report back 
to the Gram Sabha Committee.” 
13.10 Another suggestion was given by the representatives of the Odisha 
State Government during the course of evidence regarding spreading 
awareness amongst the mothers of the children up to the age of 18 years 
regarding child labour as under:  
“It is usually mothers or to be mothers.  So, at least, that awareness will 
come. Perhaps for those going into child labour, those families do know 
exactly where education will lead, because going to school does not 
necessarily give you a good job. The system is not so everywhere.” 
13.11 It was also deposed by the representative of the State Government of 
Odisha that in order to bring more and more children to the school and 
reduce dropouts, Mid -day Meal Scheme can be extended to standard X in 
every school. 
“It is that today we are giving Midday Meal for up to VIII standard, and that 
has really brought in children.  Can we extend it?  We are surplus in food 

297 
 
grains.  Can we extend that, at least, to IX and X standard?  Then, children 
will come. He had one more brilliant suggestion.  Can we also perhaps think 
of a snack in the morning?” 
13.12 Further, the representative of the Odisha State Government deposed 
as under bringing another suggestion: 
“Sir, when we select people for benefit schemes, perhaps we can ask whether 
all their children are attending schools. We can also ask whether their 
children have attended the correct number of years that they are supposed 
to attend.” 
Difficulties in Rescue Missions 
13.13 When the Committee desired to know about the challenges faced 
during raids and rescue missions, the State Government of Odisha 
submitted as under: 
“The Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, 
prescribes that- whosoever employs any child (person not completed his 14 
year of age) or permits any child to work in contravention of the provisions of 
Section 3 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than six months but which may extend to two years, or with fine 
which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees but which may extend 
to fifty thousand rupees or with both The same penal provisions apply if 
someone employs any adolescent (15 -18) or permits any adolescent to work 
in contravention of the provisions of Section 3A. 
During raid and rescue activities, Enforcing Officers find it difficult to 
ascertain the age of child/adolescent and as a result the penal amount of 
Rs. 20000 is also not being collected from the employers”   
13.14 A representative of the State Government of Odisha admitted befo re 
the Committee as follows:  
“Sir, our deterrence system is so weak. What is our deterrence? If the team 
will find a child working in a dhaba or somewhere else, it will rescue the 
child and give it to CWC. What happens to the employer? You will file a 
prosecution against the employer and at the most, he will be fined Rs. 
20,000. The employer has no fear because it is going to come much later. So, 
he is not bothered. You take the child, return the child to the family, and 
after six months, the child would a gain be there. So, deterrence is very 
weak.”  
13.15 In this connection, representative of the State Government of Odisha 
deposed before the Committee during the course of oral evidence as follows:  
“One of the difficulties the rescue missions have is about the age of the child. 
Here, we have certain age criteria, that are, 14 years and below, up to 15 
years, and then from 15-18 years. Invariably, the age group ranging from 15 
to 18 get a different compensation, and below 15 years get a different 
compensation ranging from Rs. 20,000 to 40,000, and above that, according 
to what they are doing. So, one of the things is age determination. These are 
very technical issues, small issues. If we go by documents, then we can 
determine the age but, on that spot, we hav e to make it simpler. Right now, 

298 
 
it is not simple. So, when Doctor examines, he says that the age is ranging 
between 12 to 14 or 12 to 15, plus or minus two years. So, that is one aspect 
we can look at.”  
13.16 Further, it was submitted before the Committe e by the representative 
of the State Government of Odisha that to overcome the challenges while 
ensuring the sustainability of these rescured children in the schools and to 
reduce their drop-out rates following measures can be taken: 
“Then, Sir, we are bringing the children to schools through bridging courses. 
Some of the children will adapt to schools but many will not. He, who has 
tasted the air, freedom to live as he likes, and to earn a little and spend it, 
will just not fit into the four walls of the c lassroom. This is my interaction 
with children. Those who have been on the trains up and down, those who 
are in the open areas, near temples, etc. will not fit into the school system. 
For them, there should be customised bridging courses at least for some 
time to see whether they absorb the flavour of it. If they do, it is good, and 
they can be mainstreamed into the school. If they are up to 12 years, maybe 
you can still get them into school. But talking about the age groups of 13, 
14, and 15, suppose we rescue them, if we restore them back to the families, 
there is every chance that in six months or seven months, they would be 
back to their work… 
..That is one possibility. Second possibility is, you take them for a bridging 
course, give them a customised br idging course for six months, and give 
them a skill training. But if we see, for under matric pass, you have only 
about five schemes. Now, our Director is also thinking about the schemes 
that we can bring in. If we talk about agriculture, it is untapped. S o, we can 
fully tap agriculture. Agriculture does not come under the Skill Development 
Department. So, that is one part. The other part is, everything is for the 
children who have passed 10th or 12th. But most of these kids who are from 
15 to 18 cannot pra ctically read or write. So, for these children, we can give 
some kind of a bridging course, then have a skilling course perhaps in 
another six months or one year, and then have some life skill course and so 
on until they reach at least the age of 16. The c hildren must be given 
residential support till they reach a certain age. Else, if they are restored to 
family, then the family should be economically provided otherwise the child 
is going to come back.” 
13.17 Another possibility is of providing placements to these adolescent 
children after providing them skill development courses. In this regard, 
representative of the State Government of Odisha candidly admitted before 
the Committee during the oral evidence as under: 
“When we were talking to the Director, S kill Development, we were also 
asking for placement. But then, on the other hand, when I think of it, these 
children are very street -smart. So, if you give them a skill, I am sure, they 
will be very quick to get a space for economic development. But that tie up is 
missing from our side. Then, there are some civil society organisations who 
are passionate about this. Why can we not put a bridge curriculum in place, 
give it to them, get all these children to those particular CSOs and fund 
them a bit?” 
  

299 
 
13.18 The representative of the Ministry came up with a proposal of 
converging an already existing e -portal named PAReSHRAM in Odisha with 
other departments in order to obtain up to date information regarding 
rescued children in the following deposition before the Committee :  
“…in Odisha, we have come up with a portal called PAReSHRAM in the last 
one and a half years over COVID. It has come out very well and received very 
well but this portal is for licensing and those kinds of things under labour 
department’s r egulatory activities. Under this, we are also hoping to 
converge existing tracking portals of other departments. We will go a little 
beyond that and put one tracking portal in place so that at least we get to 
know about the children who are rescued. The ti ming of the survey mattes. 
This again came up in our workshop. We do the survey when we happily say 
that there is 98 plus enrolment. But after some time, children drop out. So, 
our school education department says that if it is 30 days’ non -attendance, 
then it is out of school child. Secondly, if you do this in June -July, you will 
have full enrolment. But if you do it in the migration season, which is post -
agriculture season, you will find that most of the children have migrated in 
certain areas, at least i n the 14 districts of Odisha. So, the timing of the 
survey matters. If you time your survey in June -July, you will get different 
figures, and if you time it in September-October, the figures will be different. 
So, we need to keep that in mind and play with  it. Even when our teams go 
to rescue, just like CRPC, here also apparently, there is a clause which says 
that you have to announce that you are going on a child labour rescue raid. 
So, I think, that also needs a little bit of tweaking.” 
13.19 During the c ourse of evidence, the representative of the State 
Government of Odisha presented another suggestion for better and effective 
implementation of NCLP in the State in her deposition before the Committee 
as follows: 
“We should have a system for declaring vill ages as child labour free. In 
Odisha, there are some districts that have already been announced as child 
marriage free. The villages get a small amount of only Rs. 2000 but it is 
about dignity and prestige. So, here, can we do that for child labour free? 
More than that, all my children are in school. So, can the Sarpanch, ward 
members, and Government officials take responsibility of that?”  
Seasonal Hostels 
13.20 During the course of evidence, the Committee were apprised by the 
Principal Secretary, School a nd Mass Education Department, Odisha to the 
Government of Odisha of the opening up of Seasonal Hostels in Odisha 
under the Samagra Shiksha. The same was elaborated as under: 
“Sir, under the Samagra Shiksha, we have taken several measures to deal 
with the child labour/ migration issues. One important intervention that we 
had undertaken is, the opening up of Seasonal Hostels. We take up exercise 
for mapping and identification of the migrant children. This is conducted 
through our Assistant Block Education Off icer (ABEO), Cluster Resource 
Centre Coordinator (CRCC), the School Management Committee, the PRI 
members and the district officials. We know that there are certain pockets 
from where migration takes place in several districts like Bargarh, Balangir, 
Kalahandi, Mayurbhanj, Nuapada.  

300 
 
So, before the onset of migration, we undertake an exercise to know the 
names of the children who are likely to be associated with the migrant 
parents. We have developed a large number of IEC materials i.e., posters, 
hoardings, leaflets, street play, slogans, wall writings, TV spots etc. It 
provides education and awareness to the people. On this basis, we open 
several seasonal hostels in these districts. For example, in 2021 -22, we 
opened 80 seasonal hostels and those housed abou t 3,511 students. In the 
year 2019-20, we had 176 centres and those housed about 8,000 students”   
13.21 Replying to a pointed query about its period of operation, the 
representative of the State Government of Odisha deposed as under: 
“It is operated as lo ng as required till the return of the parents. It can be for 
six months or more. Normally, it starts during September -October. 
Depending on the need, the hostels are opened in a flexible manner.”  
13.22 Clarifying why these hostels are called seasonal, it was deposed as 
under: 
“It is because the parents move out during a particular season and then they 
return. Normally, the family members accompany. So, it is likely that the 
children would migrate out with other family members. We persuade them 
and the children are retained in the villages.”  
13.23 Further, the Committee were informed as under:  
“They are kept in the seasonal hostels managed by the NGOs and the local 
people. On an average, 7,000 to 8,000 children have been staying almost 
every year. This year, we propose to open about 207 centres to accommodate 
about 9,000 children.”  
13.24 On a pointed query regarding the boarding and lodging of the children 
in these hostels, the representatives deposed during the course of oral 
evidence as under: 
“Yes Sir. Everything is being provided. Food and other support are provided. 
There is provision under the Samagra Shiksha.” 
13.25 The role and functioning of these seasonal hostels during the COVID 
pandemic period was further elaborated as under: 
“During the COVID pandemic, we witnessed a lot of issues. All over the 
country, the children were found to be on the move along with migrant 
families. We enumerated about 5,654 children and got them admitted in the 
schools. 
In the year 2021, we took up a survey to know the out -of- school children 
and we identified about 30,000 children in the age group of 6 -14 years, and 
about 91,000 children at the secondary and higher secondary level. They 
were in the age group of 15 -18 years. These elementary -level out-of-school 
children were enrolled in the appropriate classes as per the RTE Act, and 
special training was also provided to the needy children. 
We have a good convergence with the Labour Department. They provide 
financial support. We have the details of the coverage of the migrant 

301 
 
children. We have the figure from 2006 -07 onwards. So, this is a kind of an 
established programme in Odisha. For the last 15 years or so, seasonal 
hostels are opened in those migration-prone areas, and people, generally, are 
prepared to send their children there. 
Similarly, in urban areas, for the urban deprived children, we have a similar 
provision. For example, 834 children belonging to the category of orphan, 
child beggar, children without adult protection, single parents, nomadic 
children of sex workers, BPL, and rand ragpickers, were identified, and they 
were all accommodated in 21 residential schools. 
One important point that Sir you raised is, what we are doing for the 
prevention of child labour. We have felt that the COVID pandemic for the 
last two years had a very disastrous effect, particularly, on school children. I 
believe nationwide it has the potential to generate a lot of child labour. When 
we opened the school in February, we found, despite our best efforts and 
running the Mid-Day Meal Programme, the attendance was becoming about 
70 per cent. 
Then, we took up drives at the villa ge level and sent the teachers to the 
houses. Through several measures, our attendance is now becoming about 
100 per cent.”  
13.26 On a pointed query on the issue of a learning gap caused due to lack 
of classroom teaching, the representative of the State G overnment of Odisha 
deposed as under:   
“But another issue that we have noted is that because of no classroom 
teaching for the school children, there has been a learning gap. For example, 
in areas where there was Internet, people had recourse to learning b ut in 
tribal areas, under -developed areas or the areas where there was no 
Internet, learning has been very badly affected. Despite no learning, we 
promoted the children to higher classes. For example, the children who are 
now studying in class 3, have not attended classes 1 and 2 in the school and 
they are now attending class 3. So, they have not had classes in standards I 
and II. So, to cope with the learning gaps, we have devised a method. We 
selected important topics of previous two classes (years). We h ave designed 
bridge courses and we are covering all the children with this course so that 
the children will catch up with the better off children and there will be less 
scope for them to drop out. If we do not do this kind of measure, the learning 
gap between the disadvantaged child and an otherwise not-so-disadvantaged 
child would be so much that after a year or so, the child would be forced to 
leave school.”  
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
13.27  The Committee note that the State Government of Odisha 
have taken laudable initiatives under State Action Plan for proper and 
effective implementation of National Policy on Child Labour with the 
broad objective of eliminating child labour. These include issuing 

302 
 
notification of Odisha State Child & Adolescent Labour  Rules, 2018; 
issuing directions to the District Administration during Covid 
pandemic for taking appropriate actions for preventing child labour; 
notifying District Nodal Officers for coordinating activities under 
PENCIL (Platform for Effective Enforcement  for No Child Labour) as 
instructed by Government of India; constitution of District Level Child 
and Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation Fund in all districts under the 
chairmanship of District Collectors; exclusive campaign in regular 
intervals for spreading awareness, etc. Following this State Action Plan 
809 NCLP Special Schools in 24 districts of Odisha were set up till July 
2014. In these 24 districts, 1,73,508 students had been mainstreamed 
since inception. Since 2016 -17, 111 Special Training Centres (ST Cs) 
were operational in Odisha which had enrolled 2882 rescued children. 
The Committee commend the State Government to take these steps in 
the right direction and desire that a robust monitoring mechanism 
should be put in place to achieve proper coordinati on between all the 
agencies/Departments so that objectives may be achieved effectively in 
a planned manner. 
13.28  The Committee find that the issue of prohibition and 
regulation of child labour requires proper coordination and conversion 
between different Departments of the State and the Central 
Government. The Committee believe that the purpose can only be 
solved whe n there is proper conversion mechanism set up which go 
down to the grass root level. Therefore, for proper coordination 
between the agencies, conversion at the Block level, Gram Panchayat 
level, Education Department as well as Labour and ESI Department is 
required to be set up at the earliest. The Committee recommend that 
at the Gram Panchayat level institutional mechanism for convergence 
to track “out of school” children, dropout children and children 
engaged as labourers should be devised with the help of  Panchayati Raj 
Institution (PRI) functionaries. For this purpose, Sarpanch and other 
members of the Gram Panchayat may be compulsorily trained on child 

303 
 
labour with a module for specific interventions, in every PRI trainings 
conducted by the Institutes in each State/UT. If need be, cooperation 
from the Ministry of Rural Development may also be sought to 
accomplish this task. 
13.29  The Committee are given to understand that the process of 
rescue and rehabilitation of children engaged in child labour is very  
cumbersome and includes several steps involving a number of agencies. 
One such step is identifying the accurate age of the rescued children 
with the help of medical team whether they are below 14 years or 
above 14 to 18 years of age. Further, counseling o f the children also 
needs to be conducted imperatively so that they don’t go back to work 
and continue with school education. This involves appointment of 
doctors/ psychiatrists/ psychologists and trained counselors at 
Primary Health Centres (PHCs) and Urb an PHCs. The Committee find 
that there is no provision of appointment of such medical staff specific 
for this purpose. Therefore, they recommend that the Government 
should appoint medical staff including doctors/psychologists/  
psychiatrists at least at Blo ck/ Community Health Centre (CHC) level. 
The Committee desire that proper funds should be allocated for this 
purpose.  
13.30  The Committee find that in Odisha Self Help Group 
movement is very strong and these groups are capable of working at 
various fronts for social causes at village level. The Committee are of 
the opinion that the State Government should explore the possibility of 
engaging Self Help Groups/Civil Society Organisations at every Gram 
Panchayat level and declare them as nodal SHGs and train them to 
identify the children engaged in child labour practice by visiting each 
and every household and collecting data about children enrolled in 
schools and report back to Gram Sabha Committee/Gram Panchayat on 
a ‘Mission Mode’. These SHGs can be considered as social catalysts who 
can also play the role of whistle blowers on child labour. The 
Committee also exhort that proper awareness campaigns should be 

304 
 
organized for the parents/mothers of the children up to 14 years of age 
for making them aware of haza rds of child labour and not enrolling 
them in schools.  In this way parents will come to know about the 
benefits of education for the future of child. The Committee believe 
that these social catalysts can also play a role in the urban or semi -
urban areas wi th engagement of urban local bodies/civil society 
organizations.  
13.31  The Committee note that availability of Midday Meals in 
the schools is one of the reasons for increase in enrollment of children 
in the school till Class VIII. The Midday Meal scheme of the 
Government, under the Ministry of Education, is a Centrally sponsored 
scheme under which cooked meals are provided to every child within 
the age group of 6 -14 years studying in class I -VIII who enrolls and 
attends the school with the aim of universa lisation of primary 
education. Taking note of the fact that the adolescent labours who had 
been rescued and enrolled in the Schools have the possibility of going 
back to work specially within the age group of 14 -18, the Committee 
are of the strong view tha t if the Scheme of Midday Meal is extended 
for upto the class X, it may certainly help in increasing and sustaining 
the enrollment and attendance in schools alongwith addressing hunger 
and mal-nutrition amongst the children of rural areas. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry of Education to work on taking a 
policy decision to extend the scheme of Midday Meal to the students of 
class IX and X as a pilot project in aspiring districts and monitor for 
two years also. The Committee desire the Ministr y of Education should 
work in tandem with the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) to explore the 
possibility of serving meals of higher standards also. 
13.32  The Committee find that in the la st three years i.e. from 
2020-21 to 2022 -23, which were also Covid years, more than 100 
children were rescued from the field. Subsequently, more than 
1,73,000 children were mainstreamed into the regular schools which is 

305 
 
one of the main objectives of the Na tional Policy on Child Labour apart 
from prevention, rescue and rehabilitation. The Committee appreciate 
these steps taken by the State Government of Odisha and believe that 
in order to ensure that the rescued children return to their parents and 
all of th em are enrolled in schools, it is imperative that the National 
Policy on Child Labour is implemented effectively at the very grass root 
level of the civil society. For this purpose the Committee opine that 
the beneficiaries may be asked to sign an undertak ing before availing 
the benefits of the various schemes of the Government that their 
children have completed the required number of years during their 
primary school education and also that their child/children are not 
engaged in child labour.  Those parents may be given favourable points 
while availing the benefits of scheme.  
13.33  The Committee observe that it is difficult to identify the 
correct age of the child when the child is rescued from its employer. 
When these children are referred to the doctors  they can only come up 
with the age range i.e. between 12 -14 years or 12 -15 years. In the 
absence of correct knowledge of the age of the child, it is very difficult 
to prosecute the employer in cases from where child labour has been 
rescued. In these cases  where it is difficult to ascertain the age of the 
child/adolescent the penal amount of Rs. 20,000 is also left 
uncollected from the employers. In some cases, the fine amount is not 
realized even after few years which does not act as a penal measure, 
hence the employers do not deter to employ child labours in future. 
The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment to establish a concrete deterrence mechanism for 
employers of children which could be ‘spot penalty system’ or 
compounding o f fine amount within 7 days at the level of District 
Collector for quick and maximum impact. The Committee also impress 
upon the Ministry of Labour & Employment to raise the penalty from 
Rs. 20,000 to Rs. 50,000 for deterring the employers to employ child 
labours. 

306 
 
13.34  The Committee find that the State Government of Odisha 
have taken a unique measure to deal with the Child Labour/Migration 
issues i.e. opening up of seasonal hostels. These hostels are meant for 
the children whose parents and other family m embers migrate to other 
places in search of better livelihood. An exercise is taken up for 
mapping and identification of the migrant children with the help of 
Assistant Block Education Officer (ABEO), Cluster Resource Centre 
Coordinator (CRCC), the School Management Committee, the PRI 
members and the district officials. These hostels are opened in the 
areas/pockets from where maximum migration takes place in the 
State. These hostels are managed by the NGOs and the local people and 
food and other support are provided to the hostel residents during their 
stay according to a provision under the Samagra Siksha. The 
Committee appreciate this step of the School and Mass Education 
Department, State Government of Odisha and  recommend the Ministry 
of Education (Department of School Education and Literacy) to explore 
the possibility of setting up such seasonal hostels in other States from 
where migration occurs. 
13.35  The Committee also note that in order to maintain the 
attendance of the rescued children in the schools, the Education 
Department of State Government of Odisha took up special drives at 
the village level and involved the school teachers in personally sendi ng 
them to the houses of the drop -out children. With the sensitization of 
the parents and family members of these children the students were 
able to come back to school. This is a novel initiative, which in the 
opinion of the Committee needs to be replicated in other States. 
13.36  The Committee find that in Odisha, there are some 
villages/districts which have been declared as “Child Marriage Free” 
villages. The Government grant rewards to these villages which is a 
matter of pride for the villagers . The Com mittee desire that on the 
same lines District Administration should declare “Child Labour Free” 
villages/blocks and provide monetary reward to them.  This would act 

307 
 
as an incentive for the village Sarpanch, Ward Members to keep the 
track of children in school.  
13.37  The Committee note that the Government of Odisha have 
come up with a portal called PAReSHRAM. This portal is meant for 
licensing and functions for Labour Department’s regulatory activities. 
The Committee believe that this portal can be linked w ith the other 
portals of other Departments in the State and can be used as a tracking 
portal to track and register the children who are rescued and 
rehabilitated. As addressing child labour is a multi -stakeholder issue, 
an integrated real time IT Portal to  cover the 
activities/responsibilities/deliverables of all converging Departments 
for concerted action will be helpful. The Committee observe that when 
the labour force migrate from one State to another their children also 
accompany them, the Committee fin d that the Inter -State Migrant 
Workmen Act, 1979 which is in force for more than 40 years can be 
used to ensure separation of labour and child at the destination site i.e. 
other State/UT. It is a big challenge to ensure education for the 
children who migrate with their parents to other States, the Committee 
believe that for children upto 10 years of age the availability of text 
books and the medium of education should be the mother tongue of the 
child so as to ensure continuity of education.  
13.38 For the adolescents of the age 15 -18 years, the Committee 
recommend that placement linked skill development training should be 
provided and their placements should be effectively monitored by the 
concerned State Governments , the opportunities in Agriculture Sector  
are to be properly tapped to engage trained adolescents.  
13.39  The Committee note that State Government of Odisha have 
been undertaking exclusive campaigns in regular intervals in 
association with other stakeholders in the State for spreading 
awareness against child labour and promote child rights under their 
State Action Plan. To achieve this purpose soft copies of leaflets, 

308 
 
posters and wall paintings on elimination of child labour being 
circulated to District Administration for IEC activities. The Comm ittee 
appreciate the State Government of Odisha for taking these steps for 
creating awareness amongst the common people in proper coordination 
with the District Administration, nevertheless the Committee desire 
that a stringent monitoring mechanism should be put in place to 
monitor conduct of these awareness programmes at village/block level 
and the families of the children between 8 -14 years specifically their 
mothers should be sensitized about the hazard of pushing child into 
labour and benefits of school education. 
 
  

309 
 
CHAPTER - FOURTEEN 
 
STATE GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB 
14.1 The Committee were apprised by the State Government about the 
Provisions to prohibit, track and rehabilitate child labour, including the 
penal provisions, being implemented by the State and the role, responsibility 
and accountability of different authorities such as the District Magistrate.  
14. 2 The Department of School Education, State Government of Punjab 
also informed the Committee about the steps taken for the development of 
education in the State including the facilities such as free uniform and free 
education being provided to encourage enrollment and retention. 
14.3 The Committee desired to know about the working of the District Task 
Force (DTF) to eliminate child labour in different Districts of the state as well 
as the periodicity of the meetings of the DTF. In response the Government of 
Punjab submitted as under: 
“The State Government has prepared a State Action Plan for the elimination 
of child labour. District Task Force (DTF) ha s been constituted in all the 
Districts with members from different Departments including Labour, 
Education, Women and Child Development, Police, Health and Local 
Government. The major objective of this task force is to hold meetings of its 
members and to identify and keep such areas in their respective 
jurisdictions where child labour is likely to be engaged under continuous 
active surveillance. Whenever a complaint regarding the employment of child 
or adolescent labourers is received, the members of the D istrict Task Force 
(DTF) conduct raids as per the Punjab State Action Plan for the total 
abolition of child labour. Necessary action is taken as per the procedure laid 
down under said action plan. Apart from this, Child Labour Abolition Week 
is being obser ved twice a year with the help of the DTF. During this 
campaign, random inspections and raids are conducted by the task force on 
shops, dhabas and factories etc. to remove the curse of child labour from 
society. As far as repatriation and rehabilitation of  rescued child and 
adolescent labourers is concerned, the custody of these rescued children is 
taken by the District Child Protection Officer (Department of Women and 
Child Development) who is a member of the DTF. Thereafter, the rescued 
child labourers ar e produced before the child welfare committee under the 
supervision of the District Child Protection Officer to further take follow -up 
action regarding repatriation and rehabilitation of the concerned child. 
It is proposed that however, DTFs meet every mon th to take stock of 
the situation with respect to child labour but the effort is less. There has to 
be a concrete effort by DTFs to eradicate child labour. The DTFs must also 
analyse and consider the recurrence of child labour with respect to the same 
child. The DTFs must also emphasize on the rehabilitation part where fewer 
efforts are being made.” 
  

310 
 
14.4 The Committee were also apprised of the number of  raids conducted 
by the DTF, FIRs, prosecutions and convictions made and the number of 
children rescued as under : 
Sl.  
No 
Year No. of  
inspections  
conducted 
No. of  
children  
rescued 
No. of  
violations  
detected 
No. of  
prosecutions  
launched 
No. of 
convictions 
made 
Fine  
imposed/  
Fund 
raised 
No. of  
convicted  
persons  
sent to  
jail 
1 2016-17 11412 177 152 142 52 3,81,200 1 
2 2017-18 16079 291 251 230 123 7,58,600 1 
3 2018-19 14723 168 158 149 90 2,59,031 Nil 
4 2019-20 12387 113 123 112 59 1,94,500 Nil  
5 2020-21 956 148 33 22 6 29,000 Nil 
6 2021-22 7842 90 71 61. 22 104,000 Nil 
7 2022-23 4358 98 69 39 9 Nil Nil 
 Total 67757 1085 857 755 361 17,26,331 2 
As per the directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of 
M.C. Mehta Vs State of Tamil Nadu and others, a Child Labour 
rehabilitation-cum-Welfare Fund has been created at the District level in the 
State. For every rescued child from hazardous processes and occupations, 
Rs. 20,000/- is recovered from the offending employer for the rehabilitation 
of the child. Also as per Section14B(2) of the Child and Adolescent Labour(P 
&R) Act.1986, the State Government is crediting Rs.15,000 for each child or 
adolescent in the above said Fund.” 
14.5  The Committee desired to know of the steps taken for 
addressing the issue of prevalence of child labour in MSMEs in Punjab and 
the repatriati on of the rescued children to their native States. The State 
Government of Punjab in their reply submitted as follows: 
“Since 2016,a total of 149 child labourers have been rescued from the 
factories/MSMEs.The detail of factories/MSMEs inspected during the given 
period and the output is as under: 
Sl. No Year No. of Inspections  
Conducted in  
Factories/MSMEs  
No. of  
Children  
Rescued 
No. of  
Violations  
Detected 
No. of  
Prosecutions  
Launched 
No. of 
Convictions  
Made 
1 2016-17 1112 21 7 8 4 
2 2017-18 1454 20 8 8 4 
3 2018-19 1719 5 6 6 4 
4 2019-20 909 6 5 5 3 
5 2020-21 103 68 9  2 Nil 
6 2021-22 620 14 11 1 1 
7 2022-23 445 15 Nil Nil Nil 
 TOTAL 6362 149 46 30 16 
 

311 
 
As far as rehabilitation and repatriation of these labourers are concerned it 
is done according to the Punjab State Action Plan for the total abolition of 
child labour. The procedure of handing over the rescued child labour to their 
parents, shelter homes or their repatriation to the parent State is followed 
up by the District Child Protect ion Officer (Dept of Women and Child 
Development)” 
14.6 With regard to the  coordination/agreement with other States 
regarding the interests and rehabilitation of rescued migrant child 
labourers, the State Government submitted as follows: 
“Coordination with other States, with respect to child labour where children 
have travelled from other States, is lacking even though efforts are made to 
coordinate with the States concerned for the rehabilitation of migrant child 
labourers”. 
14.7 When specifically asked about the issue of drug abuse among children 
in the State and the steps taken to address the same, the State Government 
stated as under: 
“The Standing Committee had pointed out that  children are also falling into 
drug addiction and in certain cases, children are being used by smugglers as 
drug peddlers in Punjab. In this regard, it is submitted that no such incident 
has come to the notice of the Department. The Department has further got 
in touch with the field level officers to re -check on such occurrences, but no 
such occurrence has been noticed. The matter will be taken up with the 
SSPs of the Districts to further ensure that any such occurrence must be 
reported to the department.” 
14.8 With regard to the issue of rehabilitation of child labourers, the 
Committee also sought to know the details of the number of children 
rescued and admitted to schools and those who received further 
vocational/skill development training. In response, the State Government 
submitted as follows: 
Sr. 
No. 
NCLP 
Project 
Number 
of 
Schools 
Total 
Students 
Admitted 
since its  
beginning. 
Total number of  
Children passed 
5th class/ 
mainstreaming/ 
rehabilitated 
No. Of rescued 
children given 
vocational 
training/skill  
development course 
1 Ludhiana 32 10038 4040 9080 
2 
 
Jalandhar  27 9167 7650 7650 
3 Amritsar 40 8368 9029 9029 
 
14.9 The Committee were also concerned about the children of migrant 
agricultural labourers from States such as Bihar, being engaged in child 
labour in Punjab. The Committee desired to know whether the State 
Government had undertaken any survey to estimate child labour in 
agriculture and what steps are taken to ensure their education. In reply the 
State Government submitted as under: 

312 
 
“No survey has been conducted by the Department of Labour Punjab 
regarding mi grant child labour in the agriculture sector although 
instructions have been passed to the concerned field officers to check child 
labour in the agriculture sector during the child labour weeks and also on 
the basis of complaints. However, there is not muc h concentration of child 
labour in the agriculture sector in Punjab as the agriculture sector of Punjab 
is highly mechanised. Even then, the Department officers and DTFs will 
further be sensitised on the issue to keep a vigil.” 
14.10 With regard to the det ails of children enrolled into Govt. Schools from 
NCLP schools, as per reports of District Education Officers (DEO) of the 
respective Districts, the State Government furnished the following 
information: 
 
Sr. 
No. 
District  No. of Children which  
were studying in NCLP 
 
Mainstreamed 
1. Amritsar  1774  1774 
2. Jalandhar  1300  144 
3. Ludhiana  1511  1473 
 
14.11 The Committee desired to know the number of child labour rescued in 
industrial Districts of Amritsar, Jalandhar and Ludhiana and the procedure  
followed by the State to identify whether the rescued children have relapsed 
into child labour. In response, the State Government stated as follows: 
 
2016-22 
Sr.  
No 
District No. of 
inspections 
Conducted 
No. of  
Children  
Rescued 
No of  
Violations  
Detected 
No. of  
Prosecutions  
Launched 
No. of  
Conviction s 
Made 
Fine Imposed/ 
Fund Raised 
No of  
Convicted  
Persons  
send to 
jail 
1 Amritsar 13710 65 65 65 65 15000 NIL 
2 Jalandhar 3674 164 61 45 10 50000 NIL 
3 Ludhiana 3228 254 113 111 66 159531 1 
 TOTAL 20612 483 239 221 141 224531 1 
 
“Even though no data is maintained with the Department of labour 
regarding the economic condition of the families of the rescued children, it 
has been observed that such families are usually the poorest of the poor. 
After the rescue of a child labourer and production before the CWC, the child 
is either handed over to their parents or sent to shelter homes, as the case 
may be, and parents of such children are persuaded to get their children 
admitted to schools. The Gov ernment at its level admits and registers such 
children on the e -portal of the Department of Education. The rehabilitation 
part has a lot of challenges. Still, the Department is aware of the issue of 
relapse and is working to trace search relapses/occurren ces of child labour. 
Department is also working towards making a database of all the detected 
child labour cases so that relapse could be monitored in a better way.” 

313 
 
14.12 Asked about the education of children belonging to economically 
weaker families and setting up of hostels for them by the State Government, 
the Punjab Government replied as under: 
‘Children are admitted & registered on the e -Punjab portal of the Education 
Department. Whenever any child leaves the school, School Leaving 
Certificate (SLC) i s generated, which can be tracked, and it facilitates the 
Government to know the quantum of those relapsing into child labour. Govt. 
provides Free Education, Textbooks, Uniforms, Scholarship and Mid -day 
meals etc to the children to attract them towards edu cation and also to 
assist such families in providing education to their children. As per the 
report of the Department of Education, 5 Residential Hostels were approved 
for five Districts including four border area Districts Amritsar, Ferozepur, 
Gurdaspur a nd Tarn Taran on one million plus population city Ludhiana. 
Apart from this, 29 KGBV Hostels are also established in the State.’ 
14.13 The State Government furnished the following reply when the 
Committee desired to be apprised of the detailed working of the District Task 
Force (DTF): 
‘The agenda of the DTF is to identify vulnerable areas and employments in 
the District where child labour could be prevalent and then plan raids 
accordingly and take the necessary action as per the State action plan for 
the elimination of child labour. The complaint regarding child labour can be 
lodged via Platform for effective Enforcement for No Child Labour 
(PENCIL)Portal, Punjab Grievance Redressal System (PGRS)Portal or through 
a written complaint to the concerned official s. Whenever a complaint is 
received by any official concerned of the DTF, he/she intimates the other 
members of the DTF and a raid is planned accordingly as per the law. In 
case the number of child labourers found to be employed is high, then 
immediate act ion within 24 hours is taken after contacting the Deputy 
Commissioner and Police officers by carrying out a raid through the task 
force; and if the number of child labourers is less, then immediate action is 
taken to liberate them on the very day with the help of departmental officials 
of the Labour Department and the Police. Other than receiving and acting on 
the complaints received, two child labour eradication weeks are observed by 
the DTF every year so that complete attention of the department is given to 
the task of eradication of child labour.’ 
14.14 When the Committee wanted to know more about the challenges in 
identification, rescue and rehabilitation of child labourers, the State 
Government deposed as under during the oral evidence: 
“Sir, the most challenging part of this process is rehabilitation. Identification 
is very easy; taking out the child is very easy. The important thing is how to 
monitor that child so that he makes good progress. He is rehabilitated, he 
does not go back to child labour, ev en if his family sends him there , 
otherwise, he is being drawn to these kinds of places for child labour. This is 
actually where we are lacking. It is not only in Punjab; it is everywhere. Until 
and unless we start tracking each and every child who is take n out of child 
labour, we cannot completely end this circle which is an on -going thing. Our 
plan is that we will track every child who is taken out of child labour. We will 
make a portal in which all the details come up.” 

314 
 
14.15 Regarding tracking children through the PENCIL portal, replying to 
the query of the committee, the State Government submitted the following: 
  “PENCIL is working well, but it is not tracking every individual child. It is 
only monitoring the overall progress of different Districts on different 
categories. What I am trying to put across is that every child should be 
tracked.  
Of course, it would be easier at the State level. But we will have to 
share this data with other States also when the child actually goes out from 
our State or goes back to his own State from where he came with the family 
to start working as child labour. NCLP has not done as good as we thought it 
would have done. We try to take these children to regular schools and the 
child homes which are now being run by Women a nd Child Development 
Department. They are also doing a good job. Wherever these children cannot 
be taken back to their homes, they are taken to these child homes. But it is 
the monitoring part where we are lacking. We have to monitor these children 
continuously. Even if we monitor them, we are doing it for only two or three 
months.It should be a regular thing. We should be monitoring that child for 
at least two years. We should monitor whether he is going to school, and 
what his progress is.” 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
14.16  The Committee observe and appreciate that the State 
Government has prepared a State Action Plan for the elimination of 
child labour and that District Task Forces (DTF) have been constituted 
in all the Districts with members from diffe rent Departments including 
Labour, Education, Women and Child Development, Police, Health and 
Local Government.   At the same time, the Committee feel that it is 
required to ensure that the DTFs meet at least every month to take 
stock of the situation with respect to child labour. Additionally, the 
State Government has submitted that DTFs must also analyse and 
consider the recurrence of child labour with respect to the same child 
and should also emphasise on the rehabilitation part where lesser 
efforts are b eing made currently. The Committee want the State 
Government to take urgent and specific measures to address these 
impediments that they have already identified in this connection and 
develop an effective mechanism to monitor the functioning of the DTF 
and ensure that regular meetings are held.  One of the important 
measures would be to completely convert the data/information on the 
working of the DTFs to digital mode.   There should be a secure Web 
based platform accessible to all DTFs enabling the sharing o f the 

315 
 
data/information generated as part of the work of each DTF.  Further, 
the Committee recommend that there should be a State level 
entity/agency, ideally headed by the Chief Secretary, to monitor and 
coordinate the implementation of the State Action Pl an on Child 
Labour. There has to be compilation and analysis of all data related to 
child labour in the State to originate dependable and actionable 
information for the use of operational level agencies like the DTFs as 
well as for State Level policy maker s. In the opinion of the Committee, 
the role of Local Self Government Institutions in generation of data on 
child labour, especially in the rural areas, should not be ignored. Such a 
mechanism would be pivotal to make the State Government effectively 
responsive to the varied and evolving issues relating to the fight 
against child labour. 
14.17  Based on the data provided by the State Government about 
the raids conducted by the DTF and the raids conducted in the 
industrial belts of Amritsar, Ludhiana and Jalandhar, the Committee 
find that the fine(s) imposed by the Department is not commensurate 
with the number of violations detected and the number of prosecutions 
launched, and convictions made. The quantum of fine does not match 
with the stipulation that for every rescued child, Rs. 20,000/ - is to be 
recovered from the offending employer for rehab ilitation of the child. 
The Committee thus desire that the State Government need to review 
this aspect as well as the functioning of the DTF and ensure that the 
amount of fine collected from the violators and deposited in the Child 
Labour rehabilitation an d Welfare Fund is as per the legal provisions 
laid out. The Fund itself should be strictly monitored to ensure that 
the money deposited does not stagnate in the fund and is efficiently 
utilized for welfare of the rescued children.  Further, in the opinion o f 
the Committee, rehabilitation of child labourers would hinge upon the 
knowledge and recognition of the financial/economic condition of the 
family of the child labourers. Hence, there has to be an institutional 

316 
 
arrangement to keep track of this aspect als o as well as to handhold 
wherever required.   
14.18  The Committee note that complaints regarding child labour 
can be lodged through PENCIL or PGRS portals or through a written 
complaint to the official concerned.  Whenever a complaint is received 
by any o fficial concerned of the DTF, he/she intimates the other 
members of the DTF and a raid is planned accordingly as per the law. 
Moreover, other than receiving and acting on the complaints received, 
two child labour eradication weeks are also observed by the DTF every 
year so that complete attention of the Department is given to the task 
of eradication of child labour. The Committee are of the strong opinion 
that there is much more the DTF should do and it is recommended that 
apart from the raids conducted bas ed on complaints and during the 
child labour eradication week, the DTF shall also plan and undertake 
random raids every month. The frequency of the random raids should 
depend on the degree of prevalence of child labour in each District. For 
ascertaining th is, credible data on child labour needs to be obtained 
and maintained.  Further, the Government should step up efforts to 
track and maintain record of employers who are repeat offenders in 
case of engagement of child labour and ensure their prosecution . Also, 
the Committee desire that the DTFs should also be mandated with 
tracking the children released from child labour as well as the 
progression of their rehabilitation. As already indicated by the State 
Government itself, it is imperative that the released /rehabilitated 
children are tracked/ monitored for a period of at least two years to 
ensure that they do not relapse into child labour . In this context also 
the Committee would like to re -emphasis the criticality of maintaining 
updated data regarding all a spects of child labour so that endeavour 
towards eradication of child labour finds fruitful culmination.  
14.19  The Committee note that as per the submission of the State 
Government, rehabilitation and repatriation of the rescued children is 
done according to the Punjab State Action Plan and the procedure of 

317 
 
handing over the rescued Child Labour to their parents, shelter homes, 
or their repatriation to the parent State is followed by the District 
Child Protection Officer (Department of Women and Child 
Development). The Committee however note with concern the 
submission of the State Government that coordination with other 
States with respect to Child Labour where children have travelled from 
other States is lacking. The Committee therefore stress upon the ne ed 
for creation of an entity of the State Government for coordination with 
other States especially for planning rehabilitation for migrant children.  
This will be crucial to the synchronization of efforts against child 
labour in the country since Punjab is considered as the destination of 
child labourers from many States. The Committee also desire in this 
direction that the State Government should realise the urgent need for 
an inter-State repatriation policy, particularly for children and women, 
which could  guide the proposed inter -State entity. Further, the 
Committee wants the State Government to draw up MoUs with such 
States from where substantial migrant population, which include child 
labourers also, arrives in Punjab . The MoUs could act as the base on 
which rehabilitation/mainstreaming could be built up.  
  

318 
 
CHAPTER - FIFTEEN 
 
STATE GOVERNMENT OF JHARKHAND 
 
15.1 The Committee were informed about the measures taken to prohibit, 
track and rehabilitate child labourers in accordance with the Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986. Some of the steps 
taken include :- 
“(i) All the departmental officers concerned have been directed to take 
necessary action to prohibit child labour in accordance with the "Child and 
Adolescent Labour  (Prohibition & Regulation) Act 1986 (Amendment in 
2016), and ensure rehabilitation, and tracking of child labourers rescued 
during the course of inspection in accordance with Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP). 
(ii) Awareness Programmes are Launched and r egular inspections are 
conducted by the field officers to prevent the practice of child Labour. In 
addition a Toll Free Labour Helpline (No. -18003456526) has been 
established at headquarter to monitor the incidence of Child Labour. 
(iii) In accordance with  the provisions under Section 14 D (1) of Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Amendment Act, 2016, 
provisions with regard to "Manner of Compounding offences" have been 
made in Rule 19 B of Jharkhand Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation ) 
Amendment Rules 2018. District Magistrates have been empowered with 
regard to Compounding of offences under Rule 19 B (2) of said Rules.”  
15.2 The Committee desired to know about the experience of the State 
Government with regard to eradication of Child  Labour, particularly among 
the tribal communities and the measures taken for protection of the rights 
of tribal children. In response, the Government of Jharkhand submitted as 
under:- 
“State is implementing Right to Education for all children including th e 
children of tribal areas and provides the child entitlements provisioned in 
the RTE Act. State has also undertaken special initiatives to impart primary 
education in their mother tongue in the tribal areas to enhance the learning 
level at the primary grade.” 
15.3 The Committee further desired to know the number of Child 
Labourers rescued in the past five years and the educational facilities 
provided to them. In response, the State Government stated as under: 
“599 Child Labourers have been rescued and 149 FIRs lodged against the 
offending employers during the period 2016 -2022. Most of the cases are 
pending in the competent courts. 
The rescued children are enrolled in the nearby Government Schools as per 
the provisions of Right to Education Act. They are pro vided with school 
uniforms, books, school kits, scholarship and Mid - Day Meal free of cost. In 
Jharkhand residential schools have been set up in almost all Districts for 
the education of such children.” 

319 
 
15.4 On being further asked about the steps taken to  prevent the 
discontinuation of education of the rescued children and the mechanism the 
Government wants to establish for their continuation in school , the State 
responded as under:- 
“Once a child is rescued, he/she is assessed regarding his needs based o n 
his background. Accordingly, these Rescued or dropout children are 
admitted either in regular school in their vicinity or in a special residential 
school being run for such needy children. These schools are specially for 
these categories of children name ly-Children from families affected from 
LWE activities and human trafficking, orphan/single parent children, run 
away children etc. These schools are from class I-VIII and in the present year 
the State has upgraded 20 schools up to class X and thus we have  ensured 
continuation of schooling of these children. 
For the continuation of education of these children special scholarships can 
be provided and they can be put in residential schools fully funded by the 
Government under SSA.” 
15.5 On the issue of Child trafficking and such children being 
subsequently engaged in labour, the Committee wanted to know about the 
number of FIRs lodged against people/agencies engaged in Child Trafficking 
and measures taken for rehabilitation of the rescued children. In reply, t he 
Government stated as follows:- 
“From 2016 to May 2022, 706 FIRs have been lodged against the 
people/agencies engaged in trafficking in which 1118 children were involved. 
Total of 735 traffickers were arrested. Out of total FIRs lodged, charge sheet 
has been filed in 346 cases, final report filed in 90 cases whereas 270 cases 
are pending. 
These children are enrolled in the nearby government schools and the 
enrollment of such children is being tracked by the Prabandh Portal 
developed by the Ministry of Education, GOI.” 
15.6 Poverty being the primary reason behind children turning victim of 
trafficking and Child Labour, the Committee also sought to know whether 
the State Government took any initiative to support the economic conditions 
of the parents of the rescued children. The State Government submitted 
their reply as under:- 
“SoP has been issued regarding follow up of the rescued child labour. As 
part of the SoP, attempt is being made to provide the benefit of various 
government schemes to the parents of the rescued Child Labour.” 
15.7 The Committee observed that children not enrolled in School are at 
greater risk and have greater probability to being engaged in child labour. 
Thus, the Committee sought to know the estimated number  of out of school 
children in the State. In response, the State Government submitted as 
under:- 
“Before Covid-19, the State was conducting systematic identification surveys 
for out of school children including never enrolled and dropout. The number 
was as follows: 

320 
 
2018-19 : 60018 out of which enrolled and mainstreamed 60018 
2019-20 : 53833 out of which enrolled and mainstreamed 51799 
2020-21 : 60444 out of which enrolled and mainstreamed 55770 
 
The Department of School & Literacy has a regular feature of conducting 
surveys of these children. The Department has developed DAHAR (Digital 
Application for Holistic Action plan & Review) App for this purpose.” 
 
15.8 As part of the Oral evidence before the Committee, it was submitted 
further in this regard that as under :-  
“A student’s registry is created and each child is followed. For dropouts and 
rescued children, there is a residential facility. Since it is away from the 
family, the problem of dropout is quite prevalent. So, there is a need so that 
the family itself is supported and the kids are taken care of.   The Schools 
under SSA do   not give any special incentive to the rescued children. The 
general facilities under the SSA like uniforms, stipend and mid -day meals 
are provided. No special incentive from the State Government is there.”  
15.9 Concerned about the prevalence of Child Labourers particularly 
among the migrant workers, the Committee desired to be apprised about 
any study/ examination of the number and pattern of migrant workers. In 
response, the State Government submitted as under: 
“During the period of Covid -19 lockdown, 4,96,202 returned to the native 
places in Jharkhand from different states. State has started a project called 
Safe and Responsible Migration (SRMI) with the help of NGO partners to 
conduct a detailed study ab out the migrant labourers in the state of Kerala 
and the Union Territory of Ladakh. In future the Initiative will extend to 
more states where the labourers from Jharkhand migrate in search of work.” 
15.10 On being further asked about the steps taken for we lfare of rescued 
child labour coming back from other states, the State Government in reply 
stated as follows:- 
 “The Government does not have any separate policy for such children”. 
15.11 Asked about the coordination mechanism established with other 
governments/central government, the State government, in response 
submitted as under:- 
“Department of Labour, Employment, Skill Jharkhand has set up a control 
room with a_ Toll No. - 18003456526 information regarding child labour and 
other issues. The control departmental officers coordinate with other central 
government on the matter of child Training and Development, Free Helpline 
to get room as well as the state government/ labour.” 
15.11 When the Committee further queried about incentive schemes 
instituted by the government to promote and engage citizens, civil societies 
or NGOs to report instances of child labour trafficking etc, the State 
Government replied in the negative.  
15.12 In response to a query of the committee regarding the steps taken to 
dissuade children from engaging in Mica mining, the State Government 
submitted as follows :  

321 
 
“So far as the steps taken to dissuade children from mining Mica is 
concerned, in this context it is to say that engagement of child labourers in 
Mica mining areas have n ot been found during the regular visit of Labour 
Superintendents of the concerned District.” 
15.13 As part of the deliberations of the Committee with NGOs, regarding 
the dangers of Mica mining it has been submitted to the Committee that - 
“Bachpan Bachao Andolan (BBA) works in 501 Mica villages of three 
Districts of Jharkhand - Koderma, Giridih and Nawada. Out of these 501 
villages, 31 are in Nawada.   Most of the schools were established in 2001 
following the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan programme. However, when BBA began 
intervention in the villages in 2005 and during that time, the schools in 
these villages were not fully functional. 
 
     In 2006, BBA started 9 Non -Formal Education Centres and later, 7 
schools were handed over to the government. 447 schools are  currently 
operational across 501 villages in Koderma, Giridih, and Nawada (20 schools 
in Nawada). Through discussions with the officials and constant follow -up, a 
total of 28 schools were upgraded in Koderma and Giridih. Out of these 28 
schools, 18 schools were upgraded from VIII class to X class. And 8 schools 
were upgraded from V class to VIII class. And 4 schools were upgraded from 
X class to XII class.  
 
     Under the Bal Mitra Gram (Child -Friendly Villages) weekly meetings are 
organised at the villag e level with the community, Panchayats and children 
sensitizing them about children’s issues and different schemes and services 
available for children. Meetings are also organised with Village Child 
Protection Committees and School Management Committee eve ry month on 
children’s issues. Further, once a month meeting is also held with 
government functionaries to share concerns and challenges and support the 
community in availing Government social welfare schemes. 
 
     The follow -up of rescued children involv es their admission to school 
through the involvement of the Child Welfare Committee and District Child 
Protection Units. Further, under the Child -Friendly Villages, children who 
are out of school are identified and motivated to get enrolled in school. 5,556 
children were enrolled in schools and 83,328 children were retained in 
school between April 2021 to March 2022. 
 
Mica mines have resulted in the death of children as in most of the 
mica mines, children are forced to dig small holes and are made to enter 
these mines leading to choking and also cuts caused by Mica, which is a 
highly sharp mineral and can cut through delicate skin. As these operations 
are held under the supervision of local traders who ensure no case of death 
or injury to the child is reported.” 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
15.14  The Committee recognise that the children in Jharkhand 
rescued from Child Labour are enrolled in the nearby Government 
Schools as per the provisions of Right to Education Act. They are 
provided with school uniforms, books, school kits, scholarship and Mid-

322 
 
Day Meal free of cost. In Jharkhand residential schools have been set 
up in almost all Districts for children from families affected from LWE 
activities and human trafficking, orphan/single parent children, run 
away children etc. These schools are from class I -VIII and in 2022, the 
State has upgraded 20 schools up to class X for ensuring continuity of 
schooling of these children. The Committee are appreciative of these 
steps taken by the State Government but observe that there is still 
scope for improvement in this area like optimising the proximity of 
residential facilities to the homes of children.  Further, the Committee 
take note that the State government of Jharkhand are 
also implementing Right to Education for al l children including the 
children of tribal areas and provide children the entitlements 
provisioned in the RTE Act.  
The Committee would like to specifically mention that the State 
Government has also undertaken special initiatives to impart primary 
education in their mother tongue in the tribal areas to enhance the 
learning level at the primary grade, which is a very laudable initiative. 
Towards the accomplishment of effective sustenance of the efforts for 
rehabilitation and mainstreaming of the children r escued from child 
labour, trafficking, etc., the Committee recommend that the State 
Government should come out with more incentivising initiatives like 
special scholarships and graded/calibrated financial relief/assistance 
dovetailed with continuity of school attendance.  
15.15  In the context of efforts to identify the Out of School 
Children in the State, the Committee note with appreciation that the 
State Department of  School & Literacy has a regular feature of 
conducting surveys of these children. The De partment have developed 
DAHAR (Digital Application for Holistic Action plan & Review) App for 
this purpose. As per the systematic surveys of Out of School Children 
including never enrolled and dropouts   conducted by the State 
Government before the Covid -19 pandemic, the Committee find that 
very high percentage of such children identified were mainstreamed, 

323 
 
100% during 2018-19, 96% during 2019 -20 and 92 % in 2020 -21.  The 
Committee observe that there is a critical need to generate and 
maintain data in this r egard and want the State Government to ensure 
that the data generated through the DAHAR Application has high 
credibility and is also shared with other Government Departments 
engaged in action against Child Labour.  
15.16  The Committee are concerned to not e that as per the 
submission of the State Government, during the period 2016-2022, 599 
Child Labourers were rescued and 149 FIRs lodged against the 
offending employers. But, most of the cases are pending in the 
competent courts. The Committee observe that delay in trial and 
judgement in such cases makes the Child Labour (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Act ineffective in acting as a deterrent against the practice. 
The Committee therefore recommend that all the pending cases be 
pursued on a priority basis and suit able penalties and punishments as 
per law be sought to bring out the seriousness of the intent of the 
Government, both at the Central and State levels, towards eradication 
of Child Labour. The Committee also desire that these cases may be 
taken up in Special Courts.   
15.17  The Committee would further like to point out that as 
submitted by the State Government, during the period 2016 to May 
2022, 706 FIRs were lodged against the people/agencies engaged in 
trafficking in which 1118 children were involved an d a total of 735 
traffickers were arrested. Out of total FIRs lodged, charge sheets were 
filed in 346 cases, final reports were filed in 90 cases whereas 270 
cases are pending. In this context, the Committee would reaffirm their 
recommendation concerning t he issue of pendency of child 
labour/trafficking cases and urge the State Government to take 
necessary steps with regard to the swift and effective prosecution 
under cases pertaining to Child Trafficking. The Committee observe 
that child trafficking and en gagement of these children in labour are 
inalienably linked. Moreover, children trafficked under the promise of 

324 
 
work are also susceptible to being further exploited in other worse 
forms including sexual exploitation and beggary.  
The Committee recommend th at in addition to expediting and 
augmenting the prosecution timelines, the Government should also 
consider formulating a State specific Plan to deal with child trafficking 
involving all relevant Departments of the State.  An entity at the State 
level, similar to the State Task Force created by the State Government 
of Bihar, may also be put in place  to coordinate the endeavours of the 
different Departments under the Plan as well as to constantly re -assess 
the requirements in the fight against Child Labour acc ording to the 
changing/emerging circumstances for Jharkhand.   
15.18  With regard to the employment of children in abandoned 
Mica mines especially by unlicensed middle men, the Committee 
observe upfront and with utmost concern, the contradiction between 
Media/NGO reports that indicate that illegal Mica mines are still 
operational in the State, and the submission of the State Government 
that engagement of child labourers in Mica mining areas have not been 
found ‘during the regular visit of Labour Superintend ents of the 
District concerned’. The Committee recognise that since most of the 
illegal Mica mining operations reported in the media are small -scale 
operations limited to certain Districts and continue in abandoned 
mines, they might not have come under scr utiny by the labour 
department. Most of the activities are now termed Mica scavenging, 
rather than Mica mining. Here, the Committee would like to mention 
the example of ‘Dhawa Dal’  or ‘Flying Squads’ formed by the 
Government of Bihar as an emulative idea. Such Squads may be able to 
find out  what couldn’t be found ‘during the regular visit of Labour 
Superintendents of the District concerned’ . Further in this regard, in 
the considered opinion of the Committee, a special project needs to be 
launched in the aff ected Districts through an initiative of the 
Government by involving the Local Self Government Institutions, the 
District machinery, the Police, Labour and Mines Departments along 

325 
 
with the participation of community leaders and local NGOs/civil 
society org anisations. Such specific project/initiative should have 
definite graded targets to be achieved within timeframes aimed at 
identification of hotspots, alleviating the impoverishment, immediate 
relief and sustained handholding of rescued children and their 
parents/family as well as enrolment in schools in order to eradicate the 
Child Labour from Mica mining/scavenging in the State of Jharkhand 
completely.  
15.19  The Committee note that the State of Jharkhand is one of 
the more prone States to the incidence of Child Labour. To have a 
realistic assessment of the situation, generation of credible data on 
Child Labour would be a prerequisite. Accordingly, the Committe e feel 
that the State Government should consider offering adequate and 
appropriate assistance to Urban and Rural Local Bodies, NGOs, Self 
Help Groups and other organisations of the Civil Society to help 
generate reliable data regarding the number of child labourers, the 
vulnerable geographical areas and socio-economic groups susceptible to 
it, work/projects/businesses that tend to employ child labour, etc.  To 
begin with, the primary data about children has to be generated at the 
Village/Gram Panchayat level  which would also be the ideal level to 
inter-alia identify the vulnerability of families and children due to 
various reasons, to child labour.  
Further, the Committee cognise that  during the period of Covid -
19 lockdown, 4,96,202 migrant labourers returned to their native 
places in Jharkhand from different States. The State Government has 
started a project called Safe and Responsible Migration (SRMI) with the 
help of NGO partners to conduct a detailed study about the migrant 
labourers in the state of Kerala and the Union Territory of Ladakh. In 
this regard, the Committee recommended that the State Government 
should consider establishing an office of coordination at New Delhi and 
offices in different States where migrant workers from Jharkhand are 
significant in number to handhold the migrant labourers including 

326 
 
child labourers. Further, the Committee desire that the State 
Government should consider entering into MoUs with other States 
where children/migrant population from Jharkhand are present in 
substantial numbers.  These documents should delineate the mutually 
agreed upon measures to release and rehabilitate inter -State child 
labourers and can as such hasten the processes involved.     
  

327 
 
CHAPTER - SIXTEEN 
GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI 
16.1 According to the figures provided by the Government of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) as per census figure, 2011, Ministry of 
Labour & Employment estimates number of child labour between the age 
group of 5 -14 years in India as 43 lakhs, out of which approximately 26 
thousand are in Delhi. As Delhi is the centre where a number of migrant 
workers from other States such as Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh 
come with their children in se arch of employment and better livelihood 
opportunities, these children also work as labours and are deprived of basic 
education, the Committee considered it to be relevant to examine the role of 
Government of NCT of Delhi in eradication of Child Labour. 
16.2 The Committee desired to know about the number of child labour in 
Delhi and surrounding areas. The GNCTD submitted the following before the 
Committee during the evidence: 
“A comparison of census data of 2001 and 2011 shows decrease in 
employment of child labour in Delhi. The number of child labour in Delhi as 
per census data of 2001 was 41,899 which decreased to 26,473 as per 2011 
census data.” 
16.3  During the course of oral evidence, the Chief Secretary, GNCTD 
submitted before the Committee as under: 
“Government of Delhi, right from 1987, has been following the national 
policy on child labour, which is an outcome of the Act which has been 
enacted in 1986, Child & Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Act, and the rules made therein”. 
16.4  The Committee are given to understand that there is no data 
maintained regarding engagement of children/adolescents in child labour 
and the GNCTD depends entirely on the 2011 census for this data. 
Regarding data on child labour, the representative of the GNCTD  submitted 
before the Committee during the course of oral evidence as under: 
“When we see the assessment of Child labour in Delhi from 2001 Census to 
2011 Census, the number has gone down. In 2011 Census, the figure has 
gone down in comparison to 2001 Cens us by about 38 per cent. The basic 
reason for this is the intervention of the Supreme Court in Delhi. A large 
number of industries have been shifted in outside Delhi because our 
observation in Delhi is that a large chunk of child labour primarily works in 
unauthorised industries in various parts of Delhi.” 
16.5  When the Committee desired to know about the measures adopted by 
the GNCTD for eradication of child labour in NCT of Delhi, it was stated that 
the Child & Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulati on) Act, 1986 is 
being implemented in Delhi at the district level. For this purpose, District 
Task Force is constituted which is a unique feature of GNCTD. In this 
regard, following information was forwarded by the GNCTD. 

328 
 
“The District Magistrate is the ch airman of the District Task Force (Child 
Labour). The Jt. Labour Commissioner/Dy. Labour Commissioner is the 
Member Secretary of the said Task Force. The DTF (Child Labour) has also 
having the members drawn from W&CD, MCD, Education, Health, CWC, 
NDMC, Delhi Police, Labour & NGO etc. The monthly meetings are convened 
by the DTF (Child Labour) under the chairmanship of the District Magistrate 
to review the Action Taken by the Stakeholders based on the information 
received from the Civic Society, NGO, Print M edia, any citizen and other 
sources for eliminating the Child Labour from all the sectors where it is 
prohibited.” 
Rescue Operations 
16.6  On being asked about the efforts taken by the Government of NCT of 
Delhi for preparation and planning of rescue opera tions conducted for 
rescue and restoration of child labour, the Committee were informed as 
under: 
“Rescue operations are conducted by District Task Force teams from time to 
time to rescue the child labour and adolescent. Defaulting Establishments 
are also sealed to make the effective recovery of the pending legal dues of the 
rescued Child Labourers. On the spot general medical check -up and the 
approximately age determination of rescued child labourers are done by the 
District Medical Officer's team present in the rescue operations. The rescued 
Children/Adolescents are produced before CWC (Child Welfare Committee) 
by the Juvenile Officer of Delhi Police to take their statements by the CWC. 
As per the order of the CWC, the children are sent to the child homes for the 
interim care and protection, in the due course the CWC ensured the 
restoration of the rescued child/adolescents to their parents and thereafter 
their rehabilitation etc.  
16.7  The Committee were further informed about the procedure followed to 
rescue child/children from their employer and their restoration process as 
under: 
“If the information received is regarding employment of one or two child 
labour, they are rescued then and there. In case, the information received is 
regarding employment of more number of child labour, the rescue operation 
is discussed in the meeting of District Task Force. In such cases, rescue 
operation is planned which includes constitution of a rescue team, 
maintaining secrecy, ensuring management of logistics of the rescue , 
preparing for children's interim care and facilitating coordination between 
stakeholders in the process. 
The rescue team is, headed by a Sub -Divisional Magistrate (SDM),who is the 
implementing authority under the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 
1976 and officers of the Labour Department, police ,NGO etc. accompany 
him. 
Every rescued migrant or trafficked child labour, including bonded child 
labour, is presented before the Child Welfare Committee. The Child Welfare 
Committee is the competent authorit y under the Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, 2000 & amendment Act, 2006. 

329 
 
In case of condition of bonded labour, the child is also produced before the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate for grant of certificate and other compensations. 
Preliminary medical examination of children is done within 24 hours. 
The child is sent to shelter home after the rescue operation and restored to 
their parents through CWC." 
16.8  The representative of the GNCTD, during their oral evidence, deposed 
before the Committee regarding the compensation amount provided to the 
rescued children/adolescents and the different Schemes run by the GNCTD 
for the rescued child labour as under: 
“In 1996, Supreme Court also gave a direction to Delhi Government to give 
support to the rescued child because, at the end of the day, we have to give 
an ecosystem where they can be taken care of. At that time, Supreme Court 
fixed that Rs.20,000 have to be paid by the employer who is illegally 
engaging these children and Delhi Government h as to give Rs.5,000. So, 
Rs.25,000 are being given to children who are rescued from such type of 
activities.  
 In addition to this, Delhi Government has also a scheme for those 
children who are actually in distress and do not get the support even from 
their families. We give Rs.2,000 per child per month, provided he is 
continuing either in anganwadi or school. We also rescue them and bring 
them back to their families. We have about 820 Special Training Centres. We 
have special training centres in schools. T hose children who are not coming 
to the school for 45 days continuously, they are brought into the education 
system. In special training centres, we give them three months literacy 
training so that they are in a position to enter into the regular stream of  
education.” 
16.9 When asked about the figures regarding rescue operations in Delhi 
from 2017 to 2021, the Government of NCT of Delhi stated in the reply as 
under: 
In the last five years (2017 -2021), 197 rescue operations were undertaken 
and a total of 274 3 child labourer were rescued, which includes 592 child 
labourer below the 14 years of age and 2151 child labourer above the 14 
years of age. 192 premises were sealed during this period employing child 
labour to effect recovery of Rs. 20,000 from the emplo yer. The details is 
tabulated as under: 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Number of 
rescue 
operations 
 
Child Labour 
below 14 
years 
Child Labour 
above 14 
years 
Total 
1.  2017 45 221 422 643 
2.  2018 52 110 588 698 
3.  2019 45 135 609 744 
4.  2020 15 40 159 199 
5.  2021 40 86 373 459 
    Total 197 592 2151 2743 
 

330 
 
16.10 The Committee were further informed during the oral evidence by the 
representative of the GNCTD as under: 
“…during the Covid also, we have been rescuing the children. As and when 
the information received either through the NGO or through our own 
resources, we get the industrial unit to visit it and to get the children 
rescued. In 2018, we rescued 53 children.  They were below 14 years of age 
wherein we have contributed the amount of rehabilitation to them, and 
followed their rehabilitation aspect. 
 In 2019, the number 79; in 2020, it was 38; in 2021, it was 50; and 
this time up to June, we have already rescued 30 children; and the 
rehabilitation is in process.” 
16.11  During the course of evidence, the representative of t he GNCTD 
stated in their deposition about the procedure and involvement of various 
agencies in rescue of child and adolescent labour as under: 
“Delhi Police also takes cognizance under the Child & Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986. I n the last ten years, about 845 
cases have been registered by Delhi Police. This number is almost stagnant 
in the last three years. About 50 odd cases have been registered every year 
during 2019-20 and 2020-21. 
Out of the 845 cases, which has gone to the C ourt, police have filed the 
charge-sheet in 647 cases which is almost 90 per cent.  The court has also 
given punishment in various cases.  In the last three years, the total cases 
were exactly 132. 
 Sir, these are the basic frameworks in which Delhi is wor king to 
ensure that child labour is to be reduced to the maximum possible extent.  
The number of children which we have rescued is like this.  In 2022, in the 
current calendar year, we have rescued 30 children and out of these 30 
children, 14 were from Del hi only. They were belonging to the families of 
Delhi, and remaining were from different parts of the country.  Our 
observation is that in the last few years, the major chunk of the children 
who are engaged into such type of activities are from Bihar and UP. 
 Last year, in 2021, this figure was 50.  Prior to 2021, the figure was 
38.  All the Departments of Government of Delhi which are steered by the 
Labour Department along with the Education Department, Skill 
Development and SCST Welfare Department. We are  working in tandem so 
that we can reduce this menace to the bare minimum.” 
16.12 Elaborating the details regarding FIR and prosecution pertaining to 
the cases of tracing and rescuing of child and adolescent labour, the 
Government of NCT of Delhi stated as under: 
"For violation of the provisions of Child and Adolescent Labour Act (P&R) 
Act,1986 and Juvenile Justice Act,2000 the police register cases under the 
Act. In the last 10 years, following action against defaulting employers was 
taken – 
 

331 
 
(a) Cases registered     -  845  
(b) Charge sheet filed  -  647 
(c) Fine imposed         -  61  
(d) Imprisonment  -  25 
Details of cases registered under Child and Adolescent Labour (P&R) Act – 1986 
Years No. of 
cases 
reg. 
No. of 
cases 
Charge 
Sheeted 
No of cases convicted Amount of 
fine 
realized 
Rs./- 
No. of cases 
in which 
fine 
imposed 
No. of cases in 
which 
imprisonment 
2010 85 81 21 8 192500 
2011 102 96 15 6 278200 
2012 115 101 5 6 19500 
2013 128 115 9 2 79250 
2014 86 69 5 1 40500 
2015 99 76 5 1 86000 
2016 44 31 0 0 0 
2017 54 39 1 1 5000 
2018 50 17 0 0 0 
2019 54 18 0 0 0 
2020 28 4 0 0 0 
  
16.13 The Committee during the course of oral evidence on the Subject 
raised the issue of children/adolescents being brought from the Eastern and 
North-Eastern States of India by the Placement Agencies established in 
Delhi NCR. The Committee drew the attention o f the GNCTD to these 
children who are not registered anywhere and are placed illegally in the 
households for domestic chores and are exploited by their employers.  
Rehabilitation of the Rescued Child Labour: 
16.14 The Committee were further informed regarding rehabilitation, 
measures carried out by the Government of NCT of Delhi as under:  
"To facilitate the family of child labour in rehabilitating the child labour and 
to provide some financial stability in case of child labour  employed in 
hazardous industries Labour Department issues a notice to the defaulting 
employer, directing him to deposit a sum of Rs. 20,000/ - in accordance with 
Hon’ble Supreme Court judgment in MC Mehta case. 
If the defaulting employer fails to deposit the money, a recovery certificate is 
issued and sent to SDM concerned for recovery of the amount as arrears of 
land revenue under the provisions of Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887. 
A rehabilitation package of Rs. 25,000/ - ( Rs.20,000 recovered fr om the 
employer and Rs. 5,000/ - as State Share) for child labour below 14 years is 
sent to District Magistrate of the concerned State of the Child. 
Most of the rescued child labour (approx. 95%) belongs to States such as 
Bihar, U.P, W.B, Jharkhand, etc.  In case of Child Labour belonging to Delhi, 
the amount of Rs. 25,000/ - is transferred to the account of child (Fixed 
Deposit). 

332 
 
Year wise no. of children to whom rehabilitation money has been sent (Delhi 
and other States): 
Year No. of children 
2018 53 
2019 79 
2020 38 
2021 50 
2022 30 
  
16.15 In this connection a representative of GNCTD deposed before the 
Committee as follows: 
“As directed by the hon. Supreme Court, we have been following up the 
rehabilitation package of Rs. 20,000 from the employer and Rs. 5,000 from 
the State.  So, the Department gives Rs. 25,000.  In case of Delhi, we are 
directly sending it to the accounts of the children through the Child Welfare 
Committee.  When it comes to other States, when the children reach their 
district, this amount is being transferred to the District Magistrate of the 
concerned State. It is further also followed up and monitored till the time the 
child is rehabilitated. 
 About the rescued children, Delhi has a minimum number.  It is 50 or 
60, which is hardly 10 to 12 per cent.  Rest of the States are UP, Jharkhand 
and Bihar.  We are constantly having a State coordination. 
 Year-wise, as Sir has also briefed, during the Covid also, we have been 
rescuing the children. As and when the information received either through 
the NGO or through our own resources, we get the industrial unit visited 
and get the children rescued. In 2018, we rescued 53 children.  They were 
below 14 years of age wherein we have contributed the amount of 
rehabilitation to them, and followed their rehabilitation aspect. 
 In 2019, the number 79; in 2020, it was 38; in 2021, it was 50; and 
this time up to June, we have already rescued 30 children; and the 
rehabilitation is in process.” 
16.16 On being asked about the process of identification and  enrollment of 
Out of School Children (OoSC) and dropouts due to child labour, the 
Government of NCT of Delhi informed the Committee that child labour are 
identified by (i) Conducting Surveys in coordination with the Directorate of 
Education, GNCTD the OoS C survey is conducted under Samagra Shiksha 
to locate the school Dropouts and ensure inclusive and equitable quality 
education at all levels of school education etc. which is an ongoing process; 
(ii) street children are also enquired about the whereabouts of children 
engaged in child labour; (iii) Rain Basera are also searched and the 
occupants there are enquired upon; (iv) Rescued child labours also provide 
information about the other child labours; and (v) unregulated colonies 
within Delhi are also surveyed and searched for child labours. 
16.17 Regarding process of enrolment of rescued children in schools and 
bringing them into the mainstream, the Government of NCT of Delhi have 
furnished the following supplementary information to the Committee: 

333 
 
"For resolving this issue, an urgent need was felt to take appropriate action 
and have better coordination between the Labour Department, GNCTD and 
Samagra Shiksha, Delhi in order to educate these rescued child labourers by 
enrolling them in nearby schools in age ap propriate class and after 
assessment, shift them to the Special Training Centre for bridge course to 
bring them at par with other children of their respective age group. 
Delhi enrolls the rescued child labour belonging to Delhi in a neighbourhood 
school close to their residence so that they are not deprived of the basic right 
to Education, as mandated in the Right to Education Act, 2009." 
 Role of Special Training Centres (STCs) 
16.18 The Committee were further informed regarding special drives to find 
out Out of School Children during the course of evidence by the 
representative of the GNCTD as under: 
“Special drives are carried out every year to find out the out of school 
children which includes these rescued children also.  There are special 
training centres in Delhi where they are identified and being enrolled.  That 
way, the special training centres are acting as bridge between the students 
and the formal education aspect. 
 The mechanism exists under the Samagra Shiksha.  We have enrolled 
the people to the nearest school to their residence. About Samagra Shiksha, 
so far, in Delhi we have 28,227 children enrolled which includes our rescued 
children also.  The special training centres under Samagra Shiksha are 820 
in numbers in Delhi.  They are spread all o ver Delhi.  Cluster wise, they are 
being monitored also.” 
16.19 Elaborating the role of Special Training Centres (STCs), the GNCTD 
furnished the following information to the Committee: 
“i. STCs act as a bridge between a student and school to fill the gap which is 
created due to lack of primary education and opportunity. The whole idea 
is to provide special, focused training for mainstreaming the children in 
age-appropriate class which will a ct as a pull factor for Out of School 
Children (OoSCs) and their parents.  
ii. An Out of school child is one who has either never enrolled, or has not 
attended school for more than 45 days without prior information. 
iii. Usually, most OoSC are from the dis advantaged community which 
includes Schedule Castes, Schedule Tribes, Migrants, Economically 
Weaker sections, Children with Special Needs etc. Since their living 
conditions are challenging, they are deprived of education and related 
facilities.  
iv. OoSCs are identified through targeted surveys and enrolled in Special 
Training Centres (STC) set up for this purpose.  
v. The specialized training helps in decreasing the dropout rate, and 
increasing enrolment in formal education system.” 
 

334 
 
16.20 The Committee were further informed as under: 
“Similarly, the mechanism is also in place in reporting and monitoring for 
the dropout  children so that they do not get into labour somewhere.  So, we 
want to bring all these children to the formal education.”  
Skill Development Training for Rescued Adolescent Labour 
16.21 The Committee were further informed during the course of oral 
evidence as under: 
“Our Training and Technical Education Department is also providing the 
skills for these children.  They have the socie ty for self -employment which 
provides the training for skill development as per the needs of their earning 
livelihood in a dignified manner. It is basically for the economically weaker 
sections who are unable to pursue higher studies.  The basic qualificat ion is 
10 plus.  There are simple courses like fashion designing, repair of consumer 
electronic gadgets, electricians, refrigeration, air -conditioning, water 
engineering and plumbing.    So, simple courses are being run wherein the 
term of it mostly one ye ar.  In one course, it is six months. On completion, 
they are being provided the certificates/degrees. 
 So, Training and Skill Development Department basically is doing 
rehabilitation programme; and they are giving focus on the rescued child 
labour also.” 
16.22 The Committee were further informed regarding other Schemes of 
Skill Development under Delhi Government as under: 
“The Technical Education Community Outreach Scheme is also there, and 
training is being provided to under privileged sections through NG O 
partners. Special Skill Development Training Programme is also being 
conducted under the said scheme for rehabilitation of child labour through 
our partner NGOs. This is being run by Training and Technical Education 
Department.” 
16.23 The representative of the GNCTD admitted before the Committee 
suggested few points for improvising rehabilitation and mainstreaming of 
the child labour as under:  
“…the rehabilitation package which is going on since 1996 may be revised, 
and the State Government will take the  steps ahead. As regards all types of 
other welfare schemes, we are also trying to extend the benefits to the family 
members of the rescued child to ensure that they are economically sound 
and the child never gets back to labour. So, we are doing the needf ul. 
Further, the rehabilitation aspect of the rescued children is being strictly 
monitored. Whatever directions would be given to us, we will follow them in 
letter and spirit. We are having inter -State coordination in a focussed 
manner so that we get to kn ow about the children who are going to different 
States.” 
 
 

335 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
16.24  The Committee are pleased to note that various 
programmes/ initiatives are being taken by the Government of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) in order  to search, identify, rescue, 
rehabilitation and restoration of child/adolescent labour in Delhi. The 
Committee are impressed to note that even though Delhi Police is not 
directly under the Delhi Administration, still there is a very good 
coordination and cooperation between the Administration and Police 
Department in NCT of Delhi. For better implementation of Child & 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, Delhi 
Government has constituted District Task Force (DTF) specially for 
rescuing t he child labour from their employers. It consists of Joint 
Labour Commissioner/Deputy Labour Commissioner as the Member 
Secretary. Other Members are from Department of Women and Child 
Development, Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD), Department of 
Education, Department of Health, Child Welfare Committee (CWC), New 
Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC), Delhi Police, Department of 
Labour and NGOs etc. This Task Force convenes its meeting on 
monthly basis under the chairmanship of the District Magistrate to 
review the action taken by the Stakeholders based on the information 
received from the Civic Society, NGO, Print Media, any citizen and 
other sources for eliminating the Child Labour from all the sectors 
where it is prohibited. The Committee find that from 20 17 to 2021, 
197 rescue operations have been undertaken and total 2,743 
children/adolescent labour were rescued by the Task Force. Taking into 
cognizance multi -level efforts by various Governmental and Non -
Governmental agencies, the Committee are not satisf ied with the total 
number of the rescued children/adolescent labour during the said 
period of five years. As Delhi is the centre point where workers from 
surrounding States such as Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, West Bengal, etc. migrate to Delhi for better employment 
and livelihood opportunities with their children and there are a 
considerable number of children can be found as child labour which are 

336 
 
out of school also. The Committee, therefore, advise the GNCTD to 
ascertain the gaps in t heir implementation and improvise it. The 
Committee recommend that the task force under the Chairmanship of 
District Magistrate should act as a fulcrum in this endeavour and 
effectively guide and monitor the coordination and cooperation 
activities between the different State Departments and Police for better 
implementation of this Act. For this a State Action Plan can be chalked 
out in consultation with all the concerned Departments of the UT.  
16.25  The Committee note that the number of child labour in 
Delhi has gone down from 2001 Census to 2011 Census by 38 percent. 
The reason for this lowering down of child labour cases is attributed to 
shifting of a large number of industries outside Delhi on the 
intervention of the Supreme Court. As a large chunk of c hild labour 
primarily works in unauthorized industries in various parts of Delhi, 
the shifting of industries is the main reason behind lowering down of 
the cases of child labour in Delhi. The Committee are disappointed to 
find that the child labour has rea lly not gone down but as a result of 
shifting of a large number industries outside Delhi their figure has 
come down by 38 percent. The Committee, therefore, recommend to 
chalk out a robust mechanism to ascertain the actual number of 
children employed illeg ally in these industries which should include 
those industries also which have shifted outside Delhi NCR. 
16.26  Under the rehabilitation measures carried out by the 
GNCTD a sum of Rs. 20,000 is required to be deposited by the 
defaulting employer in accord ance with Hon’ble Supreme Court 
judgment in MC Mehta Vs. State of Tamil Nadu Case which was way 
back in 1996. The Committee observe that more than 25 years have 
passed since this judgment and the penal amount remains the same. 
The Committee, therefore, rec ommend the GNCTD to explore the 
possibility to revise the rates of this penal amount in consultation with 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment and raise it to such a level in 

337 
 
proportion with the current Consumer Price Index (CPI) where it could 
be considered as a constraint. 
16.27  The Committee find that during the process of rescue and 
rehabilitation of child labour, the gap between the process of rescue 
and rehabilitation of the child labour in some cases, is upto the extent 
that the child returns to the same condition from where he was 
rescued. The  process of prosecution which involves registration of the 
cases, charge sheeting and imposition of fine on the defaulting 
employers takes long time during which the child/adolescent has to 
wait and suffer. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the 
cases which involve child/adolescent labour should be transferred to 
Fast Track Courts so that the judgment can be expedited and the 
rehabilitation of the child/ adolescent takes place without much delay . 
The Committee further desire that a time limit should be fixed for 
prosecution of child labour cases so the child does not have to wait for 
his compensation money and his further rehabilitation process. The 
Committee also advise the GNCTD to explore the pos sibility of setting 
up of ‘Child Help Desk’ in Police Stations in Delhi on lines of ‘Women 
Help Desk’ which are already existing in the Police Stations. 
16.28  The Committee find that there are a considerable number of 
Placement Agencies in NCR Delhi which are responsible for bringing 
children/adolescents from the States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar 
Pradesh, West Bengal and the North Eastern States who are in search of 
employment opportunities and better life. These children are neither 
registered in their Home States from where they come nor they are 
registered with any Government platform/Agency after reaching NCT of 
Delhi. These children often go unnoticed by the  Government agencies 
involved in identification and rescue of child labour. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the GNCTD to formulate proper guidelines for the 
procedural requirements of these Placement Agencies. Proper 
registration of these placement agencies  with the Government should 
be made imperative . Proper coordination with the State Governments 

338 
 
should be made from where workers are brought in order to register 
them with their home State Governments as well with the destination 
States. Penal provisions s hould also be there in the guidelines where 
Child & Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 is 
not followed.  
16.29  The Committee note that once the child is restored with his 
parents and leaves the home State with his parents, there is a  
possibility of his return to the destination State within a year or two 
with his parents in search of better employment opportunities. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the GNCTD to put in place robust 
coordination and conversion mechanism with the other Sta te 
Governments from where the migration of workers originate. The 
Committee suggest that a blockchain system on a digital platform 
should be developed to bring all the stakeholders into that blockchain 
so that all the agencies concerned whether within Delh i or outside, can 
update their inputs on a periodic basis . There should be a nodal officer 
appointed by the State Government to head and monitor this digital 
platform. This would enable all the Stakeholders to know the position 
of the child at the identifi cation level as well as rescue/ rehabilitation 
level. 
16.30  The Committee note that Rs. 20,000 have to be paid by the 
employer who is illegitimately engaging children/adolescent in child 
labour. The Committee appreciate the effort of the Delhi Government 
for taking meaningful steps for the rehabilitation of the rescued 
children. In addition to these Rs. 20,000 a sum of Rs. 2,000 is provided 
to the rescued child per month if the child is rehabilitated in Delhi 
NCR. If the child returns to his home State the n a sum of Rs. 5,000 in 
addition to Rs. 20,000 is provided to the child. This is a unique feature 
and the Committee commend this initiative of the GNCTD for better 
rehabilitation opportunities of the rescued child. The Committee are of 
the considered opini on that such initiative of extra compensation 

339 
 
amount can be considered by other States also as an effective 
mechanism to bring a child into the mainstream. 
  

340 
 
CHAPTER – SEVENTEEN 
 
STATE GOVERNMENT OF MADHYA PRADESH 
 
 
17.1 The Committee were informed about the steps being taken by the 
Madhya Pradesh Government for the eradication of child labour.   In this 
regard the State Government submitted as follows:  
 
“Madhya Pradesh Labour Department has made Madhya Pradesh Rules, 
2020 keeping in mind the effective enforcement of Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Abolition and Regulation) Act, 1986 and the amended Act of 2016. 
Under Rule 17(c), the duties and responsibilities of the District Magistrate 
have been mentioned for the identification, release and rehabilitation of child 
and adolescent labour as well as enforcement of the Act. Further, Keeping in 
mind the eradication and rehabilitation of child labour, District Task Force 
has been constituted under the chairmanship of Collector in a ll the 52 
Districts. Meetings of District Task Force are being organized regularly. In 
March-April 2022, meeting of the District Task Force was organized in 42 
Districts under the chairmanship of the Collector. The State Labour 
Commissioner has appointed o ne Labour Inspector in each District of the 
State as Nodal Officer for implementation of decisions taken by District Task 
Force. 
Keeping in mind identification, eradication and rehabilitation of child 
and adolescent labour, Divisional/District level workshops were organized in 
Indore, Bhopal, Shahdol, Mandsaur and Ashok Nagar. Also, a public 
awareness campaign was launched in all the Districts of the State, in which 
rallies were taken out in all the District headquarters with posters and 
banners. Child and Adolescent Rehabilitation Fund has been constituted in 
all the Districts of the State. The amount of penalty recovered from the 
employers, is deposited in the fund.” 
 
17.2 The Committee were also informed that the National Child Labour 
Project was operatin g in 9 Districts of the State namely Rewa, Katni, 
Shajapur, Damoh, Badwani, Gwalior, Mandsaur, Rajgarh, Ujjain and 
Jabalpur and presently the project has been closed in all Districts except 
Shajapur, in accordance with decision taken by Ministry of Labour. 
17.3 The State Government also submitted information about the enrolled 
children and mainstream children studying in special training centers under 
the National Child Labour Project in the last 03 years is as follows and the 
same has been uploaded in the PENCIL Portal :  
Years No. of Special 
Training Centers 
for children 
No. of children 
studying 
Number of 
Mainstream Children 
through studying the 
project 
2018-19 245 21484 42357 
2019-20 190 10873 5568 
2020-21 168 5810 1940 

341 
 
17.4 The details of the enforcement done under the Child and Adolescent 
Labour Act are posted on the PENCIL Portal by the District Nodal Officers. 
The action taken by the District Nodal Officers is being regularly monitored 
by the Child Labour Cell constituted in the Labour Commissioner’s office 
and by the Principal Secretary at Government Level. Further, there is also a 
State Level Nodal Officer.  
 
17.5 The State Government has also informed the Committee that at the 
State level, a Child Labour Cell has been co nstituted in the Labour 
Commissioner’s Office.  The Cell monitors the work of the District Offices for 
child labour eradication.  The Labour Department is hopeful that in the 
coming five years, the evil practice of child labour will be eradicated from 
Madhya Pradesh. The State Government has also opined that, as per the 
data of NGOs and Child Line, child labour and bonded labour are 
interlinked in the State and to end child labour there is a need to remove 
bonded labour also from the State.  
 
17.6 Further in this connection, the State Government has submitted that 
they propose to introduce a Comprehensive Action Plan which aims to 
rescue, rehabilitate or handover of children afflicted  by child labour and 
child trafficking as well as to prosecute the offende rs. The Action Plan also 
intends to have intra and inter State coordination of the Departments 
concerned. The objectives under the Plan include empowerment of the 
families of affected children to prevent relapse of child labour, enrollment of 
children in s chool, skill training programmes alongwith employment/ 
entrepreneurship for empowerment of rescued adolescents and reduction of 
insecurity of the families through National Rural Livelihood Mission and 
other social security schemes.  The Comprehensive Actio n Plan is to be 
introduced in 16 Districts of the State and would be considered for other 
Districts later. The target under the Plan is to rehabilitate 15,000 child 
labourers 1000 bonded labourers by July, 2025.  
 
17.7 When asked about the cooperation with  NGOs and other stakeholders 
regarding eradication of Child Labour and creation of awareness for the 
same, the representative of the State Government deposed as under: 
 
“We have had partnerships with NGO workers.   We have organised various 
workshops and seminars in coordination with NGOs and other stakeholders, 
including education department, industries, commerce, trade unions, and 
others. 
 
 Awareness generation programme has been launched time and again 
in order to ensure that everyone comes to know the various provisions under 
the Child Labour Act.   Rallies have been organised in towns.   Posters and 
banners have also been displayed for everyone to become aware of this issue. 
 
We recently celebrated the World Day against Child Labour System on 
12th June.   As per the instructions of NCPCR, a massive campaign was 
conducted from 12 th to 20 th June, 2022 across the State in all Districts by 
organising seminars, workshops and rallies, more so, in Bhopal, Indore, and 
other divisional headquarters.  During the camp aign we found 09 

342 
 
child/adolescent labourers, 34 child/adolescent labourers in Indore 
District.” 
 
17.8 As regards children in street situation the representative of the State 
Government deposed as under:  
 
‘This year, in addition to the regular inspections which are being carried out 
across the States, we also have had a survey of street children which has 
been done by the Ministry of Women and Child Development and close to 
1438 street children were identified during the last three months and out of 
which, about 161 were child labourers. These children have now become 
students in the schools. Now, the cases have also been registered against the 
employers.’ 
 
17.9 The Committee were also informed about the details of the inspections 
carried out in the State. T he data pertaining to the same was submitted as 
under:  
 
 
Year Inspections No. of children & 
adolescent labourers 
released    
Prosecution cases 
filed  
2019-20 2392 501 118 
2020-21 847 10878163 157 
2021-22 829 581055 80 
2022-23 505 57 12 (in the rest of the 
cases, 
Prosecution/recovery 
proceedings against the 
employers are being 
initiated  
 
 
17.10  When asked about the steps taken to ensure education of 
children under the Samgra Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) the State Government 
submitted as under: 
 
“I will just  add to what is happening with regard to the Samagra Shiksha  
Abhiyan. In Madhya Pradesh, each family has a Samagra ID which is a 
unique identification number and every child in that family has that 
identification number and we use that identification numb er to track down 
the children whether they have been admitted in school or not; whether they 
are coming regularly to school or not; and whether they have dropped out or 
not. So, we have an App which has been developed by NIC and we use this 
App to track ev ery single child. Based on that, we identify out -of-school 
children and then, we bring them back to school and also mainstream them. 
During COVID and the lockdown which happened after that, about 2,06,417 
migrant families came back and they got themselves registered on a portal 
which was meant for migrant labour and out of that, 82,387 children from 
such families were admitted in schools. Others who were above 15 years of 

343 
 
age could not be admitted. We admitted children below 14 years of age. We 
also have an  application for tracking attendance of children. We call it the 
Hazari App. So, we use that App to track the attendance. 
 
In 2022-23, we have got approval from the Government of India for 
special training centres and migrant and seasonal hostels for appro ximately 
6000 children. In Madhya Pradesh, we have sixty -six boys’ hostels and a 
total of 324 girls’ hostels and 408 Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya Hostels 
as well. 
 
We bring out of school children to the residential centres where we 
can actually take ca re of these children better and then, we mainstream 
them. We are not, as yet, monitoring child labour separately. We monitor 
out-of-school children but now that the NCLP has been transferred to us, we 
will also be monitoring that as a separate category.” 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
17.11  The Committee acclaim the fact that apart from the 
District Task Force (DTF) being  constituted under the chairmanship of 
the District Collector in all 52 Districts of the State, the Labour 
Commissioner appoints a Labou r Inspector in each of the Districts as 
Nodal Officer to implement the decisions of the DTF. Moreover, a Nodal 
Officer has been appointed at the State level for coordination with the 
Districts. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the 
District Nodal Officers can effectively coordinate with local 
stakeholders, identify and address child labour hotspots, and ensure 
that enforcement actions are carried out efficiently. The stakeholders 
should inter-alia include the Local Self Government Institution s, NGOs 
and other similarly placed civil society organisations who operate at 
the cutting edge level. The Committee consider the role of District 
Nodal Officers to be crucial in the effectiveness of the fight against 
child labour.  They are that part of the  State machinery which could 
project the grass root level reality before the decision/policy makers at 
the District/State level to aid them in calibrating the policy 
initiatives/directives accordingly. In view of this, the Committee want 
the State Government to equip the Nodal Officers at the District Level 
with enough resources to carry out such responsibilities.  The 
Committee expect that the District Nodal Officers would also invariably 
act as the agency to provide credible primary data and other feedback  

344 
 
to the DTF. While coordinating the work of the District Nodal Officers, 
the Committee perceive that the State level Nodal Officer can facilitate 
the exchange of the best practices, identify emerging trends, and 
ensure that resources are allocated optimall y to address child labour 
issues across the State. 
 
17.12  In this regard the Committee reckon that regular/periodic 
meetings of the District Task Force is necessary to ensure that the 
stakeholders have a forum to discuss and coordinate strategies for 
preventing, rehabilitating, and enforcing child labour laws . Moreover, 
the action by the District Nodal Officers also hinge upon the directives 
of the DTF. It is also important to conduct periodic evaluation/review 
of the DTF mechanism and Nodal Officers’ role s to assess their 
effectiveness and identify areas in need of improvement. For this, 
aggregation of data regarding all aspects of child labour in digital 
format in a web based platform enabling sharing of actionable data 
between all stakeholders is a precu rsor. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommend that the State Government should consider enhancing use 
of technology including ICT in the working of the DTFs and Nodal 
Officers to augment data collection, analysis and monitoring. To 
further supplement the data  assemblage, the Committee desire that 
surveys of the kind undertaken to identify Out of School Children in 
the State be conducted to identify child labourers.   The Committee 
want the State Government to take specific steps in this direction on 
priority so as to sustain and amplify the current efforts .   
 
17.13  The Committee note that a Child Labour Cell has been 
constituted in the Madhya Pradesh Labour Commissioner's office and 
the action taken by the District Labour Officers is being regularly 
monitored by the Child Labour Cell and by Principal Secretary at 
Government level. The Committee praise the step of creating a Child 
Labour Cell and expect that it will enable centralized monitoring of the 
action taken by the District Labour Officers and help to e nsure that all 

345 
 
Districts are taking effective and regular action to eradicate child 
labour, and that enforcement efforts are not limited to sporadic drives 
during special occasions. The involvement of the Principal Secretary at 
the State Government level s hould ensure the accountability and 
effectiveness of the Child Labour Cell as the said supervision would 
enable expedited work negating the red tape.  The Committee suggest 
that the Cell may be further strengthened by optimising the number of 
officials and also by providing more funds and the status of State Level 
Coordination agency for convergence of the action of all Departments 
of the State in addition to the DTFs and Nodal Officers engaged in the 
action to eradicate Child Labour.  The Cell's staff shoul d be provided 
with regular training on the Child and Adolescent Labour Act, on the 
latest trends and practices in child labour eradication, data analysis 
and interpretation, etc and in all other necessary fields. There also has 
to be dedicated technical support for the Cell.  
 
17.14  The Committee note that the number of inspections being 
carried out has drastically fallen from 2393 in 2019 -20 to 505 in 2022-
23. The State Government has not provided any reasons for the same 
but perhaps the decline was on ac count of the restrictions imposed 
during the Covid pandemic. Even so, the small number of inspection in 
2022-23 are a cause for concern. In the opinion of the Committee, 
increased and periodic inspections are necessary to convey the intent 
of the Government to employers that child labour will not be tolerated. 
The Committee urge the State Government to identify tangible reasons 
for this decline in inspections so that the steps can be taken to address 
the same. The Committee, being particularly concerned about the 
relatively smaller number of inspections carried out in 2022 -23, want 
the State Government to take immediate steps to increase the number 
of inspections and to ensure that the Act is effectively enforced.  The 
Principal Secretary looking after the  Child Labour Cell should ensure 
compliance in this regard and ensure that status report on this regard 
is timely received.  

346 
 
 
17.15  The Committee find that the State Government has 
prepared a State Action Plan for eradication and rehabilitation of Child 
Labour. In this regard the Committee suggest that the State 
Government should also develop a comprehensive Child Protection 
policy. A comprehensive child protection policy should provide a 
guiding framework for all institutions and officials who work with 
children to prevent and respond to child abuse, trafficking, 
exploitation, and neglect. The policy should include clear definitions of 
child abuse, exploitation, and neglect, as well as procedures for 
reporting and investigating allegations of child abuse. It should also 
outline the roles and responsibilities of different stakeholders such as 
Local Self Government Institutions, schools, hostels, ashram schools, 
CCIs, SJPUs, and NGO -run homes, etc in protecting children. The 
policy should mandate regular trai ning for all functionaries who deal 
with children directly. It should envisage and promote awareness -
raising campaigns among children and the community to prevent child 
abuse and encourage reporting through appropriate incentives/rewards 
and other similar means. Moreover, the policy should establish 
mechanisms for monitoring its implementation and evaluating its 
effectiveness.  
 
17.16  The Committee cognise from the submission of the State 
Government that they propose to introduce a Comprehensive Action 
Plan which aims to rescue, rehabilitate or handover of children afflicted 
by child labour and child trafficking as well as to prosecute the 
offenders. The Action Plan also intends to have intra and inter Sta te 
coordination of the Departments concerned. The objectives under the 
Plan include empowerment of the families of affected children to 
prevent relapse of child labour, enrollment of children in school, skill 
training programmes along with employment/entre preneurship for 
empowerment of rescued adolescents and reduction of insecurity of the 
families through National Rural Livelihood Mission and other social 

347 
 
security and schemes.  The Comprehensive Action Plan is to be 
introduced in 16 Districts of the State and would be considered for 
other Districts later. The target under the Plan is to rehabilitate 15,000 
child labourers 1000 bonded labourers by July, 2025. The Committee 
are pleased to note that, through the said Action Plan, the State 
Government has inter-alia realized the pressing need for inter -State 
coordination to effectively stamp out child labour from the country . In 
this connection, the Committee desire that the State Government 
should consider entering into MoUs with other States where 
children/migrant population from Madhya Pradesh are present in 
substantial numbers.  Mutually agreed parameters can be drawn up to 
facilitate and quicken the release and rehabilitation of trafficked 
children and those compelled into child labour. Further, the 
Committee also note that the proposed Comprehensive Action Plan 
recognises the need to address the root causes of child labour like 
impoverishment of the family. The committee observe that this is the 
right line of thought as without the family of the child l abourer being 
provided a sustainable livelihood and the rehabilitated 
children/adolescents being offered a path to secure future, child labour 
cannot be ended. Here, the Committee feel that it would be equally 
important that adolescents above 15 years of a ge, who could not be 
covered under SSA, are also assisted through the Action Plan by 
imparting them with the requisite skill sets and vocational faculties so 
that the rehabilitation efforts are sustained to the last stretch of 
handholding. The Committee he nce recommend that the State 
Government should implement the Comprehensive Action Plan keeping 
all this in its ambit and on the basis of its initial results/feedback, 
continuously improve and tailor the same according to the emerging 
needs of the State. Here, the Committee feel that it would be important 
that adolescents above 15 years of age are also assisted through 
imparting them with the requisite skill sets and vocational faculties so 
that the rehabilitation efforts are sustained to the last stretch of  
handholding.      

348 
 
CHAPTER - EIGHTEEN 
STATE GOVERNMENT OF ASSAM 
Introduction 
18.1 The Committee were apprised by the State Government about the 
measures taken by the State Government to prohibit, track and rehabilitate 
Child labour in accordance with the Child and adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition &Regulation) Act, 1986, Roles and responsibilities of the District 
Magistrate and operation of Special Training Centres by the District Project 
Societies under National Child Labour Project.      
18.2 The Committee were informed that a Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) has been issued by the State Labour Welfare Department on 7 th May 
2021 to streamline procedures to tackle child labour with the following 
objectives as under:         
  
 Development of effective action  plan from the village to the national level 
for prevention of Child Labour and Adolescent Labour.  
 Creation of mechanism for identification, rescue and rehabilitation of 
Child & Adolescent Labour along with other members of the task force. 
 Creation of mec hanism for regulation of adolescents working in non -
hazardous occupations and processes.  
 Ensuring coordinated and convergent action along with standardization 
of roles and responsibilities pertaining to stakeholders through clear 
definition of such roles and responsibilities.  
18.3 Further, in pursuance of the SOP issued by the Government of India 
in 2017, various authorities in the State have been alerted, district task 
force and various departments have been involved, and nodal officers have 
been appointed.         
18.4 The Committee were also informed that the Commissionerate of 
Labour, Assam under the Labour Welfare Department has released an 
amount of Rs. 2.00 lakh to all District Magistrates of Assam for creation of a 
Child Labour Rehabilitation Fund.  As per information received at this end, 
all Districts have created  the same at their level.     
  
18.5 The State Government apprised the Committee that during the last 
financial year during April 2021 to March 2022, as per the figures furnished 
by the State Child Protection Society, about 437 children were rescued, 424 
children were restored to their families and only 13 were referred to Child 
Care Institutions (CCIs) after the Child Welfare Committee (CWC) gave their 
views. Over the past few years, we h ave noticed that most of the children 
have been restored to their families. Neither CCIs have taken that many 
children nor they have been referred to CCIs.     
   
18.6 On being asked about the measures taken for development of 
education, particularly in tr ibal areas of the State, the Chief Secretary of 

349 
 
Assam deposed as under:-        
   
“There was a mention about experience about education in tribal areas.  
For the last 3 -4 years at least, we have had two rounds of Gunotsav, which 
is 
actually the method that has been applied in Gujarat of making assessment 
of 
schools. Very recently, we had one round of Gunotsav and I have myself 
been 
to some schools where there are tribals studying in large numbers. The main 
problem is two things. One issue is of language. Th ere is a problem in their 
own language, which is not very well developed. So, complex / complicated 
things cannot be taught very well. After a certain point, they also switch over 
to English medium. Many of these tribal schools do not have the main State 
language used there. So, they go to English medium and flounder as they 
are unable to cope with it. They may be able to read, but they do not 
understand the meaning of words. This has been my experience, especially 
in tribal areas. I have been to a Garo vil lage and it is English medium in 
Classes 9 & 10, but their knowledge of English was rather sketchy and they 
did not know much of the local language as well, what to speak of any other 
languages. So, that was a problem there.” 
18.7 Concerning the rationalisation of educational infrastructure the 
representative of the State Government, during oral evidence, deposed as 
follows:-           
“There is also a problem of rationalisation of schools. There are many  
schools where I have seen having as many a s 100 students or more but just 
one teacher, and there are schools where there are 40 students and five 
teachers. So, for some historical reason or some legacy issue the number of 
teachers is much more than the required number for a class of 30 students. 
So, the State Government has taken up a plan to rationalise the schools and 
that exercise is being done. It is going to be done in a wholesale manner. 
This thing is going to be implemented very seriously in the next 2 -3 months. 
The Cabinet has already discu ssed this, and this is one thing that we are 
going to do.” 
18.8 With regard to the participation of NGOs and other social 
organisations in the welfare activities related to children and women the 
Chief Secretary of Assam, during oral evidence, stated as follows:  
   
“There was a mention about NGOs – the number of active NGOs.  Bachpan 
Bachao and Child Line are almost ubiquitous in the State. Besides 
that,there are some very good local NGOs in respect of trafficking women 
and child labour.” 
18.9 Asked about t he rehabilitation of the rescued children and the 
institutions available for the same, the Official of the State Government, 
deposed as under:         
“Nine of them are government -run; five are observation homes, and four  
are government -run CCIs. There are  about 1800 –1900 children in these 

350 
 
CCIs, which are registered as per the JJ Act, 2015. Guwahati High Court is 
trying to sort of popularise; all experts feel it is very important that there 
should be adequate emphasis on alternative care”. 
18.10 Further, the Official of the State Government during the course of 
evidence also made the following observations concerning the rehabilitation 
of children particularly on the emphasis on alternative care:  
“All experts feel it is very important that there should be  
adequate emphasis on alternative care because children who go to CCIs do 
not ultimately do very well, but children who actually grow in family 
surroundings are much better off. This is seen in a number of cases. I myself 
have been to SOS, and my own experie nce of working in the Social Welfare 
Department in the past; I have been to many CCIs, where I found out there 
is tracking of what happens to the children once they attain the age of 18, 
because they then disappear and melt into society. I find that most o f them 
end up in beauty parlours, hotels, and places like that. There are no success 
stories to mention there. That is where we need to do something about it. We 
have to collect the list of success stories; CCIs should know where exactly 
these children have finally gone to. This is the lacuna. I personally am very 
committed to this idea; we need to track these children after they leave the 
CCIs. This I find in organisations like SOS. Their record is also not complete; 
they will tell you one or three childre n who have gone abroad, to the US or 
Spain, but what about the rest? Usually, the children who are in touch with 
the house father or mother for a while, with whom they get along and get 
engaged for years, but after a while, even those tenuous connections g et 
disconnected. We need some kind of popular support for alternative care and 
also for care after care, that is, care after 18 years in the long run”. 
18.11 On the mechanism put in place to locate school dropouts and to 
ensure inclusive and equitable qual ity education at all levels of school 
education, the State Government submitted that the Department of School 
Education conducts survey every year and enroll the children who dropped 
out of school in a school nearest to their habitation. To ensure inclusiv e 
quality education, the dropouts are imparted education through residential 
bridge course and made them fit for admission in a class they deserve. 
     
18.12 With regard to the enrolment and retention of children in schools and 
measures to check school dr op-outs, the State Government deposed as 
under:-  
“As for what steps are taken to prevent dropouts, my personal experience  
has been that over the years, the enrolment figures have gone up. Primarily, 
it is not because of sensitisation, it is happening, in my opinion, due to 
midday meals. Most of the children who come from poor backgrounds, those 
whose father is a marginal farmer or a daily wager, will have only one meal a 
day. They have some kind of flimsy meal in the morning, then they wait for 
the mid-day meal; and have their mid -day meal, and when they go back in 
the evening, they have their meals, which are properly provided for. Midday 
meals are a success story, which is why we are still attracting students to 
schools, especially in junior classes where the enrolment figure is very high.” 

351 
 
18.13 With regard to identification of hotspots in relation to child trafficking 
and Child Labour, the State Government, during oral evidence submitted as 
under:-          
“When it comes to the hotspots, there are two regions. One is in  
immigrants’ areas, who had originally come from Bengal or Bangladesh.  
In those areas, there is a serious problem with child labour because they 
move out. Children are also employed in the fields. The other area is the 
tribal areas of Ass am, where people get into trafficking. Many young and 
teenage children  are lured into trafficking, and they may even end up in 
places like Mumbai or Delhi.” 
18.14 The Committee were apprised of the various Special Training Centres 
by District Project Socie ties under the National Child Labour Project as 
under:  
 
“In Kamrup metro district, 35 Special Training Centres (NCLP Schools) were 
functioning covering FY 2019 -20, and 40 Special Training Centres were 
functioning covering 2020 -21, 2021 -22. However, in the  year 2019 -20, 41 
nos. of STCs were sanctioned by Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India. The total number of beneficiaries (Enrollment) in 2019-
20, 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 were stated to be 1601, 1228 and 1265 
respectively.  
In Nagaon district, 93 Special Training Centres (NCLP Schools) were 
functioning covering FY 2021, 2021 -22 & 2022 -23 as per approval of 
Ministry of Labour & Employment, Government of India and the total 
number of beneficiaries (Enrollment) are stated to be 2768.” 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
18.15  The Committee note and appreciate that the 
Commissionerate of Labour, Assam under the Labour Welfare 
Department has released an amount of Rs. 2 lakh to all District 
Magistrates of Assam for creation of a Child Labour Rehabilitation Fund 
and that all the Di stricts have created the same at their level. In the 
view of the Committee, such support would enable the districts to 
supplement existing schemes, expand rehabilitation programmes and 
strengthen enforcement mechanisms to combat child labour more 
effectively. The Committee desire that the Labour Welfare Department 
should devise a mechanism for the timely monitoring and periodic 
review of the expenditure from the fund to ensure the effective 
utilization of the fund. Feedback must also be sought from the Dist rict 
magistrates in the near future to ascertain whether Rs. 2 Lakh is 
sufficient for the purpose rehabilitation of the children and if found 

352 
 
necessary, a proposal for upward revision may be favourably considered 
so that no effort on the part of the DM wit h respect to rehabilitation of 
children is derailed due to paucity of funds. 
 
18.16  The Committee observe that, with regard to the education 
of tribal children, during the two rounds of ‘gunotsav’, which is a 
method for assessment of schools, one of the p roblems faced by them 
is the language of instruction in the tribal schools. As per the Ministry, 
the tribal languages are not developed enough for teaching of complex 
concepts as a result. Further, many of the tribal schools do not have 
the main State lang uage used at these schools due to which, when 
students move to instruction in the English language in higher classes, 
they face difficulty in understanding leading to a negative impact on 
their learning outcomes. Recognizing the important role played by th e 
language used in classrooms in influencing the learning outcomes of 
children, particularly at the elementary level, the Committee 
emphasize the use of mother tongue as medium of instruction as much 
as possible in line with the RTE Act. At the same time, the Committee 
also take cognizance of the challenges reported by the State 
Government to focus on a Multilingual Education Programme under 
which State languages, including English, are introduced at early stages 
to mainstream the tribal children in state -wide education system. The 
Committee thus recommend that equal emphasis is required on the 
development of suitable curriculum, texts and capacity enhancement 
of teachers to ensure that retention of children in schools and that 
they are duly equipped to pursue higher education.  
 
18.17  The Committee observe that there has been a discrepancy 
in the number of teachers viz a viz students in several schools across 
the State. The Committee find that the State Government has 
undertaken an exercise to rationalize t he number of teachers at the 
earliest in various schools so as to ensure an adequate teacher -student 
ratio. In the considered opinion of the Committee, an inadequate 

353 
 
teacher student ratio leads to overburdening of a small group of 
teachers and also adversely impacts the quality of education imparted. 
The Committee urge the State Government to expedite the exercise 
and ensure that there are sufficient number of teachers in every School 
in the State particularly in tribal areas. 
 
18.18  The views of th e Committee are aligned with the 
submission of the State Government with regard to the fact that 
rescued children who are rehabilitated in family surroundings are much 
better off and their chances of relapsing as child labour are lower than 
those children who stay at Child Care Institutions (CCIs). The State 
Government submitted that during April 2021 to March 2022, as per 
the figures furnished by the State Child Protection Society, about 437 
children were rescued, out of which 424 children were restored to their 
families and only 13 were referred to Child Care Institutions (CCIs) 
after the Child Welfare Committee (CWC) gave their views. The 
Committee find that despite most of the children having been restored 
to their families observe that CCIs continue to re main the primary 
choice for most children without parental care or orphans. The 
Committee affirm that a family environment, one where children 
experience love, happiness and understanding is essential for their 
harmonious development and are pleased to note  that CCIs are only 
being used a ‘a measure of last resort’ after due consideration by Child 
Welfare Committees. The shift towards de -institutionalisation is a step 
in the right direction and aligns with the mandate of the alternative 
family based Child care.  
 
Further, the Committee find that childcare institutions in India 
cater for children up to 18 years old and the sudden withdrawal of 
support at 18 years leaves these young people, face heightened 
challenges and at times, adverse outcomes on leaving CCIs. The 
Committee are of the view that s ince present Aftercare services are 
insufficient, most of them are ill -prepared for transition from CCIs to 

354 
 
independent living, and thus again fall into the vicious cycle of 
vulnerability, homelessness, unemployment, pover ty and 
exploitation. Thus, there is a need to explore initiatives for alternative 
care and transition gradually towards  achieving a safe and nurturing 
family environment for children in vulnerable situations. 
 
18.19  The Committee appreciate the steps take n by the  
Department of School Education which as per the submission of the 
State Government conducts survey every year and enroll the children 
who dropped out of school in a school nearest to their habitation so as 
to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education. In the aftermath of 
Covid-19, it is likely that number of out of school children has 
significantly increased owing to the economic woes brought about by 
the pandemic. In this regard, the Committee is pleased to note the 
steps taken by the State Governm ent whereby education was imparted 
to drop-outs through residential bridge course in order to make them 
fit for admission in a class they deserve. Commending the steps taken 
by the State Government, the Committee further urge the State to take 
necessary steps to ensure the survey to ascertain drop-outs be taken up 
periodically so that commensurate steps can be taken for their 
rehabilitation and mainstream them under the ambit of education. At 
the same time, the adolescents who are rescued should be linked t o a 
skill development programme run by the Government for economically 
empowering them. 
 
18.20  The Committee are pleased to find that as per the 
submission of the State Government, the enrolment figures in schools 
especially in junior classes are high owi ng to successful intervention in 
the form of mid -may meals that is augmenting attendance of children  
and bringing out of school children back to school thereby enabling 
higher retention in schools. The Committee were given to understand 
that mid-day Meal s cheme has reduced the burden of the parents for 
providing one time meal to their children and is great support to the 

355 
 
families especially those from low socio -economic status. In view of its 
tangible benefits, the Committee urge upon the State Government to 
conduct continuous inspections and periodically review the mid -may 
meal programme since the effective management of any programme 
depends on the its monitoring mechanism.  Further, in the view of the 
Committee, the State Government may consider providing breakfast 
also in order to attract more children into the fold of education 
especially in areas of high incidence of child labour and to incentivize 
the children who have dropped out of school. The Committee further 
reckon that the mid -day meal scheme, typ ically covers Children 
between the age group 6 -14. In this regard, the Committee feel that 
inclusion of students of classes IX and X  will incentivize the children 
who are out of school and desire that necessary steps be taken towards 
extending the benefit s of the scheme.  The Committee wish to be 
apprised of developments in this regard. 
 
18.21  The Committee are concerned to note that two major 
hotspots have emerged where incidence of child labour and child 
trafficking is prevalent. As per the submission of  the State 
Government, two regions viz, immigrants area who had come from 
Bengal and Bangladesh where children are employed in fields among 
others while the other hotspot concerns the tribal areas of Assam 
where vulnerable children are lured into trafficki ng. The Committee 
affirm that child trafficking and engagement of these Children in 
labour are invariably linked. Moreover, children trafficked under the 
promise of work are vulnerable to being further exploited in other 
worse forms including sexual exploi tation and beggary. The Committee 
urge the State Government to consider formulating a State specific 
plan to deal with Child trafficking integrating all concerned 
Departments of the State. Further, the Committee stress the need for 
the State Government to institute a specialized task force for this 
endeavour in order to coordinate the efforts of all departments under 
the Plan as well as periodically review the framework in the wake of 

356 
 
combating Child labour. The Committee also desire that anti -human 
trafficking units be set up in all districts in line with decision of 
Ministry of Home Affairs and made functional at the earliest in order to 
check incidence of human trafficking especially child trafficking. The 
Committee feel special attention need to be paid in districts situated in 
these hotspots viz, Inter -State border with West Bengal and the 
International border with Bangladesh where the incidence of child 
trafficking and child labour is maximum. Since, poverty and illiteracy 
are the root causes for child labour, it is incumbent on the State 
Government to take proactive interventionist steps to supplement 
Educational Rehabilitation of the children with economic rehabilitation 
of their families especially in the tribal areas of Assam to offset the 
economic c ompulsions of engaging children in labour. In so far as 
issues related to repatriation of children who are victims of 
international cross border trafficking is concerned, the Committee are 
of the view that a mechanism be devised with the Central Government  
to put in place for smooth repatriation of such children. 
  

357 
 
CHAPTER - NINETEEN 
 
STATE GOVERNMENT OF MAHARASHTRA 
 
19.1 The State Government of Maharashtra informed the Committee the 
following about the steps being taken for eradication of child labour 
practice: 
 
A) “For creating awareness among the various stake holders, the 
Government of Maharashtra has taken following preventive steps: 
 
I) Government of Maharashtra has made budgetary provision of Rs. l 
crore for advertisement in print and social media to create social 
awareness in the society. 
2) On the eve of children's day, i.e., 14 th November, various awareness 
meetings are conducted with employers’ associations, hotel owners’ 
associations, Grocery owners’ associations, etc. in the State of 
Maharashtra 
3) With the help of NGO's /NCLP rallies are organised against the Child 
Labour practice in each district in the month of June with respect to 
Anti Child Labour day. 
4) Also during anti -child labour drive in the month of June, the 
messages regarding anti -child labour practice of film celebrities are 
displayed digitally on social media and also advertised at the 
prominent places in the markets and crowded places for bringing the 
awareness in common people. 
 
B) At District level, monthly meetings are conducted by the T ask Force for 
actions such as survey etc. to prevent child labour.” 
 
19.2 The measures taken by the State Government for identification of 
Child Labour were informed to be as under: 
 
1) “Through National Child Labour Project for identification of the child 
labourers, surveys are conducted in the NCLP District under the 
Chairmanship of the District Collector. 
2) With the help of NGO's, identification of child labourers are being 
done in each District. 
3) "1098"-the toll-Free telephone number for making a complaint or to 
extend help to the children is activated in each District through 
which complaints of engaging child labourers are received and 
immediately actions to rescue children are taken. 
4) PENCIL Portal is also an Online platform for getting information of 
child labour from common people. 
5) Task Force -To identify and rescue the child labourers from the 
employers and to rehabilitate such children was a big task before the 
Government of Maharashtra. The Labour Department could not 
rescue and rehabilitate children s olely and hence the Government of 
Maharashtra decided to create a Task Force for convergence of all the 
concerned Departments like Police, Women and Child Welfare, 
Labour, Education, Public Health, Revenue as well as NGOs.  This 
Task Force has been constit uted in each District under the 

358 
 
chairmanship of the District Magistrate as per Government 
resolutions dated 25.04.2006 and 02.03.2009. As a result, since 
2016, a total of 1439 raids were conducted and 1052 child labourers 
were rescued. During these operati ons, 398 FIR's were lodged against 
the defaulted employers.” 
 
19.3 On being asked about the major steps taken for the eradication of 
child labour the representative of the state Government submitted as under:  
 
“The four major steps that the Government takes on a regular basis for 
prevention of child labour, namely we have made budgetary provisions for 
advertisements in print and social media to create social awareness; we have 
the awareness meetings in and aroun d the Children’s Day organised with 
the help of NGOs and NCLP where we take care in each and every District 
that the child labour practices are not allowed to be followed and active 
interventions are taken to spread this awareness of prevention of child 
labour. The child labour drive is constantly taken up in Maharashtra on 
sporadic basis and periodically because there are certain seasons when child 
labour tends to spike. Basically, the work at brick kilns starts after the rainy 
season and agricultural oper ations in specific areas are in full swing  those 
are the times when the incidents seem to spark. These are the times when 
active intervention at the District -level is taken for prevention of child 
labour. We have also defined identification. In 2009, we ha ve taken out a 
complete SoP and a GR whereby the District Collector and the Committee 
formed under him is proactively involved in identification as well as tracking 
of prevention of any child labour, identification of areas where its possibility 
exists, and finally to rescue these children if such complaint is brought to 
our notice through the NGOs or the local civil bodies.” 
 
19.4 As regards the procedure for handling situations of children in 
distress or engaged in child labour, the Committee were informed as under: 
 
“In 2009, we have taken out a complete SoP and a GR whereby the District 
Collector and the Committee formed under her/him is proactively involved in 
identification as well as tracking of prevention of any child labour, 
identification of areas where its possibility exists, and finally to rescue these 
children if such complaint is brought to our notice through the NGOs or the 
local civil bodies.” 
 
19.5 In respect of the action taken by the Department of School Education 
the following was submitted to the Committee : 
 
“As far as the education department is concerned, we have set a target that 
no child should be left out so far as education is concerned. For this we have 
made many provisions. The major provision made in this regard is the Rig ht 
to Education Act, which guarantees that every child gets education up to the 
eighth standard and every child be brought under mainstream education. A 
lot of work has been done in this regard in Maharashtra, the best part of it  
is that some people have been appointed as Baal Rakshak who do voluntary 
work. It was started in the year 2017. 2600 Baal Rakshak volunteers were 
appointed. At that time the number of out-of-school children in Maharashtra 
was 44698 which has now come down to 9306. A lot of work ha s been done 
on this. The initiative of Baal Rakshak is showing very good results. 

359 
 
 
   When we go into the reasons behind the drop out, we find that there are 
two or three major reasons for this. Perhaps they face the problem of 
livelihood in their family a nd for this reason they have to migrate from their 
original place to another place. Then they face some difficulty in admission 
in schools because that their children do not belong to those areas. For this, 
we have prepared a scheme that we will give them a passport like cards so 
that wherever their  children seek admission in schools, admissions are 
given to them in the standards according to the age of their children. This is 
bearing good results. There were 44, 600 children who were among out of 
school children during the year 2018-19. Out of these 42,000 i.e. 95 percent 
children have been brought back. During the year 2019 -20 a survey of 
35,000 children was conducted, out of these 33, 800 children have been 
admitted to schools. During the year 2020 -21 26,000 children were found, 
out of these 25,712 were admitted to the schools. During the year 2021 -22 
out of 23,522 children 100 percent were admitted to schools. The survey of 
the year 2022 -23 puts the figure of out of school children at 9306, out of 
these 8770 have been admitted to schools and admission of the remaining 
ones is in the process". 
 
19.6 The Committee were informed about the action taken by the State 
government to deal with the specific problems in terms of the situation in 
the urban areas of Maharashtra as mentioned below :  
 
“Sir, I would like to add that, 53 percent population of Maharashtra is urban 
and Maharashtra has the highest urban population in the country. Thus the 
major problem of child labour prevailing in  the state is that of aban doned 
children wherein  either the children from different districts flee from home 
and come to  cities like Mumbai, Pune, Nasik in trains, or in certain cases, 
the children from slum areas, due to their family reasons do not wish to 
continue living with t heir step parents under the same roof . Such children 
are often found on roads or at railway stations. We launched a pilot project 
in collaboration with Tata Institute of Social Sciences which was totally 
funded by B.M.C. We have tried to identify such chi ldren who are found on 
Mumbai roads or are found working in small roadside eateries or small 
hotels in Mumbai. We identified such children got them admitted to BMC 
schools so that their breakfast, mid -day- meal and lunch could be taken 
care of.  
Besides, we have established 16 night shelters at the expense of 
B.M.C. These night shelters are exclusively for those children, who did not 
have adult supervision anywhere. We have established these 16 night 
shelters on experimental basis, where these children can  stay safe from 6 
pm to 6 am. They are served meals there and also given a hygienic 
environment. Mumbai has made a successful effort in its urban areas. And 
now we are trying to move forward with the project through urban local 
bodies in the urban areas of  Mumbai especially in big cities like Pune, 
Nagpur, Aurangabad etc. having high concentration of slums. The 
Department of Labour and the team under the collector play a major role in 
the identification of these children, wherever they are working, since th eir 
identification takes place through them and they are declared child labour 
through the revenue department". 
 
 

360 
 
19.7 The State Government further Submitted that the Labour Department 
of Maharashtra with the vision of preventing the children doing labour with 
their parents working in the construction field/brick-kiln, promoted various 
educational, promotional monetary welfare schemes so that the parents 
should send their children to mainstream of education. It has also been 
informed in this regard that every Police Station has made compulsory to 
form a Juvenile Aid Police Unit for rescue and repatriation of street child ren 
and children working in vulnerable conditions.  
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
19.8  The Committee welcome the efforts of the State 
Government to create awareness about the need for prevention of child 
labour. Further, the State Government, realising that it was a big 
task for the Labour Department alone to identify and rescuethechild 
labourers from the employers and to rehabilitate such children, has 
constituted Task Forces in every District of the State.  The 
Committee note that the Task Force converg es the anti -child labour 
actions of all  the Departments concerned like Police, Women and 
Child Welfare, Labour , Education, Public Health, Revenue as 
well as NGOs.  As a result, since 2016, a total of 1439 raids were 
conducted and 1052 child labourers were rescued.  During these 
operations, 398 FIR's were lodged against the defaulted employers. In 
the opinion  of the Committee, while the formation of a multi -
departmental Task Force and its district -level implementation are 
positive steps, the data presented about inspections and number of 
rescued labourers suggests that more needs to be done to identify and 
rescue child labourers. The Committee find in this regard that  
frequency of the awareness campaigns and the meetings of the Task 
Force is far from the desired measure. The awareness push is not 
supposed to be an affair happening on special occasions like Children’s 
Day and Labour Day, it has to be a continuous and per sistent affair. 
Further, the Committee perceive the current periodicity of only 
monthly meetings of the Task Force, awfully inadequate. The 
Committee are of the firm opinion that the Task Force should also 
comprise of a component like a flying squad, to effect random raids to 

361 
 
detect and expose deviant employers and to unfetter the incarcerated 
children. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that the State 
Government should immediately ramp up the activities of the Task 
Force to augment their ambit and make t hem the cutting edge of the 
action of the State against child labour. It is strongly felt that the 
awareness campaigns also need to be a more prolific affair.  Child 
labour is a multifarious social evil that needs to be tackled 
commensurately. The Committe e want the State Government to take 
all steps required to tackle it effectively.  
Further, the State Government should analyse the data 
pertaining to the raids and identify the measure needed to increase 
effectiveness of raids and penal action . Steps shoul d also be taken to 
target specific sectors with high child labour prevalence for increased 
inspections and surveillance. Technology solutions such as data 
management platforms and mobile apps can be implemented to 
enhance communication, coordination, and d ata analysis among the 
Task Force of districts. The Government can also consider establishing 
an independent oversight committee composed of experts possessing 
various expertise , including child rights activists, legal professionals, 
and representatives of  civil society organizations, to monitor the Task 
Force's activities and provide recommendations for improvement. 
 
19.9  The Committee note that the Education Department of the 
State Government is taking proactive measures to ensure complete 
enrolment of c hildren in the schooling system as a way to counter 
child labour. In this regard, volunteer workers called ‘Bal Rakshaks’ 
have been appointed. Starting in 2017, 2600 Bal Rakshaks have been 
appointed. According to the State Government, at the start of the 
initiative in 2017, the number of out of school children reported was 
44,698 which has now come down to 9306. The Committee appreciate 
and congratulate the State Government for this achievement and feel 
that every child in school is one less on the streets.  Thus, appointing 
2600 "Bal Rakshak" volunteers shows the commitment to community 

362 
 
engagement and tackling the issue at the grassroots level. The 
initiative of the State Government can be strengthened by providing 
Bal Rakshaks additional resources in terms of financial incentives, 
awards, and recognition programs to acknowledge their contributions 
and motivate them.  Bal Rakshaks should also be trained and 
encouraged to gather comprehensive and dependable data regarding 
out of school children that will help t he Government improve their 
strategy against child labour . Other employees of the State 
Government than teachers can also be tasked with the important 
profile of being Bal Rakshaks . The State Government should further 
encourage collaboration with community  leaders and local authorities 
to enhance community awareness, address local challenges, and build 
trust and support for the Bal Rakshaks program.  The committee ae of 
the firm opinion that the possible role of the Local Self Government 
Institutions cannot be discounted here. The success of the Bal 
Rakshak  initiative shows that involving the community through 
volunteer programs like the Bal Rakshaks  increases the programme's 
reach and effectiveness. The Committee feel that this initiative can be 
replicated in other States but needs careful consideration of the 
specific cultural, socio -economic conditions of the State to tailor the 
program to address local needs and challenges.  
 
19.10  The Committee find that Maharashtra is the State with the 
largest population residing in the urban areas.   In this regard, 
according to the State Government, the biggest problem with respect 
to child labour that the authorities face is the case of abandone d 
children. These children end up working on the streets, on railway 
stations and in small shops. The Committee are relieved to note that 
the Government has run a pilot Project in partnership with Tata 
Institute of Social Sciences and BMC (Brihanmumbai Mun icipal 
Corporation (BMC)  for identification and mainstreaming of these 
children in schools. Moreover, in order to address the issue of urban 
child labour, BMC has also opened 16 night shelters exclusively for 

363 
 
children. In the considered opinion of the Comm ittee, Child labour in 
urban areas is a complex challenge that requires a multipronged 
approach to address its root causes and protect children from 
exploitation. The Committee reckon that there is an emergent need to 
review and analyse the effectiveness o f the projects to identify and 
mainstream abandoned children and address any shortcomings. The 
State Government should replicate such initiatives in other Municipal 
Corporations of the State. Moreover, in mega cities like Mumbai, slums 
present a staunch ch allenge in tackling child labour because they have 
numerous informal and unregulated/illegal workplaces, such as small 
workshops, street vendors. These workplaces often escape the 
oversight of the authorities and are thus more prone to employing 
children d ue to weak superintendence and enforcement. The 
Committee want the State Government to immediately enhance child 
protection services specifically in these areas.  Community engagement 
in such areas is also crucial for prevention of child labour with an 
effective system to secure information about delinquent employers. It’s 
critical to ensure the confidentiality of the informants as well as to 
reward them .  The success of such projects can be communicated to 
MoLE so that they can be adequately replicated in ot her cities across 
the country with adaptations required as per the local settings.    
 
19.11  The Committee appreciate that the State Government is 
promoting various educational and monetary welfare schemes so that 
the parents working in the construction f ield send their children to 
school. Efforts are being taken with the vision of preventing the 
children from engaging in labour with the parents at the construction 
fields/ brick-kilns. The State Government has also made it mandatory 
that every Police Station should form a Juvenile Aid Police Unit for the 
rescue and repatriation of children in street situations and 
those  working in vulnerable conditions. A lot of sensitisation of the 
Police personnel may also be needed in this connection. The 
Committee urge the State Government to take measures to ensure that 

364 
 
these Juvenile Aid Police Units are well -trained and sensitised for 
tackling child labour and protecting vulnerable children . The 
Community should be informed about the functioning of these Units. 
Raising awareness about Juvenile Aid Police Units (JAPUs) is crucial for 
promoting their effectiveness and encouraging community 
participation in combating child labour. As regards children working 
with their parents in construction sites and brick kilns, the Committee 
recommend that employers should be held accountable for violating 
child labour laws, including imposing stricter penalties and revoking 
business licenses.  
 
19.12  The Committee further observe that the large urban 
infrastructure in Maharashtra cr eates a situation where there are a 
large number of migrant labourers from different parts of the country 
particularly from states such as Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal. 
Migrant families face challenges with living arrangements such that 
most families l ive in informal settlements where children may be left 
unsupervised, making them more vulnerable to exploitation and child 
labour. Children from migrant families are particularly vulnerable to 
exploitation and child labour because of various factors includ ing 
poverty and lack of education. The Committee firmly recommend that 
the State Government should establish coordination mechanism 
between various Government departments, including Labour, Housing, 
Education, Healthcare, and Social Welfare, to ensure comp rehensive 
support for migrant families.The State Government should also 
consider signing Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) with the State 
Governments from where the largest number of migrants originate with 
the aim to share data about the movement and loca tion of these 
migrant workers. MoUs can facilitate joint enforcement efforts to 
combat child labour and exploitation of migrant workers. The MoUs 
should focus on sharing of   information on the rescue of child 
labourers, their origin, and family details and  facilitating the safe and 
swift repatriation of child labourers to their families or appropriate 

365 
 
care institutions. Provisions must also be made for providing support 
to the families of repatriated child labourers for their reintegration and 
rehabilitation alongwith clear demarcation of the roles to be essayed by 
the respective State machineries.  
 
 
  

366 
 
CHAPTER - TWENTY 
 
STATE GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN 
 
20.1 As part of the oral deposition before the Committee, the State 
Government of Rajasthan submitted as follows: 
 “The policy framework has three points. As for legal action, penal provision 
has been made in the Act to prohibit the engagement of child labour.  These 
legal provisions provide for preventive action against families forcing child 
labour. The thi rd point is taking action under the NCLP activity which was 
started on project mode. The action for effectively controlling child labour is 
beginning in Rajasthan under these three points. 
 Rules have been published under the amended Act  in 2019. The role 
of every agency has been specified therein. A task force headed by the 
District Collector was constituted. The Superintendent of Police and officers 
of the Department of Child Empowerment, Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, Department of Medical  and Healthcare, Department of 
Labour have been made its members.  The Child Protection Committee  was 
vested with first class magisterial powers in the Child Empowerment 
Department. They are authorised to enter any premises, conduct a survey, 
and rescue chi ldren. The task force has been assigned the duty to organise 
mainstream sittings and take feedback after rescuing children by conducting 
raids from time to time and bring them in the mainstream education and 
take action against the families.  
 There are tw o issues connected with it. The original residents of 
Rajasthan, their children work in other states, like they work in the Bt 
garden of Gujarat. Action has been taken in this regard. There is legal 
provision in the Act for children of Rajasthan engaged as  child labour under 
which raids are conducted by the police. The department of Labour takes 
action from time to time. Action is taken on the basis of information received 
and also on the feedback under the complaint system.   
 Complaints of children engaged in B T garden fields in Banswara, 
Udaipur etc. districts of southern Rajasthan adjoining Gujarat are received. 
We have set up 30 check posts in the border districts with the help of NGOs, 
civil society groups in this sector, and in collaboration wit h government 
departments from the year 2008. Police patrolling is also conducted during 
the seasonal period. So far, 87 children have been stopped from going there.  
There is data of primarily four -five states such as Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Odisha from which child labour is engaged 
in Rajasthan. The children accompanying the labour in the brick kilns are 
found to be working as child labour.  Child labour have been rescued from 
the carving industry, they were also from other states.  These children were 
entrusted to their families after rescue operations conducted in coordination 
with the Child Protection Committee of the district. These activities are quite 
regular. Chief Secretary, Government of Rajasthan has also written a letter 
to the Chief Secretaries of the concerned states and the correspondence is 
continuing.  The possibility of these children coming in trains from far flung 
states is high whereas they mostly travel by road from the neighbouring 
states. The Railways was sensit ised in this regard. The activity that follows 
their rescue is entrusting them to their parents. FIR is also registered under 
the provision of the Act for engaging child labour.  

367 
 
  In case of trafficking, legal action is taken under the provisions. I am 
glad to make the submission before the committee that there are two cases 
in which life sentence was awarded in 2019 and 14 years of life sentence was 
awarded in another.  The sentence was awarded considering it as a case of 
child trafficking. There are various agencies and also Railway Police to create 
awareness about child trafficking. There is a need to make separate 
provisions on child trafficking that can also help check the menace." 
 
20.2 Further, regarding the role, responsibilities and accountability o f the 
District Magistrates it was inter -alia submitted to the Committee that: 
 “In order to implement the provisions of the District Magistrate under 
Section-17(a) of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986, under the Rajasthan Child Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Rules -1996, the amended rules -2018 of the State, the 
responsibilities of the District Magistrate have been laid down in Rule 20(c). 
As per the rule, Task Force should be created to meet at regular interva ls, 
conduct raids and for rescue operations for identification of child labourers, 
etc. Provision has been made to undertake rehabilitation work to free child 
labourers under Juvenile Justice Act, Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 
Bonded Labour Rehabil itation Sector Scheme and through child labour  
projects. In this sequence, instructions have been given to hold regular 
meetings of Child Labour Task Force in each District under the 
chairmanship of District Magistrate. For effective implementation of the 
above mentioned act and rules and eradication of child labour, the Standard 
operating Procedure was issued by Rajasthan Government on 12.10.2021 
wherein the work to be done has been fixed for various departments, i.e., the 
Police Department (Anti-Human Trafficking Unit), Labour Department, Child 
Empowerment Department, Education Department, Medical and Health 
Department, District Administration and District/Block/Village Level Child 
Protection Unit.” 
20.3  The details of the prosecution proceedings against the released child 
labourers and employers in the State of Rajasthan in the last three years were 
informed to be as follows: - 
 
Year  Released  
Child Labour  
Total Cases  
Registered FIR  
Challans  
Presented  
Punishment  
to Accused  
Persons  
2019  1651  801  769  126  
2020  1803  726  704  90 
2021  1291  648  597  18 
 
20.4  In the direction of identification of schools for drop out children from 
education, the State Government has made the following provision:- 
“Under the Act and Rules, a provision has been made to inform the  Labour 
Office of the District concerned in relation to the absent children for more than 
30 days. In relation to such absent children, information about being engaged 
in child labour is collected and if a child is found doing child labour, then an 

368 
 
attempt is made to make them free from child labour and connect them to the 
main stream of education.” 
20.5  The State Government furnished the data on efforts made for 
eradication of child labour as follows:- 
“Details of the action taken in the "intensive campaign" conducted against child 
labour in the State : 
Duration  No. of  
Survey/Inspection  
No. of Promissory Notes in 
which no child labour may 
engage from establishment(s)  
Month June,2020 to 
March, 2021  
8258  7550  
Month April  to June 
2021  
2085  1990  
Month July  1302  1309  
On 14.06.2021  978  957  
From 20.12.2021 to 31 
12.2021  
3167  3762  
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
20.6  The Committee note that in Rajasthan, children from other 
States are mainly trafficked from the States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar 
Pradesh, West Bengal and Odisha. According to the Human Trafficking 
Cell of the State Government, these children are mostly fo und engaged 
as labour in Dhabas, Small Workshops, Auto Repair Shops and also in 
hazardous settings such as brick kilns which puts their health and 
safety at great risk. According to the State Government, these children 
when rescued are released in coordina tion with the Child Protection 
Committee of the District concerned and handed over to the family. In 
this regard a letter has  been written from the Chief Secretary, 
Rajasthan Government to the Chief Secretaries of the State 
Governments concerned. Since chi ldren from far away States are more 
likely to come by train, the Railways officials have been sensitized in 
this regard. The Committee appreciate the work of the State 
Government towards establishing coordination mechanisms with other 
State Governments and  stress that Inter -State coordination is crucial 
for effectively combating trafficking and ensuring the safe return of 
children to their families. The State Government should organise 

369 
 
regular meetings and workshops between officials from different States 
to share the best practices and update information on trafficking 
routes and hotspots. There is also a need to foster collabouration 
between State Governments and NGOs working on child protection to 
leverage their expertise and resources. In this regard, th e Committee 
are of the considered opinion that an MoU between the Rajasthan 
Government and other States can help establish an institutional 
mechanism for addressing the issue of child trafficking and child 
labour. The MoU can clearly define the responsibil ities of each State 
Government in terms of their rescue and post rescue roles. It should 
also provide for establishing dedicated teams, sharing of relevant data 
and information on child labour cases and trafficking patterns and 
standardized procedures for rescue and rehabilitation of trafficked 
children. 
 
20.7  As submitted by the State Government, there is also cross 
border movement of children between Gujarat and Rajasthan for the 
work of cultivation of BT Cotton. The Government has established 
Check Posts at these borders to curb such movement. The Committee 
feel that in such a scenario where the issue/problem has already been 
identified, there is a need for targeted interventions. Other such areas 
also require identification and by implementing targeted interventions 
alongside existing measures like border control, the Government can 
take a more comprehensive approach to address the issue of child 
labour in BT cotton cultivation and ensure the protection of vulnerable 
children. Engaging directly with comm unities and other stakeholders 
can incubate trust and increase cooperation in tackling the issue. In 
this regard, the Committee are of the firm belief that the Panchayats 
can play a vital role by mobilizing community members to take action 
against child la bour and trafficking and monitoring agricultural 
practices, and reporting suspected cases to authorities. 
 

370 
 
20.8  The Committee observe that the number of child labourers 
released in Rajasthan has decreased from 1651 in 2019 to 1291 in 
2020. There is also a  decrease in the total number of cases registered 
and number of challans presented from 801 and 769 in 2019 to 648 
and 597 in 2021, respectively. At the same time, the Committee are 
concerned to note the significant drop in the figures pertaining to 
punishment to the accused person where the number has decreased 
from 126 in 2019 to 18 in 2020. The Committee want the Government 
to investigate whether this decline is on account of a real drop in the 
incidence of child labour or whether this suggests that whil e efforts are 
being made to rescue child labourers, the enforcement of laws against 
child labour and prosecution of offenders might not be as effective.  
Further, there is also the possibility of the authorities not having 
enough resources or manpower to ef fectively investigate and prosecute 
child labour cases or there could be corruption within the enforcement 
agencies. The Committee thus urge the Government to scrupulously 
investigate the reasons for the decline in these numbers. Data from 
different source s, such as Government agencies, NGOs, and research 
institutions must be compared to gain a comprehensive understanding 
of the situation. The State must also identify any gaps or weaknesses 
in the existing framework that may be contributing to the decline. The 
Committee stress upon the critical need for a robust monitoring 
mechanism for effectively combating child labour. The involvement of 
high-level officials in monitoring child labour is crucial since they 
can  facilitate coordination and collabouration b etween different 
Government departments and it also helps in building trust and 
confidence among stakeholders, including victims, communities, and 
civil society organizations.  
 
20.9  The Committee find that, with regard to identification of 
out of school children, according to the State Government, provision 
has been made to inform the Labour Office of the District concerned in 
case any child is being absent for more than 30 days. In relation to 

371 
 
such absent children, information about being engaged in chil d labour 
is collected and if the child is found doing child labour, then an 
attempt is made to make them free from child labour and connect 
them to the main stream of education. In the considered opinion of the 
Committee the current mechanism of informing the Labour Office 
about children absent from school is a good starting point in 
prevention of child labour and it is justifiable that children who are not 
in school and lack access to education are more vulnerable to 
exploitation. By identifying out-of-school children and addressing child 
labour, the mechanism can also help in stopping child trafficking.   But 
there is a need to take further measures to strengthen the mechanism. 
The primary goal should be to ensure accurate and complete data 
collection on st udent attendance and reasons for absence. The role of 
teachers is of paramount importance, particularly in rural areas, and 
the Committee appreciate the fact that teachers participate in the 
survey for out of school children in the State of Rajasthan.   In this 
regard, there is also a need to implement a digital and easy to access 
system for sharing data between education, labour, and social welfare 
departments to identify children at risk of child labour. In case of child 
trafficking, education and labour d epartment officials need a 
mechanism to escalate the matter to the relevant law enforcement 
agencies. The Government should also partner with NGOs and other 
organisations to organize bridge courses and remedial classes to help 
out-of-school children bridge the gap in their knowledge and skills and 
reintegrate into the mainstream education system.  
 
20.10  With regard to the conviction in cases related to child 
trafficking, the State Government have informed that in the year 2019, 
there were two cases where the punishment awarded was exemplary. In 
one of the cases, the sentence of life imprisonment was awarded and in 
the other, a sentence of 14 years. The Committee acknowledge the 
Government's action but emphasizes the need for deeper analysis to 
consider the  overall trends in convictions and punishments for child 

372 
 
trafficking in the State. The State Government need to prepare 
measures to strengthen the enforcement and legal framework in this 
regard. The Committee recognise the difficulty in prosecution of case s 
where it is required to bring people from other States to court. It can 
be addressed through greater coordination between the States. All 
States need to agree to exchange information with each other and to 
bring accused persons to court. There should be effective coordination 
between law enforcement agencies, social welfare departments, and 
other relevant stakeholders across the States. If there is a 
technological solution for the same, then it can be achieved in a 
shorter period of time. The Committee al so feel that there is an urgent 
need to create an institutional mechanism to address this legal 
challenge and it should be taken note of by the State and Central 
Governments. One of the solutions could be the establishment of fast 
track court(s) for dealin g with all child related cases such as child 
trafficking and child Labour.  According to the State Government, the 
creation of the fast track court is the mandate of the Law Department 
and the High Court and such proposal for the same is under active 
consideration by the Government. The Committee recommend that a 
concrete timeline needs to be established for generating the 
administrative proposal for setting up the fast track court(s) and the 
Government should ensure requisite allocation of  resources for the  
same.  
 
 
  

373 
 
CHAPTER - TWENTY ONE 
 
STATE GOVERNMENT OF KERALA 
 
INTRODUCTION 
21.1 The State Government of Kerala informed the Committee that Child 
and adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 has been 
implemented in the State by the Labour Department and a ction is in final 
stage to notify the Kerala Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Amendment Rules, 2022 in accordance with the Child Labour (Prohibition 
and Regulation) Amendment Rules, 2017. With regard to National Child 
Labour Project scheme, it was submitted that the scheme is implemented in 
21 states across the country and the State of Kerala is not included under 
the scheme. The Committee were further informed that every year, June 12 
is being observed as the day against Child Labo ur and various awareness 
programmes are being conducted as part of that day to create awareness 
among the public and various stakeholders viz, schools, Trade Unions, 
industrial institutions and employers etc.             
Institutional Infrastructure to Tackle Child Labour 
 
21.2 During their oral deposition, the Officials of the State Govt highlighted 
the institutional infrastructure in place to strengthen their response against 
Child labour as under:           
 
“The Child and adolescent Labour Prohibition a nd Regulation Act of 1986 
has been implemented in the State by the Labour Department of Kerala to 
eliminate and prevent unfair child labour practice. An Enforcement Wing 
under the Labour Commissioner has been conducting regular inspections 
and the provisio ns of various labour Acts and rules including Child and 
Adolescent labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act are being implemented. 
In every district, we have got a Task Force with the District Collector as the 
Chairperson and the District Labour Officers as  members. Child Labour 
Welfare Society has been constituted in all 14 districts under the 
chairmanship of the District Collectors for the rehabilitation of the child 
labourers. It also reviews all activities viz, repatriation, rehabilitation and 
education relating to child labour.” 
21.3 The Committee then enquired about the number of Children identified 
and rescued by the State Govt. In response, the officials of the State 
Government furnished the data for the previous three years as under:  
S. No. Details No. of Children 
1 Total Rescue 622 
2 Child labour 79 
3 Child begging 42 
4 Street Children 66 
5 Abandoned children 7 
6 Child marriage 5 
7 Trafficking 4 
8 POCSO 33 
9 Other children with various difficulties 386 

374 
 
Schemes Undertaken to Rehabilitate Child Labour 
 
21.4 On the schemes currently operational by the State Government for 
child protection, the officials of the State Government submitted that the 
following were being implemented through the Integrated Child Development 
Scheme (ICDS) under the Department of Women and Child Development, as 
under: 
             
“(i) Sanadhabalyam  
 
The State Government has initiated Foster care programme from the year 
2015 onwards towards de-institutionalization of children. 
 
(ii) Kinship foster care/ Vacation Foster care  
 
It is an arrangement for full time care by relatives such as grandparents, 
uncles, aunts, or others who are not a child's parent but have a family 
relationship with the child. This project is intended for providing financial 
assistance to the  aforesaid relatives of the children, thereby making a 
situation that the child can live with the relatives and thus reducing the 
institutionalization. Further, under vacation foster care, Children living in 
children's homes are placed for spending their v acation in families selected 
by the District Child Protection Officers after enquiry. 
 
(iii)  Vijnanadeepthi:  
 
A sponsorship scheme to overcome the insufficiency of funds under the 
Central Sponsorship Scheme. Under the Scheme, the State is making all 
efforts to retain children in their own homes. Rs, 2000/ - per month is 
disbursed per child and 828 children are benefited under the scheme. This 
scheme is initiated in addition to the scheme operated through the financial 
assistance extended by Government of India. 
 
(iv)  Our Responsibility to Children (ORC):  
 
Our Responsibility to Children (ORC) is a problem-oriented, solution focused 
partnership initiative of Integrated Child protection Scheme (ICPS) to identify 
and address deviancies and other vulnerabiliti es of children. ORC facilitates 
the integration of such children to the mainstream. through Enhancing Life 
skills, nurturing strengths, addressing vulnerabilities, and promoting 
mentoring and good parenting. It also implements the School Protections 
Group Program (SPG) to ensure safety of children and curb tendency for 
juvenile delinquency as well as to protect children from becoming victims of 
illegal activities, by constructing an invisible wall of protection around every 
schools. The purpose of the initi ative inter-alia are for  Identification and 
management of behavioral, emotional, learning, social and mental health issues of 
children in a scientific manner, conducive to our settings, build capacity of 
teachers and parents to better deal with the problems of children to ensure 
care and protection of, at risk children, Ensure mentoring to children with 
behavioral and emotional issues especially those coming from disadvantaged social 
setting, Impart life skills to children , those who face various psycho-social 
challenges, create an invisible wall of protection around school to ensure care and 
protection of children especially when they spend their time around the vicinity of 

375 
 
the school, demonstrate a problem oriented, solution focused partn ership 
initiative across India. 
 
(v) Community based Rehabilitation of Children (KAVAL):    
 
KAVAL is an Innovative Program implemented by Government of Kerala through 
the Department of Women and Child Development with technical support from 
Dept. of Psychiatric Social Work, NIMHANS, Bengaluru. A systematic and 
structured methodology is developed in the State to support Children in Conflict 
with Law there by reducing the potential danger of being labelled and isolated 
from society. This reduces the chances of the child being absorbed to antisocial 
gangs and causing potential harm to society. Identifying children at high risk at a 
young age and supporting them by providing holistic care through psychosocial 
intervention would help children to keep away from unlawful activities. A 
multidisciplinary inter-sectoral approach through psychosocial intervention is 
needed to ensure holistic care and support for children. KAVAL is a community 
based approach to reach out to children in bail and providing psychosocial 
interventions through trained social work professionals in NGOs by entering 
to a working partnership with them . 
 
(vi) Saranabalyam         
 
The Government of Kerala has made a sustained effort to address exploitation 
of children but serious challenges remain and we have a long way to go if 
these lost childhoods are to be restored and children given the safeguards 
they are entitled to get. In Kerala, the children engaged in child labor and 
begging are mostl y out of states. To meet this challenge, the Kerala 
Government, has begun the initiation of "Saranabalyam" Project, a project to 
ensure that state is free from child labor, child begging, trafficking, and 
children in street situation. The project is organi zed to provide emergency 
services for such children at risk. Six rescue officers have been appointed 
under this project in four pilot districts (Kollam, Pathanamthitta, 
Alappuzha and Kottayam). In 2018, the project has been extended to 10 
other districts(to be updated) to develop clear and consistent procedure to 
identify, rescue, protect, and rehabilitate/repatriate children as well as 
initiate investigation and prosecution against the offenders. 
 
(vii) Sponsorship Programme       
 
For better coordination and monitoring adoption programme in Districts, 
State Government restructured District Level Adoption Committee 
including Child Welfare Committee Chairman (Chairman of the 
Committee), District Chil d Protection Officer, District Women and Child 
Development officer, Government Medical Practitioner, representative of 
Specialised Adoption Agency (SAA) etc. Adoption is the best possible 
option for rehabilitating orphaned, abandoned, surrendered children. As 
per the Government order, Home study report of the prospective adoptive 
parents should be conducted by a three member team lead by the District 
Child Protection Officer.  
 
 
 
 

376 
 
(viii) Community based rehabilitation & re -integration of  CNCP children 
through psycho -social approach (KAVAL Plus)     
 
Community Based Rehabilitation and Reintegration of Children in Need of 
Care and Protection through Psycho -Social approach is an innovative 
programme implemented by the State Government to support children in 
need of care and protection. There is a need to support these children 
through community based supportive programs to reduce entering into conflict 
with law as well as ensuring mainstreaming to build up their potential and 
lead a purpos eful life without the baggage of any sort of violence against 
them. Identifying children at high risk at a young age and supporting them by 
providing holistic care through psycho social intervention would help children 
to keep away from unlawful activities. 
 
 
(ix) Youth leaving care, Services and Challenges    
 
Need based financial assistance is being given for continuing education to 
the children who leave Child Care Institutions. The State Government is 
planning to prepare an aftercare programme for children who have to leave 
Child Care Institutions on attaining eighteen years of age by providing 
education, skill education and placement as well as providing them places 
for stay to facilitate their reintegration in to the mainstream of society. Skill 
assessment was conducted with the help of Hindustan Latex Family 
Planning Promotion Trust (HLFPPT) for selected children above 16 years 
from Government Child Care Institution who are weaker in formal education 
process and were given training in the concerned area.” 
 
Child Care Institutions 
21.5 On being asked to furnish the data regarding the number of 
functional Child care Institutions in the State and the modalities in place to 
monitor their functioning, the officials of the State Govt submitted as under:  
 
“817 Child Care Institution in the State have been registered under Juvenile 
Justice Act, 2015 and around 25,484 children were residing in those homes. 
But as on October, 2022, there are only 404 CCI’s and 5381 children. 
Further, with the help of UNICEF,  the Women and Child Development 
Department has designed a website for Child Care Institutions to report the 
details of children on being admitted. Details thus collected can be used as 
database and the same can be used for monitoring the CCIs also. In the first 
stage, Trainers Training was conducted for all protection officers (IC) and 
Data Analyst in all District Child Protection Unit in the state. Further 
training of the CCIs are being planned.” 
 
Rehabilitative Measures for Street Children 
21.6 The Commi ttee were informed that t he Kerala state policy for the 
rehabilitation of street children is currently in its final stages of 
development, and steps are being taken to put it into effect as quickly as 
possible.  

377 
 
Rehabilitative Initiatives for Children of Migrant Labours 
21.7 Observing that the minimum wages in Kerala were much more than 
the Central wages, the Committee enquired the reasons for families to 
engage their children as labour force despite the higher wages. In response, 
the representatives of the State Government responded as under:  
 
“As regards migrant labours who enjoy much better wages as compared to 
the rest of the country, many of them have brought their families here, and 
some of them have settled down in Kerala. But a small proportion of t hose 
children have gone into labour. We are trying to bring them to the school 
mainstream. We have been successful to a great degree but we were trying 
for 100 per cent enrolment of the migrant children in schools…..it is 
basically to supplement the income  of their parents. Some are going for this 
earning job. We have been able to persuade them to come to schools, which 
we are finding very much successful. They are engaged in plywood sector, 
industrial establishments, and casual jobs. The Education departme nt and 
the Labour department together have been trying to identify them and bring 
back to schools.” 
 
21.8  In this regard, the officials of the State Government submitted that 
‘Roshni’ project was launched  for extending education to children of 
migrant children under which they were assisted to overcome  language and 
cultural barriers and identify their strength and weakness while retaining 
their own language and culture in order to create a better society   
 
21.9 The representatives of the State Government further highlighted the 
major milestones under the 'Roshni' scheme as under:     
 
“Roshni Project is an Innovative Educational Project initiated by the District 
Administration and funded by BPCL, Kochi. Phase I o f the Project was 
launched in October 2017 and covered 110 students from four schools in 
the district. During Phase II for the academic year 2018 -2019, the project 
ran in 20 schools, both aided and government, across the district among 
620 migrant students majorly from Nepal, Lakshadweep and states like West 
Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Orissa, UP, Bihar, Karnataka and Assam. In Phase III, 
Roshni was up scaled to 38 schools covering 1,235 students. Utilizing the 
service of Education Volunteers, these multilingual an d multi -graded 
students are given an extra class of about One hour that begins with a 
nutritious breakfast every morning before the regular classes. The thematic, 
activity-oriented, multi-graded, modules designed for the program have been 
proven effective in improving the academic standards of the students. Five 
years back, the majority of the school -going migrant children were not 
regular in classes and many dropped out in the middle of the academic year. 
An impact study conducted among the migrant childre n has proved that the 
Roshini project was successful in reducing the drop-out rate, and developing 
the educational standard of these children. School dropouts across 20 
schools reduced by nearly half (49%) to 65 in 2018 -2019, when compared to 
2017-2018 as per the data given by schools.”     
        
21.10 The Committee were further apprised that under the ‘Roshni’ project, 
the linguistic barrier is overcome by adopting discourse oriented pedagogy, 

378 
 
whereby language exists not as discrete sounds, words and sentences but as 
connected speech and that is the only way to acquire language  
 
“At present, the Roshni project is in its 5th phase having 40 schools with 
around 1050 students, and would be  implemented from November 2021 to 
March 2022 (to be updated), mainly due to the crisis that emerged from post 
Covid situations and the delay in submission of the proposal to BPCL, Kochi. 
The activities of the project are being carried out by 27 trained educational 
volunteers and they are using a unique strategy of Code -Switching which is 
already identified as an effective tool for multi-lingual learning.”   
         
21.11 Elaborating on the challenges faced in continuing the Scheme, during 
Covid and its aftermath, the Committee were informed as under: 
 
“The pandemic created many troubles in the way of the ‘Roshni’ Project also 
but despite the massive exodus of migrants to their home state, most of the 
families of Roshni students prefer to stay back/ came back here mostly for 
the sake of education.    
 
After the Covid period, there has been a new issue which has come in.  Many 
families have migrated and many children are unable to continue their 
studies.  Basically, child labour as is prevalent is being focussed upon 
migrant children as such.  These childr en were brought to schools as much 
as possible and they went back to their respective States in the aftermath of 
Covid.  Now, Samagra Siksha Kerala has evolved possible schemes to trace 
and collect details of the students to the block resource centres. 225 8 
children who come under this category were identified and provided with a 
bridge course so that the gap which has been created as a result of the Covid 
pandemic is addressed to a great degree.”     
  
21.12 The officials of the State Government further st ated the major 
highlights under Phase 6 of the Roshni Project, as under:     
“(i) A comprehensive learner profile intended to track the student's 
movements from one place to another with the help of State Education 
Department using the portals "SahithamAnd Kite". 
 
(ii) Theme based adaptive modules viz, Vocation Oriented Package for 
Migrant Children to identify and nurture the talents of migrant children 
through the vocation oriented package in tune with curriculum objectives. 
 
(iii) A Health Awareness track ing system for migrant children for 
maintaining standard parameters of general health which includes periodical 
checkups and awareness programs. An updated Health Card may be 
generated for each student so as to monitor the changes in their health 
condition. As these targeted groups are the most vulnerable ones in the 
society, each step in this regard shall be monitored properly and ethically 
through committee with trusted professional.” 
 
21.13 The Committee were further apprised that the State Government of  
Kerala acknowledged ‘Roshini’ Project as one of the best inclusive model 
and SCERT, Kerala is going to upscale into other districts in the year 2022-

379 
 
2023. Asa result of this project the migrant worker's children are able to 
involve with the mainstream education system in the present society. They 
will be able to speak, read and write Malayalam, the instructional 
language, and as second languages English, Hindi and their native 
tongue. "Roshini" was recognized as best pilot project and got prestigious 
SKOCH award and was short listed for Prime Minister's Award in innovation 
category, the only one from the state. 
 
Measures to Tackle Drop-outs Among Children 
21.14 On the data pertaining to number of children who had dropped out of 
school, the Committee were informed that the State Government have 
identified 2588 children in 2022 -23 who had dropped out of school, were 
tracked and enrolled in schools and are currently given education.   
 
21.15 The State Government apprised the Committee that District Child 
Protection Officers have been appointed as Nodal officers from Women and 
Child Development Department. Further, a Deputy Director of Education of 
each district has been appointed as nodal officers of respective districts to 
address the dropouts.            
 
21.16 The Committee were apprised by the State Government that all efforts 
were being made by the State Govt to mainstream drop -outs by providing 
access to educat ional institutions and improve retention of students to 
address the incidence of dropouts from  schools. Elaborating on the same, 
the representatives of State Government apprised as under:  
“As per the Right to Education Act, 2011, the State provides primar y schools 
within a walkable distance of every three kilometres and secondary schools 
within a distance of five kilometers almost in every area. Academic 
interventions are supplemented to keep the students in track.  By 
understanding the challenges faced by  the students, considering poverty and 
illiteracy as the root cause for child labour, education of the children is 
supplemented with mid-day meal, free uniform and free textbooks. Kerala has 
the distinction of having the lowest dropout rate among the India n States 
today in terms of the primary and secondary education.        
 
Further, school drop outs are also given training and identified in Special 
Training Centres (STC) run by Samagra Siksha.   Right now, we have got 108 
such centres across the State.  T he major activities include providing 
teaching, learning materials including reading cards for children of migrant 
labourers in languages like Bengali, Tamil, Assamese, etc. Tribal language 
handbook for teachers in ten tribal languages has also been developed. This is 
how we have been trying to deal with the question of dropouts of migrant 
labourers and child labour as well.”          
 
21.17 Elaborating on a specific scheme initiated by the State to address the 
issue of drop -outs among Children hailing from  remote Scheduled tribal 
settlements, the State Govt apprised the Committee as under:  

380 
 
“The 'Gothrasarathi Project' is intended to provide Transportation Facilities to 
children living in distant and remote Schedule Tribe settlements to schools. 
This is bei ng implemented for those children studying in classes 1 to 10 of 
Government/ Aided schools from the year 2013 -14. As per this scheme, the 
distance between the residence and school of a child studying at primary level 
should be more than 0.5 km and in the c ase of a high school student it 
should be more than 2 km. Considering the regional features of each place, 
Schools Heads have been given restrictive power to provide facilities pursuant 
to the objectives of the scheme subject to the sanctioning by the Proj ect 
Officer/ Tribal Development Officer. The supervision of the scheme is 
entrusted to the concerned Tribal Extension Officers. Schedule Tribe 
Promoter/Committed Social Workers visit the schools and collect the 
attendance details of the Tribal students and make arrangements for bringing 
the students from the schools who do not attend the schools even though they 
have vehicle facility and this will be intimated to the Tribal Extension Officers. 
In the State 25,328 Tribal students of 563 schools in 150 Pancha yats get the 
benefits of the scheme through 1068 vehicles. Thus, dropout in this regard is 
brought under control.” 
 
Convergence/Collaborative Mechanism 
 
21.18 When asked about the collaborative mechanism established with 
other States to check the incidence  of the Child Labour, the State 
Government stated as under:          
At present the State Labour Department has no collaborative mechanism with 
other State Governments regarding Child Labour. Moreover, Efforts are being 
taken to rehabilitate the other Stat e children found in vulnerable situations 
either in the State owned Children's homes or they are sent to their own 
houses, if details are available, with the help of Police Departments and 
District Collectors of those States. 
 
Inspections  
21.19 Specifically asked by the Committee about the incidence of Children 
in Hotel/Restaurant sector in the State, the officials of the State 
Government informed that continuous inspections were being conducted in 
the Hotels and Restaurants by Department of Labo ur and others and it has 
been categorically stated that ‘no Child have been engaged in the Hotel and 
Tourism sectors’  
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS: 
21.20  The Committee note that the NCLP scheme is implemented 
in 21 States across the country and the State of Kerala is not included 
in the National Child Labour Project Scheme. The justification possibly 
is due to the low incidence of Child labour in the State.  It has been 
further stated that action is in the final stage to notify the Kerala Child 

381 
 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Rules, 2022 in 
accordance with the Child and adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Amendment Rules, 2017 as noti fied by the Central 
Government. The Committee find that District task force and Child 
Welfare Societies under the Chairmanship of the District Collector have 
been set up in all districts to review all exercises relating to Child 
Labour. The Committee note that a total of 622 children were 
identified and rescued from the perils of child exploitation during the 
last three years by the State Enforcement wing under the Labour 
Commissioner. The Committee were given to understand that periodic 
inspections by the Enforcement wing have led to timely identification 
and rescue of children in the State leading to low prevalence of Child 
labour in the State.  Appreciating the progress made by the State 
machinery in checking the prevalence of child labour, the Committee 
would like to lay emphasis on further strengthening of District Task 
Force and Child Welfare Societies through regular orientation/periodic 
review meetings and provision of adequate funds to bolster their 
effectiveness and help them work in a coordinated m anner with other 
agencies for timely rescue and rehabilitation of child labour. At the 
same time, the Committee also feel that the District Collector already 
has a wide range of responsibilities and may be constrained to perform 
all designated duties effec tively and urge  that they  be provided with 
the necessary support and resources by the State Government to do 
their job well. The Committee also desire that the State Government 
must contemplate carrying out wide consultations with other Non -
Governmental stakeholders especially the Civil Society Organizations 
(CSOs) who may have the domain expertise on the subject of child 
labour to further supplement the existing robust institutional 
framework in order to comprehensively combat Child labour. 
21.21  The Co mmittee note that as per the submission made by 
the State Government, it has been mentioned that the children who are 
engaged in Child labour/ begging in the State can be traced from other 

382 
 
States. The Committee observe that, regardless of their place of or igin, 
most of these children fall prey to poverty and subsequent exploitation. 
In order to tackle the challenge of identification, rescue and 
rehabilitation of such children, the Committee take note of the various 
rehabilitative initiatives/partnerships viz, Sanadhabalyam (Foster Care 
programme), Kinship/Vacation Foster Care, Vijnanadeepthi scheme, 
Our Responsibility to Children Scheme and KAVAL/KAVAL PLUS 
Community based projects for children in conflict with law, which are 
all at the forefront of the Stat es efforts to mainstream vulnerable 
Children. The various outcomes achieved by these schemes inter-alia 
include monetary support to retain children in their own homes, curb 
tendencies for juvenile delinquency, build capacity of teachers and 
parents to ensu re care and protection of at risk children, impart life 
skills, holistic care through psycho -social intervention, need based 
financial assistance for continuing education to children leaving Child 
care institutions, shift towards de -institutionalization et c. The 
Committee specifically commend the role of the State Government in 
initiating the ‘Saranabalyam’ project, which was launched to ensure 
that the State is free from the clutches of child labour, child begging, 
trafficking and children in street situat ions and provide emergency 
services for such Children at risk. Statedly, the project has been 
extended to 10 districts of the State and clear cut guidelines have been 
put in place to identify, rescue, repatriation as well as investigation 
and prosecution a gainst the offenders prescribed under it. The 
Committee desire that efforts of the State Government be directed 
towards effective monitoring/ inspection protocols and 
implementation of these schemes in order to fully justify the idea 
behind these Community  based rehabilitative partnership initiatives 
and bolster the anti -Child labour framework of the State Government.  
Further, under the Saranabalyam project, steps may be taken to 
integrate a child helpline for all child emergency cases so that 
emergency hel p can be provided to vulnerable children in distress 
condition. At the same time, the Committee emphasize on the need for 

383 
 
collection and analysis of data on the number of children benefitted 
from such schemes in order to streamline policy decisions and resource 
allocation and expand the ambit of such schemes if need be, to offer 
coverage to more beneficiaries. 
21.22  The Committee note that out of 817 Child Care 
Institutions(CCIs) registered under Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 across 
the State , around 25,484 Children were residing in these homes, 
however, as of October 2022, only 404 CCIs are operational and house 
5381 children at these homes. The Committee find that this is 
indicative of a positive trend that the care of vulnerable children has 
been gradually  transitioning from institutionalized care to 
community/family based care. Despite the shift towards de -
institutionalisation, the Committee note that the CCIs are a vital 
component of the Juvenile Justice System for providing rehabilitative 
care and protec tion to vulnerable Children. The Committee therefore 
urge the State Government to accord due importance to the 
infrastructural/residential facilities to ensure improvement in the 
condition of children residing in CCIs/ Homes with respect to their 
continuous health assessment, regular check-ups, educational facilities 
based on the age and needs of the child etc. The Committee further 
desire that regular inspection audits of the CCIs need to be carried out 
by the Child Welfare Committees for periodic monitori ng and 
assessment of their performance. The Committee are of the opinion 
that every child has a right to grow up with his / her family and 
commend the efforts of the State Government towards restoration of 
institutionalized children with their family as a step in the right 
direction. The Committee, however caution the State Government on 
exercising due diligence in evaluating whether the risks faced by the 
child have been adequately  resolved before taking a decision to de -
institutionalise the child so as t o offset any adverse outcomes for the 
child, contrary to the envisaged objective of restoration.  Further, de-
institutionalization of the child must be conditional to the provision of 

384 
 
financial support and if the follow -up indicates poor indicators, the 
child should be brought back to the Child Care institution. 
  The Committee were further  informed that with the help of 
UNICEF, the Women and Child Development Department of the State 
Government has designed a portal for Child Care Institutions to 
function as a database on the details of children being admitted at CCIs 
and steps taken to impart training to the staff deployed in these 
institutions. The Committee feel that these steps will help in 
empowering the CCIs and bolster their capacity to deliver. 
21.23  The Committee note that the Kerala State policy for the 
rehabilitation of street children is currently in its final stages of 
development and steps are being taken to put it into effect as quickly 
as possible. The Committee hope that the policy once impl emented 
would aid in the effective identification, tracking, rescue and 
rehabilitation of children in street situations. Further, the Committee 
are of the opinion that necessary steps need to be put in place to 
explore the possibility of extending access t o rehabilitative services as 
part of the policy by engaging  private professionals and organizations 
who volunteer to extend help in the form of shelters, counselling 
services, medical services, sponsorships, de -addiction services, 
education services, legal /paralegal services, identification of street 
children hotspots or any other assistance that can be rendered to 
street children in need. Further, the Committee urge upon the State 
Government to analyse the factors/socio -economic compulsions for 
forcing chi ldren onto street situations and prepare an effective 
Standard Operating Procedure for Care and Protection of Children in 
Street Situations so as to wean them away from neglect, emotional 
abuse, sexual abuse, and exploitation. 
21.24  The Committee appreciate the efforts made the State 
Government in providing higher wages for migrant workers in 
comparison to the rest of the country and find that to be one of the 

385 
 
significant reasons for rise in labour migration into the State.  The  
Committee are of the opinio n that in light of the economic woes 
brought about by the crisis caused by COVID -19, there is a strong 
possibility that a number of migrant children in the informal sector 
would have increased across all sectors in the State to supplement the 
income of their parents. The Committee were given to understand that 
several steps have been taken to mainstream these migrant children by 
the Education and Labour Departments of the State Government. In 
this regard, the attention of the Committee was drawn to ‘ Roshni’ 
project that has been run by the State Government since 2017. As a 
result, children of migrant labours are mainstreamed under the 
Education system of the State through adaptive modules through a 
education cum vocation oriented curriculum by trained Volunt eers. 
Under phase 1, 110 students from four schools were covered under the 
scheme. During the phase 2, the project ran in 20 schools and 620 
migrant children from Nepal, Lakshwadeep, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, 
Orissa, UP, Bihar, Karnataka and Assam have bene fitted under the 
Scheme. The project was scaled up to 38 schools covering 1235 
students in phase 3. Further, the Committee find that the thematic, 
activity oriented, multi-graded modules designed under the programme 
have proven effective in improving the a cademic standards of the 
students. The Committee note that the Project is currently in its 5th 
phase having 40 schools with 1050 students. While taking due 
cognizance of the challenges posed by the pandemic, the Committee 
are pleased to note that despite t he pandemic induced lockdown and 
the massive exodus of migrants back to their home State, the fact that 
most families whose children were enrolled under the Scheme, 
preferred to stay back/come back for the sake of education is 
testimony to the popularity o f this Scheme. Further, in the case of 
such Children who have gone back to their respective States and 
unable to continue their studies, the Committee appreciate to note 
that the Samagra Shiksha scheme has evolved schemes to trace and 
collect the details o f 2258 such students and provided them with a 

386 
 
bridge course in order to compensate for the gap due to Covid. Further, 
attention of the Committee was drawn to the latest components under 
phase 6 of the Roshni project which include inter-alia  formulation of a 
comprehensive learner profile to track the students movements from 
one place to another using the portal 'Sahitham and Kite', Vocation 
oriented package for migrant children and a tracking system for Health 
of children of migrant labours. The Committee a ppreciate that the 
efforts of the State Government under ‘Roshni’ project have been 
acknowledged as one of the best inclusive model and shortlisted for the 
Prime Ministers Award in innovation category. Further, the impact 
study/social audit conducted among  migrant children revealed the 
significant decline in the drop -out rate and in raising the educational 
standard of these children. The Committee find that school dropouts 
across 20 schools reduced by nearly half (49 %) to 65 in 2018 -19 as 
compared to 2017-18 as per data furnished by schools. The Committee 
feel that these are praiseworthy initiatives and augur well for the 
children of migrant labour in future. Further, with the threat of the 
pandemic eased to a considerable extent, the Committee urge the 
concerned Departments viz, Education and Labour Departments  under 
the State Government to scale up their efforts to ensure cent percent 
enrollment of migrant children under the Scheme and ensure that 
there will be no let up in sustaining and upholding the sp irit of the 
Roshni project.  
21.25  The Committee appreciate the fact that Kerala has the 
distinction of having the lowest dropout rate among the Indian States 
currently in terms of the primary and secondary education. The 
Committee feel that this can be a ttributed to the timely social 
interventions undertaken by the Government  to tackle poverty and 
illiteracy which has in turn helped in mainstreaming Child labour. The 
Committee find that the State Government have identified 2588 
children in 2022 -23 who ha d dropped out of the schools but were 
gradually tracked, enrolled back in schools and are currently being 

387 
 
given education through 108 Special Training Centres run by Samagra 
Shiksha scheme in various languages like Bengali, Tamil, Assamese etc. 
A tribal la nguage handbook has also been developed for this purpose. 
Further, as a result of schemes like 'Gothrasarathi', intended to provide 
transportation facilities to children living in distant and remote 
Schedule Tribe settlements to schools, the Committee find  that drop-
out rates  among children is being checked to a considerable extent 
owing primarily to effective monitoring of the Scheme by Tribal 
Extension Officers. The Committee while appreciating the steps taken 
in this direction urge the State Government to tie up with Anganwadi 
workers and ICDS in utilising their services to identify Child drop outs 
and ensure they return to the educational fold. Further, the State 
Government may take up Information, Education & Communication 
(IEC) campaigns to create awa reness and disseminate information 
regarding the benefits of retention of Children in School and apprise 
parents/children of the benefits available under various 
schemes/programmes so as to continue to keep the low dropout rates 
under check. 
21.26  The Com mittee are concerned to note that there is no 
specific convergence/collaborative mechanism with other State 
Governments to address issues of Child labour. As per the submission 
of the State Government, efforts are being taken to rehabilitate 
childrenfound in vulnerable situations from other States, either in the 
State owned Children's homes or they are sent to their own houses, if 
details are available, with the help of Police Departments and District 
Collectors of those States. The Committee have been informed that in 
the State of Kerala, the children engaged in child labour and begging 
activities are mostly from other States. Despite the best efforts of the 
State Government in their rehabilitation, in the considered opinion of 
the Committee, a robust inter -State convergence framework should be 
contemplated and operationalised at the earliest in the interest of 
Child welfare in order to help in devising a coordinated response and 

388 
 
ensure sustained engagement between various States towards 
rehabilitation for  children rescued from vulnerable situations.  The 
Committee therefore urge the State Government to establish linkages 
with other States especially where there is a high prevalence of Child 
labour/migration of Child labour to supp lement their efforts against 
child labour/trafficking considering the inflow of migrant labour into 
the State.  In this regard, the  Committee stress to operationalise an 
Inter-State coordination department/Inter -State repatriation policy to 
cater to rehabilitation for migrant children. 
21.27  The Committee note the submission made by the State 
Government that ‘no Child has been seen to be engaged in the Hotel 
and Restaurant sectors’ across the State. The Committee express their 
appreciation for non-engagement of child labour in the aforementioned 
sector and feel it is indicative of the significant progress made by the 
State with respect to  eliminating child labour by providing protective 
legislation and effectively enforcing both labour and education -related 
regulations. The Committee however, also caution the State 
Government, in view of the influx of migrant labour from other States 
to Ke rala coupled with their economic vulnerability and legal 
restrictions barring their employment in the formal sector, it is quite 
likely that the migrant labour including their children find economic 
refuge in various low-key jobs of the informal/unorganized sectors. The 
Committee emphasise the pivotal role of  labour inspectors on the 
ground in timely detection of child labour, monitoring and enforcing 
penal regulations. The Committee find it imperative that the State 
machinery conducts continuous inspections and awareness exercises to 
check any incidence of child labour and sensitise employers and 
workers against the deployment of child labour at their workplaces. 
 
  

389 
 
CHAPTER - TWENTY TWO 
STATE GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU 
Introduction 
22.1 The Committee were apprised by the State Government about the 
provisions to prohibit, track and rehabilitate Child labour including the 
penal provisions being implemented by the State and the role, responsibility 
and accountability of various authorities in the State. 
22.2  The Ministry informed the Committee that Tamil Nadu was among the 
first States to draw a very comprehensive State Action Plan to combat Child 
labour (Proceeding Pg 1). A Standard Operating Procedure has been drawn 
wherein various Departments have been assigned various tasks. The 
vision of the State Action Plan was to achieve a ‘State free of Child labour in 
all Occupations and Adolescent Labour in Hazardous Occupations and 
Processes’ by the end of 2025.         
22.3 Pursuant thereto, at the State level, the  State Child Labour 
Rehabilitation cum Welfare Society under the Chairmanship of the 
Commissioner of Labour will be responsible for monitoring the 
implementation of the State Action Plan for Eradication of Child/Adolescent 
Labour and the monitoring cell wh ich has already been constituted in the 
Office of the Commissioner of Labour shall continue to monitor the activities 
relating to elimination of Child labour as per the directions of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court.At the District Level, in all the 15 NCLP distr icts viz,  viz., 
Chennai, Coimbatore, Dindigul, Dharmapuri, Erode, Krishnagiri, 
Kancheepuram, Namakkal, Tuticorin, Thirunelveli, Trichy, 
Thiruvannamalai, Salem, Vellore and Virudhunagar; National Child Labour 
Project Societies have been formed comprising of  concerned departmental 
officers under the Chairmanship of the District Collector and these Societies 
are responsible for implementing the Action Plan for Elimination of 
Child/Adolescent Labour at the District level. In other districts, 
Child/Adolescent La bour Rehabilitation cum Welfare Societies headed by 
the District Collector have been constituted for identifying 
children/adolescent employed in hazardous and non -hazardous 
establishments. These Societies are responsible for implementing the Action 
Plan fo r Elimination of Child Labour at the District level. All District 
Collectors are to take steps to achieve the stated objective of declaring their 
respective districts as “Child/Adolescent Labour Free” by 2025.  
  
22.4 The State Government informed the Comm ittee that they had always 
taken a holistic approach on Child labour where the main focus has been 
not only to identify and rescue child labour but also to rehabilitate not only 
the individual child but rehabilitate the family so that they do not go back t o 
the same problem.            
22.5 Elaborating further on the issue, during the course of evidence, the 
Officials deposed as under:       

390 
 
“Wherever we get a complaint through any source, and we have number of 
NGO viz, Child line working with a dedicated 1 098 number, the whole local 
team goes there and rescues the child. Not only the child, the family is 
rehabilitated. In some cases, we have also provided for rehabilitation, which 
means we have given preference to such families under different Government 
welfare schemes. In fact, they get ration cards on priority; they get patta on 
priority; in housing schemes, they get a priority. So, the State is acutely 
aware of the responsibility it has towards such families. We have been able 
to extend this kind of welfare measures to these families.” 
22.6 The Committee were apprised broadly of the measures taken up by 
the State Government to prohibit and track and Child Labouras under: 
    
 “The Prohibitory provisions under the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 are implemented in the State by 
the Assistant Inspectors of Labour, Deputy Inspectors of Labour, Assistant 
Commissioners of Labour (Enforcement) in the Labour Department and 
enforcement officers of Directorate of Industrial Safety and Health.  
 Planned Inspections / Surprise Inspections and raids in all the establishments 
including factories are vigorously undertaken by Labour Department and 
Directorate of Industrial Safety and Health in co -ordination with line 
departments and the same is being reviewed periodically.  
 The District Task Forceis undertaking regular raids to rescue, rehabilitate the 
Child and Adolescent Labour employed in domestic and hospitality sector and 
other hazardous /non- hazardous occupations /processes apart from 
initiating legal action against the erring employers.  
 The Police officials are exercising the powers vested in them under Section 16 of 
the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 
and book cases against erring employers.  
 The outcome of inspection and ideas are shared about the rescued children 
adolescents to the District Educational Officers and Social Welfare 
Department for rehabilitation of children / adolescents.  
 If a Child Labour in any Occupation and Adolescent Labour in Hazardous 
Occupation and Processes is identified, Child Line-1098 and the District Child 
Protection Units are informed for rescue and rehabilitation.  
 If a Child / adolescent labour is identified during the survey / inspections / 
raids in the establishments and factories, they are withdrawn from the 
employment immediately and the errant employer is prosecuted under 
the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act,1986.  
 In respect of trafficked / bonded children, the legal action is being initiated 
under the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 as well as under the 
Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 by the 
Revenue and Labour Department respectively.  
 If a child / adolescent labour identified is a destitute or orphan then the 
child / adolescent be produced before the Child Welfare Committee I 
District Child Protection Units. Follow up action is being taken based on 
the provisions in the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Child)Act, 

391 
 
2015, Physical examination of the rescued child / adolescent are carried 
out by Appropriate Medical Authority. The age certificate issued by the 
Appropriate Medical Authority in the format prescribed under the State 
Rules. 
 If the rescued child labour / adolescent labour is a migrant, they will be 
handed over to the District Child Welfare Committee / District Child 
Protection Unit for handing over the child to the parent / guardian as per 
the procedure laid down in the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of 
Child) Act, 2015.” 
 
22.7  The Officials of the State Government further apprised about the 
steps taken by the State Government  for thesocial rehabilitation of Child 
Labour, as under: 
 “If the child is between 5 -8 years she / he will be directly linked to 
the Samagara Shiksha Abhiyan to access their Right to Education. 
 A child between 9-14 years will attend two year bridge education course 
in the NCLP Special Training Centers and then will be mainstreamed to 
the Schools under Samagara Shiksha Abhiyan Programme. 
 To ensure quality of educational rehabilitation, the index card prepared 
under PENCIL portal of Ministry of Labour and Employment would  be 
updated regularly by the District Project Society under NCLP 
 An adolescent between 14 -18 years will be linked to a skill 
development program run by the Government of India or the State 
Government. 
 The data of rescued adolescents are shared to the Minis try of Skill 
Development through Pencil Portal” 
 
22.8 The Officials of the State Government further apprised about the 
specific measures to economically rehabilitate Child Labour, as under: 
 “It is ensured that all rescued child labourer and adolescent 
labourers in hazardous employment are paid back wages at a rate not 
less than minimum wages for their period of employment. 
 Immediate financial assistance of Rs.20,000/- under the Central Sector 
Schemes for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer 2016 is available. If the 
child /adolescent is a bonded labour, additional compensation up to 
Rs.20,000/- is payable after proof of bondage in the Court of Law. 
 The amount of Fine Rs.20,000/- and additional amount of Rs,15,000/- is 
to be credited by the Government for each child or adolescent. 
 Focusing of development schemes in the Child /Adolescent labour 
intensive districts /blocks identified through SSA Survey to benefit the 
rescued child labour. 
 Child / Adolescent Labour families will be covered under the Social 
Security net. The parents of the child/adolescent labour are being 
registered in the relevant unorganized workers welfare boards. 
Parents of rescued child Labour / Adolescent Labour being given 
priority in the existing poverty alleviation and self-employment 
schemes. To supplement income loss, mothers of rescued 

392 
 
child/adolescent labour are being given appropriate skill training and 
encouraged to become members of self-help groups.” 
 
22.9 As per the laid down Standard Operating Procedure (SOP), the role, 
responsibility and accountability of the District Magistrates, to check the 
incidence of Child labour were stated to be as under:  
“Prevention: Ensure formation and monthly meeting of the Dis trict Task 
Force co-ordinate with the District Nodal Officer for the same and d evelop 
a plan for prevention activities in the district and track its progress in 
monthly District Task Force meeting.  
Identification: Ensure coordination with various agencies through District 
Task Force for survey and identification of child labourers and 
adolescent labour in hazardous employments in the district and b ased 
on the identification ensure that the District Task Force develo ps an action 
plan for elimination of child labour.  
Preparation before rescue and after rescue : Ensure that the during the 
rescue, protection is given to the victims and no victim is left behind. 
Post Rescue : Monitorregistration of FIR for all cases of chil d labour or 
adolescent labour in hazardous employments under all relevant child 
protection laws. Conduct timely summary trial as well as issue release 
certificate to access other forms of compensation under the Bonded Labour 
System (Abolition) Act, 1976; Monitor the progress of the investigation of 
all cases of child and adolescent labour in hazardous employment through 
District Task Force and e nsure coordination with enforcement officers of 
Labour& Director of Industrial Safety and Health. 
Rehabilitation: Facilitate repatriation of the childor adolescent victim as 
per the order of the CWC in coordination with the District Task Force 
wherever required and monitor receipt of rehabilitation service with respect 
to social, educational and economic compensation  for the victim including 
those elaborated.” 
22.10 The Committee desired to be apprised on the estimated number of 
child labour in the State. In response, the representatives deposed as under:
          
“We do not have very reliable data, we have not had an y comprehensive 
survey done as Committee may be aware, the last comprehensive data that 
is available with us is 2011 census as per which approximately 1,50,000 
child labour were found to be there in Tamil Nadu. We have been 
conducting some piecemeal survey s in some Districts or some specific 
related issues surveys. All the indications are that the incidence has been 
coming down as a result of various measures taken by the Government, not 
only in terms of enforcing the legal provisions under the Act but also  
various socio-economic welfare measures for retaining them in school for a 
longer period. All those things do indicate that there has been a declining 
trend everywhere.” 

393 
 
22.11 The Committee were apprised of the functioning of Special Training 
Centres by the District Project Societies as mandated under NCLP, as under: 
  
“In Tamil Nadu, the National Child Labour Project (NCLP) funded by the 
Government of India is implemented in 15 Districts. Special Training 
Centres (STCs) are functioning in these 15 Distric ts where rescued child 
labourers are studying. The children are provided bridge education, 
vocational training, mid -day meal, stipend, health care and recreation etc. 
with the ultimate objective of preparing them to be mainstreamed in the 
formal system of education.”  
22.12 It was further informed that Union Government vide 
Communication dated 14.03.2022 subsumed the National Child Labour 
Project under Samagra Shiksha of Ministry of Education and  that no 
Special Training Centres of NCLP will be functional after 31.03.2021. Itwas 
also informed that the children enrolled in Special Training Centres of 
NCLP as on 31.03.2021 should be mainstreamed and those enrolled 
after 31.03.2021 should be immediately transferred to STCs (Special 
Training Centres) run under Samagra Shiksha or to be mainstreamed. In 
this regard, the State Project Director, Samagra Shiksha, Chennai has 
been addressed to admit the children of NCLP Special Training Centres in 
the Special Training Centres run under Samagra Shiksha to enable NCLP 
children to continue their education. In the meanwhile, the Union 
Government allowed NCLP Districts of Dharmapuri, Krishnagiri and Vellore 
to continue operations during the Financial Year 2022 -23.   
     
22.13 The State Government furnished the follow ing details of the 
aforementioned three running NCLP Districts as under:  
  
S. No. ;' Districts No. of Special  
Training Centre 
No. of Children  
studying 
1 Dharmapuri 14 247 
2 Krishnagiri 9 135 
3 Vellore 30 519 
 TOTAL 63 901 
 
22.14 Prior to the receipt of Union Government instructions, as on 
14.03.2022, 203 Special Training Centers were functioning in the 15 NCLP 
project districts in which 3428 rescued child labourers were studying. The 
State Government is providing a monthly cash assistance of R s.500/- from 
Rs 250/- to the children who have been in NCLP schools and who have now 
been admitted in regular schools to pursue higher education. During the 
academic year 2020 -2021, 474 Students have been benefited to the tune 
Rs.28.44 lath under this scheme. 
22.15 The officials of the State Government informed the Committee that 
the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 and 

394 
 
Tamil Nadu Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Rules, 
2011 is being implemented in both letter a nd spirit. Under Section 12 (1)(c) 
of the RTE Act, 2009 clear guidelines were issued for the admission of 
children belonging to 56 disadvantaged groups and weaker sections in all 
private non -minority self -financing schools at the entry level class. The 
Director of Matriculation Schools is the State Chief Nodal Officer and Chief 
Educational Officers at the District level are District Nodal Officers for the 
implementation of the provisions of the Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Education Act, 2009. T o ensure transparency in the process of 
admission, 56,687 children were admitted under this provision during the 
academic year 2011 -22. Rs. 314.64 crore has been reimbursed to the 
schools which have admitted children under this category for the year   
2020-21.      
22.16 Asked whether any tracking mechanism is available to continuously 
tracking of Children in School, the State Government during the course of 
evidence, deposed as under:       
“It is called Education Management Information System (EMIS) which tracks 
a child from first standard. The moment a child enters into class one, all 
details of the child are being tracked. After class eight, if the child is not 
appearing in the Education Management Information System, it is being 
shared with the Labour D epartment which is managing ITI and polytechnic 
courses and also with the Higher Education Department because some 
special vocational course institutions are being run by the Higher Education 
Department. Indeed, the database is being collectively maintaine d by all 
these departments whether Higher Education or Labour.” 
 
22.17 Asked to state the mechanism in place to locate/prevent school drop -
outs and ensure inclusive and equitable quality education by increasing 
enrollment at all levels of School, the Offic ials of the State Government 
submitted as under: 
“As per provisional data, the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) for 2021 is 
99.44% at the primary level. In order to prevent dropouts, the Government of 
Tamil Nadu undertakes surveys round the year April, May and September to 
identify out of School Children and main stream them back. Considering the 
Covid Pandemic, the Government had undertaken a special mass drive 
between 10.08.2021 to 15.10.2021 using anewgeo tagged mobile application 
designed for this exercise a nd integrated with the School Education 
Department’s EMIS portal by involving Block Resource Teacher Educators 
(BRTES), Head Master, School teachers, Educational Volunteers, Special 
Educators, Anganwadi Workers, Self -help Group members and NGOs etc. 
During the survey. Special focus was given to enroll the Girls/ Children with 
Special needs /Transgender children who lost their parents due to Covid -19 
and children displaced due to the pandemic. This massive survey has 
resulted in the identification of 190593 children between Classes 1 to12, 
who dropped out of school. Immediately after identification, these children 
were enrolled in age appropriate classes in near by formal schools and 
provided welfare items viz., textbooks, uniform, schoolbag, footwear, 
notebooks, etc. These children will be tracked till they complete higher 
secondary education. A sum of Rs.869.63 lakhs has been spent for carrying 

395 
 
out this activity in 2021-22. It is also submitted that Mid-Day Meals are also 
provided to all children going to go vernment schools....mid -day meal is 
provided to all the school children up to 12th standard.” 
 
22.18 Elaborating further on the issue, the State Government deposed as 
under:        
“This is a great achievement of the Tamil Nadu Government. Indeed, we are 
the only one State which has identified such a high number of out -of-school 
children…. We could not find out if these children were regularly attending 
online classes. Many of them may not have mobile phones. Along with the 
online classes, we also provided offline support, but the children did not 
attend. We realized there was some issue and we identified that these many 
children were not attending online or offline classes. There are different 
categories among these children. Some of these children might ha ve left 
school because of migration. In some cases, children may have been affected 
by the pandemic….. The Government of India has appreciated us for 
bringing these children into the mainstream. We are consistently making 
efforts that even after this drive , no child is left out. That is why in all our 
records, we ensure more than 95 per cent enrolment up to higher secondary 
level…. We also discovered something very interesting. Many of these 
identified out -of-school students had ended up enrolling themselve s with 
ITIs. There are many ITI courses for 8th standard pass outs…. From 1st to 
10th standard, there are about 48 lakh students. Out of these, 1.09 lakh 
students have been brought into the mainstream… after 14 years, there is a 
declining percentage for the enrolment ratio, we found that even the dropout 
ratio after eighth standard is not that child is out of schooling, but that most 
of the children are being shifted to the vocational type of stream because of 
the employment opportunity either in the form of ITI or polytechnic.” 
  
22.19 On the role of the Public Distribution System in alleviating food and 
nutritional insecurity among children, the officials of the State Govt stated 
as under:         
“One of the reasons is the very farsighted policy that the State adopted long 
ago which was Universal PDS wherein not a single person, not a single 
family is left out of the safety net of the PDS. Everybody is covered. In fat, 
NFSA covers only around 48 per cent of our population, the rest are all 
covered under ou r Universal PDS. It is funded 100 per cent from the State 
Budget. Not only that, Sir, we also have a special PDS wherein not only the 
issue of hunger is tackled but also nutrition is also taken care of. The State 
Government provides additional nutrition by  way of oil, pulses at a huge 
cost. This has ensured that no family, no individual actually is going hungry 
in Tamil Nadu. This has been a great help to all of us in ensuring that the 
child is not forced to work to fill his stomach. In fact, even during Co vid 
period, which was very tough for the whole country, we took some very 
specific measures. In fact, the Government last year gave a special package 
to each family at the rate of Rs.2000 in two instalments. So, Rs.4,000 were 
given out of the State fund to  all the families which has been very helpful to 
the poorest of the poor. Tamil Nadu also has a very unique position that it 
employs a large number of inter -State migrant workers. There we have our 
own challenges. Sometimes they do come with family and chi ldren are there 
who need to be educated, who need to be taken care of. During the 
pandemic when we are faced with the problem, Tamil Nadu was the only 

396 
 
State which provided dry ration kits to around 4.6 lakh families. Each family 
was provided a dry ration kit up to 15 kg. In fact, they were given twice. This 
also ensured that nobody was going hungry there.” 
 
Inter-District Migration 
22.20  Asked about Inter -District migration within Tamil Nadu from 
rural areas to Industrial hubs like Chennai, Trichy, Coimbat ore and Erode 
which have been identified a pockets of child labour, the State Government 
submitted that necessary instructions have been issued to the enforcement 
Officers of Chennai, Trichy, Coimbatore and Erode to conduct inspections 
with the District ta sk force along with the Railway Department officials to 
identify the children in Railway Stations and to take necessary follow -up 
action for their rehabilitation.        
  
22.21  The Committee were informed that  (b/n pg 5) as per the Child 
and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, whoever 
employs any child /adolescent or permits any child I adolescent to work 
in contravention of the provisions of section 3 and section 3 (A) shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to two years or with fine which shall not be 
less than twenty thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees or with both. 
22.22 The Committee desired to know the  number of cases registered 
against the principal employer. In response, the representatives of the State 
Govt furnished as under  
Under the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 
1986, penal action is taken against the employer who employs the Child 
Labour. As per Sec 14-A of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986the offence committed by an employeris punishable 
under sec 3 or 3A and shall be cognizable. The facts available show that the 
contract Labour Act, 1976 and Inter State Migrant Workers Act, 1979 does 
not attract to this issues. In the case of children brought from other states 
for employment through an agent, joint liability is vested with several 
persons. In these cases it becomes difficult to  book cases under the Child 
and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, since the 
details of the employers are not known. The Police Department is to identify 
such persons and initiate action on the principal employer. As per there 
ports received from the ADGP (Crime against women & children wing), the 
total number of cases registered are as under for the period 01.04.2010 to 
30.06.2022: 
 
Total No of Cases (FIR) registered in Child Labour and 
Bonded Labour 
307 
Total no of Children rescued M-706 
F-466 
Total No of Accused arrested M—436 
F-121 

397 
 
Conviction 7 
Total No of trafficking reported cases 566 
Total No of Child/Bonded Labourers rescued M—732 
F-485 
Total No of traffickers arrested M—303 
F-116 
 
22.23 The Officials of the State Govt further informed the Committee that 
during the period from 1.01.2021 to 31.12.2021, 353 children were rescued 
from various Industries/establishments. 121 cases were filed and 65 cases 
have resulted in conviction. Further, be tween 1.02.2022 to 31.06.2022, 
about 61 children have been rescued,52 cases have been filed and 33 have 
been convicted, while the rest are all under progress.  
 
“The Committee were informed that a Central Monitoring Committee has 
been constituted for the o verall supervision, monitoring and evaluation of 
the NCLP. Accordingly a State Level Monitoring Committee was set up under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary to Government, Labour and Employment 
Department on the lines of the Central Monitoring Committee for mo nitoring 
the National Child Labour Projects in the State. The Secretary to 
Government, Labour & Employment is the Chairman and the Commissioner 
of Labour is the Secretary to this Committee. This Monitoring Committee 
would undertake the work of monitoring t he implementation of the State 
Action Plan.” 
  
22.24 The State Government furnished data of inspections conducted at 
Virudhanagar district, specifically with regard to Sivakasi (famous for 
firecrackers) as under:       
“Our Directorate of Industrial Safety , the department which is concerned 
with the fireworks industry for regular monitoring, have conducted 2128 
inspections. We have found 34 cases of various contraventions and 30 
adolescent labour and five child labour were rescued. So, out of 2,128 
inspections conducted, this is the number of incidences of child labour, 
which as compared to the previous years is very small in number, 
nonetheless it is there. We need to make it zero.” 
 
22.25 On the periodicity of inspections/monitoring taken up by the State 
Government, the officials of the State Govt responded as under:     
“Necessary instructions have been given to the Directorate of Industrial 
Safety, and Health to conduct regular inspections to ensure that these 
Industries are not employing Child Labour. Be sides this, District Collectors 
have been requested to convene meetings with the Industrial bodies and 
ensure ‘no child labour’ sticker on their products.” 
 
22.26 The Committee were informed that several awareness exercises were 
being undertaken in line with the State Action Plan, as under:  
“(i) Widespread awareness generation by all departments individually or 
collectively or in co -operation with UNICEF, ILO, civil society 
organizations, employers’ associations and trade unions will be 

398 
 
undertaken by all d epartments so as to create a positive climate for 
sending the children to school and not to work. Awareness among 
children and adolescents can be under taken at the school level or 
through folk activities.  
(ii) Effective use of folk, print, electronic and  social media in the awareness 
campaign.  
(iii) Organising rallies, human chains, signature campaigns, wall paintings, 
etc will form part of awareness activities.  
(iv)  The ‘Anti Child Labour Day’ on 12th June shall be observed at the State 
and District level to create awareness among public.  
(v) To take a pledge against Child Labour on 12th June of every year in all 
Schools, Offices, Factories, other establishments and also in all 
Government Offices, throughout the State to focus public attention.” 
 
22.27 On the measures taken to dissuade Industries especially across the 
State to engage Child labour and popularize the use of ‘Child -labour free’ 
labels  on products, the  representatives of the State Govt submitted as 
under:   
“In the meeting held before the Chief Secretary to Government on 25.7.2022 
the subject regarding declaring “Child Labour Free” stickers on mas s 
products was  discussed and it was agreed to. Accordingly, necessary 
instructions were issued in this regard to the Collectors of Virudhuna gar 
and Tirunelveli Districts.” 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
22.28  The Committee observe and appreciate that the State 
Government of Tamil Nadu has prepared a State Action Plan to combat 
Child Labour. Pursuant thereto, a Standard Operating Procedure has 
been drawn wherein various agencies, departments of the State have 
been assigned various tasks in order to achieve the stated objective of 
achieving a “State free of Child Labour in all occupations and 
Adolescent Labour in Hazardous occupations and  Processes by end of 
2025. Under the Action plan, at the District level, in the 15 NCLP 
districts, NCLP Societies have been formed comprising of concerned 
departmental officers under the Chairmanship of the District Collector 
and are responsible for elimination of Child/Adolescent Labour, while 
the Child/Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation cum Welfare Societies have 
been constituted for identifying children/adolescent employed in 
hazardous/non-hazardous establishments and are responsible for 
elimination of Child labour in non -NCLP districts. The Committee find 

399 
 
that the District Collector has been made the authority under which all 
work pertaining to implementation of provisions for child labour are 
supervised and will play a vital role in achieving convergence of all 
services. The Committee further find that the District Collector is a lso 
responsible for formation and holding monthly meetings of the District 
Task Force (DTF) to develop and plan for prevention activities in the 
district and track its progress along with survey and identification of 
Child/Adolescent Labour through the Dis trict task force and to 
coordinate with various agencies in this regard. The Committee while 
lauding the institutional initiative of the State  feel that it is required 
to ensure that the DTF meet every month in order to take stock of 
measures  to check Ch ild/Adolescent Labour. The Committee further 
note that since the District Task force has been made the fulcrum of all 
efforts to ultimately eradicate Child labour, it is imperative that it is 
commensurately strengthened and equipped to deal with the 
challenges arising out of tackling the menace. The Committee also feel 
that the DTF should analyse and consider the recurrence of child 
labour with the same child and necessary steps in this regard need to 
be taken to rehabilitate them on priority. Further, the Committee 
stress on the role of local panchayats in generation of data in child 
labour at the rural level and a statement to this effect may be furnished 
to the State Government for use by District Task Force for effective 
and actionable intervention again st Child Labour. The Committee thus 
hope that the coordination of all work of the different departments, 
inclusion of Local Self Government Institution, Community based 
organisation will guide the DTF in effectively tackling the range of 
child labour and a chieve the objective envisioned under the State 
Action Plan.  
22.29  The Committee note that, as per the submission made by 
the State Government, the exact estimate of the total child labour in 
the State is not available. As per Census 2011 data, around 1, 50,000 
Child Labour were identified in Tamil Nadu. As per the State 

400 
 
Government, piecemeal surveys have been carried out in some districts 
which point that the incidence of Child Labour has reduced owing to 
strict enforcement of legal provisions and impleme ntation of various 
socio-economic welfare measures for retaining them in school. The 
Committee note that despite the interventionist measures taken by the 
State Government in tackling the incidence of Child Labour, in the 
absence of exact data about the pr evalence of Child Labour, it may be 
difficult to envisage an effective response for their rehabilitation. As a 
matter of fact, 2011 census serves the only authentic source of 
information and the data available is more than a decade old and is of 
limited ut ility in so far as implementation of specific schemes and 
their targeted beneficiaries in the current scenario is concerned. In the 
wake of delay in containing Census 2021, it becomes imperative on 
part of the State Government to devise internal mechanism to 
independently conduct household surveys/data collection exercises so 
that adequate allocation of resources may be directed towards timely 
rescue and rehabilitation of Child Labour. 
22.30  The Committee note that, NCLP is implemented in 15 
districts in T amil Nadu and Special Training Centres (STCs) are 
functioning in order to rehabilitate Child Labours. The Committee find 
that, in these STCs, the children inter-alia provided bridge education, 
vocational training, mid -day meal, stipend, healthcare, recreat ion etc, 
with an objective of preparing them to be mainstreamed in the formal 
fold of education. The Committee were given to understand that 
pursuant to the order of Union Government dated 14.03.2022, NCLP 
was subsumed under Samagra Shiksha of Ministry of Education and 
that no STCs would be functional after 31.03.2021. Subsequently, as 
part of the order, the children enrolled in STC’s of NCLP as on 
31.03.2021 would be mainstreamed and those enrolled after 
31.03.2021 would be immediately transferred to STC’s  run by Samagra 
Shiksha. Furthermore, the Union Government allowed NCLP districts of 
Dharmapuri, Krishngiri and Vellore to continue operation during 

401 
 
Financial Year 2022 -23. The Committee were further apprised that 
prior to the receipt of Union Government I nstructions, as on 
14.03.2022, 203 STC’s were functioning in the 15 NCLP districts and a 
total of 3428 rescued Child Labours were studying and a total of 474 
students had benefitted in year 2020 -21, from the monthly cash 
assistance of Rs. 500 (revised from  Rs. 250) given to children in NCLP 
schools who have been admitted to regular schools to pursue higher 
educations. The Committee, observe that henceforth the rescued child 
labours will be mainstreamed into formal education system through 
Special training c entres under Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan and no more 
STC’s would be functional under NCLP Scheme. While emphasising the 
role and necessity of the STC’s in the rehabilitation of child labours 
into the formal fold of Education in a holistic of manner, the 
Committee stress the need to accord priority on maintenance of STCs 
and consider increasing the number of such centres in areas with high 
incidence of child labour. Despite the onus of supervision of STCs being 
shifted to Samagra Shiksha from NCLP, the Committee  feel that proper 
monitoring for fund disbursal and utilisation will be the key to effective 
functioning of Special Training Centres. 
22.31  The Committee find that the State Government had set up 
a tracking system called ‘Education Management Information System 
(EMIS) to impart quality education to children in school which inter-
alia also updates the status of School students who fail to rejoin 
classes. The Committee observe that, in the event of the childs details 
not appearing on the EMIS portal, the sta tus is immediately shared 
with the Department of Labour which runs ITI and polytechnic courses 
and Department of Higher Education since some vocational courses are 
also run by them. Commending the digital database put in place by the 
State Government, the Committee are of the view that the EMIS 
ensures effective tracking of the child as he/she moves up the 
education ladder and help in detecting drop -outs among children. 
Further, in order to address drop -outs, the Committee find the State 

402 
 
Government undertak es survey round the year viz. April, May and 
September to identify out of school children and mainstream them. 
Further, during the Covid period, a special mass drive was undertaken 
between 10.08.2021 to 15.10.2021 using a geo -tagged mobile 
application and integrated it with Department of School Education 
EMIS portal by involving Block Resource Teacher Education, head 
master, school teacher, volunteers, Anganwadi workers and NGO’s etc., 
in order to identify children between class I to 12 who dropped out of 
school. The Committee were informed that the special focus was given 
to Girls/Children with Special needs /Transgender children who lost 
their parents in Covid -19 and other children displaced due to 
pandemic. The Committee find that the survey resulted in 
identification of 1,90,593 children between Class I to 12. The 
Committee were informed that each of the aforementioned children 
were enrolled in age appropriate classes in nearby formal schools and 
provided books, uniforms, school bags, notebooks etc. The c hildren 
were to be tracked using the EMIS portal till they complete higher 
secondary education. Appreciating the steps taken by the State 
Government, to identify out of school children and mainstream them, 
the Committee find that this to be main reason for  high enrolment 
ratio of over 99 percent at primary level and more than 95 percent at 
secondary level. Further, the Committee also find that even in 
instances of drop-outs, it was noticed that the Children  had enrolled in 
other vocational courses especial ly such courses for Class 8 passouts. 
Commending the steps taken by the State Government, the Committee 
further urge the State to take necessary steps to ensure that periodic 
survey be undertaken to ascertain drop -outs be taken up so that 
commensurate step s can be taken for their timely rehabilitation and 
mainstreaming under the ambit of education.  At the same time, with 
regard to other drop -outs especially, those who opted for vocational 
courses/skill development programmes after completion of class 8th, 
commensurate placement help must be provided to such adolescents 

403 
 
by the State Government for long term economic empowerment/  
sustenance. 
22.32  The Committee note that there has been a regular influx of 
migrants from rural areas in Tamil Nadu towards indust rial hubs like 
Chennai, Trichy, Coimbatore and Erode as a result of which these 
pockets have been attracting child labour. According to the submission 
made by the State Government, necessary instructions have been 
issued to the Enforcement Officers of the aforementioned districts to 
conduct inspections with the District task force along with the Railway 
Department Officials to identify Children employed as child labour in 
Railway Stations and to take necessary follow up action for their 
rehabilitation. The Committee find that migration usually is a result of 
regional disparity in development and influx of migrants into districts 
like Chennai, Trichy, Coimbatore and Erode has been exacerbated in 
the aftermath of the Covid -19 pandemic. The Committee are of the  
view that there is a need for an Inter -State migration protection policy 
to look into the welfare of such migrants.  
22.33  The Committee note that under the Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, penal action is taken 
against the employer who employs the Child Labour. Further, as per 
Sec 14 -A of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition a nd 
Regulation) Act, 1986, the offence committed by an employer is 
punishable under Section 3/ 3A and shall be cognizable. However, as 
per the submission of the State Government, contract Labour Act, 1976 
and Inter State Migrant Workers Act, 1979 does not mention anything to 
this effect. Furthermore, in the case of children brought from other 
States for employment through an agent, the Committee noted that 
joint liability is vested with several persons. In the view of the 
Committee, it becomes difficult to b ook cases under the Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, since the 
details of the employers are not known. The Committee feel that the 
ambit of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 

404 
 
Act, 1986 be suitabl y amended/ambit widened to incorporate penal 
provisions in order to be able to take action against such employers for 
employing children from other States as labour.  The Committee also 
emphasize the role of the Police department in identifying such 
persons and initiate action on the principal employer.  
22.34 The Committee note that the State Government has issued 
necessary instructions to the Directorate of Industrial Safety and 
Health to conduct regular inspections at Industries across the State 
where th ere is a likely prevalence of child labour, to check its 
incidence. The Committee further note that District Collectors across 
the State have been requested to convene meetings with the Industrial 
bodies and ensure use of ‘no Child labour’ sticker on their  products. 
The Committee while commending the use of ‘Child Labour Free’ 
stickers as a novel initiative taken by the State Government to check 
incidence of Child labour and stress the need for pursuing Information, 
Education & Communication (IEC) campaigns  to create awareness and 
disseminate information regarding the benefits for Children in School 
and apprise parents/children of the benefits available under various 
schemes/programmes of the State Government so as to wean them 
from economic compulsion of being employed as Child labour. 
  

405 
 
CHAPTER – TWENTY THREE 
STATE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR 
 
23.1 According to the 2011 Census, there were 10.88 lakh Child Labourers 
in the State of Bihar in the age group of 05 -14. In the year 2009, the State 
Action Plan for Elimination, Release and Rehabilitation of Child Labour was 
formulated. The purpose of the State Action Plan was to establish 
cooperation and coordination between various departments and other 
stakeholders so that the objective of "Child Labour Free Bihar"  could be 
achieved. 
23.2 After 2017, many statutory and policy changes took place, the major 
one being the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 2016 and the National Policy for Children, 2013 etc. Due to 
these changes, amendments were brought to the State Action Plan and a 
new State Action Plan 2017 for the purpose of Elimination of Child Labour 
and Prohibition and Regulation Adolescent Labour was notified. The 
responsibilities of various Departments have been mentioned in the State 
Action Plan for the rehabilitation of the rescued child labour. A State Task 
Force is constituted as per the provision of the State Action Plan under the 
chairmanship of the Chief Secretary, Bihar.  
23.3 The Committee were informed that in the State of Bihar, Dhawa Dal(s) 
have been formed under the convenorship of Labour Superintendents in all 
the districts to rescue child labourers from  workplaces. The operation of the 
raid team is done regularly, and its monitoring is done at the headquarters  
level. Rs.3000/ - is provided to child labourers as financial assistance for 
immediate needs like ration, clothes, medicine etc., after rescue.  The details 
of the rescued child labour are interred in Child Labour Tracking System. 
This software -based track ing system has been working since 2016 and 
through this system, the economic and educational rehabilitation of released 
child labour is monitored. On the occasion of World Day against Child 
Labour on June 12, 2022, an improved version of child labour track ing 
system 2.0 has been unveiled.   An amount of Rs 25,000/ - is given to the 
rescued child labour when registered in the Child Labour Tracking System 
in the form of a fixed deposit scheme from the Chief Minister's Relief Fund. 
This principal amount along wi th interest is provided to the rescued child 
labour after attaining the age of 18 years. 
23.4 The Committee were informed that there were 10.88 lakh child 
labourers in the State of Bihar in the age group of 05 -14 which was 3.8 
percent of the total child po pulation of the State and 10 percent of the total 
number of child labourers in the country. The Committee wanted to know 
the robust efforts taken to reduce the number of child labourers in the 
State. In response, the State Government of Bihar submitted as under:- 
“Considering the fact that child labour is just one manifestation of the level 
of socio-economic development of the State and society, the Government of 
Bihar is working on multiple fronts to achieve socio -economic upliftment of 

406 
 
the masses. Broadly speaking, the efforts of the Government can be divided 
into five categories:  
a. Programmes aimed at direct employment generation like 
MNREGA and rapid development of physical infrastructure;  
b. Programmes aimed at entrepreneurship development, 
generating self employment as well as jobs, like Mukhyamantri 
Navpravartan Yojana, Mukhyamantri Cluster Yojana, Mukhymantri 
Mahila Udhami Yojana, Mukhyamantri Anusuchit Jati/ Janjati 
Yojana, Mukhyamantri Yuva Udhami Yojana, PMEGP, PMFME, etc. ; 
c. Programmes of soc ial security like PDS, pension schemes, 
scholarship schemes , ICDS etc; and  
d. Programme aimed at promoting rural livelihood through 
organization and empowerment of women. For this purpose a 
registered society named as "Bihar Rural Livelihood Promotion 
Society" also called JEEVIKA is formed. The objective of JEEVIKA is to 
improve the livelihoods of rural poor households through developing 
institutions of the women, like Self -Help Groups (SHGs) and their 
federations to enable them to access better services and obtain credit 
for creating self -employment opportunities. In Bihar more than 1 
million such groups have been formed involving more than 10 million 
women. 
e. Programmes directly aimed at social security of unorganized 
workers like, Bihar Unorganised Sec tor Workers and Artisans Social 
Security Scheme, 2011, Bihar State Migrant Labour Accidental  Grant 
Scheme, 2008 etc. 
 The purpose of all these schemes are to develop socio -economic 
parameters of the people of Bihar, and to strike at the root cause of pove rty 
which manifests itself, inter-alia, in the form of child labour” 
23.5 The Committee were further informed that the Government of Bihar 
have made specific Scheme named "Rehabilitation of Child Labour" and has 
made budgetary provision for addressing the issue of child labour.   Apart 
from immediate assistance of Rs. 3000 to the rescued child labourer, a grant 
of Rs. 25000/ - is released from Chief Minister Relief Fund for every child 
rescued. From the year 2016 to 20222, the grant of Rs. 25000/ - has  been 
disbursed for 2,084 rescued child labourers from Chief Minister Relief Fund. 
Also under the Bonded Labour Rehabilitation Scheme, an amount of 
Rs.20,000/- is provided to the rescued child bonded labourers as immediate 
financial assistance.  
23.6 With regard to the Dhawa Dal formed in the State to rescue child 
labourers, the Committee wanted to know about the method of operation of 
these ‘Flying Squads’. In reply, the State Government stated as follows:- 
“The Dhawa Dal (Flying Squad) has been constituted in al l the districts of 
Bihar. The main purpose of this Squad is to randomly inspect likely places 
where child labour may be employed as well as to act on specific complaints 
and to rescue child labourers, found if any, from the work site. 

407 
 
During the raids of D hawa Dal, Pledge is also taken from the place where 
raids are conducted regarding non employment of child labour in any form 
of work.” 
23.7 Also, with regard to the frequency of operations of Dhawa Dal the 
Committee were informed that  ‘ Direction has been given to field officers to 
ensure at least two rounds of movement of Dhawa Dal in   a week, in their 
respective districts.’ 
23.8 When asked to provide the data regarding the work done by the 
Dhawa Dal(s), the State Government submitted as follows:- 
“(i) In the current year from 01st  Jan 2022 to 03rd  Nov 2022, total 1113 
Dhawa Dal movements have been reported from all 38 districts of Bihar.  
(ii) The movement of Dhawa Dal is throughout the year. Also, special 
drives are occasionally conducted in the Districts, on the direction of District 
Magistrates or State headquarters.  
          In the current year, till 03-11-2022, a total of 333 child labourers are 
rescued from different districts through Dhawa Dal.” 
23.9 With regard to the functioning of the Dhawa Dals the Principal 
Secretary, Labour deposed as under: 
“There is a flying squad in every district under the Labour Superintendent. 
So, we continuously do it. Sometimes we do it as a drive for months together 
and sometimes it goes on a regular basis. We hav e a specific WhatsApp 
number on which we can receive complaints, and each and every complaint 
is taken care of. We have also developed an App which is about to be 
launched. As soon as the rescue teams/Dhawa Dals have taken action, they 
will just update it on the App and we will immediately come to know about 
it. Apart from the officers of the Labour Department, now the District 
Magistrate, Superintendent of Police, DDC, SDO, DSP, Circle Officer, BDO, 
Executive Officer, all have been declared as Inspectors under this Act.” 
23.10 The Committee pointed out that the involvement at Block level and 
Panchayat level functionaries was essential for eradicating child labour from 
rural areas. On being asked about the view of the State Government in this 
regard, the reply was submitted as follows:- 
 “The State Government completely agrees with the view of the Committee of 
involving Block level and Panchayat level functionaries.  
The State Action Plan for Elimination of Child Labour and Prohibition and 
Regulation of Adolescent  Labour, currently operational in the state, since 
2017 provides for the constitution of a task force at Block Level   and Gram 
Panchayat Level. The Task Force of the Block is headed by Pramukh of the 
Panchayat Samiti. Block Development Officer i s the Member Secretary. 
Similarly, the Task Force formed at Gram Panchayat is headed by Mukhiya 
as Chairman and Panchayat Secretary as the Member Secretary. 
Hence, the State Government has already provided for important role to the 
grass root level authori ties and Panchayati Raj representatives for the 
control and Elimination of Child Labour.” 

408 
 
23.11 The Committee desired to know the procedure for regular review of the 
functioning of the District Task force and whether any officer had been 
appointed for the purpose. In reply, the State Government stated as follows:- 
 “The Task Force constituted at the District level meets regularly. Some of the 
proceeding of the meeting  is included in the report which was presented 
before the Hon'ble committee. The meetings are reported to the State level. 
 The Task Force constituted at the District level is chaired by District 
Magistrate with Superintendent of Police, Deputy Development 
Commissioner, Chief Medical Officer, Executive Officer of Nagar 
Parishad, Sub-Divisional Officer, District Superintendent of Education, 
District Welfare Officer, District Panchayati Raj Officer, Assistant Director 
Child Protection, Representative of Child Welfare Committee etc. as its 
members. The Labour Superintendent of the District function s as the 
member secretary of the task force. 
The meetings at the Panchayat and Block level are monitored from the 
District level. These meetings are not taking place at the desired frequency. 
However, we are constantly monitoring and making effort to make them 
more effective as well as pursuing them to hold regular meetings of the 
taskforce.” 
23.12 As regards the frequency of the meetings at the level of the District 
Magistrate, the State Government stated as follows:- 
“The State Action Plan provides for at  least one meeting in a month at the 
place, venue and time decided by the chairperson. Some of the proceedings 
of the meeting are included in the report which was presented before the 
Hon'ble committee.” 
23.13 It was submitted to the Committee that the Sta te of Bihar has also 
established Bihar State Child Labour Commission in 1997. The Committee 
desired to be apprised of the steps taken for monitoring and facilitating the 
release and rehabilitation of rescued child labourers outside Bihar.  In 
response, the State Government apprised as under:- 
“There has been an office of Joint Labour Commissioner at Bihar Bhawan, 
New Delhi since 2007 for monitoring and facilitating release and 
rehabilitation of rescued child labourers outside Bihar. The office of Joint 
Labour Commissioner also looks into the matters related to Migrant Labour. 
The Government of Bihar shall earnestly  consider the suggestion of Hon'ble 
member for establishing offices in those States where migrant population is 
in considerable number.” 
23.14 As regards the high incidence of child trafficking in districts such as 
Saharsa, the State Government submitted as under:- 
“It is true that Saharsa is one of the major hubs of child trafficking as many 
trains originate from Saharsa. The districts surrounding S aharsa like 
Madhepura, Supaul, Madhubani  have high percentage of child labour. The 
trafficker takes children from the surrounding areas and boards the train 
from  Saharsa. That is why, in many instances child laborers are rescued 
from Saharsa.” 

409 
 
23.15 In this regard the Principal Secretary Labour stated as follows: 
“If we look at the geographical expanse, there are certain districts which are 
more endemic in terms of child workers. Gaya, Bhojpur, Patna, Shivpura, 
Nawada, Jamui, Banka, Madhubani, Supaul, Ara ria, and West Champaran 
are the districts which are more prone in this regard.” 
23.16 When asked whether the State Government received any specific 
assistance from the Central Government for addressing the issue of Child 
Labour, the State Government responded as under:- 
“There is no specific assistance from the Central Government for child labour 
issues to the State Government.” 
23.17 When asked about the occupations where Child Labour is mostly 
engaged in the State, the State Government stated as follows:- 
“Inside Bihar, child labourers are found to be mostly engaged in road side 
eateries, motor garages, brick kilns, small shops etc.” 
23.18 Highlighting the efforts of the State Government for ensuring retention 
and preventing drop -out of children from schoo ls, the State Government 
furnished the following details:- 
“As already mentioned, a special programme called "Muhim" is running in 
the State to ensure retention and to prevent drop -out of children from 
school. This programme has been operational since 2013. 
Also for identifying the Out of School children and children never enrolled 
between the ages of 6 -14 years, house -hold survey is done by the teachers 
in its catchment areas to track such children and enroll them in nearby 
schools in the age appropriate class. The school management committee and 
community also play an important role in identifying out of school children.  
The data of the survey is uploaded on the "Prabandh" Portal of Government 
of India. It is noteworthy to mention that the number of Out of School 
children has significantly come down from about 20 Lakh in 2005-06 to 1.34 
Lakh in 2021-22.” 
23.19 When asked about the steps taken for vocational rehabilitation of 
children and the assistance provided to NGOs working towards eradication 
of child labour, the State Government submitted as follows: 
“There were four Special Training Centers operational in the state for 
educational and vocational rehabilitation of rescued child labour before 
Covid pandemic. These centers were run by the Non Governmental 
Organization with the financial support of the Government of Bihar. 
However, currently the centres are non-operational.” 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
23.20  The Committee are highly pleased to note that the State 
Government of Bihar, considering the fact that child labour is just one 
manifestation of the level of socio -economic development of the State 

410 
 
and society, is working on multiple fronts to achieve socio -economic 
upliftment of the masses. Programmes aimed at direct employment 
generation, entrepreneurship development, social security including 
that of people in the unorganised sectors, promoting rural livelihood 
through organization and empowerment of women, etc are part of the 
strategy of the State Government in this direction. It is also impressive 
to see that more than 1 million groups akin to Self Help Groups have 
been formed in Bihar involving more than 10 million women. Further,  
the Bihar State Action Plan for Elimination, Release and Rehabilitation 
of Child Labour was formul ated in 2009. The purpose of the State 
Action Plan was to establish cooperation and coordination between 
various departments and other stakeholders so that the objective of 
"Child Labour Free Bihar" could be achieved. The State Plan was 
modified in 2017 in  the wake of the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2016 and the National 
Policy for Children, 2013, etc and a State Task Force has been 
constituted as per the provision of the State Action Plan under the 
chairmanship o f the Chief Secretary, Bihar. The Committee observe 
that the institutional initiatives of the State Government of Bihar are 
in the right direction, aimed ultimately at eradicating child labour and 
recommend that the Task Force should act as the fulcrum in this 
endeavour. Coordination of the work of the different Departments, 
inclusion of Local Self Government Institutions, NGOs and other Civil 
Society organisations can be effectively guided and monitored under 
the umbrella of the State Task Force.    
23.21  The Committee find that Bihar had set up a Child Labour 
Tracking System as early as in 2016 and appreciate the efforts and 
work of the State Government in using technology to tackle public 
policy issues. The Committee are informed that the upgraded versio n 
of CLTS 2.0 has been launched on the occasion of World Day against 
Child Labour in 2022.   The Committee recommend that the Central 
Government consider setting up a national level child tracking system 

411 
 
for which the basic framework can be adopted from the  system 
operational in Bihar. The Tracking system should provide information 
pertaining to every child rescued across all the States on a single 
platform. Such a facility would be of immense importance particularly 
if the child is rescued in a State different from his/her home State. The 
system should allow all the participating authorities and stakeholders 
to access information pertaining to the rescue and rehabilitation status 
of child labourers. 
23.22  The Committee are pleased to take into cognisance th e 
formation of the Dhawa Dal by the State Government of Bihar that act 
as flying squads for rescue of child labourers from workplaces in the 
State. It is an important initiative towards the prevention and 
elimination of child labour as the Dhawa Dal, forme d in each 38 
Districts, are slated to conduct twice a week inspections at suspected 
child labour sites. The Committee note with appreciation that during 
2022, from 01st January to 03rd November, a total of 1113 Dhawa Dal 
movements have been reported from all districts of Bihar. Further, 333 
child labourers were rescued from different districts through Dhawa Dal 
during the said period.   The Committee hope that the mobile 
application reported to be under development for Dhawa Dal has come 
into being as it can  lend more effectiveness in gathering information 
about the incidence of Child labour and the same can be acted upon by 
the Dal. However, it would be of high importance to ensure that the 
identity of the persons passing on the information shall be kept strictly 
confidential. Further, the possibility of the Dhawa Dal being deployed 
against trafficking as well should also need to be explored. The 
Committee are of the considered opinion that the formation of such 
flying squads can be considered by other States  also as an effective 
step to combat child labour.   
23.23  The Committee greatly appreciate the efforts of the State 
Government in developing a mechanism to locate school dropouts and 
ensure inclusive and equitable quality education at all levels of schoo l 

412 
 
education including the special program under "Muhim" aimed at 
preventing/tackling drop out and ensuring retention of children in 
school. It is noteworthy to mention that the number of Out of School 
Children has significantly come down from about 20 lakh  in 2005-2006 
to 1.34 lakh by 2021 - 2022. In the considered opinion of the 
Committee, the tracking of out of School Children in villages and rural 
areas is more effective while there is a need to strengthen the 
mechanism in urban areas considering the lar ge number of migrant 
workers, who live under flyovers or shanties near railway stations, and 
do not have a residence, which makes it difficult to track such families 
and their children.  The Committee urge the State Government to take 
urgent and specific s teps to identify such out of school children living 
in street conditions and ensure that they return to the educational 
system. Also, the adolescents who are rescued should be linked to a 
skill development program run by the Government that should have a 
mechanism to ensure their placement. 
23.24  The Committee find that there is an office of Joint Labour 
Commissioner at Bihar Bhawan, New Delhi for monitoring and 
facilitating the release and rehabilitation of rescued child labour who 
have gone outside from Bihar. This is a proactive welcome step from 
the State Government towards setting up an effective counter front to 
tackle child labour . The Committee recommend that the State 
Government should also consider opening similar offices in all States 
with substantial migrant population from Bihar since such a step can 
ensure that rescued children receive the necessary support 
expeditiously and are rehabilitated in the shortest possible time. 
Additionally, the Government should collaborate with the respective 
State Governments to ensure seamless coordination and effective 
implementation of rehabilitation programs. The Committee are of the 
firm opinion in this regard that entering into Memoranda of 
Understanding (MoU) with States that have considerable presence of 
migrant labourers from Bihar would go a long way in the release and 

413 
 
rehabilitation of child labourers. The victims of child trafficking should 
also be covered by such MoUs and emancipated in a sustainable 
manner.  The Committee recommend that an umbrella me chanism 
from the Union Government also needs to be initiated in this direction 
bringing all the States/UTs into its fold . The Committee also suggest 
that all bodies of the Governments set up to eradicate child labour can 
be strengthened by allocating addit ional personnel with expertise in 
child labor issues which may involve roping in the help of credible 
NGOs. Providing adequate financial resources to support the their 
operations, including data collection, monitoring, and outreach 
activities would be the prerequisite. 
23.25  The Committee are concerned to note that there is no 
specific assistance from the Central Government for child labour issues 
to the State Government. In the considered opinion of the Committee, 
additional resources and targeted support  from the Central 
Government are pivotal to effectively address the scourge of child 
labour in States such as Bihar that report the largest number of child 
labourers in the country.   They should be provided with special grants 
and other logistical and infr astructural support specifically to aid the 
schemes for eradication of child labour . These grants/support would 
enable these States to supplement existing schemes, expand 
rehabilitation programs, and strengthen enforcement mechanisms to 
combat child labor more effectively. The Committee therefore urge the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment to make the necessary provisions 
in the budget to provide the States prone to child labour such as 
Bihar  with additional resources, to bolster their efforts against child  
trafficking, eradication of child labour and for the overall development 
of children . Meanwhile, transparency and accountability in the 
utilisation of funds would be crucial to ensure that funds actually 
benefit the children in distress on the ground. States should also, on 
their part, establish lucid reporting mechanisms to inform the Central 

414 
 
Government and the public about the utilization of funds and the 
progress of efforts to stamp out child labour. 
23.26  The Committee are concerned to note that as pe r the 
submission of the State Government, the only four Special Training 
Centers in the State run by Non Governmental Organizations with 
financial support of the Government of Bihar for educational and 
vocational rehabilitation of rescued child labourers b efore Covid 
pandemic are currently non -operational. The Committee desire to 
highlight the role and necessity of such centres in the rehabilitation of 
child labourers in a holistic manner and urge the State Government to 
take immediate steps for re -opening of these centres.  The Committee 
also want the Government to consider increasing the number of such 
centres in areas with high incidence of child labour. The State 
Government may also consider enhancing the financial support being 
provided to the NGOs for t heir operation while ensuring proper 
monitoring for fund disbursal and utilisation.  
 
  

415 
 
OVERVIEW 
 To sum up, the National Policy on Child Labour, though rolled out in 
the year 1987, its implementation gained momentum after the 
amendment to the Act came in the year 2016, when for the first time 
the term ‘adolescent’ was included in the Act and complete ban was 
imposed on employment of children below 14 years.  Major follow up 
action commenced from the year 2017 onwards, when standard 
operating procedure was launched on 26 September, 2017 providing for 
legal provisions pursuant to issuance of Child Labour  (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Amendment Rules 2017 which came into effect from 2nd 
June, 2017.  These rules broadly provide for prevention, rescue and 
rehabilitation of child and adolescent labour.  The Committee took up  
the subject ‘National Policy on Ch ild Labour —An Assessment’ for 
comprehensive examination in November, 2021. It is significant to 
mention that after deliberation with the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment, it came to light that there is very little data being 
collected relating to child labo ur, annually. Whatever information and 
data is there it comes from Census, which is done in every 10 years. 
Therefore, it was felt necessary to collate upto date data biannually, if 
not annually through a dedicated method by the Government. The 
nodal ministry for implementation of this policy agreed with the view 
of the Committee that any effective plan against child labour has to be 
centred round ‘whole -of-government approach’ so as to make this 
policy a success story.  In pursuance thereof, an inter -ministerial 
meeting was held to discuss the child labour related issues under the 
chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment on 7 
January, 2022 and the line ministries  were advised to draw plan of 
action to combat  scourge of child labour.    
 There is no denying the fact that child labour is a multi -dimensional 
phenomenon requiring a multitude of solutions to be planned and 
delivered in harmony and coherence by a range of stakeholders from 
the policy makers to the families and children at the grass-root level.   
Recognizing the inextricable link between the abolition of child labour 

416 
 
and  the right to education, mainstreaming should be the key strategy 
for ensuring that child labour issues  and  concerns are included in 
policies, plans and budge ts, appraisals, feasibility studies, evaluations, 
economic-development targets/goals, etc. at the national, sub-national, 
sectorial levels and with regional bodies.   
 In the context of implementation of the national programme, it is 
observed that despite t he economic and social gains in the country, 
ending child labour, together with addressing other forms of child 
rights issues, has remained a challenge.  Indications are that the 
majority of these working children are coping with numerous 
contextual challenges, including household poverty, extensive informal 
economies, unregulated agriculture sector, vulnerabilities caused by 
conflicts and natural disasters, movement of persons in the form of 
migration/trafficking from rural and agricultural areas to cities  and 
cross borders as well as internal displacement of persons, bonded 
labour and exclusion, insufficient reach of social protection measures, 
youth unemployment, inadequate capabilities for enforcement, 
uninformed public, and coordination and delivery bottlenecks.   
 Among the key Ministries being the major stakeholders, are the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment, Ministry of Women and Child 
Development, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Ministry of 
Education and a host of Ministries focusing  on sec tors which are 
confronted with the problem —agriculture, mining, tourism, and urban 
development, as well as agencies dealing with internal and external 
migration and trafficking.   
 The Ministry of Labour and Employment shall be the nodal Ministry for 
implementing the programme in coordination with other line 
ministries, state governments/UTs and other stakeholders.  
 With a view to conduct performance review of all the stakeholders on 
regular basis, an accountability framework should be developed for 
each sta keholder involved in the entire convergence process of the 
rescued children. 

417 
 
 All requisite and foolproof measures should be taken by the 
Government entities to promote and secure the socio -economic and 
physical well being of the children and their families  in all spaces 
within the informal sector so as to prevent exploitation of the child. 
 As the meaningful realization of the policies of the Government for 
securing the rights of the children could only be achieved through 
rigorous monitoring and evaluation compliance, the Committee exhort 
the Government entities to embark upon seamless collaboration and 
coordination strategies with the help of IT -enabled tools and robust 
tracking system for every rescued child so as to ensure that no child is 
re-victimized. 
 The Committee are of the firm opinion that the quality implementation 
of the Child Labour Policy should be ensured through timely and 
transparent allocation and release of adequate financial material and 
human resources to the implementing agencies. 
 In its  endeavour to exhibit zero tolerance to child labour, the 
Government should ensure that supply chains in the Government 
procurement are free from child labour or any form of violation of child 
rights. 
 The Government besides integrating ‘Child Budgeting’ in to all the 
budgets and programmes of the Central and State Governments and 
their Undertakings, should also ensure optimum utilization of budget 
allocated for children while periodically increasing the allocation 
keeping in mind the evolving needs. 
 The primary focus of the Government must be on the prevention of any 
form of violation of the rights of children as well as to create and 
preserve a robust safety net around every child. The primary objective 
of the Government should be to ensure access to quality  healthcare, 
education and social security to the child and his/her families. 
Developing technological strategies that involve active monitoring of 
cluster areas that are prone to child labour will go a long way in the 
rescue and rehabilitation of children  in a planned and comprehensive 
manner. 

418 
 
 The Government should ensure that all out of school children such as 
child labourers, trafficked and street children, orphans, children with 
disability, children in areas of civil unrest, children of migrant labours,  
prisoners and manual scavengers etc. are tracked, rescued, 
rehabilitated and have access to their right to education. 
 It is imperative to ensure consistent coordination among various 
agencies at the District Level such as District Child Protection Unit 
(DCPU), Special Juvenile Police Unit (SJPU), District Magistrate, Child 
Welfare Committee, Village Level Child Protection Committee under 
ICPS, District level Vigilance Committee under ITPA Act, 1986, Schools 
and Panchayats through the District Task Force (DTF), etc. 
 One of the most critical prerequisites to prevent child labour and 
adolescent labour in hazardous employment is to put in place 
prescribed institutional mechanisms and build capacity of institutions 
to carry out designated tasks assigned to each of them. 
 Analyzing information collected from the database of the missing 
children and previously rescued survivors as well as forming a strong 
network with all the stakeholders and law enforcement agencies 
engaged in the transit points and destination are as will go a long way 
in ensuring accurate data collection and effective child labour 
prevention.  
 Victim Protection mechanisms including logistic and medical supports 
and access to legal aid are very crucial to rehabilitate the rescued 
children. 
 Counseling must be provided to the victims by trained and certified 
counselors, community social workers, NGOs so as to assess the mental 
trauma caused to the victims and determine the required support to 
them. 
 It is absolutely essential to strengthen the whole pro cess of 
investigation and prosecution and conducting the trial in a time bound 
and victim friendly manner. 

419 
 
 Social, educational and economic rehabilitation of the child and 
adolescent labourers who have been rescued must be done through 
coordinated and convergent efforts by a series of stakeholders. 
 Convergence mechanism must be developed between NDMA and NCPCR 
to protect children in times of natural and manmade disaster and other 
humanitarian crisis. Similarly, focus must be on interdepartmental 
coordination at State and District levels and their SOP so that effective 
monitoring is done for prevention, rescue and rehabilitation of child 
labours. 
 In line with the aim of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 8.7, 
the Government should take immediate and eff ective measures to 
eradicate forced labour and modern slavery and human trafficking and 
secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child 
labour, including recruitment and use of child soldiers and by 2025 end 
child labour in all its forms . With the ratification of International 
Labour Organisation (ILO) Conventions 138 and 182 in 2017, the 
successful implementation of National Policy on Child Labour would be 
critical in enhancing the image of the country in global scenario and 
positioning its status with pride among developed countries.   
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                 BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB 
18th December, 2023                        CHAIRPERSON, 
27 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)        STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
  TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
  

420 
 
Annexure 
THE SCHEDULE  
PART A 
HAZARDOUS OCCUPATIONS AND PROCESSES IN WHICH ADOLESCENTS ARE 
PROHIBITED TO WORK AND CHILDREN ARE PROHIBITED TO HELP 
1. Mines and Collieries (underground and underwater) and related work in:- 
 
(i) Stone quarries; 
(ii) Brick kilns; 
(iii) Preparatory and incidental processes thereof including extraction, 
grinding, cutting, splitting, polishing, collection, cobbling of stones or 
lime or slate or silica or mica or any other such element or mineral 
extracted from the earth; or 
(iv) Open pit mines. 
2. Inflammable substances and explosives such as:- 
(i) Production, storage or sale of fire crackers; 
(ii) For manufacture, storage, sale, loading, unloading or transport of 
explosives as defined under the Explosives Act, 1884 (4 of 1884); 
(iii) Work relating to manufacturing, handling, grinding, glazing, cutting, 
polishing, welding, molding, electro-plating, or any other process 
involving inflammable substances; 
(iv) Waste management of inflammable substances, explosives and their by- 
products; or 
(v) Natural gas and other related products. 
Hazardous processes (serial numbers (3) to (31) below are as specified in the 
First Schedule of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948)) 
3. Ferrous Metallurgical Industries 
 
(i) Integrated Iron and Steel; 
 
(ii) Ferro-alloys; 
 
(iii) Special Steels. 
 
 
4. Non-ferrous Metallurgical Industries: Primary Metallurgical Industries, namely 
zinc, lead, copper, manganese and aluminium. 

421 
 
5. Foundries (ferrous and non-ferrous): Castings and forgings including cleaning 
or smoothening or roughening by sand and shot blasting. 
6. Coal (including coke) Industries:- 
(i) Coal, Lignite, Coke, similar other substance; 
(ii) Fuel Cases (including Coal Gas, Producer Gas, and Water Gas). 
7. Power Generating Industries. 
8. Pulp and paper (including paper products) Industries. 
9. Fertilizer Industries:- 
(i) Nitrogenous; 
(ii) Phosphatic; 
(iii) Mixed. 
10. Cement Industries: portland cement (including slag cement, puzzolona 
cement and their products). 
11. Petroleum Industries:- 
(i) Oil Refining; 
(ii) Lubricating Oils and Greases. 
12. Petro-chemical Industries. 
13. Drugs and Pharmaceutical Industries: Narcotics, Drugs and Pharmaceuticals. 
14. Fermentation Industries (Distilleries and Breweries). 
15. Rubber (Synthetic Industries). 
16. Paints and Pigment Industries. 
17. Leather Tanning Industries. 
18. Electro-plating Industries. 
19. Chemical Industries: 
(i) Coke Oven By-products and Coaltar Distillation products; 
(ii) Industrial Gases (nitrogen, oxygen, acetylene, argon, carbon dioxide, 
hydrogen, sulphurdioxide, nitrous oxide, halogenated hydrocarbon, 
ozone, similar other gas); 
(iii) Industrial Carbon; 
(iv) Alkalies and Acids; 
(v) Chromates and dichromate; 
(vi) Lead and its compounds; 

422 
 
(vii) Electro chemicals (metallic sodium, potassium and magnesium, 
chlorates, per chlorates and peroxides); 
(viii) Electro thermal produces (artificial abrasive, calcium carbide); 
(ix) Nitrogenous compounds (cyanides, Cyanamid’s, and other nitrogenous 
compounds); 
(x) Phosphorus and its compounds; 
(xi) Halogens and Halogenated compounds (chlorine, fluorine, bromine and 
iodine); 
(xii) Explosives (including industrial explosives and detonators and fuses). 
 
20. Insecticides, Fungicides, Herbicides and other pesticides industries. 
21. Synthetic Resin and Plastics. 
22. Man-made Fiber (Cellulosic and non-cellulosic) industry. 
23. Manufacture and repair of electrical accumulators. 
24. Glass and Ceramics. 
25. Grinding or glazing of metals. 
26. Manufacture, handling and processing of asbestos and its products. 
27. Extraction of oils and fats from vegetable and animal sources. 
28. Manufacture, handling and use of benzene and substances containing 
benzene. 
29. Manufacturing processes and operations involving carbon disulphide. 
30. Dyes and dyestuff including their intermediates. 
31. Highly flammable liquids and gases. 
32. Process involving handling and processing of hazardous and toxic chemicals as 
specified in Part-II of the Schedule Ito the Manufacture, Storage and Import of 
Hazardous Chemical Rules, 1989. 
33. Work in slaughter houses and including work with guillotines. 
34. Work involving exposure to radioactive substances including electronic waste 
and incidental processes therein. 
35. Ship breaking. 
36. Salt Mining or Salt Pan Work. 
37. Hazardous processes as specified in Schedule IX to the Building and Other 
Construction Workers’ (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Central Rules, 1998. 
38. Work in beedi-making or processing of tobacco including manufacturing, 
pasting and handling tobacco or any drugs or psychotropic substance or 

423 
 
alcohol in any form in food processing and beverage industry and at bars, 
pubs, parties or other similar occasions that serve alcoholic substances. 
 
PART B 
LIST OF OCCUPATIONS AND PROCESSES WHERE CHILDREN ARE 
PROHIBITED TO HELP IN FAMILY OR FAMILY ENTERPRISES (IN ADDITION 
TO PART A) 
Occupations 
Any occupation concerned with — 
1. Transport of passengers, goods or mails by railways; 
2. cinder picking, clearing of an ash pit or building operation in the railway 
premises; 
3. work in a catering establi shment at a railway station, involving the movement 
of a vendor or any other employee of the establishment from one platform to 
another or into or out of a moving train; 
4. work relating to the construction of a railway station or with any other work 
where such work is done in close proximity to or between the railway tracks; 
5. a port authority within the limits of any port; 
6. automobile workshops and garages; 
7. handloom and powerloom industry; 
8. plastic units and fiberglass workshops; 
9. domestic workers or servants; 
10. dhabas (roadside eateries), restaurants, hotels, motels, resorts; 
11. diving; 
12. circus; 
13. caring of Elephant; 
14. power driven bakery machine; 
15. shoe making. 
Processes 
1. Carpet-weaving including preparatory and incidental process thereof; 
2. Cement manufacture, including bagging of cement; 
3. Cloth printing, dyeing and weaving including processes, preparatory and 
incidental thereto; 
4. Shellac manufacture; 

424 
 
5. Soap manufacture; 
6. Wool-cleaning; 
7. Building and construction industry including processing and polishing of 
granite stones; hauling and stacking materials; carpentry; masonry; 
8. Manufacture of slate pencils (including packing); 
9. Manufacture of products from agate; 
10. Cashew and cashew nut descaling and processing; 
11. Metal cleaning, photo engraving and soldering processes in electronic 
industries; 
12. Aggarbatti manufacturing; 
13. Automobile repairs and maintenance including processes incidental thereto 
namely, welding, lathe work, dent beating and painting; 
14. Roof tiles units; 
15. Cotton ginning and processing and production of hosiery goods; 
16. Detergent manufacturing; 
17. Fabrication workshops (ferrous and non-ferrous); 
18. Gem cutting and polishing; 
19. Handling of chromite and manganese ores; 
20. Jute textile manufacture and coir making; 
21. Lime kilns and manufacture of lime; 
22. Lock making; 
23. Manufacturing processes  having exposure to lead such as primary and 
secondary smelting, welding and cutting of lead -painted metal constructions, 
welding of galvanized or zinc  silicate, polyvinyl chloride, mixing (by hand) of 
crystal glass mass, sanding or scraping of lead paint,  burning of lead in 
enameling workshops, lead mining, plumbing, cable making, wire patenting, lead 
casting, type founding in printing shops. shot making and lead glass blowing; 
24. Manufacture of cement pipes, cement products and other related work; 
25. Manufacture of glass, glass ware including bangles, florescent tubes, bulbs 
and other similar glass products; 
26. Manufacturing or handling of pesticides and insecticides; 
27. Manufacturing or processing and handling of corrosive and toxic substances; 
28. Manufacturing of burning coal and coal briquettes; 
29. Manufacturing of sports goods involving exposure to synthetic materials, 
chemicals and leather; 

425 
 
30. Oil expelling and refinery; 
31. Paper making; 
32. Potteries and ceramic industry; 
33. Polishing, moulding, cutting, welding and manufacturing of brass goods in all 
forms; 
34. Processes in agriculture where tractors, threshing and harvesting machines 
are used and chaff cutting; 
35. Saw mill – all processes; 
36. Sericulture processing; 
37. Skinning, dyeing and processes for manufacturing of leather and leather 
products; 
38. Tyre making, repairing, re-treading and graphite beneficiation; 
39. Utensils making, polishing and metal buffing; 
40. ‘Zari’ making and processes involving the use of zari (all processes); 
41. Graphite powdering and incidental processing; 
42. Grinding or glazing of metals; 
43. Diamond cutting and polishing; 
44. Rag picking and scavenging; 
45. Mechanized fishing; 
46. Food processing; 
47. Beverage industry; 
48. Cultivating, sorting, drying and packaging in spice industry; 
49. Timber handling and loading; 
50. Mechanical lumbering; 
51. Warehousing; 
52. Massage parlours, gymnasiums, or other recreational centres, or in medical 
facilities; 
53. Operations involving the following dangerous machines:- 
(a) hoists and lifts; 
(b) lifting machines, chains, ropes and lifting tackles; 
(c) revolving machinery; 
(d) power presses; 

426 
 
(e) machine tools used in the metal trades; 
54. Composing types for printing, printing by letter press, lithography, 
photogravure or other similar process or book-binding, as specified in sub-clause 
(iv) of clause (k) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948.” 
 
  

427 
 
APPENDIX-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 01 st November, 2021 from 1100 
hrs. to 1315 hrs. in Committee Room 'C’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
  MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
     
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
5. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
6. Shri Bhola Singh 
7. Shri Nayab Singh 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
  
8. Shri Naresh Bansal 
9.  Shri Dushyant Gautam 
10.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
11.  Dr. Banda Prakash 
12.  Ms. Dola Sen 
13.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
14.  Shri Vivek Thakur 
15.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
    
SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri D.R. Mohanty   - Director 
  3. Shri Sanjay Sethi    -        Additional Director 
  4. Shri Sidhartha Gautam Kamidi - Deputy Secretary 
  
   
  

428 
 
 
 Witnesses 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
1. Shri Sunil Barthwal Secretary, (L&E) 
2. Ms. Kalpana Rajsinghot Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Tewari Joint Secretary 
4. Shri R.K. Gupta Joint Secretary 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment 
to the sitting of the Committee, convened to have a briefing on the Subject 
‘National Policy on Child Labour – An Assessment’. Drawing the attention of 
the witnesses to Direction 58 of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings during deposition before the Parliamentary 
Committees, the Chairperson asked the Secretary, Ministry of Labour & 
Employment to brief the Committee on various initiatives taken and 
challenges faced to identify the cause and number of child labour in the 
Country, steps taken to formulate appropriate programmes/polices to 
eliminate all forms of child labour, impact of COVID-19 on child labour, etc. 
3. The Secretary, accordingly, gave an overview on aspects like legislative 
intervention, convergence of schemes and National Child Labour Project etc. 
Thereafter, the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment made a 
Power Point Presentation highlighting inter-alia constitutional provisions on 
child labour viz. fundamental rights (Art. 24)  and Directive Principles of 
State Policy (Art. 39);   Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, 
National Policy on Child Labour (NCLP), 1987 and Child Labour (Prohibition 
and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2016 and Rules made thereunder; 
penalties under the Act; ratification of ILO Conventions by the Government, 
census data on child labour; and components and performance of Platform 
for effective enforcement for No Child Labour (PENCiL) Portal etc. 
4. The Members then raised certain specific queries on various issues, 
which inter-alia included  engagement of children of age group of 14 to 17 
years in hazardous Industries; need to re -visit such Industries; fall in 
attendance of children of the age group of 14 -17 years in schools; 
engagement of large number of children in age group of 5 -14 years in rural 
areas; clarity in definition of  “hazardous process’’ under OSHWC Code; 
regulation of conditions of work of adolescents; state -wise information 
regarding functioning of District level Committees including periodicity of 
meetings held, issues raised and action taken; action plan to eradicate child 
labour/street children and budgetary provisions thereof;  timeline 
prescribed to extend the coverage of NCLP in all Districts and the extent to 
which its objectives were achieved; periodicity of c onducting surveys under 
NCLP; number of persons penalized and the details of penalties imposed; 

429 
 
need to have provision for registration on PENCIL Portal by child 
himself/herself;  need to conduct survey to have updated data on child 
labour; plan for revival of special schools;  necessity to carry out inspections 
at the Factories/Establishments; organizing awareness campaigns on 
regular basis; strengthening monitoring and implementation mechanism 
etc. The representatives of the Ministry responded to some of the queries/ 
points raised by the Members. 
5. As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the Secretary to furnish written replies thereon within 15 days. The 
Secretary assured to comply.  
6. The Chairperson thanked the Secretary and other representatives of 
the Ministry for appearing before the Committee and furnishing valuable 
information on the subject matter as well as responding to the queries of the 
Members. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned.  
  

430 
 
APPENDIX-II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 29 th April, 2022 from 1130 hrs . to 
1230 hrs. in Committee Room 'C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
     
   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
     
2. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
3. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
4. Shri Dharmendra Kashyap 
5. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
6. Shri Bhola Singh 
7. Shri Nayab Singh 
    
RAJYA SABHA 
  
8. Shri Naresh Bansal 
9. Shri Dushyant Gautam 
10. Ms. Dola Sen 
11. Shri Vivek Thakur 
12. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Sanjay Sethi   -        Additional Director 
  3. Shri K.G. Sidhartha  - Deputy Secretary 
   
  

431 
 
Witnesses 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sl. No.       Name      Designation 
 
1. Shri Sunil Barthwal Secretary 
2. Dr. Shashank Goel Additional Secretary 
3. Shri S.C. Joshi Chief Labour Commissioner (C) 
4. Ms. Kalpana Rajsinghot Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Ajay Tewari Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Labour & Employment 
(MoLE) to the sitting of the Committee, convened for taking further oral 
evidence of the Ministry on the subject ‘National P olicy on Child Labour 
(NCLP) - An Assessment’.  Drawing the attention of the representatives to 
Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of 
the proceedings of the Committee, the Chairperson asked the Secretary, 
MoLE, to app rise the Committee  of the status of proposals for taking up 
new projects and completion of pending projects under NCLP, level of 
preparedness in implementation of the Scheme, amendments that may be 
required in the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation)  Act, further steps 
taken to check prevalence of Child Labour across the country  and  
additional measures taken by the Ministry to alleviate the menace of Child 
labour. 
 
3.  The Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment briefed the 
Committee about the di scussions held with Fourteen Ministries/ 
Departments linked to the child labour issue.  T hereafter,  the Joint 
Secretary, MoLE made a Power Point Presentation inter-alia highlighting the 
provisions contained in Right to Education Act, 2009 and Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 2016, ratification of ILO 
conventions, major components of NCLP,  release of funds under NCLP, 
merger of NCLP with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) Scheme, etc.  
 
4. The Secretary and other representatives of the Ministry also 
responded to various queries raised by the Members which inter-alia 
included details of fourteen Ministries/Departments with whom the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment held discussions on issues related to c hild 
labour and their sector sp ecific responsibility ; details of sectors and 
establishments having higher incidence of child labour; NGOs  working for 
elimination of child labour and the criteria being followed by the Ministry for 
their involvement; number of children rescued, rehabilit ated and 
mainstreamed from working in hazardous Industries; number of meetings 
held by Central Monitoring Committee, State Monitoring Committee and 
District Level Monitoring and Vigilance Committee;  plan of action to cover 

432 
 
the Districts where NCLP has not  been sanctioned; coordination with those 
State Governments where cases of violation of child labour laws are 
registered/reported;  effectiveness of  PENCIL Portal; mechanism put in 
place to ensure proper rehabilitation of the rescued children; tracking 
mechanism in the case of school drop outs; assistance provided to the 
family members of the rescued children; gender -wise percentage of Child 
labour and marginalised sections rescued and rehabilitated; status of ‘State 
Action Plan’ for abolition of child labour in various States; functioning of the 
State Resource Centres. 
5.  As some points required detailed and statistical reply, the Chairperson 
asked the Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment to furnish written 
replies thereon within ten days. The Secretary assured to comply.  
6.  The Chairperson, then, thanked the Secretary and other 
representatives of the Ministry for furnishing valuable information on the 
subject and responding to the queries of the Members.  
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
 [A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
7. The Committee, then, decided to have oral evidence of the 
representatives of the fourteen Ministries/Departments identified by the 
MoLE and involved in the subject matter besides obtaining detaile d write 
ups from them. The Committee also decided to call some State Governments 
and Non -Governmental Organisations to tender evidence before them on 
issues relating to child labour. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

433 
 
APPENDIX-III 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
 
Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 6 th May, 2022 from 1100 hrs. to  
1220 hrs. in Committee Room 'B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
     
   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
     
2. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
3. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
4. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
5. Shri Bhola Singh 
6. Shri Ganesh Singh 
7. Shri Nayab Singh 
    
 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
8. Shri Naresh Bansal 
9. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
10. Shri Dushyant Gautam 
11. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director 
3. Shri Sanjay Sethi   -        Additional Director 
     
 

434 
 
Witnesses 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION  
(DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & LITERACY) 
 
 
Sl. No.       Name Designation 
 
1. Ms. Anita Karwal Secretary 
2. Shri Maneesh Garg Joint Secretary 
3. Ms. Rashi Sharma Director 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Education (Department 
of School Education & Literacy) to the sitting of the Committee, convened to 
have a briefing on the Subject  'National Policy on Child Labour – An 
Assessment’ in the light of the merger of National Child Labour Project 
(NCLP) with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) Scheme. Drawing the attention 
of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regar ding 
confidentiality of the proceedings during deposition before the Parliamentary 
Committees, the Chairperson asked the Secretary, DoSEL to apprise the 
Committee on the action plan on Child Labour after merger of NCLP with 
SSA, outcome of the discussions held with MoLE; measures taken by DoSEL 
to alleviate and rehabilitate Child Labour and provisions of the Right of 
Children to Free and Compulsory Education, etc.  
3. The Secretary, DoSEL accordingly, gave an overview of the discussion 
held with the Ministry of Labour & Employment on the merger of NCLP with 
SSA and thereafter the Joint Secretary, DoSEL made a Power -Point 
Presentation, high -lighting inter-alia concerns of DoSEL shared with the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment and their response; provisions of RTE Act 
and SSA for Out of School Children (OoSC); fund sharing pattern between 
Centre and Sates; preparation of annual plans by States and UTs; norms for 
provisioning of Special Training Centres (STCs); various child centric 
interventions; stipend for non -residential and residential courses, 
PRABANDH Portal, etc.  
4. The Members then raised certain specific queries on various issues 
which inter-alia included level of preparedness of the Department in carrying 
forward NCLP Scheme following its merger with SSA; budget allocation for 
the Scheme during FY 2022 -2023; State -wise data regarding school drop -
outs;  quantum of financial assistance sought by va rious States for ‘out of 
school’ children; effectiveness of the tracking mechanism for rescued 
children and need to appoint Nodal Officer by DoSEL; steps taken to extend 
coverage to ‘out of school’ children of nomadic tribes; efforts made to identify 
skilling needs of recued children; periodicity of conducting surveys under 
SSA by the teachers and training imparted to them; organizing awareness 

435 
 
campaigns on regular basis on provisions of RTE Act and SSA; need to 
involve public representatives at District le vel under SSA; maintenance of 
State-wise ‘Student Registry’; need to integrate PRABANDH Portal of DoSEL 
with PENCIL Portal of MoLE; number of STCs functional under SSA and 
having hostel facilities; distinction between ‘working children’ and ‘main 
working c hildren’; strengthening the monitoring and implementation 
mechanism, etc.  The representatives of the Department responded to the 
queries/points raised by the Members. 
5.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the Secretary, Ministry of Education to furnish written replies thereon 
within two weeks. The Secretary assured to comply. 
6.  The Chairperson, then, thanked the Secretary and other 
representatives of the Ministry for furnishing valuable information on the 
subject and responding to the queries of the Members.  
 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
 [A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  

436 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
 
Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31 st May, 2022 from 1100 hrs. to 
1240 hrs. in Committee Room 'C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
     
   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Pasunoori Dayakar 
5. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
6. Shri Dharmendra Kashyap 
7. Shri Pakauri Lal Kol 
8. Shri Sanjay Sadashiv Rao Mandlik 
9. Shri Nayab Singh 
      
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.  Shri Dushyant Gautam 
11.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri A.K. Shah   -  Joint Secretary   
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director 
4. Shri Sanjay Sethi   -        Additional Director 
5. Shri KG Sidhartha  -  Deputy Secretary  

437 
 
Witnesses 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS  
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Dr. Vivek Joshi RGI and Secretary (Coordination), 
MHA 
 
2. Shri Vivek Gogia Director, National Crime Records 
Bureau (NCRB) 
 
3. Shri Shyamal Misra Joint Secretary, MHA 
4. Shri Ashish Batra IG, National Investigating Agency 
(NIA) 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT  
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Ms. Vibha Bhalla Joint Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) to 
the sitting of the Committee convened to have briefing by the Ministry on the 
subject ‘National Policy on Child Labour - An Assessment’.   Drawing the 
attention of the representatives to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the 
Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked the RGI and Secretary ( Coordination), MHA, to apprise 
the Committee  of sector specific responsibility and  action plan of the 
Ministry subsequent to the meeting convened by MoLE in January, 2022 
and the measures taken to curb human/child trafficking, identification of 
child labour in the Census, the role of NCRB in documenting the incidence 
of crimes against children etc. 
 
3.  Accordingly, the RGI and Secretary (Coordination) , Ministry of Home 
Affairs briefed the Committee about Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013; 
compilation an d publication of crime statistics by NCRB as reported by 
States/UTs; establishment of Anti Trafficking Cell in 2006; release of funds 
to States/UTs for Setting up Anti Human Trafficking Units (AHTUs); issue of 
advisories/SOPs to States and UTs to address h uman trafficking, enforce 
legislations relating to crime against children including Child Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, set up exclusive ‘Crime against 
Women/Children Desks’ in each Police Station, thoroughly investigate crime 
against Children and Conduct speedy investigation; advisory to Ministry of 

438 
 
Railways to involve Railway Protection Force (RPF) and Government Railway 
Police (GRP) personnel deployed at Railway Stations in detecting the 
trafficking incidents & apprehending the trafficke rs; advisory to MoLE to 
sensitize officers of Labour Departments to keep watch over placement 
agencies; advisory to Ministry of Women & Child Development (MWCD) for 
rehabilitation of victims of trafficking; amendment of  National Investigation 
Agencies Act , 2008 in 2019 authorizing NIA to investigate the offence of 
human trafficking by bringing Section 370 and 370A of IPC  in its ambit; 
establishment of Crime Multi Agency Centre (Cri -MAC) in 2020 for online 
sharing of information on crime and criminals on 2 4X7 bases between 
various Law Enforcement Agencies and seamless flow of information 
between them, etc.  
4. The Members then raised various related queries which inter-alia 
included collection of data regarding child labour, adolescents in the age 
group of 15 to 17 and  'houseless' children in the next census, number of 
individuals prosecuted under the Child Labour (Regulation and Prohibition) 
Act, 1986;  progress made to curtail or eradicate trafficking after 
amendment of NIA Act, 2008; mandate of NIA to co ordinate with other 
Countries, effectiveness of Anti Trafficking Cell; mechanism available to 
monitor the functioning of AHTUs; employers penalised for violation of Child 
trafficking provisions under IPC 370/370A; mechanism available for 
rehabilitation of children rescued from trafficking;  measures taken to create 
awareness among police personnel  and sensitise them  to detect and 
apprehend child traffickers;  effectiveness  of Crime Multi Agency Centre 
(Cri-Mac); mechanism available to deal   with cases o f forced child labour in 
domestic work, begging, theft,  etc. The representatives of the Ministry 
responded to some of the points/queries raised by the Members.  
5.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the representa tives of the Ministry of Home Affairs to furnish written 
replies thereon within two weeks. They assured to comply. 
 
6.  The Chairperson, then, thanked the RGI and Secretary (Coordination) 
and other representatives of the Ministry for furnishing valuable information 
on the subject matter and responding to the queries of the Members.  
 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
 [A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
7. The Committee decided to have their next sitting on 7th June, 2022. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

439 
 
APPENDIX-V 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 7 th June, 2022 from 1130 hrs. to 
1245 hrs. in Committee Room No. 1, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
     
   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
5. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
6. Shri Dharmendra Kashyap 
7. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
8. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
9. Shri Bhola Singh 
10. Shri Nayab Singh 
11. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
 
    
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
13.  Shri Dushyant Gautam 
14.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
15. Ms. Dola Sen 
16.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
17.  Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri A.K. Shah   -  Joint Secretary   
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director 
4. Shri Sanjay Sethi   -        Additional Director 
5. Shri KG Sidhartha  -  Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 

440 
 
 
Witnesses 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND  
URBAN AFFAIRS  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1. Shri Ved Prakash Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Dharmesh 
Chandra Goel 
Additional Director General (Tech.), 
CPWD 
 
3. Shri Vinayak Rai Chief Engineer (CSQ-Civil), CPWD 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT  
 
 Name Designation 
 Ms. Kalpana Rajsinghot Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee and apprised them that upon a request received from the 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, he had granted exemption to the 
representatives of the Ministry of Agricu lture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare) to depose before the 
Committee as they had to appear before the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  that day at 1100 
hours.  However, he had not ag reed to another request of the Ministry to 
altogether exempt them from deposing before the Committee since a large 
number of adolescents and children are engaged in Agriculture Sector like 
cultivation, livestock, fisheries etc.     
3. XX  XX  XX  XX.  
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs were called in.  The Chairperson welcomed them to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing by the Ministry on the subject 
‘National Policy on Child Labour - An Assessment’.  Drawing the attention of 
the representatives to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked the Joint Secretary  to apprise the Committee of sector 
specific re sponsibility and action plan of the Ministry subsequent to the 
meeting  convened by MoLE in January, 2022 and the measures taken to 
ensure non -deployment of children in the public works related with 
offices/departments under the purview of the Ministry; im position of penal 

441 
 
provisions for non -compliance of various labour laws especially Child 
Labour  (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986; directions issued to prevent 
the engagement of adolescents and children in the works carried out by the 
departments under the administrative control of Ministry, etc. 
5.  The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) 
accordingly briefed the Committee about compliance of the provisions 
contained in the Child & Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulatio n) 
Act, 1986 and the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service Act, 1996) by all executing agencies 
under the Ministry; specific provisions regarding non -deployment of labour 
below the age of 14 years in Cl ause 19 and 19A of CPWD’s General 
Conditions of Contract – 2020 for construction works and their compliance 
at construction sites of CPWD through its field officers; ensuring compliance 
of various Acts related to labour through Labour Welfare Commissioners ; 
payment of fair wages to labourers employed by Contractors either directly 
or through sub -contractors as per CPWD Contractor’s Labour Regulations 
or as per the provisions of Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 
1970 and the Contract Labour (Re gulation and Abolition) Central Rules, 
1971, etc. 
6. The Members then raised various related queries which inter alia  
included inputs/feedback provided by MoHUA to the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment  at the meeting held in January, 2022 and the outcome 
thereof; number of instances where violation of the provisions of Clause(s) 
19 & 19A of CPWD’s General Conditions of Contract – 2020 were noticed  
and the action taken thereupon by the CPWD, as the principal employer; 
engagement of adolescents by CPWD & NB CC and precautionary measures 
taken to ensure their safety  at construction sites; steps taken to check the 
incidence of child labour in various public works; criteria for determination 
of fair wages and monitoring mechanism available to ensure payment of fair 
wages; need to involve urban local bodies to conduct survey of homeless 
children living under the bridges, flyovers, etc. in urban areas; cases of 
accidents at construction sites involving labours especially adolescent/child 
labour resulting in death/ grievous injury; action taken against the 
contractors and the quantum of compensation awarded;  details of surprise 
visits undertaken by CPWD officials along with the officials of Labour 
Departments of States/UTs concerned to prohibit deployment of child 
labours at construction site; measures taken to rehabilitate the child labour  
especially in the provision of housing facilities in the urban areas/pockets; 
etc. The Joint Secretary, MoHUA responded to some of the points/queries 
raised by the Members.  
7.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs  to furnish 
written replies thereon within two weeks. He assured to comply. 
8.  The Chairperson, then, thanked the Joint Secretary and other 
representatives of the Ministry for furnishing valuable information on the 
subject and responding to the queries of the Members.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 

442 
 
 
 [A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
9. The Committee decided to have their next sitting on 15th June, 2022 
The Committee then adjourned. 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
XX Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
  

443 
 
APPENDIX-VI 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 15th June, 2022 from 1130 hrs. 
to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
     
   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
5. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
6. Shri Dharmendra Kashyap 
7. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
8. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
9. Shri Ganesh Singh 
10. Shri K. Subbarayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
12. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
13.  Shri Dushyant Gautam 
14.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
15.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
16.  Shri Vivek Thakur 
17.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director 
2. Shri Sanjay Sethi   -        Additional Director 
3. Shri KG Sidhartha  -  Deputy Secretary  
  

444 
 
Witnesses 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
AND DAIRYING 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Shri Atul Chaturvedi Secretary 
2. Dr. O.P. Chaudhary Joint Secretary (NLM/PC) 
3. Dr. Sujit Dutta Joint Commissioner (NLM) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES 
 
Sl. No.               Name          Designation 
1. Shri Jatindra Nath Swain Secretary 
2. Shri Sagar Mehra Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Shankar L. Joint Commissioner 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sl. No.               Name    Designation 
1. Shri Nagendra Nath Sinha Secretary 
2. Shri Amit Kataria Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Nita Kejriwal Joint Secretary 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND 
FARMERS WELFARE  
 
Sl. No.           Name      Designation 
1. Shri Abhilaksh Likhi Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Lalsanglur Sr. ESA, DES 
3. Ms. Chhavi Jha Joint Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
               Name        Designation 
 Ms. Kalpana Rajsinghot Joint Secretary 
 
  

445 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and the representatives of the Departments of Animal 
Husbandry & Dairying; Fisheries; Rural Development; and Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare to the sitting of the Committee convened to have briefing by 
the Departments on the Subject 'National Policy on Child Labour -An 
Assessment'. Drawing the attention of the representatives to Direction 58 of 
the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of 
the Committee, the Chairperson asked the representatives to apprise the 
Committee of sector specific responsibilities of the Departments one by one 
inter-alia highlighting engagement of adolescents and child labour in 
livestock, forestry, fisheries, crop production, cultivation, etc. in rural/urban 
areas; awareness campaigns undertaken for prohibition of child labour in 
the Schemes implemented by the Department s; measures taken for 
sensitization about 'No Child Labour' etc.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Joint Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying made a Power Point Presentation inter-alia highlighting livestock 
sector growth since 2014, cattle and dairy development schemes; National 
Livestock Mission, livestock health and disease control programme; Animal 
Husbandry Infrastructure Development Fund; non -availability of any 
information/report/data on involvement of child labour in organised/ 
unorganised sect ors; engagement of children as family labour in dairy, 
poultry and to rear animals, etc.  
 
5. The Secretary, Department of Fisheries then briefed the Committee 
about non -availability of data on child labour in fisheries sector; 
confirmation from most of th e States/UTs regarding non-prevalence of child 
labour in fisheries; possibility of having child labour in individual fish farms; 
engagement of children by parents in family business; non -engagement of 
child labour in organised sector; etc. 
 
6. Thereafter, the Secretary, Department of Rural Development briefed 
the Committee about non -availability/non-maintenance of data on child 
labour in the sectors falling under the jurisdiction of the Department; 
factors responsible for child labour viz. poor economic condition and natural 
disasters like droughts, floods etc.; role of Labour Departments and NGOs in 
deterring child labour; etc. 
 
7. The Chairperson, then, asked Additional Secretary, Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to explain the reasons for the ir reluctance 
through a written communication to appear before the Committee on the 
plea that the subject matter did not relate to them. The Additional Secretary 
apologised for the communication sent by them and requested that the said 
communication be treated as withdrawn. Thereafter, he made a Power Point 
Presentation inter alia  highlighting the number of cultivators and  
agricultural labours, as per 2011 census; non -maintenance of data of child 
labour by the Department; etc. 
 

446 
 
8. The Members then raised v arious queries which inter alia  included 
financial support provided to NGOs/other organizations working towards 
the welfare of children of the marginalized workers; need to devise an 
independent mechanism for identification of child labour working in 
organized as well as unorganized sector through the NGOs engaged by the 
Departments; mechanism available to categorise/segregate the children 
working with the family vis -à-vis working on hired basis; need to launch 
awareness campaigns to sensitize parents about  non-engagement of 
children along with the alternatives available to them; mechanism available 
to ensure availability of foodgrain under National Food Security Act, 2013 
(Right to Food Act) for the labourers involved in the sectors; mechanism 
established t o ensure enrolment of children of migrant workers at 
Anganwadi Centres of Ministry of Women and Child Development; 
suggestions for prohibition/eradication of child labour and also for 
increasing productivity as well as better livelihood;  plan of action of  
Departments to interact/coordinate with the line Ministries for collection of 
data on child labour; steps taken to ensure compliance with provisions of 
Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, as amended; the need 
for making the laws  more str ingent to effectively prohibit engagement of 
Child Labour in various schemes, etc. The representatives of the 
Departments responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
9.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the representatives of the Departments of Animal Husbandry & 
Dairying; Fisheries; Rural Development; and Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
to furnish written replies thereon within two weeks. They assured to comply. 
 
10.  The Chairperson, then, thanked the represe ntatives of the 
Departments for furnishing valuable information on the subject and 
responding to the queries of the Members.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
 [A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
11. The Committee decided to have their next sitting on 22nd June, 2022 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

447 
 
APPENDIX-VII 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 22 nd June, 2022 from 1130 
hrs. to 1415 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
     
   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
5. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
6. Shri Pakauri Lal Kol 
7. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
8. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
9. Shri Bhola Singh 
10. Shri Nayab Singh  
11. Shri K. Subbarayan 
12. Shri Giridhari Yadav    
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
14.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
15. Ms. Dola Sen 
16.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
17. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri A.K. Shah   -  Joint Secretary   
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director 
  
 
  

448 
 
Witnesses 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND  
CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1. Shri Indevar Pandey Secretary 
2. Ms Pallavi Agarwal Joint Secretary  
 
3. Shri Drijesh Kumar 
Tiwari 
Statistical Advisor 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT  
 
 Name Designation 
 Ms. Kalpana Rajsinghot Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and representatives of the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development to the sitting of the Committee convened to have briefing on 
the subject ‘National Policy on Child Labour - An Assessment’. Drawing the 
attention of the representatives to Direction 58 of the ‘Directions by the 
Speaker’ regarding confidentialit y of the proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked the representatives to apprise the Committee of sector 
specific responsibility and action plan of the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development subsequent to their meeting convened by the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment in  January, 2022; areas of concern; scope for 
convergence and improvement; measures to ensure food and shelter to the 
children withdrawn from work through the schemes of shelter homes; 
functioning of the National Commission for Pr otection of Child Rights; 
awareness campaigns for sensitization and prohibition of child labour in the 
various schemes implemented by the Ministry, etc. 
3. The Secretary, Ministry and Women and Child Development 
accordingly briefed the Committee about comp liance of the provisions 
contained in the various schemes viz. Juveline Justice (Care and Protection 
of Children) Act, 2015, National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
(NCPCR), Integrated Child Development Services, Beti Bachao Beti Padhao, 
Ujjawala Scheme, Working Women Hostel Scheme, Immoral Traffic 
(Prevention) Act, 1956 by all executive agencies under the Ministry and the 
coverage of various categories of Children therein; Rehabilitation measures 
including institutional and non -institutional care for Children by providing 
shelter, food, vocational training, medical and legal aid; Procedure for 
identification of Children in need of care and protection; Prevention through 

449 
 
social mobilisation, communities and awareness generation programmes; 
Performance of online complaint management system viz. POSCO e -box; 
Reintegration of the victims into family and society, etc. 
4. The Members then raised certain specific queries on various issues, 
which inter-alia included  inputs/feedback provided by Ministry o f Women 
and Child Development at the meeting held in January,2022 and the 
outcome thereof; steps taken to check the incidence of child labour; need to 
increase the honorarium for Anganwadi workers; steps taken to enroll 
children in schools; the need for ma king the laws/inspections more 
stringent to effectively prohibit engagement of Child labour in various 
occupations; steps taken to ensure compliance with provisions of The Child 
and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986; mechanism 
established to ensure enrollment of children of migrant workers at 
Anganwadi Centres of Ministry of Women and Child Development; Working 
of Child Welfare Committees; suggestions for prohibition/eradication of 
Child labour and also for increasing productivity as we ll as better 
livelihoods; need to launch awareness campaigns to sensitise parents about 
non-engagement of children along with alternatives available to them, etc. 
The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the 
Members. 
5. As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development to furnish 
written replies thereon within two weeks. He assured to comply. 
6. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of the Ministry for 
appearing before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable 
information on the subject and responding to the queries of the Members. 
   (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 [A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
7. The Committee decided to have their next sitting on 29th June, 2022. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
       
  

450 
 
APPENDIX-VIII 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 29th June, 2022 from 1100 hrs. 
to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
     
   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
3. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
4. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
5. Shri Pakauri Lal Koli 
6. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
7. Shri Bhola Singh 
8. Shri Nayab Singh 
9. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
11. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Shah   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director 
4. Shri Sanjay Sethi   -        Additional Director 
5. Shri K.G. Sidhartha  -  Deputy Secretary  
  

451 
 
Witnesses 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (DoSJE) 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Shri R. Subrahmanyam Secretary 
2. Shri Parveen Kumar Thind Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
               Name        Designation 
 Ms. Kalpana Rajsinghot Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and the representatives of the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment to the sitting of the Committee convened to have a briefing by 
the Department on the Subject 'National Policy o n Child Labour -An 
Assessment'. The Chairperson sought explanation from the Secretary, 
DoSJE for not furnishing any background note/write up on the plea that no 
scheme on child labour was being implemented by the Department. The 
Secretary apologized for the  unintended lapse and assured to remain 
vigilant in future. Thereafter, drawing the attention of the representatives to 
Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of 
the proceedings of the Committee, the Chairperson asked the  
representatives to apprise the Committee of the sector specific responsibility 
and action plan of the Department, inter alia , highlighting the areas of 
concern; scope for convergence and improvement; the Protection of Civil 
Rights Act, 1955; assistance ex tended to NGOs for welfare of SCs and their 
children including various educational and scholarship schemes; awareness 
campaigns about prohibition of child labour in the Schemes implemented by 
the Ministry; measures taken for sensitization about 'No Child Labour', etc. 
3. The Secretary, Department of Social Justice and Empowerment 
accordingly briefed the Committee about scholarship being provided to the 
students belonging to SCs and OBCs in the field of education; Protection of 
Civil Rights and Prevention of  Atrocities Act; launch of national helpline 
against atrocities; economic empowerment of SCs and OBCs; connection 
between child labour and bonded labour; Support for Marginalized 
Individuals for Livelihood and Enterprise (SMILE)  scheme; setting up of de -
addiction centres funded by the Department;  National Action for 
Mechanized Sanitization Ecosystem (NAMASTE); Swachhta Udyami Yojana 
(SUY), etc.  
 
4. The Members then raised various queries which inter alia  included 
exploitation of children for begging espec ially at traffic intersections and  
need to place them in shelter homes; need to have coordination mechanism 
between Department of Social Justice and Empowerment  and Ministry of 

452 
 
Labour to eradicate begging/child labour; mechanism available to identify 
deprived sections of the society and providing them support;  measures 
taken for the eradication of beggary and rehabilitation of persons engaged in 
begging;  measures taken for the welfare of Children engaged in hazardous 
occupations;  mechanism put in place for mapping of adolescent labours 
rescued from hazardous occupation;   measures taken for the welfare of 
Manual Scavengers, particularly those affecting their children;  role and 
responsibility of the National Commission for Safai Karamcharis and 
National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation; 
campaigns undertaken to raise awareness about the welfare measures for 
the Scheduled Castes, Socially and Educationally Backward Classes; etc. 
The Secretary responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
5.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the Secretary to furnish written replies thereon within two weeks. He 
assured to comply. He also assured to submit a draft policy containing 
suggestions and plan of action  for prohibition, rescue and rehabilitation of 
child labour. 
 
6.  The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Department for 
appearing before the Committee and responding to the queries of the 
Members.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
 [A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
7. The Committee decided to have their next sittings on 12 th and 13 th 
July, 2022 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

453 
 
APPENDIX-IX 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 12 th July, 2022 from 1100 hrs. to 
1300 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
     
   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
4. Shri Dharmendra Kashyap 
5. Shri Sanjay Sadashiv Rao Mandlik 
6. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
7. Shri Bhola Singh 
8. Shri Ganesh Singh 
9. Shri Nayab Singh 
10. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
12. Shri Dushyant Gautam 
13.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
14.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
15.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director 
3. Shri Sanjay Sethi   -        Additional Director 
4. Shri KG Sidhartha  -  Deputy Secretary  
  

454 
 
Witnesses 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF CHILDLINE INDIA FOUNDATION, MUMBAI 
 
Sl. No.               Name          Designation 
1. Dr.Anjaiah Pandiri Executive Director 
2. Ms Anuradha Vidyasankar Regional Head, Regional Resource 
Centre, South Region 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF BACHPAN BACHAO ANDOLAN, NEW DELHI 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Ms. Rajni Sekhri Sibal CEO 
2. Ms Jyoti Mathur Executive Director - Policy & 
Research Department 
3. Mr. Bhuwan Ribhu Child Rights Activist 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
               Name          Designation 
 Ms. Kalpana Rajsinghot       Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and  the representatives of Childline India Foundation  to the 
sitting of the Committee convened to hear their views on the Subject  
‘National Policy on Child Labour – An Assessment'.  Impressing upon the 
witnesses to keep the proceedings of the Committee 'Confidential', the 
Chairperson asked them to present their views/suggestions on the subject. 
3. Thereafter, the representatives of Childline India Foundation briefed 
the Committee about the ir organisation, which is supported by the Ministry 
of Women & Child Development, their presence in 602 districts; procedure 
followed on receipt of complaints on helpline number 1098 relating to 
children deployed in begging, industries, dhabas, restaurants , domestic 
work, family units, etc. and the interventions made by the organisation to 
rescue/rehabilitate the child labours. Their suggestions for 
prevention/elimination of child labour inter alia  included need to create 
database of children at Panchayat level; need to ensure regular school 
attendance of children and treating ‘out of school children’ as child labour;  
appointment of District Nodal Officers to track the cases of child labour at 
PENCIL Portal and also to attach complaints received from other sources to 
the Portal; mandatory registration of FIRs; ensuring compliance of 
Directions of Supreme Court in MC Mehta v/s State of Tamil Nadu case 
regarding contribution of Rs. 20,000 per child by  offending employers;  
employment of one adult member of family of rescued child or contribution 

455 
 
of Rs. 5,000 to the Welfare Fund by State Government and need to 
formulate guidelines for the utilization of the Fund; skill training of rescued 
child as per a ptitude; zero tolerance for engaging  adolescents in hazardous 
work; need to obtain permission of State Government for mass movement of 
children from one State to another; formulation of detailed guidelines/SOPs 
for inter -department coordination of Labour,  Health, Social Justice, 
Panchayati Raj, Women & Child Education, Police, etc. and their execution; 
need to launch  awareness campaigns to report cases of child labour to 
Childline helpline number, etc. 
 
4. The Members then raised various queries which inter alia  included 
working of PENCIL portal of MoLE; conduct of District Level Committee 
meetings at regular intervals; mechanism available to help ‘out school 
children’ to go back to school especially in urban areas; treating child labour 
as bonded labour; survey conducted by organisation to identify ‘out of 
school children' and working at places other than their homes, etc. The 
representatives of the NGO responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
5. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and furnishing their views/suggestions on the subject matter. 
The Chairperson also asked the representatives to furnish their written 
submission / additional information within a week. They  assured to 
comply. 
 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
6. The representatives of Bachpan Bachao Andolan were then called in 
and the Chairperson welcomed them to the sitting.  Impressing upon the 
witnesses to keep the proceedings of the Committee 'Confidential', the 
Chairperson asked them to present their views/suggestions on the subject. 
 
7. The representatives of Bachpan Bachao Andolan  briefed the 
Committee about the number of children rescued by them with the help of 
police and other agencies; causes of child labour, etc. Their suggestion for 
prevention/elimination of child labour, inter alia, included need to consider 
‘out of school children’ as children at risk or vulnerable to child labour; need 
to take up the issue in mission mode to meet international commitment to 
eliminate child labour by 2025; need to look child labour as an organized 
crime and take action against traffickers; need to have individual care plan 
of rescued child; need to include a Chapter on elimination of child labour in 
school curriculum; need to fix timeline for filing the char gesheet and 
completion of trial; imposition of fine, registration of FIRs, fixing time limit 
for repatriation;   creation of Child Protection Fund of Rs. 100 crore by every 
State; spreading awareness about the ill effects of employment of children; 
all ‘ou t of school children’ to be tracked, rescued, rehabilitated and have 
access to right to education; every School to have its own child protection 
and safety policy; need to make mandatory provisions for ‘Child Labour Free’ 
tag/label in the supply chain in t he contracts executed by Government for 
procurement of various items/products; reporting of cases of child labour by 

456 
 
the Residential Welfare Associations; Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) to 
include child labour and trafficking as part of their monitorin g activity; 
implementation of Supreme Court guidelines in MC Mehta vs Union of India 
case and need to increase the amount of fine fixed in 1996 from Rs. 
20,000/- to Rs.1 lakh per child and also substantially increase financial 
assistance from Rs. 5000 to a n appropriate amount keeping in view 
inflation, etc.  
 
8. The Members then raised various queries which inter alia  included 
difficulties being faced while rescuing children and expectations from the 
Government; contribution made by organization in mica min ing and 
changes effected after their intervention; adverse effect on health of children 
involved in mica mining; details of Central Government Ministries/State 
Governments, which cooperate well in rescue operation; source of 
information from which the NGO gets details regarding child/bonded labour; 
survey conducted to identify hotspots and facilities provided by 
Central/State Governments at such places; coordination with Education 
Departments to find out the drop outs; steps taken to track progress of 
children after their repatriation, difficulties faced and assistance/support 
required from Central/State Government;  etc.  The representatives of the 
NGO responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
9. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and furnishing their views/suggestions on the subject matter. 
The Chairperson also asked the representatives to furnish their written 
submission/ additional information within a week. They assured to comply. 
 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

457 
 
APPENDIX-X 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 12 th July, 2022 from 1400 hrs. to 
1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
     
   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
4. Shri Dharmendra Kashyap 
5. Shri Sanjay Sadashiv Rao Mandlik 
6. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
7. Shri Bhola Singh 
8. Shri Ganesh Singh 
9. Shri Nayab Singh 
10. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
12. Shri Dushyant Gautam 
13.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
14.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
15.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director 
3. Shri Sanjay Sethi   -        Additional Director 
4. Shri KG Sidhartha  -  Deputy Secretary  
  

458 
 
Witnesses 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF PRAYAS JUVENILE AID CENTER, NEW DELHI 
 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Shri Amod K Kanth General Secretary 
2. Ms Indu Rani Singh Executive Director 
3. Mr Ashish Kumar Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF SAVE THE CHILDREN INDIA, NEW DELHI 
 
Sl. No.               Name          Designation 
1. Dr. Namrata Jaitli Director - Policy & Programme 
Impact 
2. Ms. Shivani Bhaskar Manager Policy & Advocacy 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF SOS CHILDREN'S VILLAGES INDIA, NEW DELHI 
 
              Name          Designation 
Mr. Sumanta Kar     Secretary General 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
              Name          Designation 
Ms. Kalpana Rajsinghot       Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and  the representatives of Prayas Juvenile Aid Center  to the 
sitting of the Committee convened to hear their views on the Subject  
‘National Policy on Child Labour – An Assessment'.  Impressing upon the 
witnesses to keep the proceedings of the Committee 'Confidential', the 
Chairperson asked them to present their views/suggestions on the subject. 
3. Thereafter, the representative of Prayas Juvenile Aid Center  briefed 
the Committee about the role of the NGO in tracking and rehabilitating child 
labour. Their suggestions for prevention/ elimination of child labour inter 
alia included need to amend Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Act 1986/2016 to define child as a person of 18 years of age so 
as to make the definition in agreement with Juvenile Justice Act, 2015, 
other laws and ILO Convention 182 & 138; need to amend part B of 
Schedule to CALPRA, 1986 to exclude occupation & processes, which are  
hazardous in nature; need to enforce compliance of working hours for 
children & adolescents, as defined in Act/Rules by 
establishments/industries; to conduct survey to have data regarding 
hotspots/endemic areas and number of child labours in the country; to 

459 
 
involve NGOs/voluntary organizations while formulating national policy on 
children; to devise systematic action plan based national policy to meet the 
objective of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 8.7 to eliminate child 
labour in all its forms by 2025 ; to activate Central Advisory Board & have 
representation of NGOs/voluntary organizations in Technical Advisory 
Committee; to have separate/exclusive scheme for child labour as merger of 
NCLP with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) may have serious 
repercussions; to bring in fundamental changes in criminal justice system & 
align it with social legislations; need for convergence of various Schemes run 
by various Ministries/ Departments & also convert to action plan; to have 
Inter-State Repatriation Policy or SOP s for the rescued children; to make 
Task Force as integral part of law/policy; need to enhance amount of 
compensation fixed by Hon’ble Supreme Court in M. C. Mehta v/s State of 
Tamil Nadu case, etc.  
 
4. The Members then raised various queries which inter alia included 
launch of awareness campaign in rural & urban areas by NGOs; utilization 
of CSR Fund; steps taken by organisation to identify any District/Block with 
no child labour;  follow up action taken by organisation after rescue of 
children; number of  shelter homes run by NGOs & the capacity of each 
shelter home  vis-à-vis the number of children rescued; steps ought to be 
taken to meet the objective of child labour free country by 2025; assistance 
provided by District administration; etc. The represent atives responded to 
the queries raised by the Members. 
 
5. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and furnishing their views/suggestions on the subject matter. 
The Chairperson also asked the representatives to furnish their written 
submission/ additional information within a week. They assured to comply. 
 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
6. The representatives of Save the Children and SOS Children's Villages 
were then called in and the Chairperson welcomed them to the si tting.  
Impressing upon the witnesses to keep the proceedings of the Committee 
'Confidential', the Chairperson asked them to present their 
views/suggestions on the subject matter. 
 
7. The representative of Save the Children India   made a Power Point 
Presentation inter-alia highlighting  prevalence of child labour in the 
organized & unorganized sectors particularly in sectors like garment 
industry, brick kilns, agriculture, fire works; increase in child labour due to 
COVID-19 pandemic; studies undertaken to identify prevalence of child 
labour in Government organisations. Their suggestions for prevention/ 
elimination of child labour inter alia included  need to strengthen District 
Task Force; need for convergence of Child Welfare Committees, District 
Child Protection Units, District Legal Se rvice Authorities at District level 
with District Labour Officer as District Nodal Officer; need to conduct 
district level periodic survey and census for child labour; mandatory 

460 
 
registration of home based units; mandatory declaration of ‘No Child Labour’ 
as per CALPRA 1986 by industries/business houses as a pre -requisite for 
receiving labour cards; convergence between CALPRA, 1986 & National 
Education Policy (NEP), 2020; to include information regarding child labour 
in school curriculum; to address the econ omic crisis of families; to share 
information regarding children absent from schools for thirty or more days 
with Department of Labour; to amend Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 so as to 
make serious offences against children as cognizable; MoLE to constitute a 
high-level advisory Committee comprising Ministries/Departments 
concerned, Commissions for Child Rights, law enforcement agencies & 
representatives of Civil Society Organisations (CSOs), etc. 
 
8. The Members then raised various queries which inter alia   included 
cognizable & non-cognizable offences under Juvenile Justice Act, 2015; role 
of various Ministries/Departments while effecting convergence of services; 
constitution of high -level advisory Committee; appointment of district nodal 
officer; conducting p eriodic survey annually; etc. The representatives 
responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
9. The representative of SOS Children's Villages then briefed the 
Committee about  factors responsible for child labour including family 
circumstances, viz. f amily not being economically empowered; earning 
member suffering from  life threatening illness; marital dispute; man made 
or natural calamities; loss of livelihood due to COVID -19 pandemic; etc. 
Their suggestions for prevention/ elimination of child labou r inter alia  
included need to identify areas/clusters having high incidents of child 
labour; to allocate resources for identification of family having higher 
incidents of child labour followed by Family Strengthening Measures viz. 
livelihood support, provi sion of education material, nutrition supplement, 
legal & psycho social support for a period of 5 years, etc. 
 
10. The Members then raised various queries which inter alia   included 
the number of care centers operated by the organisation & the number of 
children covered; sources of financial support to the organisation; duration 
for which the organisation provides support to the families; etc. The 
representative responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
11. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for a ppearing before the 
Committee and furnishing their views/suggestions on the subject matter. 
The Chairperson also asked the representatives to furnish their written 
submission/ additional information within a week. They assured to comply. 
 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

461 
 
APPENDIX-XI 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 13 th July, 2022 from 1100 hrs. 
to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
     
   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
3. Shri Dharmendra Kashyap 
4. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
5. Shri Sanjay Sadashiv Rao Mandlik 
6. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
7. Shri Bhola Singh 
8. Shri Ganesh Singh 
9. Shri Nayab Singh 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Naresh Bansal 
11. Shri Dushyant Gautam 
12. Shri Elamaram Kareem 
13. Shri M. Shanmugam 
14. Shri Vivek Thakur 
15.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
 
    
   SECRETARIAT 
 
 
         1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director 
3. Shri Sanjay Sethi   -        Additional Director 
4. Shri K.G. Sidhartha  -  Deputy Secretary  
  

462 
 
Witnesses 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI 
 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Sh. Naresh Kumar  Chief Secretary, GNCTD 
2. Sh. K.R Meena  Pr. Secretary Labour 
3. Sh. Ashok Kumar  Secretary Education 
4. Smt. R Alice Vaz  Secretary Technical 
Education/Higher Education 
5. Sh. Virender Kumar  Secretary SC/ST Department 
6. Sh. R.N Sharma  Commissioner (Labour) 
   
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN 
 
Sl. No.               Name          Designation 
1. Shri P.K. Goyal Additional Chief Secretary, 
Education Deptt. 
2. Shri Bhanu Prakash Yeturu Secretary, Labour Deptt. 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB 
 
Sl. No.               Name          Designation 
1. Sh. Manvesh Singh Sidhu Secretary Labour 
2. Sh. Pradeep Kumar Agrawal Special Secretary, School Education 
3. Sh. Baljit Singh  Assistant Labour Commissioner, 
Moga 
4. Sh. Harpreet Singh  Assistant Labour Commissioner, 
Headquarter 
5. Sh. Jagpreet Singh  Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer 
 
  

463 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
               Name          Designation 
 Ms. Kalpana Rajsinghot       Joint Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and the representatives of Government of NCT of Delhi  to the 
sitting of the Committee convened to take their oral evidence on the Subject 
‘National Policy on Child Labour – An Assessment'. Drawing the attention of 
the witnesses to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the Chairperson asked 
them to present their views/suggestions on prevention, tracing,  tracking, 
rescue, rehabilitation and reintegration of child labour; enforcement and 
strengthening of the legal provisions; coordination with other stakeholders 
to ensure no child labour; fixing accountability and responsibility at all 
levels etc. 
3. The Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi gave a brief account 
of the initiatives taken to trace, rescue and rehabilitate child labour. 
Thereafter, the Commissioner (Labour) made a Power Point Presentation 
inter-alia highlighting constitution of District Task Force (DTF ) in all the 
Districts; restoration of rescued children to their parents through CWC; 
rehabilitation package of Rs 25,000 (Rs. 20000 recovered from employer &  
Rs. 5,000 as State share) through District Magistrate of States concerned 
and transfer to accoun t of child (Fixed Deposit) belonging to Delhi; number 
of cases registered, charge sheets filed, fine imposed & imprisonment during 
the last 10 years; carrying out annual special drives for identifying out of 
school children & their enrolment in Special Tra ining Centres; mechanism 
established for reporting and monitoring drop out children; training courses 
offered by Society for Self Employment (SSE), etc. Their suggestion for 
prevention/elimination of child labour inter alia  included need to revise 
rehabilitation package; to extend benefits of other welfare schemes to the 
family members of rescued children; skill training to rescued child; strict 
monitoring and main streaming of ‘out of school’ children & drop out 
children; to have proper and focused Inter -State coordination; to develop a 
block-chain system on a digital platform by bringing all stakeholders in the 
block-chain with a nodal officer at District level having responsibility of 
updating the status of rescued children,  etc. 
 
4. The Members then rai sed various queries which inter alia  included   
status of financial proposal and plans for the year 2022 -23 prepared in 
response to guidelines issued by the Ministry of Women & Child 
Development under ‘Mission Vatsalaya’ for welfare and rehabilitation of 
children in difficult circumstances; constitution of ‘Child Desk’ on the lines 
of ‘Women Desk’ in Police Stations; details of Scheme to provide additional 
financial assistance to the Delhi based rescued children, etc.  The Chief 

464 
 
Secretary and other represen tatives responded to the queries raised by the 
Members. 
 
5.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the Chief Secretary to furnish written replies thereon within one week. 
He assured to comply.   
 
6.  The Chairperson t hanked the representatives of the Government of 
NCT of Delhi  for appearing before the Committee and responding to the 
queries of the Members.  
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
7. The representatives of the State Government of Rajasthan were then 
called in and the Chairperson welcomed them to the sitting. Drawing the 
attention of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the  Committee, the 
Chairperson asked them to present their views/suggestions on the subject 
matter. 
 
8. The representatives of State Government of Rajasthan accordingly  
briefed the Committee of  the provisions contained in the Rajasthan Child 
Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1996 & the Rules made thereunder 
regarding constitution of Task Force under District Magistrate; holding 
meetings at regular intervals; conduc ting raids & rescue operations for 
identification of child labours; details regarding children released, cases 
registered, prosecution proceedings made during last three years; operation 
of Special Training Centres; merger of NCLP with SSA; efforts made fo r 
eradication of child labour; appointment of nodal officers in each District; 
conducting periodic survey to identify out of school children, etc. 
9. The Members then raised various queries which inter alia  included 
constitution of fast track courts for sp eedy conviction; need to restore 
National Child Labour Project (NCLP); conducting survey on annual basis to 
identify out of school children; mechanism available to include the children 
residing in slums/under flyovers while undertaking survey; providing 
information regarding children absent from schools for more than 30 days to 
CWC;  action taken against the traffickers of children; experience with 
regard to working of PENCIL portal; coordination with NGOs; need to hold 
meetings of District Level Task Force  on a specified date of a month; efforts 
made to provide education to the local residents who migrate from the State, 
etc. The representatives of State Government of Rajasthan  responded to the 
queries raised by the Members. 
  
10.  As some points required d etailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the representatives to furnish written replies thereon within one week. 
They assured to comply.   
 
11.  The Chairperson thanked the representatives for appearing before the 
Committee and responding to the queries of the Members.  

465 
 
  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
12. The representatives of the State Government of Punjab were then 
called in and the Chairperson welcomed them to the sitting. Drawing the 
attention of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked them to present their views/suggestions on the subject 
matter. 
 
13. Accordingly, the  representatives of the State Government of Punjab 
briefed the Committee of the mechanism available for identification of child 
labour, prosecution of violators of laws, rehabilitation of rescued children; 
existence of child labour in organized sectors; co nstitution of Task force in 
every District since 2010;  number of establishments inspected, violations 
detected, prosecutions effected, compounding fee recovered during the last 
three years; digitally monitoring of progress of every child studying in 
Government School; proposal to track every rescued child through a 
dedicated Portal at State level in line of the PENCIL Portal, etc. 
 
14. The Members then raised various queries which inter alia  included 
number of meetings of Task Force held in every District,  raids conducted & 
the outcome thereof; medium of imparting education to the rescued 
children; employment of migrant labours in MSMEs; mechanism available 
for coordination with other State Governments; survey conducted to identify 
child labour in agricultu re sector; number of children transferred to 
Government Schools after merger of NCLP with SSA; status of financial 
proposal and plans for the year 2022 -23 prepared in response to guidelines 
issued by the Ministry of Women & Child Development under ‘Mission  
Vatsalaya’ for welfare and rehabilitation of children in difficult 
circumstances, etc. The representatives of State Government of Punjab  
responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
  
15.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chai rperson 
asked the representatives to furnish written replies thereon within one week. 
They assured to comply.   
 
16.  The Chairperson thanked the representatives for appearing before the 
Committee and responding to the queries of the Members.  
  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 [A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

466 
 
APPENDIX-XII 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 13 th July, 2022 from 1400 hrs. 
to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
     
   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
3. Shri Dharmendra Kashyap 
4. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
5. Shri Sanjay Sadashiv Rao Mandlik 
6. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
7. Shri Bhola Singh 
8. Shri Ganesh Singh 
9. Shri Nayab Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Naresh Bansal 
11. Shri Dushyant Gautam 
12. Shri Elamaram Kareem 
13. Shri M. Shanmugam 
14. Shri Vivek Thakur 
15.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director 
3. Shri Sanjay Sethi   -        Additional Director 
4. Shri KG Sidhartha  -  Deputy Secretary  
  

467 
 
Witnesses 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVERNMENT OF MADHYA PRADESH 
 
Sl. No.               Name          Designation 
1. Smt. Rashmi Arun Shami  Principal Secretary, School 
Education Department 
2. Shri Sachin Sinha  Principal Secretary, Labour 
Department 
3. Dr. Virendra Singh Rawat  Labour Commissioner 
4. Shri S.S. Dikshit  Deputy Labour Commissioner 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVERNMENT OF ODISHA 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Shri Bishnupada Sethi  Principal Secretary, School & Mass 
Education Department 
2. Ms. Chithra Arumugam  Principal Secretary, Labour and ESI 
Department 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVERNMENT OF ASSAM 
 
Sl. No.               Name          Designation 
1. Shri Jishnu Baruah Chief Secretary 
2. Shri Ashish Kumar Bhutani  Addl. Chief Secretary, Agriculture 
Department and APC 
3. Shri B. Kalyan Chakravarthy  Principal Secretary, Labour 
4. Smt. Roshni Aparanji Korati  
 
MD, SSA,  Elementary and 
Secondary Education Department 
5. Smt. Anusuiya Dutta Baruah Secretary, Food & Civil Supplies 
6. Smt. Anamika Tewari Labour Commissioner 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVERNMENT OF JHARKHAND 
 
Sl. No.               Name          Designation 
1. Shri Arun Kumar Singh  Chief Secretary 
2. Shri Prawin Kumar Toppo  Secretary, Labour, Employment and 
Skill Development Department 
3. Smt. Kiran Pasi  State Project Director, Jharkhand 
Education Project, Council, Ranchi 
 
 
 
 
 

468 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU 
 
Sl. No.               Name          Designation 
1. Thiru Md. Nasimuddin  Addl. Chief Secretary to Govt., 
Labour Welfare and Skill 
Department 
2. Dr. D. Manikandan  Joint Secretary to Govt., School 
Education Department 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
               Name          Designation 
 Ms. Kalpana Rajsinghot       Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and the representatives of State Government of Madhya Pradesh 
to the sitting of the Committee convened to take their oral evidence on the 
Subject ‘National Policy on Child Labour – An Assessment'.  Drawing the 
attention of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding confidentiality of th e proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked them to present their views/suggestions on prevention, 
tracing, tracking, rescue, rehabilitation and reintegration of child labour; 
enforcement and strengthening of the legal provisions; coordination wi th 
other stakeholders to ensure no child labour; fixing accountability and 
responsibility at all levels etc. 
3. Thereafter, the Principal Secretary, Labour Department, State 
Government of Madhya Pradesh made a Power Point Presentation which 
inter-alia included  the work done with regard to regulation & rehabilitation 
of child & adolescent labour in the State; constitution of the District Task 
Force under the Chairmanship of Collector in all 52 Districts; appointment 
of Labour Inspector in each district as N odal Officer; appointment of Nodal 
Officer at State level to coordinate with Districts; preparation of State Action 
Plan; organisation of awareness campaigns/workshops at District level; 
action against establishments employing child labour; details of numb er of 
inspections conducted, children released & prosecution cases filed during 
the last three years; recovery of penalty of Rs. 20,000 per child from 
employers; uploading of information related to children studying in Special 
Training Centres on PENCIL po rtal; training of Labour Officers & Labour 
Inspectors by NGO Experts, etc.  Thereafter,  the Principal Secretary, School 
Education Department briefed the Committee about the Samagra Shiksha 
Abhiyan which inter-alia included allocation of unique identification 
(Samagra ID) to every family to track children through Mobile App.; 
monitoring of child labour separately consequent upon transfer of NCLP to 
SSA, etc. 
 
4. The Members then raised various queries which inter alia included  
status of financial proposal and plans for the year 2022 -23 prepared in 

469 
 
response to guidelines issued by the Ministry of Women & Child 
Development under ‘Mission Vatsalaya’ for welfare and rehabilitation of 
children in difficult circumstances; survey undertaken to track child labour; 
achievements under State Action Plan; amount of penalty deposited in Child 
& Adolescent Rehabilitation Fund during last the three years; constitution of 
Fast Track courts; categorisation of Child labour cases as criminal cases as 
in the case of bonded labour & trafficking; representation of public 
representatives in District task force; outcome of awareness campaigns 
launched; opinion on increasing penalty amount of Rs. 20000/ - fixed 
approximate 30 years back; nee d to provide financial support to families of 
rescued children,  etc.  The representatives of State Government of Madhya 
Pradesh responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
  
5.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the representatives to furnish written replies thereon within one week. 
They assured to comply.   
 
6.  The Chairperson thanked the representatives for appearing before the 
Committee and responding to the queries of the Members.  
  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
 
7. The representatives of the State Government of Odisha were then 
called in and the Chairperson welcomed them to the sitting. Drawing the 
attention of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked them to present their views/suggestions on the subject 
matter. 
 
8. Thereafter, the Principal Secretary, Labour & ESI Department, State 
Government of Odisha briefed the Committee about implementation of State 
Action Plan for elimination of child labour and the initiatives taken 
thereunder including notification of Odisha State Child & Adolescent Labour 
Rules, 2018, notification of Distri ct Nodal Officers for coordinating activities 
under PENCIL, constitution of District Level Child and Adolescent Labour 
Rehabilitation Fund in all Districts. Their suggestions for 
prevention/elimination of child labour inter alia  included need to have 
convergence of various Departments at Gram Panchayat and Block level; 
keeping ‘Child Labour’ as compulsory agenda at Gram Panchayat meetings 
held monthly;  need to provide residential support to the rescued children 
till a specified age or providing financial s upport to the family of restored 
children; provisions for on-the-spot fine on employer; payment of fine within 
7 days of rescue; provisions for portability of benefits to migrant workers; 
need to have a portal covering activities and responsibilities of al l the 
Departments, etc. The Principal Secretary, School & Mass Education then 
briefed the Committee about measures taken under Samagra Shiksha 
Abhiyan to deal with child labour migration issue and opening of seasonal 

470 
 
hostels for the purpose; impact of COVI D-19 on education especially in 
tribal/under developed areas where internet facility is not abailable and 
measure taken to overcome the issue, etc. 
 
9. The Members then raised certain queries which inter alia  included   
periodicity of operation of seasonal hostels, the agency responsible for taking 
care of children and the facilities provided therein; disbursement made 
during the last three years from District Level Child & Adolescent Labour 
Rehabilitation Fund; support provided to single parent; number of FIRs 
registered during the last three years; proposal to provide monthly financial 
support to families of rescued children; outcome of training provided during 
rehabilitation; experience of State Government regarding PENCIL portal; 
involvement of NGOs, etc .  The representatives of the State Government of 
Odisha responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
  
10.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the representatives to furnish written replies thereon within one week. 
They assured to comply.   
 
11.  The Chairperson thanked the representatives for appearing before the 
Committee and responding to the queries of the Members.  
  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
12. The representatives of State Governments of Assam and Jharkhand  
were then called in and the Chairperson welcomed them to the sitting. 
Drawing the attention of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by 
the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, 
the Chairperson asked them to present their views/suggestions on the 
subject matter. 
 
13. Thereafter, the Chief Secretary, State Government of Assam  briefed 
the Committee about release of Rs. 2 lakh to all District Magistrates for 
creation of Child Labour Rehabilitation Fund, publication of SoPs on child 
labour, role & responsibilities of Departmental Nodal Officer (Labour Welfare 
Department) and District Magistrate; operation of Special Training Centres 
by the District Project Societies under NCLP; conduct of annual survey to 
identify school dropout children and their enrolment in school nearest to 
their h abitation; etc. Their suggestions for prevention/elimination of child 
labour inter alia included MoLE to compile the best practices & circulate to 
all States; provision of Mid -day meals to construction worker at various 
sites; mid -day meals in Schools to i nclude breakfast also to attract more 
children especially at areas having high concentration of child labours; 
introduction of mid-day meals for students of Class IX & X; mobile school to 
take care of children of construction workers; need to redesign cens us 
format to collect data of children at work; need to pay focused attention to 
agriculture sector especially paddy cultivation in which children are 
engaged, etc. 

471 
 
  
14. Thereafter,  the Chief Secretary, Government of Jharkhand briefed the 
Committee about notification of Standing Order for tracking and 
rehabilitation of rescued child labour; launch of awareness programmes; 
conduct of inspections on regular basis; establishment of a toll -free labour 
helpline number to monitor the incidences of child labour; details regarding 
number of child labour rescued, violations detected, prosecutions launched 
& amount of fine collected during the last 6 years; notification of Jharkhand 
Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Rules, 2018 
empowering Deputy Commissioner to monitor and track child labour cases; 
recovery of Rs.20,000/ - per child from defaulting employer, etc.  Their 
suggestions for prevention/elimination of child labour inter alia  included 
need to provide vocational education for proper rehabilitation of rescued 
children; to improve economic status of society and families, etc. 
 
15. The Members then raised various queries which inter alia  included 
coordination with NGOs; views on c onstitution of Fast Track Courts; 
involvement of Gram Panchayats during survey; working of Special Task 
Force and scope for improvement; need to include public representatives in 
Task Force; study conducted to identify the number of migrant workers; 
child rights to tribals; identification of traffickers of children & registration of 
FIRs against them; tracking of rescued children; steps taken to engage 
citizens, civil societies/NGOs to report incidences of child labour, trafficking 
etc; steps taken for coor dination with Central Government and other State 
Governments; etc. The Chief Secretaries of the State Governments of Assam 
and Jharkhand   responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
 16.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chai rperson 
asked the Chief Secretaries to furnish written replies thereon within one 
week. They assured to comply.   
 
17.  The Chairperson thanked the Chief Secretaries for appearing before 
the Committee and responding to the queries of the Members.  
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 18. The representatives of State Government of Tamil Nadu were then 
called in and the Chairperson welcomed them to the sitting. Drawing the 
attention of the witnesses  to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked them to present their views/suggestions on the subject 
matter. 
 
19. The, Additional Chief Secretary, Labour Welfare & S kill Development, 
State Government of Tamil Nadu accordingly briefed the Committee  about 
the measures taken to prohibit, track and rehabilitate child labours in 
accordance with the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) 
Act, 1986; role, re sponsibility and accountability of District Magistrates; 
comprehensive State Action Plan and Standard Operating Procedure drawn 
by the State Government; constitution of District level Task Force under 
District Collector comprising representatives of Education, Labour, Revenue, 

472 
 
Police and NGOs; decline in incidences of Child Labour due to strict 
enforcement of legal provision and various socio economic welfare measures 
taken by the State Government for retaining children in school for a longer 
period; univer sal PDS policy funded by State Government covering all 
families; special package of Rs. 4000 per family out of State Fund, etc. Their 
suggestions for prevention/elimination of child labour inter alia  included 
need to increase penalty of Rs. 20,000/ - to Rs. 2,00,000/- and utilisation of 
fund for rescued child, etc. Thereafter, the Joint Secretary, School 
Education Department, Government of Tamil Nadu briefed the Committee 
about conducting survey under SSA by Block Resource Teachers and 
regular teachers in Ap ril, May and September to identify ‘out of school’ 
children; existence of Education Management Information System(EMIS) to 
track students from first standard; stipend of Rs. 1000 per month to all girl 
students, who join college, etc.  
20. The Members then raised various queries which inter alia  included 
remuneration paid to Block Resource Teachers; views on providing ‘Child 
Labour Free’ label to products having no involvement of child labour; 
initiation of criminal case as in the case of bonded labour again st defaulters 
of child labour Act; identification and apprehending primary employer 
(trafficker) who brings children to State, etc. The representatives of State 
Government of Tamil Nadu responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
 21.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the representatives to furnish written replies thereon within one week. 
They assured to comply.   
22.  The Chairperson thanked the representatives for appearing before the 
Committee and responding to the queries of the Members.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 [A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

473 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-XIII 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty- Fourth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 22 nd August, 2022 from 1100 hrs. 
to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
     
   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab    –    CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
3. Dr. Umesh G Jadhav 
4. Shri Pakauri Lal Kol 
5. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
6. Shri Naba Kumar Sarania 
7. Shri Bhola Singh 
8. Shri Nayab Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  9. Shri Naresh Bansal 
10. Ms. Dola Sen 
11. Shri Vivek Thakur 
  
  
  
  
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director  
3. Shri Sanjay Sethi   - Additional Director 
4. Shri K.G. Sidhartha  -        Deputy Secretary 
  

474 
 
Witnesses 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL & MEDIUM 
ENTERPRISES  
 
 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
 
1. Shri Shailesh Kumar Singh Additional Secretary & Development 
Commissioner (MSME) 
2. Shri D. P. Srivastava  Dy Director General 
3. Shri Ateesh Kumar Singh Joint Secretary 
4. Smt Ishita Ganguli Tripathy Additional Development Commissioner 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
Sl. No. Name 
 
Designation 
1. Shri Anil Kumar Jha Secretary 
2. Shri Naval Jit Kapoor Joint Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sl. No.       Name Designation 
 
 Shri Shiv Kant Deputy Secretary 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee, convened  XXXXX for taking oral evidence of the Ministry of  
Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises and the Ministry of Tribal Affairs on the 
subject ‘National Policy on Child Labour-An Assessment’ 
3. XX  XX  XX  XX. 
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Micro, Smal l & Medium 
Enterprises were then called in and the Chairperson welcomed them. 
Drawing the attention of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by 
the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, 
the Chairperson asked the  representatives to apprise the Committee of 
various aspects of National Policy on Child Labour highlighting inter-alia, 
action taken by the Ministry towards prohibition of child labour in MSMEs; 
mechanism put in place to effectively implement the directio ns/instructions 
laid down under various Acts and Rules for identification and prohibition of 
child labour; awareness campaigns; advisories and guidelines laid down for 
prohibition of child labour; initiatives taken to check the employment of 

475 
 
children in sm all scale industries; rehabilitation of the child/adolescent 
labour rescued from the MSME units etc. 
5.  The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium 
Enterprises  accordingly, briefed the Committee and thereafter the Deputy 
Director General, Ministry of MSME made a power point presentation inter-
alia highlighting the role and responsibility of the Ministry in elimination of 
child labour, self -declaration on Udyam Registration Portal; awareness 
programmes to sensitize MSMEs to prohibit child and adolescent labour; 
publicity through websites; vocational  training for rescued adolescent 
labour, etc. 
 
6. The Members then raised various queries which inter-alia included 
information on state -wise set up of MSME units; monitoring mechanism to 
ensure elimination and prevention of child and adolescent labour; 
rehabilitation methodology and numbers of children rescued and 
rehabilitated; concrete  measures adopted to curb child labour, etc. The 
representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the 
Members. 
 
7. As some points required detailed and s tatistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the Additional Secretary, MSME to furnish written replies thereon 
within three weeks. The Additional Secretary assured to comply. 
 
8.  The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry for 
appearing before t he Committee and responding to the queries of the 
Members.  
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
 
9. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs were 
called in and the Chairperson welcomed them to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Drawing their attention to Direction 58 of the ‘Directions by the 
Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked the representatives to apprise the Committee of the 
various aspects of the National Policy on Child Labour highlighting inter-alia 
policy measures for the Welfare of the children in tribal areas; the practice of 
child labour among tribal population; educational policies and schemes for 
tribal children; action plan of the Ministry to address the problem of child 
labour, etc. 
10. The Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs accordingly briefed the 
Committee on the subject matter and thereafter the Joint Secretary made a 
PowerPoint Presentation highlighting measures taken by the Ministry for the 
welfare of the children in tribal areas; provision of employment and better 
livelihood through various schemes and prog rammes run by the Ministry; 
socio-economic rehabilitation of the rescued tribal children and adolescents; 
awareness campaigns to identify and prohibit child labour, etc. 

476 
 
11. The Members then raised various queries which inter-alia included 
identification a nd prevention of adolescent labour amongst tribal people; 
proper implementation of schemes for the welfare of tribal children specially 
in very remote areas; district -wise data of the tribal children and adolescent 
workers; role of Eklavya Model Residentia l Schools (EMRS) in preventing 
migration and better employment opportunities for tribal children; online 
issuance of certificates to Tribal children throughout the country; socio -
cultural causes contributing to a higher incidence of child labour; utilizati on 
of funds under Tribal Sub Plan; school drop -out rate of tribal children; 
vocational training for tribal children aged 15 to 18 years; functioning of 
tribal children welfare committee at district level; convergence with other 
Ministries to deal with the issue of child labour etc. The Secretary, Tribal 
Affairs responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
12. As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the Secretary to furnish written replies thereon by within three weeks. 
The Secretary assured to comply. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
 [A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
XX Does not pertain to this Report.  

477 
 
APPENDIX-XIV 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2022-23) 
 
Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 27 th October, 2022 from 1100 
hrs. to 1430 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
5. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
6. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
7. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
8. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
9. Shri Bhola Singh 
10. Shri Ganesh Singh 
11. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
   
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Naresh Bansal 
13. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
14. Shri Elamaram Kareem 
15. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
16. Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Director 
2. Shri Sanjay Sethi  - Additional Director 
3. Shri K.G. Sidhartha -  Deputy Secretary 
 
  

478 
 
Witnesses 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR 
 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Shri Dipak Kumar Singh Additional Chief Secretary, 
Department of Education 
 
2. Shri Arvind Kumar Choudhary  Principal Secretary,  
Department of Labour 
Resources 
3. Shri Rohit Raj Singh ALC, Department of Labour 
Resources 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF GOVERNMENT OF MAHARASHTRA 
 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Smt. Vinita Vaid Singal Principal Secretary, Labour  
2. Smt. I.A. Kundan Principal Secretary, Women and 
Child Development  
3. Shri Suraj D. Mandhare Commissioner, School 
Education 
4. Smt. R. Vimla Commissioner, Women and 
Child Development 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF GOVERNMENT OF KERALA 
 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Shri S. P. M. Mohammed Hanish Principal Secretary, 
General Education Department  
2. Smt. Mini Antony Secretary, Labour and Skills 
Department  
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
 Ms. Nandita Gupta Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and the representatives of State Government of Bihar to the 
sitting of the Committee convened to take their oral evidence on the Subject 
‘National Policy on Child Labour – An Assessment'. Drawing the attention of 
the witnesses to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding 
confidentiality of th e proceedings of the Committee, the Chairperson asked 
them to apprise the Committee of the specific measures taken by the State 
Government to prohibit, identify, trace, track, rescue and rehabilitate Child 

479 
 
Labour in accordance with the Child and Adolescent  Labour (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Act, 1986 (Amended in 2016); Role, Responsibility and 
Accountability of the District Magistrates; Penal Provisions implemented; 
Operation of Special Training Centres by the District Project Societies under 
National Child Labour Project; Free Education to the Children under Right 
to Education (RTE) Act, 2009; Mechanism put in place to locate school 
dropouts and ensure inclusive and equitable quality education at all levels 
of school education, etc. 
3. The Principal Secretar y, Department of Labour accordingly made a 
Power Point Presentation  inter-alia highlighting the number of child labour 
in Bihar as per 2011 census, operationalisation of Dhawa Dal (Flying Squad) 
in all Districts; registration of child labour related complaints through 
WhatsApp; development of App to monitor movement of Dhawa Dal & rescue 
of child labour, nomination of Nodal Officer as per Child and Adolescent 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Central Rules 2017; setting up of Child Friendly 
Desk and appointment of Child Welfare Police Officer in all Police Stations; 
constitution of Special Juvenile Police Unit and Anti Human Trafficking unit 
in every District; existence of Child Labour Tracking System (CLTS) since 
2016 & launch of new version of CLTS 2.0 in June, 2022; constitution of 
Bihar State Child Labour Commission; monitoring of State Action Plan (SAP) 
for elimination of Child Labour and Prohibition and Regulation of 
Adolescents by State Task Force (STF); operationalisation of UDAAN in 22 
Districts with the aim to enroll rescued child labour in school and ensure 
linkages of families o f rescued child labour to existing government schemes 
and services; formation of Child Prohibition Committees at District, Block, 
Gram Panchayat & Ward levels since 2015. The suggestions of the State 
Government of Bihar for prevention/elimination of child labour inter alia  
included need to have an umbrella MOU by the Central Government with 
States on the issue of rescue, repatriation and rehabilitation of migrant child 
labour; to have National Level Child Labour Tracking System for 
coordination between diff erent States; to make the offences under the Act 
compoundable, etc.   
 
4. The Members then raised certain specific queries which inter-alia 
included composition of Child Protection Committee and periodicity of its 
meetings; steps taken to bring down the nu mber of child labour; role of 
Dhawa Dal and number of movements made by them; details of Special 
Training provided to school dropouts; steps taken to provide education to all 
and alleviate poverty; need to involve Block level and Panchayat level 
functionaries; periodicity of meetings of District Task Force and mechanism 
available to monitor Block Level Committees;  study undertaken to analyse 
the reasons for certain districts being more prone to child labour; number of 
children home registered in the State;  details of assistance provided by 
Central Government for child labour related issues; assistance provided by 
State Government to NGOs; need to make changes in CrPC, etc. The 
Additional Chief Secretary, Department of Education responded to the 
queries raised by the Members. 
 

480 
 
5.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the Additional Chief Secretary to furnish written replies thereon 
within two weeks. He assured to comply.   
 
6.  The Chairperson thanked the representative s of the Government of 
Bihar for appearing before the Committee and responding to the queries of 
the Members.  
 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
 
7. The representatives of State Government of Maharashtra were then 
called in and the Chairperson welcomed them to the sitting. Drawing the 
attention of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedi ngs of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked them to present their performance/views/suggestions on 
elimination and rehabilitation of child labour. 
 
8. Thereafter, the representatives of the State Government of 
Maharashtra briefed the Committee of  the steps taken for identification and 
eradication of child labour; physical, educational and economic 
rehabilitation of the rescued children; responsibility and accountability of 
the District Magistrate; implementation of penal provisions; operation of 
Special Tr aining Centres (STC) by the District Project Societies; free 
education to the children under Right to Education (RTE) Act, 2009; 
mechanism put in place to locate school dropouts and ensure inclusive and 
equitable quality education at all levels of school education, etc.   
 
9. The Members then raised various pointed queries which inter alia  
included mechanism available to count children living under flyover, 
shanties; engagement of NGOs to address the issue of child labour; inter -
Departmental mechanism available to address the issue; number of children 
admitted in residential schools; facilities provided to the children in addition 
to education; skill development programme for drop out children; operative 
framework available for Ghumantu community; outcome of study conducted 
by Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) to identify children at 
roadside/streets/hotels, etc. The representatives of State Government of 
Maharashtra responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
  
10.  As some points required detaile d and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the representatives to furnish written replies thereon within two 
weeks. They assured to comply.   
 
11.  The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Government of 
Maharashtra for appearing before the Com mittee and responding to the 
queries of the Members.  
 

481 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
 
12. The representatives of the State Government of Kerala were then 
called in and the Chairperson welc omed them to the sitting. Drawing the 
attention of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked them to present their performance/views/suggestions on 
tracing, rescuing and rehabilitating child labour. 
 
13. Thereafter, the representatives of the State Government of Kerala 
briefed the Committee  about the implementation of Child Labour 
(Prohibition & Regulation)  Act, 1986 in the State; conduct of regular 
inspections by Enforcement Wing under Labour Commissioner; constitution 
of District Task Force and Child Labour Rehabilitation cum Welfare Societies 
in all Districts under the chairmanship of District Collectors; appointment of 
Nodal Officer under Rule 2 B(2) of Child Labour Rules, 2017; 
implementation of ‘Saranabalyam’ programme to ensure child labour free 
State; provision of primary schools within a dista nce of every three 
kilometers and secondary schools within a distance of five kilometers in 
every area; provision of mid -day meal, free uniform and free text books; 
introduction of ‘Roshni’ project for migrant labourers’ children; 
establishment of six boys  hostels and two girls hostels and provision of 
Transportation Allowance @ Rs. 600 per head; constitution of Child Labour 
Rehabilitation cum Welfare Societies in all 14 Districts to deal with 
repatriation, rehabilitation and education of children, etc. 
 
14. The Members then raised certain queries which inter alia  included 
discrepancy in number of child labour identified during the last three years; 
details of Saranabalyam and Gothrasarathi Projects; collaborative 
mechanism in place or proposed to be introdu ced with other State 
Governments from where child labour is supplied: details of children 
engaged in the hospitality Sectors, etc. The representatives of State 
Government of Kerala responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
15.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the Principal Secretary to furnish written replies thereon within two 
weeks. He assured to comply.   
 
16.  The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Government of 
Kerala for appearing before the Committee and responding to the queries of 
the Members.  
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 [A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

482 
 
APPENDIX-XV 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2022-23) 
 
Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10 th November, 2022 from 1130 
hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
5. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
6. Dr. D. Ravikumar 
7. Shri Naba (Hira) Kumar Sarania 
8. Shri Bhola Singh 
9. Shri Nayab Singh 
10. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Naresh Bansal 
12. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
13. Shri M. Shanmugam 
14. Shri Binoy Viswam 
    
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty  - Director 
3. Shri Sanjay Sethi   - Additional Director 
  

483 
 
Witnesses 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF UNICEF, INDIA 
 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
   
1. Ms. Vandhana Kandhari Child Protection Specialist 
UNICEF, India 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
   
1. Dr. Shashank Goel Additional Secretary 
2. Ms. Nandita Gupta Joint Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and  the representative of United Nations International 
Children’s Emergency Fund ( UNICEF), India to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to hear her views on the Subject ‘National Policy on Child Labour – 
An Assessment'. Impressing upon the witness to keep the proceedings of the 
Committee 'Confidential', the Chairperson asked her to present her 
views/suggestions/feedback on the  significant role played by UNICEF in 
extending various support to the Government in their endeavour to prevent, 
trace, track, rescue, rehabilitate and rein tegrate child labour;  enforcement 
and strengthening of the legal provisions; inter -department convergence for 
ensuring total eradication of child labour, etc.   
3. Thereafter, the representative of UNICEF, India made a Power Point 
Presentation on existing legislations on child labour and Right to Education; 
ILO Conventions; merger of NCLP Scheme with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan; 
Mission Vatsalya; convergence between different line 
Ministries/Departments, etc. The suggestions made for 
prevention/elimination of child labour inter alia included capacity building 
of law enforcement, labour department officials, child protection 
functionaries and stakeholders; monitoring of supply chain and hot spots 
and mapping of vulnerable families and children at risk of child l abour; 
development of National, State and District action plans; targeted 
intervention for child migrants/children of migrant labourers and those 
belonging to socially disadvantaged groups; mainstreaming of ‘out of school’ 
children and drop out children an d those rescued from child labour; 
conduct of periodic national surveys to have child labour data; development 
of state -based child tracking systems for each rescued/at risk child; 
strengthening of PENCIL portal; conducting studies/research to understand 
nature and pattern of child labour; etc. 

484 
 
4. Members, thereafter, raised various queries which inter alia included 
support provided by UNICEF to supplement the efforts of Government of 
India towards the elimination of Child labour; views/suggestions for 
strengthening the system of identification, rescue and rehabilitation of Child 
Labour at the State and District level in India; suggestions for other social 
security programmes to specifically target Child Labour and the possible 
design of such an intervention ;  inputs for making the Platform for Effective 
Enforcement for No Child Labour (PENCIL) portal more effective; key 
findings of UNICEF in other countries facing the problem of child labour; 
suggestions to reduce the school dropouts rate; suggestion for con ducting 
research and study, etc. The representative of the UNICEF, India responded 
to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
5. The Chairperson thanked the witness for appearing before the 
Committee and furnishing the views/suggestions of UNICEF, India on the 
subject. The Chairperson also asked the representative to furnish written 
submissions/ additional information in 10 days.   
 (The witness then withdrew) 
6. The representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Employment were 
then called in. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives to the sitting.    
Drawing the attention of the representatives to Direction 58 of the 
'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the 
Committee and also to the meetings held by the Committee with  various 
Ministries/Departments concerned, NGOs and State Governments on the 
Subject, the Chairperson asked the representati ves to apprise the 
Committee of additional information of relevance, including updated facts 
and figures on matters considered previously on the subject; the 
amendments that may be required in the Child Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act; further step s taken to check prevalence of child labour 
across the country and other additional measures that might have been 
taken by the Ministry to address various issues on child labour, etc. 
7. Thereafter, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Labour and 
Employment sought permission for making a Power Point Presentation on 
the Subject. The  Joint Secretary then made a Power Point Presentation on 
the provisions contained in the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition 
and Regulation) Act, 2016 regarding ban on emplo yment of children below 
14 years, linking of age with RTE Act, 2009, prohibition of adolescents (14 -
18 years) to work in hazardous occupations and processes, responsibility of 
Task Force headed by District Magistrate, enhanced penal provisions; 
ratification of ILO Conventions (138 & 182) in June, 2017; objectives and 
coverage of NCLP during 1988 to 2021 and merger of NCLP with Samagra 
Shiksha Abhiyan w.e.f. 01.04.2021; number of children 
rehabilitated/mainstreamed since 2017 -18;  existence of Platform for 
Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour (PENCIL) portal since 
26.09.2017; proposals regarding (i) revising the  Schedule of 
occupations/processes under hazardous list of the Act through Technical 

485 
 
Advisory Committee; (ii) National Level Child Labour Tracki ng System for 
coordination between different States; (iii) umbrella MOU for States on the 
issue of release, repatriation and rehabilitation of rescued child by the 
Central Government and (iv) Conference with States and Stakeholders to 
obtain inputs on strengthening of implementation of Act,   etc.  
  
8. Members, thereafter, raised various queries which inter alia included 
inputs/feedback provided by the Ministries with whom the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment had held discussions  and follow up action taken;  
suggestions  for the laws to be made more stringent to effectively prohibit 
engagement of Child Labour;  plan of a ction of the Ministry to 
interact/coordinate with the line Ministries for collection of data on child 
labour as well as its elimination; mechanism put in place for effective 
coordination with the Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSEL) 
and with the State Governments consequent upon merger of NCLP Scheme 
with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan;  suggestions to further strengthen the 
monitoring mechanism; integration of PRABANDH Portal of the DoSEL with 
the PENCIL portal of Ministry; role and responsibility of the Ministry to meet 
the international commitment of the Government after  ratification of ILO 
Conventions (Convention 138 and 182);  need for amendment to  the Right 
to Education Act, 2009 & the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986, as amended;   mechanism put in place for mapping of 
adolescent labour rescued from hazardous occupations in the Schemes 
implemented by the Ministry;  steps taken for the rescue and rehabilitation 
of children engaged in beggary, particularly, tho se found at traffic lights in 
urban areas;  steps taken by the Ministry to extend assistance in accurately 
quantifying homeless ‘out of school’ children living in urban areas;   
guidance and  support provided by the Ministry to the NGOs and other 
organizations working for the benefit of the children;   vocational training 
imparted to rescued adolescent child labour; role and responsibilities of 
enforcing agencies, etc The Additional Secretary responded to some of the 
queries posed by the Members. 
 
9.  As so me points required detailed information including statistical 
data, the Chairperson asked the Additional Secretary to furnish written 
replies thereon within 10 days.   
 
10.  The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry for 
appearing before t he Committee and responding to the queries of the 
Members.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
 [A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
11. The Committee decided to have their next sitting on 24 th November, 
2022. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

486 
 
APPENDIX-XVI 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2022-23) 
 
Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 24 th November, 2022 from 1100 
hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
4. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
5. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
6. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
7. Shri Naba (Hira) Kumar Sarania 
8. Shri Bhola Singh 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Naresh Bansal 
10. Shri R. Dharmar 
11. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
12. Shri Elamaram Kareem 
13. Ms. Dola Sen 
    
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjay Sethi  - Additional Director 
3. Shri K.G. Sidhartha  -   Deputy Secretary 
  
Witnesses 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR PROTECTION 
OF CHILD RIGHTS (NCPCR) 
 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Shri Priyank Kanoongo Chairperson, NCPCR 
2. Smt. Rupali Banerjee Singh Member Secretary, NCPCR 
 

487 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD 
DEVELOPMENT 
  
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Ms. Indra Mallo Joint Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Ms. Vibha Bhalla Joint Secretary 
 
EXPERT  
Sl. No.          Name          Designation 
1. Shri G. Asok Kumar Director General, National 
Mission for Clean Ganga 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee, the representatives of National Commission for Protection of 
Child Rights (NCPCR) and the Ministry of Women and Child Development to 
the sitting of the Committee convened to take their oral evidence on the 
Subject ‘National Policy on Child Labour – An Assessment'.  Drawing the 
attention of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding confidentiality of th e proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked them to express their views and suggestions on the 
subject matter inter -alia highlighting the performance of NCPCR in 
protecting child rights as a whole and eliminating child labour in particular; 
prevalence of child labour in various organised/ unorganised sectors; and 
possible scope of convergence among various Ministries/ Departments of 
Government of India as well as the State Governments to prohibit child 
labour and secure their appropriate rehabilitation, etc. 
3. The Chairperson, NCPCR made a Power Point Presentation inter-alia 
highlighting the  interventions initiated by NCPCR for effective monitoring of 
the children related Acts; non -registration of FIRs in Child Labour cases; 
reporting of less num ber of child labour as compared to the actual number; 
less number of children being produced before Child Welfare Committee 
(CWC); rescue of 1025 children by NCPCR in June 2022; non -appointment 
of nodal officer under Rule 2B(2) of Child Labour (Regulation & Prohibition) 
Rules, 2017 by 16 States/UTs; prevalence of child labour in unorganised 
sector and automobile industry; deployment of children in e -waste 
management sector, road side dhabas and stalls; role of placement agencies 
in trafficking of children e specially in Metro cities; non -existence of many 
Special Training Centres under NCLP, etc. The suggestions inter alia  
included, need to ensure that servicing of vehicles is undertaken through 
organized sector only; fixing accountability of Fast Moving Cons umer Goods 
(FMCG) Companies in cases where road side dhabas & stalls are engaging 
children as labour; need to regulate Placement agencies; need to orgainse 

488 
 
recycling of plastic; need to sensitize labour officers & police officers about 
the provisions of Juvenile Justice Act, 2015; need to issue migration card to 
‘out of school’ children of migrant workers & sharing of information with 
States/UTs by establishment of a Portal,  etc. 
4. The Members then raised various queries which inter-alia included, 
need for making the laws more stringent to effectively prohibit engagement 
of Child Labour in various sectors falling under the purview of different 
Ministries; views on merger of NCLP with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan; study 
undertaken by NCPCR to evaluate the magnit ude and prevalence of Child 
Labour; estimate of the number of children found to be in distress and 
without family support due to COVID -19 Pandemic;  estimates of the total 
child population engaged as labour; steps to be taken to provide security to 
children of migrant workers; measures to be initiated to ensure appointment 
of Nodal Officer by all States/UTs  under Rule 2(B) of the Child Labour 
(Regulation and Prohibition) Rules, 2017;  measures to be taken for 
preventing child labour in unorganized sector p articularly when the sector 
could be transformed as part of the organized sector; status/ response of 
State Governments/UTs with regard to the guidelines issued by the Ministry 
of Women and Child Development under “Mission Vatsalya” for the welfare  
and re habilitation of children in difficult circumstances; status of 
consultation process with the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation regarding conducting survey of children, etc.  The 
representative of NCPCR responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
 5.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the representatives  to furnish written replies thereon within 10 days. 
They assured to comply.   
 
6.  The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the NCPCR and the 
Ministry of Women & Child Development for appearing before the Committee 
and responding to the queries of the Members.  
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
7. Shri G. Asok Kumar, Director Ge neral, National Mission for Clean 
Ganga (NMCG) was then called in as an expert on the subject. The 
Chairperson welcomed Shri G. Asok Kumar to the Sitting. Drawing the 
attention of the expert to Direction 58 of the 'Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding conf identiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked him to present his views/suggestions  inter -alia 
highlighting the prevalence of child labour in various organized and 
unorganised sectors; possible scope of convergence among various 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India as well as the State 
Governments to prohibit child labour and secure their appropriate 
rehabilitation and efforts made for declaration of Veilpur Mandal of 
Nizamabad District as ‘Child Labour Free Mandal’ on 02nd  October, 2001 
when he was serving as the District Collector. 
 
8. Thereafter, Shri G. Asok Kumar   made a Power Point Presentation on 
efforts made, strategies worked out, timelines fixed, awareness campaigns 

489 
 
launched, difficulties faced, contribution made b y the community, 
involvement of teachers, periodic reviews undertaken, support from 
Government, NGOs, etc. resulting in relieving of approximately 800 child 
labourers and declaration of Veilpur Mandal in Nizamabad District as Child 
Labour Free Mandal on 02 .10.2001 after achieving 100% enrolment of the 
children in the age group of 5 -14 years; and 100% retention even after 21 
years of declaring Veilpur Mandal  as ‘Child Labour Free Mandal’. 
 
9. Members then raised various queries which inter-alia included  
methodology adopted for carrying out surveys for assessing the number of 
children engaged as labour;  factors that necessitated the State Government 
of Andhra Pradesh to broaden the definition of child labour to include all out 
of school children;   main fea tures of the MoU signed between the Sarpanch 
of Gram Panchayat and the District Collector under the AP Compulsory 
Education Act, 1985;   challenges faced while coordinating with other 
departments; the role played by the society/community in achieving the 
target of Child Labour Free Mandal;  strategy/mechanism worked out in 
organizing motivational camps; suggestions for better coordination among 
the authorities; i nputs with regard to bringing about behavioral change in 
the people; approach to be adopted to e ngage people  including Self Help 
Groups, NGOs and other organisations to eradicate child labour;  inputs to 
be incorporated in national surveys to gauge the magnitude and prevalence 
of Child Labour, particularly in  areas of agriculture and domestic work;  
suggestions for combating Child Labour in Urban areas, particularly in large 
metropolitan cities;  views on merger of NCLP with Samagra Shiksha 
Abhiyan, etc. The expert responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
10.  As some points required detailed and statistical data, the Chairperson 
asked the expert to furnish written replies thereon within 10 days. He 
assured to comply.   
 
11.  The Chairperson thanked the expert for appearing before the 
Committee and responding to the queries of the Members.   
 
(The witness then withdrew) 
 [A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
 
12. The Committee decided to have their next sitting on 2 nd December, 
2022. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

490 
 
APPENDIX-XVII 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE AND THE MINISTRIES/ 
DEPARTMENTS/ STATE GOVERNMENTS 
RESPONSIBLE FOR TAKING ACTION 
 
S. 
No. 
Rec. 
Para 
No. 
Text of Observation/Recommendation Ministry/ 
Department/
State 
Government 
Responsible 
1.  2.165 In the light of provisions contained in the Fundamental Rights 
pertaining to right against exploitation prohibiting employment 
of children below fourteen years of age and the Directive 
Principles of State Policy, the Government in the year 1986 
enacted the  Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986. The National Policy on  Child Labour 
framed in 1987 is the outcome of the Act made in the year 1986. 
A major amendment to the Act was made in the year 2016, 
when  for the first time, ‘ado lescent’ was  defined as a person 
who has completed fourteenth year of age but has not completed 
eighteenth year. With a view to implementing  the amendments 
made in the year 2016, the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition & Regulation) Rules, 2017 were  formulated and 
simultaneously, the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)  for 
enforcement of the Act were also issued by the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment in September, 2017 for enforcing 
agencies and other stakeholders, which provides step by step 
SOP f or effective enforcement and implementation.  The 
Committee took up examination of the Subject in November, 
2021. Thereafter, the Ministry of Labour & Employment started 
consultation with the line Ministries and formed an Inter -
Ministerial Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(L&E) comprising representatives of fourteen 
Ministries/Departments to discuss the effective implementation 
of the  Act  and also to formulate strategy for sector -wise 
eradication of child labour. After comprehensive examinati on of 
the Subject in all its ramifications and taking into consideration 
that Labour is under concurrent list and State Governments are 
the important stakeholders for implementation of the Act, the 
Committee find that the implementation of the Policy has to go a 
long way for achieving the objective of elimination of child labour 
as per commitments made by the county after ratification of ILO 
conventions   and to achieve the target stipulated in Sustainable 
Development Goal 8.7 to end all forms of child labo ur by 2025. 
The Ministry/State-wise recommendations of the Committee are 
contained in different Chapters  and are brought out in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
Ministry of 
Labour & 
Employment 
2.  2.166 i) Ambiguity in definition of child under various Acts 
The Committee note that under the Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, ‘child’ means a 
person who has not completed his fourteenth year of age or such 
age as may be specified in the Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Ed ucation Act, 2009, whichever is more. The 
amendment made to the Act in 2016 defines the child falling in 
-do- 

491 
 
the age group of (14 -18) years. Under the Right of Children to 
Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, ‘child’ means  a 
male or female child of the ag e of six to fourteen years. Under 
the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 vide its amendment in 1986 
defined “child” as a person who has not completed his 
fourteenth year of age. Under the Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, 2015, ‘child’  means a person who 
has not completed eighteen years of age. The term ‘adolescent’ is 
not defined in JJ Act, 2015.  The Committee have also been 
given to understand that the Rashtriya Kishore Swasthya 
Karyakaram under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
defines an adolescent as a person between 10 -19 years.  The 
Committee further note that the employment of children in 
contravention of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition 
and Regulation) Act, 1986 is a cognizable offence, whereas 
under the Juvenile Justi ce  (Care and Protection of Children) 
Act, 2015, it is a non -cognizable offence. The Committee desire 
that the discrepancies in the criteria for determination of age of 
child in the aforesaid Acts and other related Acts as well as the 
provisions of offence  being congnizable/non -cognizable under 
CALPRA Act/JJ Act be examined with a view to ensuring that 
these do not lead to any ambiguity  as well as delay in justice to 
the aggrieved children. 
 
3.  2.167 (ii) Schedule of Hazardous Occupations and Processes 
The Committee note that the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 prohibits employment of 
children below 14 years of age in all occupations and processes 
and the employment of adolescents in hazardous occupations 
and processes . The Schedule of hazardous occupations and 
processes of the Act is divided in two parts namely 'Part A' 
covering a list of 38 hazardous occupations and processes in 
which adolescents are prohibited to work and children are 
prohibited to help in family or family enterprises and 'Part B' 
covering an additional list of 15 occupations and 54 processes 
where children are prohibited to help in family or family 
enterprises (in addition to 'Part A'). However, the child is 
permitted to help his family or in family enterprises, which is 
other than any processes or hazardous occupations/ processes 
set forth in the Schedule of the Act, and only after school hours 
or during vacations. This “help” does not include “engagement in 
employment” or the situation where a relat ionship of “employer-
employee” exists. In the Act, “family enterprises” means any 
work, profession, manufacture or business which is performed 
by the members of the family. In this context, the Committee in 
their 4th Report (2019-20), 16th Lok Sabha on the  Occupational 
Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2019 had inter 
alia recommended that steps be taken to revise the list of 
hazardous industries in line with developed countries.  
-do- 
4.  2.168 The Committee note that as per the provisions of the Ac t, the 
Government have constituted a Technical Advisory Committee 
(which is a body of experts) to advise the Central Government on 
inclusion of additional occupations and processes to the 
Schedule of the Act. In this context, the representatives of the 
Ministry during oral evidence informed that based on the 
deliberations of the Committee, the Ministry were in the process 
of revising the list of occupations and processes under the Act 
-do- 

492 
 
through Technical Advisory Committee. Subsequently, the 
Ministry also sta ted that if required, the Government may also 
specify the nature of non -hazardous work where an adolescent 
may be permitted to work. The Committee note that ‘processes 
in agriculture where tractors, threshing and harvesting 
machines are used and chaff cutt ing’ has been included in Part 
B of the Schedule. The Committee have been apprised that the 
agriculture sector has been transforming rapidly into extensive 
use of chemical fertilizers and use of heavy machineries which 
makes some component of agriculture s ector hazardous. While 
appreciating the efforts being made by the Ministry to have a 
positive list of occupations and processes where adolescent can 
work, the Committee desire that while undertaking the exercise 
of revising the list, it may also be ensured that such occupations 
and processes as included in Part B of the Schedule, which may 
be hazardous in nature, in the present context be excluded. The 
Committee further desire that depending upon their expertise, 
the representatives of NGOs/voluntary organi zations be invited 
to Technical Advisory Committee so as to have feedback from all 
possible sources engaged in the work relating to elimination of 
child labour in the country. 
5.  2.169 (iii) Penalty/Economic Rehabilitation of the rescued 
child/adolescent 
The Committee note that amendment to the Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, which 
came into force w.e.f. 01.09.2016 inter alia provided for stricter 
punishment for employers  through enhancement of penalty for 
contravention of the provisions of the Act. As per the amended 
Act, the amount of penalty for first offence for employment of 
children below 14 years and adolescents ranges from Rs. 20,000  
to Rs. 50,000 with imprisonment for a period of 06 months to 2  
years and for  second or subsequent offence it is for a  period of 
one year to three  years. In the case of parents/ guardians, there 
is no punishment for the first offence and in case of second and 
subsequent offence, the penalty is in the form of a fine  upto Rs. 
10,000.  The offence under the Act is a cognizable offence for the 
employers but for parents/ guardians, it is  non -cognizable. For 
violations of any other section of the Act, penalty is in the form 
of i mprisonment for a month or fine of Rs. 1000 0 or both. A 
provision was also made in the Act for constitution of “Child and 
Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation Fund” for one or more districts 
to which the amount of the fine realized from the employer of the 
child and adolescent is credited. In addition,  an amount of Rs. 
fifteen thousand is credited by the appropriate Government for 
each of the child and adolescents rescued from the work. The 
amount credited to the Fund is deposited in banks or invested 
and the interest accrued on is paid to the child or adolescent in 
whose favour such amount is credited. 
-do- 
6.  2.170 As per SOPs issued by the Ministry of Labour and Employment, 
all rescued child labourer and adolescent labourers in 
hazardous employment are to be paid back wages at a rate not 
less than minimum wages for their period of employment. 
Further, immediate financial assistance of Rs 30,000 under the 
Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer 
2017 is required to be provided if the child/ adolescent is a 
bonded labour.  In addition, as per the judgment of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in the case of MC Mehta vs. State of Tamil Nadu 
and Ors. [AIR 1997 SC 699], a sum of Rs 20,000 per child is to 
be paid by the employer to  “Child Labour Rehabilitation -cum-
-do- 

493 
 
Welfare Fund”, which is to be used only for the benefit of that 
child. In addition, the Government is to provide employment to 
an adult family member of the child or contribute Rs 5000 per 
child to this fund. The Committee, thus, find that two types of 
funds are in existence for economic rehabilitation of the rescued 
child/adolescent viz. “Child and Adolescent Labour 
Rehabilitation Fund”, as per amended Act and  “Child Labour 
Rehabilitation-cum-Welfare Fund”, as per judgment of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court. The Committee have been apprised that, at 
present, specific guidelines for the utilization of the Fund do not 
exist. The Committee also note that the Central Sector Scheme 
for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer, 2017 has a provision of 
creating a district corpus fund of Rs. 10 lakhs for meeting 
immediate relief of rehabilitation of legally released bonded 
labourers. The Committee have also received suggestion to 
increase the amount of fine of Rs. 20,000 fixed by Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in 1996  under “Child Labour Rehabilitation -
cum-Welfare Fund” as well as contribution of Rs. 5000 by the 
Government under “Child and Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation 
Fund”, as per the amended Act. 
7.  2.171 The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment to formulate suitable guidelines for the utilization 
of the fund and also take immediate steps to increase the 
amount of fine of Rs. 20,000/contribution of Rs.5000 keeping in 
view the inflation and ensure timely deposit of the amount in the 
account of the rescued child/adolescent so as to have their 
secure future. The Committee also urge the Ministry to take 
steps for creating a district corpus fund of appropriate amount 
for child labourers on the lines of the provisions contained in  
the Central Sector Plan for rehabilitation of bonded labourer for 
meeting the immediate relief and rehabilitation of child 
labourers. The Committee feel that the corpus fund so created 
may also be used for the rehabilitation of trafficked and migrant 
child labourers repatriated from other States. 
-do- 
8.  2.172 The Committee further note that employment of children as 
domestic workers/servants, in dhabas (roadside eateries), 
restaurants, hotels, motels, automobile workshops, garages, etc. 
is prohibited under the Act. However, children are deployed in 
these places . The Committee find that despite revision of 
penalties there is no deterrence on the employer and as 
informed by NGOs, the children after being rescued are again 
employed in the same occupation. The Committee, therefore, feel 
that there is a desperate nee d to make the laws more stringent 
for the employers/violators in particular. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that in addition to the three/four times 
increase in the amount of fine, some stricter punishment in the 
form of cancellation of license, attac hment of property, etc. also 
need to be incorporated so as to protect and safeguard the 
interest of the children.  This may require amendment in the 
Act, which the Ministry of Labour & Employment should pursue 
in order to have zero tolerance on child labour. 
-do- 
9.  2.173 The Committee note that a large number of establishments 
outsource their work to contractors, who hire the contract 
workers through manpower suppliers. The Committee further 
note that while the Act has provision for punishment for 
employer, there are no provisions for penalty on principal 
employer and traffickers. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
in the case of deployment of child labour, in addition to the 
employer, the accountability of principal employer and 
-do- 

494 
 
traffickers be also fixed. 
10.  2.174 (iv) District Project Societies 
The Committee were apprised that under the NCLP, grants in 
aid are released to District Project Societies (DPSs) to operate 
the Special Training Centres (STCs). Further, stipend @ Rs. 400 
per month is also released to the eligible child enrolled at STC 
through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) mode. The Committee 
were also apprised that after the closure of STCs in the District, 
the DPS would cease to exist after a period of 6 months. With 
regard to the fate of District Project Societies after merger of 
NCLP with SSA, while DOSEL have stated that DOSEL/Samagra 
Shiksha will not absorb/take over DPS or any liabilities of NCLP 
Scheme, the Ministry of Labour & Employment have stated that 
new STCs under NCLP will not start and as such the functions 
of DPS will no longer be required. The Committee, however, find 
that the activities undertaken by DPS on PENCIL Portal, inter-
alia, include creating the Index Cards, validating the daily 
attendance, uploading bank account details of the rescued child 
etc. The Committee also  note that awareness generation at the 
district level about the menace of child labour is done by the 
DPS, which is responsible for operationalising the social 
mobilization component of NCLP. The Committee further note 
that the District Project Societies a ct as a linking agency for 
facilitating vocational training through existing Schemes of the 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship of the 
Government of India & Skill Development Departments of 
respective State Governments. In addition, DPSs are a lso 
required to conduct the baseline surveys to identify child labour. 
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the functions 
of DPS with regard to uploading information of the rescued child 
on PENCIL Portal, awareness generation, facilitating vocat ional 
training, conducting baseline survey, etc. have not been 
assigned to anyone. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
an appropriate mechanism in this regard be put in place in a 
time bound manner so that there is no discontinuity with regard 
to mand ate assigned to DPS through Standard Operating 
Procedure. 
-do- 
11.  2.175 (v) Children Rescued, Rehabilitated and Mainstreamed 
The Committee note that 14.3 lakh children were 
rescued/withdrawn from work, rehabilitated and mainstreamed 
under NCLP Scheme since its inception viz. since 1988 up to 
31.03.2023. The Scheme, which was sanctioned in 324 Districts 
in 21 States, was operatio nal in 59 Districts of 11 States, as on 
31.03.2021. The Committee further note that during the last five 
years, 1,95,365 children were rescued and mainstreamed and 
majority of them were from the six States viz. West Bengal 
(46164), Madhya Pradesh (39539), Maharashtra (22364), Uttar 
Pradesh (29946), Assam (14828) and Tamil Nadu (12729), which 
is indicative of existence of large number of child labour in these 
States in particular. The Committee are deeply concerned to 
note that despite existence of stringent  measures in the Child 
and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 
and the Rules made thereunder, the scourge of child labour still 
exists in a big way. It has also been brought to the notice of the 
Committees that FIRs in child labour cases are not being lodged 
as it should be.  During calendar year 2019, 2020 and 2021, the 
number of cases registered under the Act were 772, 476 and 
613 respectively implying that the implementation of the existing 
-do- 

495 
 
laws are not strictly enforced. The Committ ee are of the 
considered view that strict action needs to be taken against the 
violators. The Committee also note that there are inherent 
provisions in Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 
2012 for action against police for not registering FIRs . The 
Committee desire that similar provisions need to be made in 
CALPRA Act, 1986. The Committee also desire that the 
responsibility of reporting children selling goods or begging at 
traffic lights be assigned to the Traffic Police and they may also 
be he ld accountable for not reporting such instances. In 
addition, there needs to be a better coordination between 
various law enforcing agencies. Training needs to be provided to 
the officials of NGOs, Child Welfare Committee (CWC), Anti -
Human Trafficking Unit  (AHTU),  District Child Protection Unit 
(DCPU), District Legal Service Authority (DLSA), Railway 
Protection Force (RPF)/ Ground Railway Police, Labour 
Inspector, Factories inspector, RDO/ deputy collector, Child 
Welfare Police Officer and central armed forces and they need to 
be sensitized about the gravity of the crime and also about the 
international commitment made to eliminate child labour by 
2025 and its relevance for economic development of the country. 
The Committee also desire that at the local level, various Market 
Associations/Resident Welfare Associations be sensitized about 
consequences of deployment of child labours at commercial/  
residential places through launch of massive awareness 
campaigns through all possible means viz. Print, Electronic and 
social media platforms and be encouraged to report such cases. 
Further, the Government/PSU employees be asked to 
mandatorily furnish an undertaking annually regarding non -
deployment of children below 14 years of age as domestic 
workers/ servants at the ir residence(s) . The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the measures taken in this regard. 
12.  2.176 (vi) Sector-Wise eradication of Child Labour 
The Committee note that as per 2001 census, the number of 
main workers in the age group of 5 to 14 years in various 
industries was 57.54 lakh. Out of them, 39.73 lakh were in 
Agriculture, Hunting & Forestry & Fishing; 7.90 lakh in 
Manufacturing & 2.99 lakh in Wholesale and Retail Trade.  The 
Committee note that in the year 2021, after the Committee 
started examination of the Subject, the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment constituted an Inter -Ministerial Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary (L&E) to d iscuss the effective 
implementation of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition 
and Regulation), Act 1986 and strategy of sector -wise 
eradication of child labour comprising representatives of various 
Ministries/Departments viz. Department of School Eduation and 
Literacy, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Women and Child 
Development, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, 
Ministry of Rural Development, Department of Commerce, 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship, Ministry of 
Textiles, etc. While appreciating the step taken by the Ministry 
in the right direction, the Committee desire that it is imperative 
on the part of the Ministries/Departments/State Governments 
to chalk out a Sector -wise focused strategy for effective 
enforcement of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition 
and Regulation) Act, 1986 so as to ensure elimination of child 
labour. Further, as assured by the representative of the Ministry 
during evidence, the Committee desire that these inter -
-do- 

496 
 
Ministerial meetings wit h the line Ministries be conducted at 
least once in six months so that a comprehensive approach for 
tackling the issue of child labour in various sectors could be 
evolved. The Committee further desire that a special campaign 
and appeal be made to industries, factories and employers to be 
sensitive about child labour and to make their premises ‘No 
Child Labour Zone’. 
13.  2.177 (vii) Census & Survey 
The Committee note that the number of working children has 
decreased from 1.26 crore (as per 2001 census) to 1.01 crore (as 
per 2011 census) and the number of main working children in 
the age group of 5-14 years have also decreased from 57.79 lakh 
(as per 2001 census) to 43.53 lakh (as per 2011 census). The 
Committee further note that the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment do not conduct any survey to ascertain the number 
of child labours across the country and consider this data as 
child labour data. The Ministry have also categorically stated 
that no proposal is under their consideration to develop a 
mechanism to maintain child labour data except depending on 
census data. The Committee further note that the Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 was 
amended in 2016 and for the first time, ‘adolescent’ has been 
defined as a person who has  completed fourteenth year of age 
but has not completed eighteenth year. The amendment has 
been made after census 2011, wherein data of working children 
up to 14 years of age was captured & notified. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry of Labour & Employment to take up 
the matter regarding capturing data of children between 14 to 
18 years during next census exercise with the Ministry of Home 
Affairs so as to have reliable data of children and adolescents, 
which would not only help in formulating pol icies but also 
devising action plan for eliminating child labour . Since census 
exercise is conducted after a period of ten years and for 2021, it 
is yet to commence, the Committee impress upon the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment to conduct periodic survey particularly in 
urban areas to identify child labours, as assured by the 
representatives of the Ministry during oral evidence. 
Ministry of 
Labour & 
Employment 
and Ministry 
of Home 
Affairs 
14.  2.178 The Committee also impress upon the Ministry to continue 
issuing directives/advisories to States/UTs on regular intervals 
to conduct survey to identify the child labour, collect and 
furnish enforcement data alongwith their views/suggestions on 
difficulties being faced and measures to be taken for further 
improvement, framing of State Action Plan, functioning of State 
Resource Centres and other related actions on their part for 
enforcement of the Child & Adolescent Labour (Prevention and 
Regulation) Act, 1986. 
Ministry of 
Labour & 
Employment 
15.  2.179 (viii) Standard Operating Procedures 
The Committee note that the Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP)  for enforcement of the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 issued by the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment in September, 2017 is a comprehensive 
document containing detailed guidelines on (i) understanding 
legal framework; (ii) prevention, identification and reporting of 
child and adolescent labour in hazardous employment; (iii) pre -
rescue; (iv) rescue; (iv) post -rescue; (v) rehabilitation; (vi)  
monitoring mechanism and (vii) role and responsibilities of 
enforcing agencies and other stakeholders at different stages. 
The document acts as a ready reckoner for enforcing agencies 
-do- 

497 
 
and other stakeholders and provides step by step SOP for 
effective enfo rcement and implementation of the provisions of 
the various legislations, convergence of resources of Government 
both horizontally and vertically, coordination between various 
stakeholders and active involvement of the community. The 
Committee have been ap prised that multiple Departments have 
issued advisories and SOPs which are in conflict with each other 
and to avoid confusion and conflicts, a single document needs to 
be prepared after consultation with the Ministries concerned so 
as to maintain uniformit y. The Committee desire that the 
document so prepared should inter-alia contain Inter -State 
Repatriation Policy highlighting clear cut demarcation of duties 
and responsibilities and coordination between various Ministries 
and Department concerned, State Go vernments, stakeholders, 
Police, Anti -Human Trafficking Unit (AHTU), Child Welfare 
Committee, District Child Protection Unit, etc. inter-alia 
containing provisions for grant of permission from State 
Governments for mass movement of children from one State to 
another and targeted interventions for child migrants/ children 
of migrant labours and those belonging to socially 
disadvantaged group. The Committee note that in this context, 
Department of School Education and Literacy have also stated 
that with the c onvergence of the two schemes viz. NCLP and 
SSA, detailed Standard Operating Procedure with regard to 
mainstreaming of children to schools is required to be prepared 
in consultation with all the Stakeholders and implementing 
agencies including all States &  UTs and all concerned 
departments.  
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a 
detailed Standard Operating Procedure be worked out by the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment in consultation with all 
concerned in a time bound manner so as to avoid any confusion 
amongst all stakeholders. 
16.  2.180 (ix) Child Budgeting 
The Committee note that the ‘budgetary allocation to Ministry of 
Labour & Employment under NCLP Scheme during 2017 -18 to 
2022-23 was Rs. 352.16 crore and out of which Rs. 337.06 crore 
(95%) was utilized. For 2023 -24, Rs. 10 crore has been 
allocated. The Co mmittee during deliberations with various 
Ministries/Departments noted with concern that some of the 
Ministries viz. Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment had expressed reservations with 
regard to their jurisdiction on chil d labour related issues. 
Though both the Ministries later extended full support and 
responded well to the points raised during deliberations, the 
Committee feel that although the overall responsibility for 
eliminating child labour vests with the Ministry o f Labour & 
Employment, the other Ministries/Departments as well as State 
Governments have also an equally important role to play and 
this social evil can be eliminated only with the coordinated 
efforts of Central & State Governments. The Committee are of 
the considered view that all Ministries/Departments should 
have budgetary allocations in their Demands for Grants 
exclusively for the child labour related activities. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government besides integrating 
‘Child Budgeti ng’ into all the budgets and programmes of the 
Central and State Governments and their Undertakings, should 
also ensure optimum utilization of budget allocated for children 
-do- 

498 
 
while periodically increasing the allocation keeping in mind the 
evolving needs. 
17.  2.181 (x) ILO Conventions 
The Committee note that consequent upon strengthening the 
legislative framework for complete prohibition of employment of 
children below 14 years through amendment in the Child 
Labour and Adolescent (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 in 
2016, ILO Convention No. 138 of 01.06.1973 concerning 
minimum age for employment and No. 182 of 01.06.1999 
concerning prohibition and elimination of worst forms of child 
labour viz. slavery, trafficking, bonded labour, child soldiers, etc. 
were subsequently ratified in June, 2017. The Committee 
further note that with the ratification of these two ILO 
conventions, the country has re -affirmed its commitment 
towards elimination of child labour and to achieve the target 
stipulated in Sustainable Development Goal 8.7 to end all forms 
of child labour by 2025. The Committee feel that various factors 
like economic insecurity, lack of social protection, inadequate 
household income, etc. has increased the risk of exposure to 
exploitative work. Considering the prevalence of child labour at 
present, it is practically not possible to meet the international 
commitment to eliminate child labour by 2025. As action taken 
today will determine the future of children of tomorrow, the 
Committee impress upon the Mi nistry to take up the issue in a 
mission mode and devise a systematic action plan based policy 
to meet international commitments, which are not only relevant 
for economic development of the country but will also brighten 
the image of the country in international forum. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that in line with the aim of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) 8.7, the Government should take 
immediate and effective measures to eradicate forced labour and 
modern slavery and human trafficking and se cure the 
prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour, 
including recruitment and use of child soldiers and by 2025 end 
child labour in all its forms. 
-do- 
18.  2.182 (xi) PENCIL Portal 
The Committee note that to ensure the effective enforcement of 
the provisions of the Child and Adolescent (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Act, 1986 and smooth implementation of the 
National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme, an online portal 
PENCIL (Platform for Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour) 
was launched w.e.f. 26 September, 2017. The Portal connects 
Central Government to State Government(s), District(s), all 
Project Societies and the General public.  Further, online 
complaints regarding child labour can also be filed by anybody 
on the Portal.  The complaints received on the Portal are 
resolved by the District Nodal Officers (DNOs) which are 
appointed by the State Governments under the Child and 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Rules, 2017. 
-do- 
19.  2.183 Further, as per Standard Operat ing Procedure (SOP) for 
enforcement of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition 
and Regulation) Act, 1986 issued by the Ministry in September, 
2017, the role and responsibilities of the District Nodal Officer 
includes prevention, identification, prepar ation before rescue, 
rescue, post rescue, rehabilitation and follow up including 
uploading Information on the Portal. The Committee were 
apprised by National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
(NCPCR) that the District Nodal Officer has not been app ointed 
-do- 

499 
 
by many States/UTs. Considering the fact that the District 
Nodal Officer has a very important role to play, the Committee 
impress upon the Ministry to ensure that District Nodal Officers 
are appointed by all States/UTs within two months of the 
presentation of this Report to the Parliament. The Committee 
also recommend that the District Labour Officer be appointed 
ex-officio District Nodal Officer under the Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Rules, 2017. The Committee 
further not e that since its launch in September, 2017, 4290 
complaints were registered on Portal and out of them, 3312 
complaints have been resolved and 978 complaints (22%) are yet 
to be resolved. The Committee impress upon the Ministry to 
issue appropriate instructions to the concerned to resolve these 
complaints on priority. The Committee further desire that a 
mechanism be put in place to resolve the complaints in a time 
bound manner. 
20.  2.184 The Committee appreciate that an NGO has been on-boarded on 
PENCIL Portal on pilot basis to have access to the complaints 
registered and take up the matter with District Nodal Officer for 
redressal of the same. The Committee desire that other NGOs be 
on-boarded on the portal for speedy redressal of complaints. 
-do- 
21.  2.185 The Committee find that PENCIL Portal has provision to register 
complaints for which details of child labour/adolescent child, 
address where child is found & details of reporting persons are 
required to be filled in. There is , however, no provisions for a  
child labour to register himself/herself. The Committee desire 
that a provision to this effect be made on the Portal for effective 
implementation of the Act. 
-do- 
22.  2.186 The Committee were apprised that the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment are considering  the integration of PENCIL Portal 
with women/child help line no. 1098 being administered by the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development. The Committee 
desire that the exercise may be completed in a time bound 
manner. The Committee also desire that conseque nt upon 
merger of NCLP with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan, the integration 
of PENCIL Portal with PRABANDH Portal of Department of 
School Education & Literacy also needs to be undertaken.  The 
Committee wish to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard. 
Ministry of 
Labour & 
Employment, 
Ministry of 
Women and 
Child 
Development 
and 
Department of 
School 
Education 
and Literacy 
23.  2.187 (xii) Deployment of Children at Construction Sites/Beedi -
making/firecrackers Industries 
The Committee note that construction work; beedi making; and 
production, storage or sale of fire crackers, etc. are included in 
Part A of the Schedule to the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 containing hazardous 
occupations and processes in which adolescents are prohibited 
to work and children are prohibited to help. However, the 
instances of deployment of children in these hazardous 
occupations are often reported from time to time. In the case of 
construction work, the Min istry have stated that no surprise 
visits are being undertaken due to launch of Shram Suvidha 
Portal w.e.f. 16.10.2014. The Committee feel that deployment of 
children in hazardous occupations can be prevented only 
through physical/on -site inspections and t hrough massive 
awareness campaigns. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to undertake surprise physical inspections at 
construction sites/beedi making/fire cracker industries and 
other hazardous occupations included in Schedule ‘A’ and also 
Ministry of 
Labour & 
Employment  

500 
 
launch mass media campaign by involving State Governments, 
NGOs, Trade Unions and other stakeholders so as to prevent the 
engagement of adolescents/ children in such work. 
24.  2.188 (xiii) Participation of Public Representatives 
The Committee were apprised that the State Government(s) 
ensure the participation of local  representatives  in  the 
meetings conducted by the respective district authorities in 
connection with various aspects of Child Labour. The Committee 
were also apprised that as per revised NCLP Guidelines, a 
District Vigilance & Monitoring Committee (VMC) which 
functions in an advisory capacity, and  monitors the National 
Child Labour Project under the Chairmanship of local Member 
of Parliament. The Committee, however, fi nd that despite 
existence of laid down guidelines, the participation of local MPs, 
MLAs and other public representatives in District Level 
Committees is not ensured. The Committee, therefore, exhort 
the Ministry to issue advisories to State Governments to adhere 
to the guidelines & ensure that such meeting are held at regular 
intervals so that the feedback and suggestions of public 
representatives with regard to the aspects related to child labour 
could be gainfully utilized. 
-do- 
25.  2.189 (xiv) Vocational Training to Adolescents 
The Committee were apprised that under the Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship, there are no vocational 
training programme/schemes exclusively for the training of 
rescued adolescent children. As admitted by the represen tative 
of the Ministry during oral evidence, the rescued adolescent 
children from hazardous industry need to be re -skilled for 
utilizing their services in non -hazardous industries. The 
Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to take up the 
matter r egarding skilling/re -skilling of rescued adolescent 
children with the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship and devise customized/need based training 
programmes keeping in view the interest, aptitude and skill of 
the rescued adolescent. The Comm ittee also call upon the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment to coordinate with School 
Education Departments and Skill Development Departments of 
States and UTs to provide skill training to the rescued 
adolescents. 
Ministry of 
Labour & 
Employment 
and Ministry 
of Skill 
Development 
& 
Entrepreneur
ship  
26.  2.190 (xv) Child Friendly Police Stations 
The Committee agree with the views of the NGOs that there is a  
need to bridge the gap between the police and children by 
making all police stations child -friendly including a dedicated 
corner for children besides introducing child friendly approach 
to investigations. In addition, legal aid and counseling to the 
parents and the victim be provided at the police station and at 
the place of safety wherever necessary by empanell ed lawyers of 
the DLSA/SLSA and NGOs, as laid down in Standard Operating 
Procedures. The Committee desire the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment to take up the matter with the Ministry of Home 
Affairs/others concerned on priority. 
Ministry of 
Labour & 
Employment 
and Ministry 
of Home 
Affairs 
27.  2.191 (xvi) Child Friendly Courts 
The Committee also agree with the views of NGOs that there is a 
need to have all courts as child friendly in terms of 
infrastructure and processes including exclusive or dedicated 
children’s courts for crimes against children, child friendly 
spaces and rooms in the courts, victim/ witness protection to 
the child and his family, etc. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry of 
Labour & 
Employment 

501 
 
matter be taken up with the concerned authorities by the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
28.  2.192 (xvii) Financial assistance to the family of rescued child 
The Committee were apprised that some of the factors 
responsible for child labour include family circumstances viz. 
family not being economically empowered, earning member 
suffering from life threatening illness, marital dispute, 
occurrence of manmade or n atural calamities, etc. The 
Committee feel that under such circumstances, the family needs 
to be supported through livelihood support especially in the case 
of rescued child. The Committee desire that the issue of 
economic  crisis of the family needs to be  addressed to prevent 
the recurrence of incidents of child labour and for the purpose, a 
special scheme for providing financial assistance to the family of 
rescued child be formulated to provide interim financial 
assistance until such time the child receives access to economic 
benefits under laws, schemes and court orders. 
-do- 
29.  2.193 (xviii) Monitoring and Coordination Mechanism 
The Committee note that Labour is under concurrent list and 
State Governments are the important stakeholders for 
implementation of the Act in an effective manner. There is no 
denying the fact that despite existence of monitoring and 
coordination mechanism, the menace of child labour still exists. 
The Committee were apprised that the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment propose to hold Conference with States and 
Stakeholders to obtain inputs on strengthening of 
implementation of the Child and Adolescent Labour (P rohibition 
and Regulation) Act,1986. The Committee were also apprised 
that the Ministry propose to have umbrella MoU for States on 
the issue of release, repatriation and rehabilitation of rescued 
child by Central Government. The Committee wish to be 
apprised of the developments made in this regard. 
-do- 
30.  2.194 The Committee also desire that steps be taken to establish a 
National Level Child Tracking Mechanism to facilitate 
coordination among the States/Centre in such a way that the 
monitoring at District l evel is reported to States and from there 
to Centre by digital mode through coordinated efforts of all 
concerned so as to facilitate prevention, tracing, tracking, 
rescue, rehabilitation and reintegration of the rescued children. 
-do- 
31.  3.45 (i) Merger of National Child Labour Project (NCLP) with 
Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) 
3.45 The Committee note that under the National Child 
Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme,  which was sanctioned in 324 
Districts and operational in 59 Districts as on 31.03.2021, the 
District Project Society (DPS) at District level is required to 
conduct the baseline survey to identify child labour and based 
on the number of child labours identified and rescued from the 
survey, Special Training Centres (STCs) are opened for 
rehabilitation of the child labour in the age group of 9 -14 years, 
who are enrolled in these Centres for a maximum period of 2 
years. These Centres are operated by NGOs, Civil Society 
Organisations, etc. or by the District Project Society directly 
themselves. Further, the o nus of selection/identification of 
implementing agencies to operate the STC lies with District 
Project Society. These STCs provide bridge education to children 
before they mainstreamed into formal education system. As 
stated by the Ministry of Labour and E mployment, after 
mainstreaming of the children enrolled in the STCs under NCLP, 
the NCLP STC will cease to be operational but District Project 
Ministry of 
Education 
(Department 
of School 
Education & 
Literacy) 

502 
 
Society will continue to be functional for a period of six months 
after closure of STCs. The Committee further no te that no new 
permission after 31.03.2021 has been given by the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment for opening STCs under NCLP after its 
merger with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan Scheme. The children 
enrolled at the STCs of NCLP as on 31.03.2021 will be 
mainstreamed in accordance with NCLP guidelines. If any child 
has been enrolled after 31.03.2021 in any STC functional under 
NCLP, he/she be mainstreamed or shifted to STCs functional 
under SSA. 
The Committee also note that during 2022 -23, 282 STCs under 
NCLP were operational in 11 Districts of 5 States viz. Madhya 
Pradesh, Odisha, Assam, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu. The 
Committee further note that under Samagra Shiksha, 83,979 
STCs are functional in 32 States/UTs and out of them, 228 
STCs in 12 States/UTs have hostel facilities. The Committee feel 
that access to hostels will increase retention rate of children in 
schools, as many children engaged in child labour belong to 
migrant families/Nomadic Tribes having no permanent home. 
The Committee, therefore, impress upo n DoSEL to increase the 
number and capacity of their Special Training Centres across 
the country in a time bound manner especially at places where 
the concentration of child labour is very large. 
32.  3.46 The Committee further note that the DoSEL has categorically 
stated that Samagra Shiksha will not be absorbing/taking over 
the District Project Society or any liability of NCLP Scheme as 
convergence of NCLP with Samagra Shiksha is only to the extent 
of providing special training and mainstreaming of students. The 
Committee also take cognizance of the issues flagged by DoSEL 
with regard to closure of STCs under NCLP, utilization of human 
resources deployed and taking over/running STCs under NCLP, 
etc. with th e Ministry of Labour and Employment and feel that 
comprehensive guidelines on running the STCs and 
mainstreaming the Out of School Children and other related 
issues need to be framed jointly by the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and DoSEL so as to amicably resolve the issues. 
Ministry of 
Education 
(Department 
of School 
Education & 
Literacy)and 
Ministry of 
Labour & 
Employment  
33.  3.47 Considering the fact that the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) had granted no objection to the proposal of t he 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for merger of NCLP with 
SSA on the ground that both Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and DoSEL had come to an agreement for merger 
of NCLP with SSA, the Committee desire that detailed 
guidelines/modalities/procedures t o be observed by States/  
UTs/Stakeholders implementing agencies following the merger 
of two Schemes be worked out by both the Ministries on priority. 
Ministry of 
Education 
(Department 
of School 
Education & 
Literacy) 
34.  3.48 Further, the Committee while ackn owledging the fact that the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment do not have an independent 
mechanism to identify the child labour, impress upon the 
Ministry that prevention, identification, rescue, rehabilitation 
and reintegration of the rescued child is the ir overall 
responsibility assigned by an Act of Parliament and the Rules 
made thereunder. Simultaneously after merger of NCLP with 
SSA, DoSEL has now a very important role as far as 
rehabilitation of the rescued child is concerned. During the 
course of ext ensive examination of the subject for a period 
exceeding two years, the Committee have attempted to sensitize 
some of the line Ministries, State Governments and 
Stakeholders about their direct/indirect role and further efforts 
to be made for elimination th e social evil of child labour. It is 
Ministry of 
Labour & 
Employment  

503 
 
now for the Ministry of Labour and Employment in particular 
and other Ministries and State/UT Governments to ensure that 
observations/recommendations made by the Committee are 
implemented in letter and spirit. 
35.  3.49 (ii) Financial support to States/ UTs for providing Special 
Training to Out of School Children. 
The Committee note that DoSEL, under the Samagra Shiksha 
Scheme, provides financial support to States and UTs for 
providing Special Training to Out of School Children. The 
Committee were apprised that the amount of Rs. 6000 per child 
per annum and Rs. 20,000 per child per annum for non -
residential and residential courses (class 1 st to 8th) respectively, 
which was available unde r the erstwhile centrally sponsored 
scheme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, has been continued for non -
residential and residential (upto class XIIth)  under the Samagra 
Shiksha also. The Committee were apprised during oral evidence 
that when RTE Act, 2009 came in to existence, Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan (SSA) Scheme was in operation implying that the 
amount of financial assistance was fixed prior to 2009. 
Considering the fact that the amount of financial assistance 
being  provided to States/ UTs for providing Special Tr aining to 
Out of School Children, viz. Rs. 500 per child per month for 
non-residential and Rs. 1667 per child per month for residential 
courses has not been increased for more than 14 years, the 
Committee desire that this amount be suitably increased 
keeping in view the inflation as well as the interest of 
beneficiaries. 
Ministry of 
Education 
(Department 
of School 
Education & 
Literacy) 
36.  3.50 (iii) Out of School Children 
The Committee note that the target group in Out of School 
Children (OOSC) is the ‘never  enrolled’ and ‘drop out’ children. 
The National Education Policy, 2020, inter alia, lays emphasis 
on identification of OOSC, their mainstreaming and tracking. In 
this context, the Committee further note that DoSEL has 
developed an online module for compil ing the data of Out of 
School Children identified by each State/UT and their mapping 
with Special Training Centres (STC) on the PRABANDH Portal 
(http://samagrashiksha.in). The concerned State/UT validates 
the child-wise information of the identified OOSC  uploaded by 
the concerned Block Resource Centre of the State for monitoring 
the progress of mainstreaming of OOSC. 
The Committee note that at present District -wise data of OOSC 
is not being maintained. The Committee desire that in addition 
to child-wise/school-wise data, the District-wise details of OOSC 
be maintained and shared with the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment, as OOSC are the children at risk or vulnerable to 
child labour. 
-do- 
37.  3.51 The Committee were apprised by an NGO that one of the major 
causes of dropout of children especially girls in rural areas is 
that the schools are upto 8 th class whereas in urban areas, the 
schools are upto 12 th class. The Committee desire the DoSEL to 
examine this aspect with a view to maintaining the uniformity 
and also to ensure that the children in rural areas in particular 
do not have to travel long distance for getting secondary and 
senior secondary level of education. 
-do- 
38.  3.52 (iv) Dropout Rate  
The Committee note that the annual average drop out rate at the 
elementary level for 2019 -20, 2020 -21 and 2021 -2022 was 
1.9%, 1.3% and 2.0% respectively, whereas at the secondary 
level, it was 16.1%, 14.0% and 12.6% during the corresponding 
-do- 

504 
 
period implying that the number of children who dropped out at 
the secondary level were 8,11 & 6 times more than those 
dropped o ut at the elementary level during 2019 -20, 2020 -21 
and 2021 -22 respectively.The Committee also note that the 
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 
2009 mandates the Government to provide free and compulsory 
elementary education to every child of the age 6 to 14 years in a 
neighbourhood school. The Committee feel that one of the 
reasons for dropping out of a large number of children is that 
the provisions of RTE Act, 2009 do not cover the adolescent 
group of children due to which thes e children are not mobilized 
to attend school. In this context, the Committee further note 
that under ‘Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman’ (PM 
POSHAN), one hot cooked meal in Government and Government 
aided schools is provided to students at the elementar y level of 
education under Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan. The Committee 
desire that with a view to reducing drop out rate at secondary 
level, the adolescents be covered under the RTE, Act, 2009 and 
the facility of providing hot cooked meal be extended from 
elementary level of education to secondary/ senior secondary 
levelso as to minimize drop out rate at secondary level. 
39.  3.53 (v) ‘Working Children’ and ‘Main Working Children’ 
The Committee note that the survey of ‘Out of School Children 
(OOSC) does not capture the data of ‘working children’ and 
‘main working children’. The DoSEL have, however, stated that 
they propose to improvise the survey format of out of school 
children, in consultation with Ministry of Labour and 
Employment, to add new entries for identification of child labour 
as also to identify if the child is a ‘working child’ only or is the 
‘main working child’ i.e. the sole earner. The Committee desire 
that the consultation process be expedited and the format for 
out of school children be revised so as to include these two 
categories of children, as committed by the representative of the 
Ministry during evidence.The Committee also impress upon the 
DoSEL to ensure that the data, as per revised for mat, is 
captured during next ‘OOSC’ survey. 
-do- 
40.  3.54 (vi) Data of migrant children/Nomadic Tribes 
The Committee note that as per Section 4 of the RTE Act, 2009, 
special training is provided to Out of School Children (OOSC) in 
the age group of six to fou rteen years so that they can be 
mainstreamed into the age -appropriate classes.The Committee 
further note that during the period 2018 -19 to 30.09.2023, 
25.04 lakh OOSC were provided special training at elementary 
level. The data, however, does not include t he data of migrant 
children/Nomadic Tribes. As informed by the DoSEL, the 
residential facilities are also provided to child labour rescued, 
migrant children who belong to poor landless families, etc. The 
Committee desire that the data of migrant children/N omadic 
Tribes provided special training be maintained as the possibility 
of such children being pushed to child labour is always very 
high. 
-do- 
41.  3.55 (vii) Door-to-Door Surveys 
The Committee note that teachers conduct door -to-door survey 
in rural as well as urban areas to identify Out of School 
Children (OOSC). The Committee feel that while it is 
comparatively easier to conduct door -to-door surveys in rural 
areas, there are many places in the urban areas where 
homeless/migrant families alongwith their children including 
Nomadic Tribes live viz. under the flyovers, on roadside/slum 
-do- 

505 
 
areas or outskirts of the city, etc. The Committee, thus find that 
there is gap in identification of OOSC, especially in urban areas, 
which needs to be filled in. The Committee , therefore, desire the 
DoSEL to devise suitable mechanism to cover such homeless 
children, who reside in urban areas, so as to have correct data 
of OOSC. 
42.  3.56 (viii) Special Training to Teachers 
The Committee note that 25.69 lakh, 7.73 lakh and 4.87 lakh 
teachers were trained during 2020 -21, 2021 -22 and upto 
30.09.2023 respectively. The Committee further note that under 
Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan, door -to-door survey to identify  the 
Out of School Children(OOSC) is conducted by the respective 
States/UTs Government through the teachers. The Committee 
were apprised that the teachers have neither the expertise nor 
mandate to identify the child labour. The Committee are of the 
considered view that  though identification of child labour is the 
mandate of Ministry of Labour and Employment/ State 
Governments, considering the fact that the teachers conduct 
door-to-door survey annually to identify OOSC, and are the only 
source of direct int eraction with parents/guardians throughout 
the country, it is imperative on the part of DoSEL to sensitize 
teachers through Special Training about the international 
commitment of the country towards elimination of child labour 
and to achieve the target stipulated in Sustainable Development 
Goal 8.7 to end all forms of child labour by 2025. As the services 
of teachers are also utilized at the time of preparation of 
electoral list and, for the purpose, training is also being 
imparted to them, the Committee de sire that on the similar 
lines, DoSEL may devise an appropriate mechanism to include 
child labour related component in the training module of 
teachers so that the exposure so gained is gainfully utilized by 
them while interacting with parents/guardians at the time of 
conducting OOSC surveys. The Committee wish to be apprised 
of the developments made in this regard. 
-do- 
43.  3.57 (ix) Student Registry 
The Committee note that to curtail dropout rate and ensuring 
universal access to education at all levels, National Education 
Policy, 2020 (NEP) recommends achieving universal 
participation in school by carefully tracking students, as well as 
their learning  levels, Student Registry by the States. The 
Committee were apprised that child tracking at national level is 
yet to be rolled out, however, around 20 States/ UTs have 
prepared Student Registry with all relevant details and around 
20 crore children are bei ng tracked at State level. The 
Committee urge the DoSEL to issue appropriate instructions to 
the remaining 16 States/UTs to prepare Student Registry and 
start tracking them. The Committee are happy to note that w.e.f. 
2022-23, DoSEL have started collecting  child-wise information 
under UDISE+  Portal in order to track students to reduce 
dropouts and to track their Learning Outcomes and the number 
of enrolments of students from pre -primary to higher secondary 
level in 2022 -23 is 25.17 crore across all States/ UTs. The 
Committee call upon the DoSEL to leave no stone unturned to 
ensure that child tracking at National level is undertaken as per 
norms so as to achieve the objectives of NEP, 2020. 
-do- 
44.  3.58 (x) Integration with Department of Women and Child 
Development 
The Committee were apprised that the Department of Women 
and Child Development had observed that some of the 
-do- 

506 
 
adolescent girls visiting Anganwadi Centres were ‘out of school’. 
The Committee were also apprised that the Department of 
School Education and Literacy(DoSEL) and  Women and Child 
Development had issued joint instructions to all the States with 
regard to mainstreaming of such children. The Committee 
appreciate the joint efforts made in this direction and desire that 
the process of integration  with Department of Child 
Development be expedited and completed in a time bound 
manner. 
45.  3.59 (xi) Role of Elected Representatives 
The Committee note that as per Section 21 of the RTE Act, 2009, 
the  School Management Committee/School Management 
Development Committee consists of the elected representatives 
of the local authority, parents or guardians of children admitted 
and teachers.  The Committee further note that under the 
Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan, provisions exist for Governing 
Council/Body at National level; single Implementation Society at 
State level to facilitate better decision making; and District 
Project office at District Le vel headed by District 
Collector/Magistrate/Chief Executive Officer of the Zila 
Parishad. The Committee feel that the experience gained by MPs 
and MLAs through interactions with stakeholders at ground 
level and also through various other means can be gainf ully 
utilized by sharing their views and feedback. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the local MPs and MLAs be also invited at 
the meetings held at State/District level so as to strengthen the 
monitoring mechanism. 
-do- 
46.  3.60 (xii) Awareness Campaigns 
The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Department of 
School Education and Literacy(DoSEL) for generating awareness 
on RTE Act, 2009; Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan; and NEP, 2020, 
etc. through print, electronic and social media platforms, road 
shows, Shikshak Parv, publication of NEP 2020 Implementation 
Booklet, launch of Nation wide reading campaign, organizing 
Akhil Bhartiya Shiksha Samagam, Bhartiya Bhasha Utsav, 
Swachhata Pakhwada, etc. As teachers have a very important 
role in eliminating the socia l evil of child labour from the 
country, the Committee desire the DoSEL to include this aspect 
also in the awareness campaigns to be launched in future. 
-do- 
47.  3.61 (xiii) Educating children about child labour and child 
protection issues 
The Committee note that the Samagra Shiksha Scheme aims to 
ensure inclusive and equitable quality education at all levels of 
school education. The Scheme has also been aligned with the 
recommendations of the National Education Policy, 2020.The 
Committee fu rther note that the scheme being an integrated 
scheme for school education also aims to ensure that all 
children have access to quality education with an equitable and 
inclusive classroom environment which should take care of their 
diverse background, mult ilingual needs and different academic 
abilities, thereby making them active participants in the learning 
process. The Committee have been apprised by NGOs that there 
is a need to include a Chapter on elimination of child labour in 
school curriculum and als o to educate the children in 
understanding, recognizing and reporting any crimes against 
children and other child protection issues through   academic 
curriculum and in non -academic spaces. The Committee call 
upon the DoSEL to accord priority to these meas ures in the 
overall interest of the country and also in the interest of children 
-do- 

507 
 
in particular. 
48.  4.71 The Committee note that the Mission Vatsalya (erstwhile Child 
Protection Services-CPS) aims to pursue convergence of schemes 
to ensure desired outcomes in terms of child development while 
optimising investment,  for care, protection, rehabilitation and 
reintegration of children in difficult circumstances. As per the 
Ministry, under the Scheme, financial assistance is provided to 
State Governments/UT Ad ministrations, for providing various 
rehabilitative services through institutional and non -
institutional care under the JJ Act, 2015.  In this regard, the 
Committee while lauding the efforts made under the Mission, 
are of the opinion that the efforts toward s convergence should 
be taken at the three levels namely, District, State and National 
level, so as to effectively forge convergence between States and 
services. In this regard, the Committee feel that synergy 
particularly with the Ministry of Labour and E mployment and 
Departments of Labour in States is critical for prevention, 
identification, rescue and rehabilitation of Child labours and  
urge upon the Ministry to consistently coordinate and work with 
other agencies at the District level such as District Child 
Protection Unit, District Magistrate, Child Welfare Committee 
and Village level Child Protection Committees under Mission 
Vatsalaya in order  to successfully mitigate incidence of Child 
labour. 
Ministry of 
Woman and 
Child 
Development 
49.  4.72 The Committee note that under the JJ Act, 2015, a ‘Child’ is 
defined as a person who has not completed eighteen years of 
age. Further, all cases related to child labour are dealt solely 
under the Act, which provides for prosecution of those involved 
in chi ld labour and rehabilitation of child labours. The 
Committee, however, find that the term ‘adolescent’ is not 
defined under the JJ Act, 2015. The Committee have also been 
given to understand that the Rashtriya Kishore Swasthya 
Karyakaram under the Ministry  of Health of Family Welfare 
defines an adolescent as a person between 10-19 years. Further, 
as per the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, 
children between age group 14 -18 years are defined as 
adolescents. The Committee feel that, in the absence of any 
definition of ‘adolescent’ category of children, in cases related to 
adolescents, prosecuting someone under JJ Act will become 
difficult. In the considered opinion of the Committee, there is a 
lack of consistency in the definition of adolescents and there is a 
need for inclusion of a sub -category of children under JJ Act to 
cater to Adolescents. Moreover, the Committee feel that the lack 
of clarity in definition of Child/adolescents in Government 
policies is also bound to adversely affect law s governing their 
employability and prosecution. There is thus an urgent need to 
harmonize the various laws on the definition of 
Child/adolescents so as to effectively regulate and rehabilitate 
them. 
-do- 
50.  4.73 The Committee find that under the JJ Act, 2015, the State/UT 
Government is mandated to constitute one or more Child 
Welfare Committees (CWCs) in each District for the purpose of 
reporting of children in need of care and protection for 
exercising the powers and to discharge the duties in relation to 
Children. In this regard, it was informed that continuous efforts 
were made to ensure that the CWCs are set up and functional in 
all districts. The Committee find that as on 31.03.2022, 753 
CWCs have been set up across the country and urge the 
Ministry to immediately intervene in such States/districts where 
-do- 

508 
 
CWCs are yet to be set up or are dysfunctional owing to staff 
shortage, lack of adequate monitoring and lack of timely review. 
The Committee are of the opinion  that unless timely 
interventions are undertaken to address any shortcomings, a 
robust welfare system will continue to be out of reach for 
vulnerable Children and they will have to bear the brunt of it. 
51.  4.74 The Committee were informed that, as per procedure laid down 
under the Act, a child in need of care and protection is to be 
produced before Child Welfare Committee(CWC) and CWC 
declares that child, as a child in need of care and protection on 
consideration of Social Investigation Report of the ch ild and by 
taking into account the child’s wishes in case the child is 
sufficiently mature to take that view. The Committee have been 
given to understand that the procedure of Social Investgation 
Report was being revised to address the different categories  of 
children in need of care and protection. The Committee are 
conscious of the fact that the Social investigation report is an 
important procedure regarding the antecedents of the child and 
is a vital link for assessing the requirements of the Child in need 
of care and protection and helps in taking a clear decision 
regarding rehabilitation and their social re -integration. The 
Committee urge upon the Ministry to expedite revision of Social 
Investigation Report so as to enable the implementing 
authorities to better understand the needs and requirement of 
the child including provisions for welfare and rehabilitation of 
children who are found working in contravention of provisions of 
JJ Act or Labour laws.   The Committee may be updated 
regarding the progress in this regard. 
-do- 
52.  4.75 The Committee note the laudable initiatives taken by the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development (MWCD) to 
strengthen the implementation of the Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (JJ Act). In this regard , the 
Ministry having felt the need for constant supervision at a senior 
level in the Districts for  strict adherence of the Act, has notified 
the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Amendment Act, 2021 which has made the  District Magistrat e 
(DM) as the focal point for implementation of the JJ Act at the 
district level. The Committee find that now the DM will be 
responsible for conducting quarterly reviews of the functioning 
of the Child Welfare Committees (CWCs) and for passing 
adoption ord ers, which was previously being exercised by the 
Judiciary. However, the enabling rules need to be notified at the 
earliest for swift implementation of revision in the Act. Moreover, 
the DM will also head the District Child Protection Units 
(DCPUs), which are responsible for coordinating all child 
protection, welfare, and development activities in the district. 
The Committee emphasize that the existing coordination 
mechanism among different stakeholders viz. Juvenile Justice 
Board, Child Welfare Committee a nd District Child Protection 
Units need to be monitored and reviewed by the DM at regular 
intervals for seamless implementation of JJ Act. The Committee 
view this as a significant step as it will provide constant 
supervision and leadership for child protec tion efforts in the 
district and these stakeholders play a critical role in the 
implementation of the JJ Act, the DM's oversight will help to 
ensure that they are functioning effectively. At the same time the 
Committee feel that the DM already has a wide r ange of 
responsibilities and adding the JJ Act to this could strain the 
DM's resources and time. To address this concern, the 
-do- 

509 
 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development (MWCD) should provide the DMs with the 
necessary support to e ffectively carry out their new 
responsibilities. The Ministry should also work closely with the 
State Governments to ensure that the DMs are given the 
authority and resources they need to do their job effectively. 
53.  4.76 The Committee find that there are 241 Open shelters (as on 
31.03.2022) that are assisted under the Mission Vatsalya 
Scheme across the country which has benefitted only 5048 
children across the country, which in the estimation of the 
Committee is inadequate. Moreover, it is also observed that the 
open shelters in some of the more populous states such as UP 
(13), MP(9), Bihar(0) and Maharashtra(13) is a serious cause of 
concern for the Committee. According to the Ministry, the JJ 
Act, 2015 provides that the State Government may establish and 
maintain, by itself or through voluntary or non -governmental 
organisations, as many open shelters as may be required, which 
shall be registered under the Act. These shelters are to function 
as a community based facility fo r children in need of residential 
support, on short term basis, with the objective of protecting 
them from abuse or weaning them, or keeping them, away from 
a life on the streets. The Committee note with concern that the 
lack of adequate open shelters can have serious consequences 
for children, including through increased vulnerability to abuse 
and exploitation and also exposure to criminal activity. The 
Committee thus recommend that the Ministry urge the State 
Governments and their concerned departments to increase their 
partnerships with non -governmental organizations (NGOs) in 
order to establish and operate larger number of such open 
shelters. The Ministry might devise suitable incentives to 
encourage the States towards this end. Efforts are also required  
for regular monitoring and evaluation of open shelters to ensure 
that they are meeting the needs of children. At the same time 
the Committee emphasize on the need for collection and analysis 
of data on the number of children utilizing open shelters, their  
backgrounds, and their outcomes to help policy decisions and 
resource allocation. 
-do- 
54.  4.77 The Committee note the provision of Specialised Adoption 
Agency (SSA) to house orphans, abandoned and surrendered 
Children, for the children under age group upto  5 years for the 
purpose of placing them under adoption and non -institutional 
care. The Committee have been informed that a total of 390 
SSAs have been set up and 4105 children have been benefitted 
from these SSAs. The Committee find that necessary 
monitoring/inspection procedure is also laid down under the Act 
which postulate conducting visits to all facilities by the 
Inspection Committees and submit their findings to the District 
Magistrate for necessary action within a month. Additionally 
under the Act, it is mandatory for the Child Welfare Committees 
to conduct inspections and recommend action for improvement 
in quality of services to the District Child Protection Unit/State 
Government. The Committee are of the opinion that the SAA’s 
are an essential ref uge/link till a suitable means of 
rehabilitation is available for the Child. Further, in addition to 
according importance to timely inspection protocols, the 
Committee would like to impress upon the Child Welfare 
Committees to prioritise infrastructural up gradation and 
extending essential services to the Children to ensure their 
wellbeing and to improve overall capacity of the institution for 
-do- 

510 
 
housing orphans, abandoned and surrendered Children in order 
to aid in their effective rehabilitation. The Committee  
recommend that more number of SAAs need to be set up 
expanding the scope of larger beneficiaries. 
55.  4.78 The Committee were informed about the Childline services 
which is a 24 hour emergency outreach service for children in 
crisis, linking them to lo ng term care and rehabilitation service. 
As per the Ministry, in line with the Mission Vatsalya guidelines, 
the Child helpline shall be run in coordination with State and 
District functionaries and is to be integrated with the Emergency 
Response Support Sy stem 112 (ER -112) helpline of Ministry of 
Home Affairs. The Committee commend the steps taken to 
integrate the child helpline with ERSS -112 for all child 
emergency cases so that immediate help can be provided to 
vulnerable children in distress conditions w ithout any hassle. 
Moreover, the Committee further desire that a mechanism to 
ensure interoperability with other services like police, fire and 
ambulance may be devised which may be of help in distress 
situations. The Committee desire that the Ministry wor k in 
tandem with the Ministry of Home Affairs  in expediting the 
process of integration of  the emergency outreach service and 
activating the service in all the States/UTs along with a detailed 
SOP in this regard.  Further, the Committee were informed that 
for the purpose of real time monitoring of children in the 
Juvenile Justice System, the Mission Vatsalya portal is under 
development. The Committee hope that the portal, when 
functional, will avoid duplication of work, ensure better 
monitoring through Mana gement Information System (MIS) 
dashboard, better citizen participation, effective decision making 
and provide an evidence based roadmap for implementation of 
provisions under JJ Act  and specifically in tackling Child labour 
and their  rehabilitation. 
-do- 
56.  4.79 The Committee note that necessary penal provisions have been 
incorporated under the JJ Act for offences committed against 
children, which include employment of child for begging, using 
of child for vending, peddling, carrying supplying or smuggling 
any intoxicating liquor, narcotic drug or psychotropic substance 
and exploitation of a child employee. According to the Ministry, 
the Act also acknowledges several new forms of offences 
committed against children, which were not adequately covered 
under any other existing law, such as, sale and procurement of 
children for any purpose including illegal adoption, corporal 
punishment in child care institutions, use of children by 
militant groups, offences against disabled children and, 
kidnapping and abduction of children etc.  Taking note of the 
penal interventions in place under the Act, the Committee 
believe that only stringent conviction rates under these 
provisions can serve as a barometer to gauge the extent of 
effectiveness of the laws under the Act. Moreover, it is 
particularly important that those who violate the law are 
convicted and appropriately punished or else such a situation 
would pave way for perpetuation of the practice of exploitation of 
children and shield the perpetrators who are found working in 
contravention of the provisions of the labour laws. Further, the 
Committee would also urge upon the Ministry to take a relook at 
the classification of serious offences against children so that 
there are no legal loopholes/let up available for employers to 
exploit which will serve as one of the significant steps towards 
ending child labour. 
-do- 

511 
 
57.  4.80 The Committee note the efforts taken by the National Institute of 
Public Cooperation and Child Development (NIPCCD) under the 
Ministry of Women and Child Deve lopment in regularly 
conducting training programmes for sensitization of the 
stakeholders, including the District Magistrates. As per the 
Ministry, during the year 2021 -22, 115 training programmes 
were conducted by NIPCCD on Child Rights and Protection 
including on JJ Act, 2015. Keeping in view, the multi -
dimensional challenges posed by the scourge of Child labour, 
the Committee urge the Ministry to further work in coordination 
with the State Governments to hold multi -city/zone awareness 
camps to emphasize on the effective implementation of the 
provisions under the JJ Act along with amplifying the frequency 
and coverage of sensitization/training programs for Child 
Labour related issues. The Committee also impress upon the 
Ministry to further expand the ambit  of training programs so as 
to reach a wider range of officials, including police officers, 
labour inspectors and officials of the CWCs and CCIs.  The 
Ministry may also consider identifying all the relevant 
institutions  whose professionals play a role in a ddressing child 
labour and customize training modules on child labour to 
provide the officials practical hands-on training to prepare them 
for working in a sensitive manner with the affected children. At 
the same time support for research on child labour i ssues is 
crucial for quantifying the prevalence, forms, and demographics 
of child labour. The Committee desire that adequate funds be 
allocated for these endeavours. 
-do- 
58.  4.81 The Committee note that the mandate of the National 
Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) to ensure 
better protection of the rights of the child through monitoring of 
constitutional and legal rights of children, review of safeguards, 
reviews of existing laws, look into violations of the constitutional 
and legal rights of children, and monitor programmes relating to 
the survival, protection, participation and development of 
children. Further, NCPCR is also mandated for monitoring the 
implementation of the Protection of Children from Sexual 
Offences Act (POCSO Act), Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of 
Children) Act and Right of Children to Free & Compulsory 
Education (RTE) Act, 2009. It consists of a Chairperson and six 
members. It is a matter of deep concern that since December, 
2021, six posts for members are lying vaca nt. As per the 
Ministry, procedure is laid down by the Supreme Court insofar 
as procedure for filing up of vacancies is concerned. The 
Committee are of the opinion that if the Commission is 
functioning below its mandated administrative capacity, it would 
be detrimental to the welfare and well -being of children and 
exhort the Ministry to expedite the exercise to call for 
applications for filling up all the vacancies in NCPCR at the 
earliest in order to justify its mandate  as India's apex body for 
safeguarding children's rights. 
-do- 
59.  4.82 As per census 2011, of the total population of 259.6 million in 
the age group of 5 -14 years, 10.1 million representing 3.9% of 
the total child population are working either as main workers or 
as marginal workers. However, according to NCPCR, the exact 
estimate of the total child labourers is not available. The 
Committee are constrained to point out that in the absence of 
exact data about presence of child labours, it may be difficult to 
envisage an effective response for th eir rehabilitation. As a 
matter of fact, the 2011 census serves the only authentic source 
-do- 

512 
 
of information and the data available is more than a decade old 
and is of limited utility and relevance insofar as implementation 
of specific schemes and their target ed beneficiaries in the 
present scenario is concerned. In the wake of delay in Census 
2021, it becomes imperative on the part of the Ministry to devise 
an internal mechanism to independently conduct household 
survey/data collection exercises so that adequa te allocation of 
resources may be directed towards effective rescue/repatriation 
and rehabilitation of child victims. 
60.  4.83 The Committee note that under Section 31 of the JJ Act, 2015, 
it is mandated to produce a Child in need of care and protection 
before the Child Welfare Committees (CWC). However, the 
Committee find that without the presence of District task force 
headed by  the S.D.M, child rescue operations are not being 
undertaken. The Committee are given to understand that such a 
scenario is creating a hurdle for NCPCR during their child 
rescue operations as no other authorities of the District  would 
be willing to partak e in such an exercise in the absence of 
SDM/District task force. Further, as illustrated by NCPCR to the  
Committee, it was noted that NCRB data has reported only 613 
cases whereas Rajasthan Government had informed NCPCR that 
more than 700 cases were regis tered by them against Child 
labour. In this regard, the Committee are of the view that the 
remaining 87 cases have not been acted upon owing to the 
absence of the SDM/District task force during the Child rescue 
operations as mandated under Section 31 of th e JJ Act. The 
Committee thus recommend for streamlining the procedures of 
Child labour rescue under the JJ Act so that all the cases are 
registered with NCPCR and follow up action taken for effectively 
tackling incidence of Child labour. 
-do- 
61.  4.84 The Committee note that most of the industries/sector have a 
distinct feature of having two facets, i.e., ‘organised sector’ 
which is well -regulated and the ‘urorganised sector’ which is 
unregulated, uninspected and not monitored. Children are 
found working in t hese unorganized sectors. Sharing its 
experience, NCPCR pointed out that when an industry or sector 
involves or depends upon unorganized activities in its entire 
supply chain, that attracts child labour. The majority of the 
industries and sectors in India which attract child labour relate 
to automobile industry, e -waste management, Fast Moving 
Consumer Goods (FMCGs), placement agencies in the metro 
cities especially in Delhi etc. In this regard, the Committee find 
that whenever any Industry/Company involves /depends upon 
unorganized activities, its supply chain attracts child labour. 
The Committee feel that it is imperative to identify the real 
reasons behind the influx of Child labour in certain Industries. 
The Committee feel that any erring Industry which e mploys 
child labour in the unorganized supply chain of products cannot 
be held accountable as it is discrete and unregulated. Further, 
accountability may be difficult to fix as it may be possible that 
several Industries outsource part of their responsibili ties to the 
unorganized sector which are again unregulated. In the opinion 
of the Committee, a mechanism/principle of accountability of 
such Industries ought to be fixed and only when they take 
responsibility for a supply chain free of unethical practices 
including Child labour, incidence of unregulated child labour in 
the unorganized sector will be difficult to tackle. 
-do- 
62.  4.85 In this regard, the Committee observe that the Automobile 
Industry has a distinct feature of having two facets i.e. 
-do- 

513 
 
“organized sector” which is well regulated and the “unorganized 
sector” which is unregulated, uninspected and not monitored. 
The Committee while recognizing the significance of the sector 
and its potential to increase the share of manufacturing in gross 
domestic prod uct (GDP), exports and employment feel it is 
important to delve into the inherent reasons of attracting child 
labour. The Committee observe that there are cases of 
Automobile manufacturers regularly outsourcing the 
services/repairing work and these repairi ng and servicing of 
automobiles are carried out in unorganized sector without any 
monitoring. Further, the availability of spare parts in the grey 
market are also a cause of concern. The Committee find it 
interesting that despite the manufacturing and repairing process 
of any automobile is a confidential process of any automobile 
company, the spare parts of such automobiles and the labour 
mechanics having the skill and knowledge about such 
automobiles are available readily. The Committee feel that, it is 
time to ensure that the companies must take the responsibility 
of the repairing and servicing and not just outsource to any 
third party. Additionally, there is a need for a system of 
controlling/monitoring the supply chain of automobile spare 
parts in the ma rket. Moreover, the Committee would like to 
impress upon the Ministry to standardize road side repairing 
shops and list of vendors involved in repairing work must be 
approved and registered with the Road Transport Authority.  
Once registered with the RTO an d the respective automobile 
company, these small road side auto shops would come under 
regulation thereby ensuring that such activities are free of child 
labour and the accountability of the automobile company can 
thus be fixed. 
63.  4.86 The Committee are deeply concerned over the precarious 
manner in which Children are employed as labour at e -waste 
sites. The process of electronic waste management process can 
become dangerous if necessary precautionary measures are not 
taken. The Committe e find that e -waste contains heavy metals 
and many components that can be re -used by grey market even 
after its disposal. The Committee feel that such exercises 
exposes  children to toxic gases and adversely impacts their 
health, growth and development. The Committee recommend 
that a third party monitoring mechanism for assessing the 
implementation of EWM Rules, 2015 should be established for 
end-to-end monitoring of the entire process beginning from e -
waste generation to its disposal so as to ensure that children are 
not being used for such hazardous occupation.  Further, strict 
penal provisions need to be enforced and stringently against 
violators of the EVM, Rules 2015. The Committee  also call upon 
all concerned stakeholder Ministries/Departments includin g 
Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare, Ministry of Education for devising an action 
plan for eradicating child labour in this sector. 
-do- 
64.  4.87 In respect of FMCGs sector, the Committee find that that in 
cases where the roadside dhabas and stalls are engaging 
children as labour, it may be easier to ensure inspections if 
companies while publishing banners/hoardings maintain a list 
of such shops and dhabas. The Committee urge upon the 
Ministry to intensify effo rts to ensure that Children should not 
be engaged or involved in entire supply chain as well as selling 
of these products . Further, the Committee are of the view that 
FMCG companies need to take the social, ethical and legal 
-do- 

514 
 
responsibility to prohibit chil d labour in this segment of 
business. Such a step in the opinion of the Committee will help 
in addressing child labour in this sector. 
65.  4.88 The Committee observe that one of the common issues prevalent 
in child labour is the unregulated placement ag encies working 
in Metropolitan Cities. The real reason behind trafficking of 
children is that traffickers use tools of enticement and 
allurement. The Committee find that these placement agencies 
then bring these children to metro cities like Delhi from var ious 
parts of India like Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Odisha, 
North-East. The agencies not only place these children as 
domestic help but also sell these children to other parts of India 
making them  vulnerable to abuse, exploitation and cruelty. 
While a cknowledging that there are unregulated multiple 
placement agencies working in many parts of Delhi that are 
contributing in trafficking of children, it is vital that regulation 
of such placement agencies is done by the Delhi Government so 
as to stop child trafficking by these agencies. Furthermore, as 
Delhi is an strategic destination as well as transit point for 
whole of north India, regulation and timely inspections  of these 
agencies would make the functioning of these agencies 
transparent. The Committee  desire that all other States across 
the Country should also make regulations binding for placement 
agencies operating under their jurisdiction. 
-do- 
66.  4.89 The Committee are dismayed to note the anomalies which have 
come to the fore through the information uploaded in the MIS 
Portal (as provided by the Police and Labour Department of 
various States/UTs). The Committee observe that there is a 
gross mismatch be tween the number of child labour rescued 
and the number of child labour produced before Child Welfare 
Committees (CWC). The Committee find that this is in direct 
contravention of the JJ Act, 2015 which provides (under Section 
31) that every child in need o f care and protection should be 
produced before a CWC. Secondly, it was stated by NCPCR that 
1025 children who were employed as child labour were rescued 
as part of ‘Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav’ drive against Child labour 
in June 2022. However, it has been not iced that this is in 
variance with the number provided (no. of Child labours rescued 
is 339 between 01.04.2022 – 22.11.2022) in the portal. The 
Committee thus urge upon the NCPCR to ascertain the 
credibility and authenticity of the data uploaded in the portal by 
matching the information pertaining to their own data relating 
to rescue of child labours and issue necessary directions to the 
concerned labour/police departments in case of discrepancies. 
Thirdly, the Committee feel that it may be possible that in  many 
cases, the Police and the Labour Department may not have filed 
FIRs in child labour cases which may be the reason for less 
number of child labour being reported than the actual number 
on the ground. Further, in this regard, the Committee were 
apprised that on 07th July 2022, NCPCR had organized a 
meeting with Department of WCD, Social Welfare, Labour and 
Education of all States/UTs and it was impressed upon that all 
child labour cases reported under the Child Labour Act are 
cognizable offences and tha t States/UTs should register the 
FIRs in such cases immediately and promptly. Moreover, filing of 
FIR and strong implementation of the law is bound to create 
deterrence in society. The Committee are of the considered 
opinion that such inaccuracies in data /lapses on the part of the 
authorities lead to flawed outcomes potentially hampering the 
-do- 

515 
 
tangible benefits of the Policy in ensuring care and protection as 
envisioned under the JJ Act.  Further, emphasis may be placed 
on conducting training of Labour office rs and police officers on 
the issue of Child Labour including a capsule training 
specifically on the various provisions of  JJ Act, 2015. 
67.  4.90 The Committee expressed their concern on the submission made 
by NCPCR that the proper and timely updation of data, that is to 
be uploaded by the Labour Department and Police Department, 
is not being done on  the NCPCR’s portal. The Committee 
observe that the States/UTs are not prompt in uploading the 
information on the MIS portal and that only 12  States/1UT viz, 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Assam, Chhattisgarh,  Haryana, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Manipur,  
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh have  
submitted information on the portal. In the view of the 
Committee, if all States/UT s would provide data to the 
Commission in a timely manner, the monitoring by the 
Commission would be more effective and the Commission would 
be able to identify issues where interventions can be made. 
Comprehensive data also provides a strong foundation fo r 
evidence-based policy decisions at the national and state levels. 
The Committee would therefore urge the Ministry of Women and 
Child Development as well as the Ministry of Home Affairs to ask 
the State Governments and their respective Labour and Police 
Departments to take serious note of the issue highlighted by 
NCPCR and take urgent action to rectify the situation. The 
Ministry should ensure that necessary technical assistance is 
provided to the States/UTs on how to use the MIS portal and 
any difficultie s being reported in this regard be resolved 
expeditiously. There is also a need to develop clear and concise 
reporting guidelines to ensure consistency and accuracy. 
-do- 
68.  4.91 The Committee note that NCPCR, while dealing with the cases of 
complaints rela ting to child labour, observed that there arose 
procedural delays in the process of rescue and rehabilitation of 
children due to lack of convergence in the implementation of 
various legislations and multiple authorities under the Child 
labour Act 1986 and Juvenile Justice Act, 2015. As a result of 
which delays and lapses were observed by authorities in 
initiating investigation in matters leading to difficulty in 
identification and prosecution of offenders. In order to effectively 
strengthen the process of r escue and rehabilitation of children 
involved in child labour, necessary steps were taken by the 
Commission in preparing a Draft SOP for Child Labour. It has 
been stated that the Draft SOP has been sent to district officials 
for pilot testing as well. The Committee are of the opinion that 
the endeavour of the Draft SOP for the rescue and post rescue of 
child labour is to streamline the understanding of the process 
laid down for inquiry and rehabilitation of children who are 
victims of child labour. The Committee also hope that if the SOP 
is complied to, in letter and spirit by all States/UTs, it will aid in 
better integration with the various Child welfare legislations and 
effectively facilitate a concerted framework to tackle the scourge 
of Child labour. 
-do- 
69.  4.92 The Committee note that in a suo motu writ petition (SMWP)(c) 
No. 6 of 2021, Hon'ble Supreme Court had taken cognizance on 
the issue of Children in street situations and to which NCPCR is 
party. The Committee find that while developing SOP 2.0 
regarding rescue of children in street situation NCPCR had been 
informed by Save the Children -NGO that they had mapped 
-do- 

516 
 
about 2 lakh in 04 States/UTs namely Delhi, Maharashtra, 
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The Hon’ble Supreme Court 
was also informed about this data in affidavit of NCPCR dated 
12.11.2021 and the Hon’ble Court directed the State 
Governments to take necessary action for these children. At the 
same time, according to the Ministry, as on 31.03.2022, 2245 
CCIs are funded under Mission Vatsalya Scheme (erstwhile 
Child Protection Services) housing 76118 Children/beneficiaries 
including children who have been rehabilitated from begging by 
concerned Child Welfare Committees. Thus the number of 
children in street situation being reported by Save the Children, 
for just four states, is more than doubl e the total number of 
children being housed by the CCIs. Evidently, the obtaining 
situation calls for greater efforts on the part of the Government 
to consolidate the coordination mechanism to accumulate 
accurate data regarding children in street situation  so that 
effective policy interventions can be made. The Committee thus 
urge the Ministry to conduct a comprehensive nationwide survey 
in collaboration with various stakeholders, including NGOs, 
social workers, and community representatives to ensure a 
thorough and inclusive assessment so as to accurately 
determine the number of children in street situation. At the 
same time, there is a need to establish a robust data 
management system to track the number and characteristics of 
children in street situations  and strengthen coordination and 
collaboration among various government agencies and non -
governmental organizations working on child protection issues. 
70.  4.93 The Committee note that the Hon’ble Supreme Court in January 
2022 expressed its concern rega rding having a set policy for 
dealing with children in street situations and asked NCPCR to 
provide some suggestions which can help in framing a policy. 
NCPCR in its affidavit dated 17.02.2022 submitted suggestions 
for developing a policy for rehabilitatio n of children in street 
situations. The Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its order dated 
09.05.2022 has asked all States/UTs to implement the policy 
made by NCPCR till they don’t frame their own policy for 
children in street situations. The Committee appreciate that 
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) has 
taken the initiative to develop a policy for the rehabilitation of 
children in street situations. The Committee believe that the 
NCPCR policy is a comprehensive document that can provide a 
valuable framework for States/UTs to develop their own policies 
and programmes to address the issue of children in street 
situations. The Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that all 
States/UTs to give the NCPCR policy careful consideration and 
that they implement it effectively until they are able to formulate 
their own policies as per the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court. The Ministry can provide the necessary technical 
assistance to the State Governments so that they expedite 
framing of their own policies based on the specific conditions 
prevalent in their States.  
-do- 
71.  4.94 The Committee note that the NCPCR through its affidavits has 
been informing the Hon’ble Court about the steps taken by it to 
address the issues concerning  street children and submitting 
its data uploaded by the States/UTs  on Baal Swaraj Portal-CiSS 
from time to time. The Committee hope that the Children in 
Street Situations(CiSS) platform is effectively used, as 
envisioned, for receiving data of children in street situations 
from all the States and Union territories, to aid in their eff ective 
-do- 

517 
 
identification, tracking,  rescue and rehabilitation process. 
Further, the Committee are of the opinion that necessary steps 
may be put in place to explore the possibility of 
engaging/providing access through the application to private 
professionals and organizations who volunteer to provide help in 
the form of open shelters, counselling services, medical services, 
sponsorships, de -addiction services, education services, 
legal/paralegal services, identification of street children hotspots 
or any othe r assistance that can be rendered to street children 
in need. Further, the Committee urge upon the Ministry to 
analyse the factors/socio -economic compulsions for forcing 
children onto street situations and prepare an effective Standard 
Operating Procedure for Care and Protection of Children in 
Street Situations so as to wean them away from neglect, 
emotional abuse, sexual abuse, and exploitation. 
72.  4.95 The Committee are deeply concerned to note the observation of 
NCPCR that nodal officers to be appointed under Rule 2B(2) of 
the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Rules, 2017 have 
not been appointed at the district level in the majority of 
States/UTs (13 States and 3 UTs are yet to appoint nodal 
officers, according to the information furnished by the NCPCR in 
light of the  review meeting by NCPCR on 16.07.2022). The 
Committee feel that the appointment of nodal officers under 
Rule 2B(2) of the Child Lab our (Regulation & Prohibition Rules 
2017) is crucial for the effective implementation of the Act and 
the protection of children from exploitation. The absence of 
nodal officers in these states hinders the coordination and 
monitoring of child labor-related activities, potentially leading to 
gaps in enforcement and protection. The Committee thus urge 
the Ministry and NCPCR to work with the State Governments to 
ensure that they expeditiously appoint nodal officers under Rule 
2B(2) of the Child Labour (Regulation & Prohibition Rules 2017). 
Moreover, there is an urgent need to establish a mechanism for 
regular monitoring and evaluation of the performance of nodal 
officers through periodic meetings and performance reviews. 
Efforts must also be taken for capacity-building and training for 
nodal officers to enhance their knowledge and skills in dealing 
with child labor issues and promote inter -state collaboration 
and knowledge sharing among nodal officers to encourage the 
exchange of best practices and effective strategies in this regard. 
-do- 
73.  4.96 The Committee were informed that under the Mission Vatsalaya 
Scheme, directives have been issued in July 2022 to notify Child 
welfare and Protection Committees in every Panchayat and 
Municipal Urban/local bodies under clause 2.12 of the Scheme.  
The Committee find that the mandate of the Committee would 
be to deliberate on issues pertaining to women and Child welfare 
along with ascertaining the number of school going children, out 
of school children, etc. along with commen surate budgeting 
under the 15 th Finance Commission. Further, under the 
Scheme, the Committee are given to understand that proposal to 
conduct Child survey and a National child index is under active 
consideration with the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by 
the Ministry to enagage Panchayats/Municipal bodies for 
conducting a National Child Survey and development of Child 
Index in convergence with the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MoSPI) to map the needs o f 
children through a periodic child survey, so as to envisage a 
suitable response in terms of an effective policy to eliminate 
-do- 

518 
 
Child labour.  The Committee desire that the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development to expedite the process in coordination 
with the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
74.  4.97 The Committee note that the Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 
2.0 scheme is an Integrated Nutrition Support Programme that 
seeks to address the challenges of malnutrition in children, 
adolescent girls, pregnant women and lactating mothers through 
a shift in nutrition content and its delivery by creation of a 
convergent eco -system to develop and promote practices that 
nurture health, wellness and immunity. The Committee observe 
that with a view  to address various gaps and shortcomings in 
the ongoing nutrition programme and to improve 
implementation as well as to accelerate improvement in 
nutrition and child development outcomes, the existing scheme 
components have been re -organized under Poshan 2.0 into the 
three primary verticals viz, Nutrition Support for POSHAN and 
for Adolescent Girls (14 -18), Early Childhood Care and 
Education [3 -6 years], Anganwadi Infrastructure including 
modern, upgraded Saksham Anganwadis. The Committee note 
that any child of age group 6 months to 6 years is entitled to a 
set of six services under the scheme viz, (i) Supplementary 
Nutrition (SNP), (ii) Pre -school Non -formal Education,  (iii) 
Nutrition & Health Education,  (iv) Immunization, (v) Health 
Check-up,  and (vi) Re ferral Services.   Immunization, Health 
check-up and Referral Services are   provided through NHM & 
Public Health Infrastructure. The Committee were informed that 
the total number of beneficiaries up to December, 2021 are 
9,50,18,684 comprising of 7.5 lakh children and 2 lakh women. 
The Committee urge that necessary awareness be created among 
public to avail the nutritional and health services provided to 
fulfill the commitment of ensuring holistic development of all 
children under the age of 6 years, adolesc ent girls and 
pregnant/lactating mothers. 
-do- 
75.  4.98 The Committee find that Anganwadi Centres have been 
sanctioned to all States/UTs as of 31.12.2021 (to be updated). 
However it has been observed that in a  few States like Bihar, 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh  and  Jammu and Kashmir, there 
appears to be a variance between the numbers of sanctioned 
and operational Anganwadi centres. The Committee urge upon 
the Ministry to issue necessary instructions to address the 
deficit so as to ensure that the Anganwadi centres that have not 
been operationalised as yet be expeditiously functional. The 
Committee further also exhort the Ministry to direct the State 
Governments to re -visit the issue of availability of Anganwadi 
Centres (AWCs) at the habitation level and determin e the actual 
requirement of AWCs vis-a-vis the population of the area, 
number of children actually attending the AWCs and the 
number of AWCs available. Further, the Committee feel that the 
recent initiative to provide 2 lakh AWCs Rs 40,000 per year 
towards their upgradation by the respective Panchayat Raj 
departments/Poshan Panchayats, is a step in the right 
direction. The Committee feel that modernization/  upgradation 
is a continuous process and the Ministry issue directions to 
various States/UTs to intensify their efforts through the Poshan 
Panchayats in rejuvenating the Anganwadi Centres under their 
jurisdiction in order to effectively function towards achieving the  
goal of a malnutrition free India. 
-do- 
76.  4.99 Anganwadi Services Scheme is a symbol of the country’s 
commitment to its children and nourishing mothers, as a 
-do- 

519 
 
response to the challenge of providing pre -school non -formal 
education on one hand and breaking the vicious cycle of 
malnutrition, morbidity, reduced learning capacity and mortality 
on the other. The Committee appreciate the recent initiatives 
taken by the Ministry to achieve the enshrined objective. The 
major initiatives, inter-alia, include issuance of guidelines on 
January, 2021  to ensure transp arency, efficiency and 
accountability in delivery of nutrition delivery support systems. 
In keeping with the announcement made by the Prime Minister 
on 15 August, 2021, 100% fortified rice to all State/UTs are 
allocated to address the issue of malnutrition  faced by women 
and children. States have been advised to incorporate millets to 
enhance quality of supplementary nutrition. Further, 
introduction of diet diversity and consumption of wholesome 
local produce through 4.35 lakh Poshan vatikas, improving 
digital infrastructure support for last -mile tracking and 
monitoring of nutrition delivery through 'Poshan Tracker' for 
transparency, efficiency and accountability in delivery of 
Supplementary Nutrition, providing Anganwadi workers with 
11.13 lakh smartphones and 11.94 lakh growth monitoring 
services, 40 crore activities under Poshan Maah and Poshan 
Pakhwada, Community outreach services, Media advocacy are 
all steps in the right direction. All these measures provide the 
necessary direction towards improving the  nutritional norms 
and standards of children, women and lactating mothers. For all 
these schemes to effectively synergise, the Committee urge upon 
the Ministry to issue directions to all States/UTs to ensure 
Aadhar seeding of all beneficiaries so as to ensure good 
governance through last -mile delivery of services including 
Supplementary Nutrition under Poshan 2.0. 
77.  4.100 The Committee observe that, in response to a rapidly 
deteriorating child sex ratio and related issues of empowerment 
of girls and women over a life cycle continuum, the ‘Beti Bachao, 
Beti Padhao’ programme was launched in 2014, aiming to 
provide survival, safety and education to the girl child. This 
Scheme has a multi-sectoral intervention at district level. It was 
initially being run in 405 districts and through multi -media 
advocacy, it was expanded to 640 districts of the country. The 
Committee were given  to understand  that there has been a 
increase in 19 points in Sex ratio at birth at National level from 
918 (2014 -15) to 937 (2020 -21). Also, enrolment of girls in 
Secondary education at National level has increased from 
75.51% in 2014 -15 to 7.83% in 2019 -20. Appreciating the 
efforts taken in this regard, the Committee feel that continuing 
convergence with partner Ministries viz, Ministry of Education, 
Health and Family Welfare, Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship and Youth Affairs and Sports at all lev els will 
ensure holistic empowerment of the girl child. Further, the 
Committee urge upon the Ministry to devise a mechanism to 
evaluate the performance of various States/districts to create an 
environment of healthy competition. 
-do- 
78.  4.101 The Committee note that Ujjawala scheme was launched for the 
prevention of illicit trafficking, with five specific components viz. 
prevention, rescue, rehabilitation, re -integration and 
repatriation of victims who were trafficked for commercial sexual 
exploitation. The Committee were apprised of the difference 
between Swadhar Greh which caters to the primary needs of 
women in difficult circumstances and Ujjawala homes which  is 
a scheme for prevention of trafficking and rescue and 
-do- 

520 
 
rehabilitation of survivors. As per the Ministry, during the 15 th 
Financial year cycle, both these schemes are being integrated 
under the name ‘Shakti Sadan’ so as to effectively run them.  
 Further, the Committee were also apprised of the 
Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act (ITPA), 1956 which was also 
enacted with the objective to prevent trafficking for commercial 
sexual exploitation. Further, the Committee were informed that, 
if Children are involved in these situations, they are covered 
under JJ Act/POCSO Act, whereas women above 18 years, are 
rehabilitated and taken to Ujjawala homes, under provisions of 
ITPA. Commending the Ministry for the initiatives taken by them 
under Ujjawala and Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 to 
effectively aid in checking trafficking in women and children, the 
Committee desire that endeavour of the Ministry to effectively 
provide shelter and rehabilitate the victims and lead a life of 
dignity would be  effectively served if the three pillars of anti -
trafficking efforts —prevention, protection and prosecution are 
enforced. The Committee urge upon the Ministry to intensify 
their efforts towards raising awareness, shelters for protection 
and rehabilitation of victims, law enforcement and prosecution 
in order to bolster the effectiveness of these legislations. 
79.  5.43 The Committee are concerned to note that during the Census 
exercise, no specific data on child Iabour is documented. 
However, data on workers (main and marginal) and non-workers 
are collected and published.  The Committee were informed that 
Main Workers were workers who worked for more than 6months 
during the year and Marginal Workers were workers who worked 
for 0 -6 months. Further, the Committee find that traditionally the 
enumeration of the houseless populati on is carried out on the 
last night of the population Census and the Census department 
has a well established protocol to ensure the complete coverage 
of the houseless population. According to the last Census 
conducted in 2011, out of the total population of houseless 
persons, 270605 are children aged between 0-6 years, which, in 
the opinion of the Committee, is a cause of great concern. The 
Committee observe that the houseless population comprise of 
the most underprivileged and disadvantaged sections of th e 
society and thus there is a dire need to target the welfare efforts 
of the Government towards them. The Committee observe that 
the Census exercise provides an opportunity to map the areas 
where the homeless populations are concentrated particularly in 
metropolitan areas where such groups tend to settle down in 
certain parts over the years. The Committee further recommend 
that the publication of the data pertaining to the houseless 
population be expedited after the next Census so that urgent 
interventionist measures can be undertaken by departments 
such as the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Ministry of 
Labour and Ministry of Women and Child Development for the 
welfare of the houseless population. 
Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
80.  5.44 The Committee while acknowledging the link between human 
trafficking and the engagement of trafficked children as child 
labour,  appreciate the efforts of the Government in bringing the 
offence of human trafficking, as envisaged under section 370 
and 370 A  of IPC, under the mandate of National Investigation 
Agency (NIA). The Committee also laud the work done by NIA 
under its new mandate where out of the 12 cases of Human 
trafficking entrusted to NIA, it has submitted charge sheet in 7 
cases against 53 accused. The Committee also find that in order 
to strengthen the efforts of NIA against traffickers, the Ministry 
-do- 

521 
 
have sanctioned 6 new Branch offices (18 total) while a separate 
vertical of Anti - Human Trafficking is under consideration of the 
Government. The Committee observe that NIA, being a National 
level investigative agency which has the mandate and the 
expertise to take up cases having inter -State and International 
ramifications, the steps taken by the Government to strengthen 
the agency are in the righ t direction and may be earnestly 
pursued.In this regard, the Committee recommend that the 
process of creation of a separate vertical of Anti - Human 
Trafficking in NIA be expedited. 
81.  5.45 The Committee note that in order to address the law 
enforcement response to human trafficking, the Anti -Trafficking 
Cell(ATCs) was established in 2006. An amount of Rs. 25.16 
crore was released to the states during the period 2010 to 2019 
for setting up Anti -Human Trafficking Units (AHTUs) in 332 
districts of States besides AHTUs being set up by some states on 
their own. These  ATCs act as an interface with Ministry of 
Women and Child Development, Ministry of External Affairs, 
Ministry of Labour & Employment and State/UT authorities by 
issuing guidelines, Standard Oper ating Procedure(SOP) and 
advisories from time to time. Moreover, the Committee were 
given to understand that in order to address 
transnational/cross border issues of human trafficking, the ATC 
has also assisted in signing of Bilateral Memorandums of 
Understanding with Bangladesh, UAE, Cambodia and Myanmar 
and other Multilateral treaties on human trafficking. The 
Committee are of the view that Inter -State/ Inter -
Ministerial/International cooperation is a prerequisite for 
envisaging any response against human  trafficking and without 
a collective framework, feel that human trafficking cannot be 
addressed comprehensively.  Specifically with regard to the 
bilateral and multilateral agreements, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to periodically review the progress in  anti-human 
trafficking efforts in order to hold Member States/Countries 
accountable and embark on interventionist measures, if need 
be. 
-do- 
82.  5.46 The Committee note that Anti -Human Trafficking Units(AHTUs) 
are integrated task forces to prevent and comba t trafficking in 
persons and comprise of a group of trained sensitive officials of 
Police, Women and Child Welfare Department and other relevant 
Departments of the State. The Committee were given to 
understand that AHTUs function as coherent units to preve nt 
and combat trafficking and attend to all three aspects of 
trafficking viz. prevention, protection and assistance in 
prosecution and are thus the field level functionalunits to 
address human trafficking in a holistic manner.The Committee 
were given to un derstand that pursuant to the decision of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) to set up Anti-Human Trafficking 
Units(AHTUs) in all the districts, 696 AHTUs have been 
established across various States and Union Territories. While 
the MHA have also issued advisories to all States and UTs, inter-
alia advising them to immediately set up new AHTUs and 
upgrade the infrastructure of the existing AHTUs with the 
financial assistance provided to them and make the AHTUs 
functional on urgent basis. The Committee find th at there are 
still districts where AHTUs have not been established and urge 
the Ministry to ensure that the remaining districts are covered 
at the earliest. The Committee also desire that the AHTUs 
established in States with greater prevalence of trafficki ng 
-do- 

522 
 
related activities be provided additional funds for strengthening 
infrastructure and other capabilities. The Committee feel that 
special attention, in this regard, needs to be paid towards states 
sharing border with Bangladesh, Nepal and Myanmar from 
where cross border trafficking takes place. 
83.  5.47 The Committee laud the steps taken by the Ministry to 
periodically engage with the States and UTs in the matter of 
human trafficking from time to time. The Committee find that 
the progress of implementation of various Women Safety 
projects, including the scheme of setting up/strengthening Anti-
Human Trafficking Units (AHTUs) through virtual meetings with 
State/UT functionaries are reviewed regularly by the Ministry. In 
this regard, the Committee were informed that an online 
monitoring portal for the States and UTs to update the progress 
of AHTUs and for sharing their best practices and success 
stories has been established by the Ministry. The Committee 
hope that the web portal would serve as a vital IT tool for 
dissemination of information across all stakeho lders, 
States/UTs and civil society organizations for effective 
implementation of Anti Human Trafficking measures and would 
serve as a repository on issues relating to trafficking including 
details of Anti-Human Trafficking Units (AHTUs), their locations, 
contact details of Anti-Human Trafficking Nodal Officers so as to 
supplement the efforts of the Ministry in tackling human 
trafficking. 
-do- 
84.  5.48 The Committee were given to understand that an Institutional 
mechanism to counter human trafficking in a foc ussed and 
effective manner at the level of State Governments was devised 
and shared with all States and UTs in December, 2020. 
Subsequently, the States had been asked to establish 
appropriate Bureau/Units at State -Headquarter level, District 
level and Police Station level to address the issues of trafficking 
in a comprehensive manner. In this regard,the Committee note 
that as a way of strengthening the Anti Human Trafficking 
efforts, States were asked to notify a State -Headquarter level 
Anti-Human Trafficking Bureau. However, the Committee were 
informed that the details of the Officer heading such Anti -
Human Trafficking Bureaus were not maintained Centrally by 
the Ministry. The Committee, in this regard, urge the Ministry to 
ensure that all the States setup the Anti -Human Trafficking 
Bureaus at State -Headquarter level and made functional in 
every State along with maintaining the details of the Officer 
heading such a unit. The Committee also urge upon the Ministry 
to devise a mechanism for effective coordinati on between the 
different AHTBs and the nodal Ministry for timely dissemination 
of intelligence. 
-do- 
85.  5.49 The Committee are concerned to note that human trafficking 
especially, of women and children for various purposes such as 
commercial sexual exploita tion (CSE), forced labour, domestic 
servitude etc. is a crime that gravely violates basic human 
rights. In this regard, the Committee appreciate the steps taken 
by the Ministry towards issuance of a SOP/Advisory to handle 
trafficking in Children for Child labour and penal action against 
employers/traffickers. Additionally, advisories have been issued 
to the States/UTs to set up exclusive ‘Crime aginst 
Women/Children Desks and that there should not be any delay 
in registration in FIRs in all cases of crime a gainst Children and 
has released 100 crores under Nirbhaya Fund in 2020 for 
establishing Women Help Desks in Police Stations. While 
-do- 

523 
 
lauding the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs to 
check the incidence of human trafficking especially among 
women and children, the Committee urge the Ministry to issue 
and reiterate directions to the States/UTs to place utmost 
priority to cases of child trafficking/registration of FIRs in cases 
of crime against Children in order to preempt instances of 
according low priority  to cases of trafficking due to the 
preoccupation of police with other crimes. The Committee thus 
recommend further strengthening the institutional response for 
the law enforcement officers viz, police and prosecutors, against 
trafficking thr ough training and capacity building to better 
investigate and prosecute offenders perpetrating this crime. 
86.  5.50 The Committee find that measures were taken to create 
awareness among police personnel on the perils of trafficking 
and the need to sensitise them in order to facilitate early 
detection and apprehension of child traffickers. In this regard, 
Ministry of Hom e Affairs (MHA) provide financial assistance to 
States and UTs for holding ‘State level conferences’ on periodic 
basis for police officials and to make available to them, updated 
information on latest provisions of law relating to trafficking. 
The Committe e were also informed that Bureau of Police 
Research and Development (BPRD) has been regularly 
conducting training courses pertaining to Anti -Human 
Trafficking. MHA has also issued an Advisory dated 6.7.2020 to 
all States and UTs inter-alia advising them th at Police Officers 
should be advised to undertake preventive steps such as 
identification of children in distress, watching out for suspicious 
persons, keeping special vigil at transit points and identify 
vulnerable population and susceptible pockets in th e State. The 
Committee appreciate the various steps taken for tackling the 
issue of trafficking and urge the Ministry to continue with its 
efforts and at the same time seek inputs from the States with 
regard to the impediments being faced and the ways and means 
to remove them. In the above context, the Committee also 
recommend that all the measures that are being taken by the 
Ministry for the sensitization of police departments regarding the 
issue of trafficking, may suitably be replicated for addressing the 
issue of child labour. The Committee thus recommend that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs collaborate with the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment and take similar measures, including 
organising training short courses of training and sensitising 
police personnel to keep vigil on identified areas such as eateries 
and small shops, so as to strengthen  the awareness of police 
personnel with regard to the issue of child labour. 
-do- 
87.  5.51 The Committee were informed that the Ministry of Railways have 
been advised t o involve Railway Protection Force (RPF) and 
Government Railway Police (GRP) personnel deployed at Railway 
Stations in detecting trafficking incidents and apprehending the 
traffickers in coordination with the local police. Further, it was 
brought to the no tice of the Committee that the Ministry of 
Railways in collaboration with the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development and National Commission for Protection of Child 
Rights has issued a Standard operating procedure (SOP) for 
ensuring care and protection of  children in contact with 
Railways, which also includes a protocol for rescue for children 
found abandoned at rail stations or trafficked through trains. 
Appreciating the multi -sectoral efforts taken by the Ministry in 
collaboration with other Ministries/agencies, the Committee feel 
that, in addition to discharging its responsibility as mandated by 
-do- 

524 
 
the Standard operating procedure(SOP) for the rescue of 
children issued by the Ministry of Railways, the Committee in 
their considered opinion feel that active i nvolvement and 
engagement of other stakeholders like NGOs/Voluntary 
associations with domain expertise in field of action of child 
trafficking will enhance the scale, reach and efforts of the 
Ministry in addressing trafficking. 
88.  5.52 The Committee’s attention was drawn to reported incidence of 
child labourers brought by middlemen or placement agencies 
with the promise of better future but are subject to exploitation 
and have to endure violence, sexual abuse, harassment, threat 
and coercion. The Commit tee feel that it is important to keep a 
check on the various placement agencies that might traffick 
children for the purpose of employing them in domestic labour, 
particularly in metropolitan cities. However, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs in this regard, ha ve stated that it is the sole 
responsibility of the Ministry of Labour to address these 
concerns.In this regard, the Committee observe that, in 2017, 
Ministry of Home Affairs had also requested the Ministry of 
Labour& Employment to sensitize officers of th e Labour 
Department in all States and UTs to keep a close vigil and watch 
on the activities of placement agencies in States with a view to 
addressing the crime of human trafficking and render all 
necessary assistance to the law enforcement agencies to chec k 
the crime. Further, in this context, the Committee are of the 
opinion that, given the multi -dimensional complexity in 
addressing the problem of child labour, unless various 
departments recognize the magnitude of the problem, accept 
collective responsibil ity and devise internal mechanism to 
address the incidence of child labour, child labour will continue 
to persist unabated. Therefore, the Committee recommend that 
since such placement agencies and other similar establishments 
have an interface with the police authorities, the Ministry should 
take robust steps to ensure that the police departments keep a 
periodic check on the functioning of these placement agencies. 
-do- 
89.  5.53 The Committee find that the prevalence of child labour is high in 
establishments such as brick kilns and construction sites. 
However, the Committee were dismayed with the response of the 
Ministry when enquired whether guidelines had been issued to 
the local police authorities in the States for regular inspection of 
such establishments with high incidence of child labour. The 
Ministry had evaded responsibility by stating that the issue 
concerned the Ministry of Labour and Employment. Although 
the Committee w hile recognising the differing mandate of both 
the Ministries, however urge the Ministry of Home Affairs, that 
even though law and order might be a State subject and the 
inspections of work sites may qualify to be the primary 
responsibility of the Ministry  of Labour, the Ministry of Home 
Affairs may still issue certain instructions/guidelines to the 
police departments to devise a mechanism of coordination with 
the labour departments and ensure that even the police 
authorities keep a vigil/check on establish ments that are prone 
to employ children/adolescents, particularly in districts 
identified as hotspots of child labour. 
-do- 
90.  5.54 The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs towards establishing a National level 
communication platform- Crime Multi Agency Centre (Cri -MAC) 
which facilitates dissemination of information about significant 
crimes including human trafficking cases across the country on 
-do- 

525 
 
real time basis. The Committee observe that by effectively 
leveraging technology for real-time information sharing between 
States, the platform can help various law enforcement agencies 
with seamless flow of information in prevention, detection and 
investigation of crime. The Committee while recognizing that 
trafficking is a grave crime , urge the Ministry to issue directives 
to all the States/UTs to actively participate in uploading of 
information about incidence of crime and criminals and 
continue to accord highest priority to the efforts directed at 
preventing and countering the scourge of trafficking. 
91.  6.47 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment recognized 
their role in prohibition of child labour as late as in June, 2022 
when the Committee decided to examine the Ministry and took 
evidence of their representatives. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the Ministry have a greater role to play not 
only in the prohibition of child labour but also in their rescue 
and rehabilitation.  In evidence, the Secretary conceded that the 
Ministry needed to come out with a clear -cut action plan and a 
policy on child labour, which hitherto had not been one of the 
focus areas.  The Committee undertook a comprehensive review 
of the schemes run by the Ministry for marginalized and 
disadvantaged sections of the society aimed at educational 
empowerment on the one s ide, protection on the other and 
overall economic empowerment.   The Committee firmly believe 
that efficacy in successful implementation of these schemes 
would ultimately ensure economic upliftment of households 
thereby preventing child labour. In the succ eeding  paragraphs, 
the Committee  have reviewed implementation of individual 
schemes and identified areas where the Ministry need to focus 
for prevention, rescue, rehabilitation and mainstreaming of 
vulnerable  children. 
Ministry of 
Social Justice & 
Empowerment 
(Department of 
Social Justice 
and 
Empowerment) 
92.  6.48 The Committee note that in order to identify and frame policies 
for the targeted beneficiaries viz, marginalized and 
disadvantaged sections of the society under the various schemes 
run by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, the 
data relating in Census 2011 has been used and as per the 
Ministry, no mechanism for internal/independent 
survey/collection of data to ascertain the latest data is available. 
The Committee are constrained to point out that in the absence 
of up to date data on vulnerable children, beyond Census 2011, 
envisaging a targeted welfare protection programme for their 
rehabilitation will be adversely impacted. Further, as a matter of 
fact, the 2011 census serves the only authentic source of 
information and the data available is more than a decade old 
and is of limited utility and relevance insofar as implementation 
of specific schemes and their targeted beneficiaries in the 
present scenario is concerned. In the wake of delay in Census 
2021, it becomes imperative on the part of the Ministry to devise 
an internal mechanism to independently conduct household 
survey/data collection exercises in order to guage the latest data 
and trends, so that targeted allocation of resources may be 
directed towards Policies aimed at effective rescue/repatriation 
and rehabilitation of vulnerable/marginalized sections. 
-do- 
93.  6.49 The Ministry had la unched a scheme ‘SMILE’ – Support for 
Marginalised Individuals for Livelihood and Enterprise on 
12.02.2022 which includes two sub -schemes, out of which one 
pertains to Central Sector Scheme for Comprehensive 
Rehabilitation of persons engaged in begging. Th e Committee 
were given to understand that the scheme was aimed at making 
-do- 

526 
 
places begging free and cover identification, rehabilitation, 
provision of medical facilities, counselling, education, skill 
development with the support of State Governments/UTs/Loca l 
Urban bodies and Voluntary Organisations etc. Further, the 
budget allocation under the Scheme for the financial year 2021 -
22 to 2025 -26 is Rs.100 crore and expenditure, as on March 
2022 was Rs.1.94 crore.  According to the Ministry, several pilot 
projects in this regard, are being implemented in major cities of 
New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Banglore, Lucknow, Indore and 
Patna. One of the significant developments in the 
implementation of this scheme has been the interest evinced by 
about 1300 NGOs in taking up the responsibility of beggary 
rehabilitation. The Committee appreciate the Ministry's efforts in 
roping in NGO's/Community based Organisations (CBO’s) for 
pilot projects on beggary rehabilitation under the SMILE sub -
scheme  and consider it to be a step in the right direction. More 
importantly, these NGO's would be required to be working in 
close coordination with the respective Municipal Corporations of 
various Cities in identifying, monitoring, rehabilitating, skilling 
and sustainable settlement of pers ons engaged in beggary. The 
Committee therefore desire that the CBO's/NGO's need to be 
strengthened and equipped to perform the role of local pressure 
groups to check and combat beggary and also act as catalysts in 
effective formulation and implementation of anti -beggary 
framework. The Committee also desire that in the course of 
rehabilitation, necessary skills training may be imparted to 
Adolescent Children rescued from Beggary under the SMILE 
scheme by mapping them for age appropriate works/occupation 
in coordination with Ministry of Skill development and 
Entrepreneurship. The Committee desire to be apprised of 
concrete measures taken in this direction. 
94.  6.50 The Committee appreciate the welfare measures for Transgender 
persons under the SMILE suppor ted sub -scheme on ‘Central 
Sector Scheme for Comprehensive Rehabilitation for Welfare of 
Transgender Persons’ which focuses extensively on providing 
them identity, provision of medical facilities, education, skill 
development, access to cashless medical facilities and livelihood. 
The Committee were also given to understand that the Ministry 
have set up housing facilities namely, ‘Garima Greh’ for 
transgender persons. As of June 2022, eight ‘Garima Grihas’ 
have already been set up across the country, five mo re have 
been sanctioned recently and about 13 States would be covered 
gradually. The Ministry have further assured the Committee that 
the housing facilities will be set up in each State. The 
Committee, in this regard are of the opinion that a huge section 
of the transgender community do not have access to safe 
housing facilities and consider the setting up of safe shelters to 
the needy and homeless transgenders as a step in the right 
direction towards mainstreaming them. The Committee urge 
upon the Ministry  to expedite setting up of the shelters at the 
earliest as they constitute the basic step in empowering the 
transgender community and desire that adequate finances be 
allocated for operationalizing these shelters and their upkeep. 
The Committee further feel that subsequent steps may be taken 
under the scheme for empowering the transgenders by providing 
access to interest subvention, sanction of loans in order to 
improve their socio -economic conditions and capacity 
development /skilling with a view to upgrad e their skills to 
enable them to start income generating activities on their own or 
-do- 

527 
 
get gainfully employed in due course. The Committee are of the 
view that adequate efforts be channelized towards generating 
awareness of the various schemes aimed at rehabi litating the 
transgender community so as to help them in leading a life of 
dignity by prohibiting discrimination and ensuring equitable 
access to social and public places and benefits at par with the 
other genders. 
95.  6.51 The Committee laud the steps taken by the Ministry towards 
providing free competitive exam coaching, health insurance, 
housing assistance, and livelihood initiatives to the De -notified, 
Nomadic and Semi Nomadic (DNT) communities in the country 
by empowerin g them through the Scheme for Economic 
Empowerment of DNTs  (SEED) launched in February 2022 
with a total outlay of Rs.200 crores for five years. The Committee 
further observe that in order to implement the scheme 
components, National Informatics Centre (NI C) has developed 
the online portal with the help of a technical Study group which 
is open for seeking benefit under the scheme components. 
According to the data provided by the Ministry, Rs 28 Crores 
had been allocated under the Scheme for FY 2022 -23 and as on 
June 2022, a total of 36 beneficiaries had applied for seeking 
benefits. In the view of the Committee, the De-notified, Nomadic 
and Semi -Nomadic Tribes are among the most neglected and 
economically/socially deprived communities and feel there is an 
urgent need to take steps to mainstream them.  While 
appreciating the initiatives undertaken under the SEED 
Scheme, the Committee would further urge the Ministry to 
assess and identify/review gaps in accessing the effectiveness of 
existing schemes for the DNT  Communities and to collaborate 
with various Ministries/Implementing agencies in order to 
identify the locations/areas where these communities are 
densely populated so that the DNT Communities can be 
comprehensively rehabilitated and mainstreamed. In the opinion 
of the Committee, successful implementation of SEED would 
largely help in mitigating the incidence of child labour among 
vulnerable De -notified, nomadic and semi -nomadic 
communities. 
-do- 
96.  6.52 The Committee note that the Central Sector Self Employ ment 
Scheme for Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers (SRMS) was 
revised in November, 2013, in consonance with the provisions of 
the “Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their 
Rehabilitation Act, 2013” (MS Act, 2013). The scheme has been 
thereafter provided in 2017-18, 2020-21 and 2021-22 to provide 
more benefits to the identified manual scavengers and their 
dependants. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that 
the main provisions inter-alia under the Scheme include (i) One 
Time Cash A ssistance of Rs. 40,000/ - to identified manual 
scavengers (one per family); (ii) Skill Development Training up to 
two years with stipend @ Rs. 3,000/ - per month; (iii) Capital 
Subsidy up to Rs. 5.00 lakh for Self -Employment Projects up to 
Rs. 15.00 lakh; (iv)Sanitation Workers and their dependents are 
provided capital subsidy up to Rs. 5.00 lakh and interest 
subsidy for sanitation related projects; (v)Coverage of Manual 
Scavengers for Health Insurance under Ayushman Bharat (PM -
JAY) Yojana. Further, the Comm ittee were given to understand 
that two surveys were conducted by the Ministry in the year 
2013 and 2018 for identification of manual scavengers during 
which 58,098 manual scavengers were identified. The 
Committee in this regard laud the Ministry that all eligible 
-do- 

528 
 
manual scavengers had been timely provided with a One Time 
Cash Assistance of 40,000 rupees as stipulated under the 
provisions of the scheme. Also, 18,880 manual scavengers and 
their dependants were covered under various skill development  
training programmes with stipend of @ Rs.300/ - per month.  
The Ministry also provided capital subsidy up to Rs.5.0 lakh for 
self-employment projects covering 2095 beneficiaries.  Further, 
it was brought to the notice of the Committee that the National 
Safai Karam charis Finance and Development Corporation 
(NSKFDC) is the nodal agency for implementation of SRMS for 
the rehabilitation of manual scavengers under which a National 
Survey of Manual Scavengers was started in 2018 and 44,217 
manual scavengers were identifi ed and no adolescent was 
identified as manual scavenger. Appreciating the fact that no 
adolescent was identified as a manual scavenger as a testimony 
to effective policy intervention, the Committee exhort the 
Ministry to further elicit information/confirma tion from the 
concerned Chief Secretaries/Administrators to ascertain 
whether their States/UTs are free from the scourge of manual 
scavenging and whether any Child labour/Adolescent labour are 
engaged as manual scavenger currently. The Committee wish to 
be apprised of the developments in this regard. 
97.  6.53 The Committee observe that in addition to the steps taken to 
eliminate and rehabilitate identified manual scavengers, a lot 
needs to be done for full mechanization of cleaning of sewers 
and septic tanks and rehabilitation of the sanitation workers 
engaged therein. The Committee are concerned to find  that 
despite the provisions of Manual Scavenging Act, 2013, persons 
are still being engaged for manual cleaning of sewers, drains 
containing sewage and septic tanks without proper gear and 
safety precautions which is a sort of hazardous occupation.  In 
this regard, the Committee were informed that the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment and Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs have proposed the ‘National Action for Mechanised 
Sanitation Ecosystem (NAMAST E)’ scheme to make sanitation 
work safer. Under this scheme, a programme called Swachhta 
Udyami Yogna (SUY) is being run in which the Ministry provide 
up to 50 per cent subsidy to purchase vehicles which can clean 
the sewers.  The Committee have been given  to understand that 
hundreds of vehicles have been purchased benefiting number of 
municipal corporations.  Considering the huge requirement of  
such vehicles in the country,  the Committee feel that the 
Ministry have to go a long way for successful implem entation of 
these schemes. The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry should coordinate with the Ministry of Housing  and 
Urban Affairs and Niti Ayog in order to fund those startups  
which come up with new technology for cleaning sewers and 
septic tanks without any manual intervention.  The Committee 
also desire that National Karmachari and Finance Development 
Corporation should provide loans to households of scavenging 
community to take alternate occupations and skill development 
training programmes. T he Committee recommend the ministry 
to institute a robust monitoring mechanism for successful 
implementation of schemes in operation, in order to break the 
intergenerationality in sanitation work and thus prohibit 
incidence of child labour in their families. 
-do- 
98.  6.54 The Committee note that insofar as the drug victims and de -
addiction efforts are concerned, the Ministry run a  National 
programme, Nasha Mukt Bharat Abhiyan (NMBA) for drug 
-do- 

529 
 
demand reduction under which 600 de -addiction centres are 
currently operational, w hich are fully funded by them. The 
Committee were given to understand that these centres are run 
by the NGOs wherein around seven lakh people were getting de -
addicted every year. According to the Ministry, 2,86,402 
beneficiaries in 2021 -22 had been treated  in aforesaid Centres 
across the country. The Committee find that the total capacity of 
these centres are about seven lakhs and so far, only victims over 
18 years are currently enrolled at these centres. The Ministry 
further submitted that they are conside ring a proposal to work 
together with the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
towards bringing in a de -addiction medication and other 
modalities in the Child Care institutions (CCIs) in order to 
extend this de -addiction campaign to children and women. 
Additionally, as per the Ministry, the revised guidelines of 
National Action Plan for Drug Demand Reduction ( NAPDDR) 
provides for establishing and assisting counseling/de -addiction 
centres or facilities in closed settings such as Juvenile Homes, 
for special groups such as women and children in need for care 
and protection/conflict with law or any other special group etc. 
by them or in convergence with other Central Ministries and 
implemented through various organizations/Government 
Departments. The Committe e recommend that the initiatives 
taken by the ministry should be taken to its logical conclusion 
to curb drug menace among children. 
99.  6.55 The Committee  note that the ministry are presently supporting 
various NGOs for running 514 centers including 3 50 Integrated 
Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts (IRCAs), 73 outreach and Drop 
in Centres (ODICs), 53 Community based Peer Lead Intervention 
(CPLIs) and 38 Addiction Treatment Facilities (ATFs) under 
NAPDDR throughout  the country.  These centres provide 
counseling, de -addiction, treatment, after care, and 
rehabilitation of affected persons.  The Committee have been 
informed that during the last three years, 93,364 beneficiaries in 
2019-20, 2,08,415 beneficiaries in 2020 -21 and 2,86,402 
beneficiaries in 2021 -22 have taken treatment in aforesaid 
centres in the country.  Considering that nearly six crore people 
are found to be substance abuse victims, in the absence of 
adequate capacity to treat such a huge population, it seems to 
be a daunting task to tackle a nd rehabilitate drug/substance 
abuse victims. In this regard, the Committee find that NGOs are 
provided with financial assistance up to 90 percent of the 
approved expenditure  and State Governments  are provide 100 
per cent for setting up of IRCAs. Despite  this, the Committee 
lament the lack of adequate de -addiction facilities to treat 
victims of drug abuse and recommend more pro -active 
participation on the part of the Ministry and call upon Voluntary 
organization/NGOs intervention, including participation of State 
Governments.  The  focus needs to be on preventive education, 
awareness generation, counseling, treatment and rehabilitation 
of individuals with substance abuse along with training and 
capacity building of the service providers through collaborati ve 
efforts of Central/State Governments, NGOs  and Civil Society to 
create awareness about the ill -effects of substance dependence, 
reduce stigmatization and integrate individuals with substance 
abuse, back into society. 
-do- 
100.  6.56 The Committee note that the Pre-matric Scholarship Scheme for 
SC Students & Others’ is an Umbrella scheme that has two sub 
schemes, one of which is a Centrally sponsored scheme and 
-do- 

530 
 
implemented through States/UTs to support parents of SC 
Children for education of their wards studying in classes IX and 
X. In this regard, the Committee are pleased to take note of the 
efforts made by the Ministry  to ensure the continued increase of 
coverage in targeted Scheduled Caste beneficiaries studying in 
classes IX and X under the pre -matric S cholarship scheme 
(Component 1) viz, 3479969 beneficiaries during 2021 -22 as 
against 3068876 beneficiaries in    2020 -21 and 2809542 in 
2019-20 respectively. The Committee feel this is indicative of a 
healthy trend and is of the view that such scholarship schemes 
help tackle the incidence of drop out especially in the transition 
from the elementary to the Secondary stage and to improve their 
participation and facilitate in enabling them to progress to the 
post-matric stage of education. Further, the Committee feel that 
the measures like scholarship/fee waiver serve as an incentive 
for parents to enroll their children in Schools. The Committee 
thus recommend that adequate policy measures should be 
directed at providing financial incentives to families which would 
continue to encourage retention of their wards in schools so as 
to incentivize them and aid in providing families with avenues 
for supplementary income so that the vicious trap of poverty 
which often compel families to send their children/adolescent to 
work can be offset. 
101.  6.57 The Committee note the steps envisaged by the Ministry for the 
welfare of children of those engaged in hazardous occupations 
viz, 'Component 2: Pre -Matric Scholarship for children of 
parents/guardians engaged in Unclean and hazardous 
Occupation’ under the "Pre -Matric Scholarships Scheme for 
Scheduled Castes and Others". Under the Scholarship Scheme, 
children/wards studying classes I to X of parents/guardians 
engaged in Unclean and hazardous Occupation are eligible to 
pursue pre-matric education provided they belong to one of the 
following categories namely, Persons who are Manual 
Scavengers as defined under section 2(I) (g) of  Manual 
Scavengers Act 2013; Tanners & Flayers; Waste pickers; and 
Persons engaged in hazardous cleaning as defined in Section 2(I) 
(d)  of Manual Scavengers Act 2013. The Committee were given 
to understand that, in order to strengthen the implementation of 
the Scheme, several steps have been taken viz., Online end to 
end processing, verification of e ligibility credentials through 
online transaction to ensure greater transparency, control 
duplicity and wrongful claims by institutions, automated 
verification process of the students using the digital process; a 
performance module to monitor the progress of student as well 
as performance of the institution; focus on coverage of poorest 
households; ensuring quality education to the target group etc. 
Appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry to further the 
endeavour of providing access to vulnerable child ren whose 
parents/guardians are employed in hazardous occupations, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to periodically review the 
functioning of the scheme and strengthen the institutional 
mechanism  so that more Children are provided a platform to 
pursue lite racy and uninterrupted pre -matric education, lower 
the incidence of drop -out and have a better chance of 
progressing to the Post -matric stage of education. Further, the 
Committee recommend that necessary public awareness drives 
shall be undertaken by the S tate Governments/UTs about the 
scheme at the local level through the Municipalities/Gram 
Panchayats in order to extend its coverage by encouraging 
-do- 

531 
 
pupils who have dropped out to bring them back into the fold of 
education. 
102.  6.58 The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Dakshta Aur 
Kushalta Sampann Hitgrahi (PM-DAKSH) had been launched as 
a Central sector scheme during 2020 -21 for five years (2021 -22 
to 2025 -26) for the marginalized persons of 
SC/OBC/EBC/DNT/Safai Karamchari incl uding waste -pickers 
in the age group of 18 -45 years with a budget outlay of Rs. 
450.25 crores to enhance the skills available that could aid in 
economic upliftment of these marginalized sections. The 
Committee have been given to understand that the scheme is 
implemented through three apex corporations, i.e., National 
Scheduled Caste Finance and Development Corporation 
(NSFDC), National Backward Classes Finance and Development 
Corporation (NBCFDC) and National Safai Karamcharis Finance 
and Development Corpor ation (NSKFDC) for their respective 
target groups with an objective to make them employable both 
in self -employment and wage employment for their respective 
socio-economic development. The Committee find that, under 
the Scheme, a multipronged approach to i mprove all -round 
competency by focusing on revenue generation capacities of 
artisans, self-employment of women and long-term training and 
specialization in employable vocations among youth. According 
to the Ministry, a PM -DAKSH portal and Mobile App were 
launched to make end -to-end digitization of the programme 
starting from registration of candidates to their placements. The 
Committee also observe that the scheme has been made trainee 
centric providing facilities for online registration, selection of 
course, training institutes and place of training as per the 
convenience of the candidate. Further, AI based biometric 
system has been integrated with PM DAKSH portal to monitor 
the attendance of candidates with facial recognition.  
 The Ministry further stated  that the four core 
interventions under the Scheme viz., Up -skilling/Re-skilling, 
Short term training, Long term training and Entrepreneurship 
Development Programmes (EDP) have been introduced under 
the Scheme to enhance the skill of candidates. The Commit tee 
find that the key benefits under the scheme are inter -alia free 
cost of training, stipend of Rs1500 per month for SC and Safai 
Karamcharis and Rs.1000 per month for OBC/EBC/DNT 
candidates, Certification, Placement facilitation and assistance 
in starting own enterprise and convergence with loan scheme of 
Corporation and assistance for beneficiaries in starting own 
work/self employment. The Committee appreciate the various 
steps taken by the Ministry in order to meet the deadline of 
skilling the target be neficiaries viz., 71,000 SC/OBC/EBC/DNT 
persons/ Safai Karamcharis including waste pickers by 2025 -
26. Further, in the view of the Committee, the process of 
registration has been hastened due to the presence of a 
dedicated portal and mobile application for candidates to choose 
the training course and the training institute/centre as per their 
requirement/interest. The Committee would urge the Ministry to 
look into areas which may limit the effectiveness of the PM -
DAKSH scheme, viz., lack of infrastructure,  especially in rural 
areas which may not have adequate training facilities and need 
for robust industry/placement partnerships to provide job 
opportunities to the trained individuals,  particularly in sectors 
where there is limited demand for skilled labor . The Committee 
are of the opinion that the success of the scheme is directly 
-do- 

532 
 
proportional to the number of candidate registrations on the  
PM-DAKSH portal and hence urge the Ministry to popularize 
and create awareness about the tangible benefits under the  
scheme among the potential candidates through electronic and 
print/social media. Public information campaigns in this regard 
in regional dialects would help in reaching out to candidates 
who are not well versed in English or Hindi. The Committee 
desire th at adequate finances be allocated towards this 
endeavour. 
103.  6.59 The Committee appreciate the initiatives of the Ministry under 
the Atal Vayo Abhyuday Yojana (AVYAY) for the maintenance of 
senior citizens. As part of the Yojana, at least one old age h ome 
must be set up in every district, fully funded by the 
Government. In accordance to the guidelines, the Committee  
were informed that about 600 old age homes were being run by 
the NGOs in various parts of the Country. However around 250 
districts do not yet have any old age home. The Ministry assured 
the Committee that within the next two years, the target of 
coverage of all the 250 districts is likely to be achieved so as to 
facilitate any destitute/elderly person in finding accommodation 
in these old a ge homes in every district. The Committee desire 
that the deadline be adhered to scrupulously. Further, the 
Committee are of the view that ensuring that senior citizens lead 
a secure, dignified and productive life is a major challenge and 
urge the Ministry to formulate proposals to re -skill them if they 
want to seek re -employment. The Committee also exhort the 
Ministry to set up a national helpline for the welfare of senior 
citizens and sensitise youth and other sections of the society 
towards issues of the  elderly. The Committee also desire that 
steps be taken to encourage senior citizens to form Self -help 
Groups in order to provide them with productive occupation and 
share time constructively with each other. 
-do- 
104.  6.60 The Committee observe that the eradication of Child labour is a 
multidimensional problem and addressing it in its entirety 
would require a holistic inter -Ministerial legislative convergence 
involving a range of stakeholders to effectively formulate and 
collaborate on targeted policies a nd  review measures for 
identification, rescue and socio -economic rehabilitation of child 
labour. However, the Committee are deeply perturbed at the 
admission on the part of the Ministry on the absence of any 
convergence strategy either with the Ministry o f Labour or other 
Ministries of the Government of India on a critical issue of Child 
labour. The Committee feel that inadequate synergy and lack of 
coordination at grass -root levels and Ministerial level between 
Child labour policies and interventions between various agencies 
of the Ministries of the GoI has hampered the anti -Child labour 
framework. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry of 
Social Justice have an important role not only in prohibition of 
Child labour but also in its rescue and reha bilitation. The 
Committee therefore exhort the Ministry to devise a coherent 
convergence strategy wherever possible among various 
stakeholders involved in standardizing SOPs on identification, 
rescue, trafficking, repatriation, reintegration and rehabilita tion 
for Children or those found vulnerable to child labour in order to 
address them effectively and the benefits of convergence can be 
targeted towards areas of high incidence of child labour by 
leveraging the strengths of different Ministries to achieve the 
desired outcomes so as to effectively tackle Child labour in all its 
manifestation. 
-do- 

533 
 
105.  7.45 The Committee find that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs aim at 
elevating the socio -economic status of the tribal people by 
providing them better livelihood o pportunities better prospects 
of quality education and accessible health care. The Ministry are 
not directly related with the implementation of National Policy 
on Child Labour. The Ministry have a unique funding pattern 
under which 41 Central Ministries ap art from Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs earmark their funds in the range from 4.3% to 17.5% of 
their total Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP) Scheme allocation every year as 
Tribal Sub Plan/Scheduled Tribes Component (STC) also known 
as Development Action Plan for STs (DAP ST) for various 
schemes for Tribal development. These funds are spent by 
different Central Ministries/ Departments under their schemes 
for various development projects for accelerated socio -economic 
development of Tribal population. Besides State Governmen ts 
are also supposed to earmark TSP funds in proportion to ST 
population in the States. Apart from this there is a statutory 
provision under Article 275(1) under which 100% financial 
assistance is provided to enable the States to meet the cost of 
their sch emes of development for promoting welfare of 
Scheduled Tribes. The Committee find that the scheme of 
Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRS) receives grants under 
the Article 275(1) for setting up of these schools. The Ministry 
have identified 452 blocks under tribal areas where there is a 
population of 20 thousand and above and 50 percent of them 
are tribals where a decision have been made to establish an 
EMRS. The Committee also find that Ministry have set up the 
target of establishing of 740 EMRS out of  which 685 have been 
sanctioned, yet only 230 have been completed, 234 are under 
construction and 221 are yet to start. The Committee believe 
that there is no dearth of funds for making these schools 
functional. Only the Ministry are required to take policy decision 
and issue directions to the concerned States to leave no stone 
unturned and expedite the procedure of creating proper 
infrastructure to enroll more and more tribal students.  The 
Committee advise the Ministry to come up with a suitable 
roadmap for proper consultation with the Ministry of Education 
(Department of School Education and Literacy) to establish and 
monitor schools for tribal children.  The Committee also desire 
that the Ministry should come up with a robust monitoring 
mechanism to conduct regular inspections of these EMRS sites 
and pursue with State Governments to make these Schools 
functional at the earliest. The Committee further desire that the 
Ministry should also explore the possibility of mandatory 
enrolment of those children and adolescents in these residential 
schools whose parents migrate to other States seasonally on the 
lines of setting up of ‘Seasonal Homes’ by State Government of 
Odisha. 
Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs 
106.  7.46 Tribal children are the most vulnerable section of our s ociety. 
Their socio -economic conditions are responsible for higher 
incidences of child and adolescent labour amongst the tribal 
population. Although the Ministry have been implementing a 
number of Schemes for their socio -cultural and economic 
development a nd to provide them with better employment 
opportunities and raise their economic conditions, the 
Committee are of the considered view that more concerted 
efforts of the Ministry are extremely imperative for genuinely 
bringing down the incidences of child l abours. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry should pursue with the State 
-do- 

534 
 
Governments with majority of tribal population such as 
Chhatisgarh, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, etc. more vigorously to 
implement the tribal welfare schemes at grass root level more 
effectively and efficiently.  The Ministry should advise State 
Governments to conduct periodic surprise inspections.  In 
addition, top management of the Ministry should pursue this 
matter at regular intervals with the Secretaries of the State 
Welfare Department especially with the North-Eastern States. 
107.  7.47 The Committee are dismayed to note that there is a huge gap 
existing between Scheduled Tribe students and remaining all 
students at Upper Primary and Secondary levels in school 
educations. Under Primary, Upper Primary and Secondary levels 
of education in 2 019-20, there are dropout rates of 3.85%, 
6.06% and 24.18% respectively, for overall ST students 
(including girls and boys) in comparison to that of 1.48%, 2.60% 
and 16.09 respectively, for remaining All Students (including 
girls and boys). In 2020-21, it was 2.52%, 5.02% and 20.91% in 
Primary, Upper Primary and Secondary levels of education 
respectively, for overall ST students (including girls and boys) 
vis-à-vis 0.76%, 2.27% and 14.04% for remaining All Students 
(including girls and boys). The Committee find that although the 
dropout rates amongst the Tribal students have been showing 
decreasing trend over the years but still additional endeavour is 
imperative from the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to achieve the 
objective of containing the students in schoo ls so that our 
ultimate goal of ‘No Child Labour’ is achieved. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should dovetail their efforts 
with the Ministry of Education (Department of School Education 
& Literacy) and formulate more comprehensive 
schemes/programmes to achieve this goal. 
-do- 
108.  7.48 The Committee find that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs do not 
compile any data about the number of working tribal children 
and depend totally on Ministry of Labour & Employment for 
maintaining this data and the census figures which are more 
than 11 years old. The Committee feel that the welfare of tribal 
population including children is the main objective of the 
Ministry around which all the major schemes and programmes 
of the Ministry run. The Committee taki ng note of the fact that 
the Ministry rely entirely on the data maintained by the Ministry 
of Labour & Employment and the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development which is not satisfactory, urge the Ministry to 
conduct district-wise surveys in atleast triba l majority States to 
prepare a database of tribal children/adolescents who are 
enrolled in school and those households where the 
children/adolescents are out of school/dropouts and are 
engaged in the child labour in any form.  This may include 
separate colu mns for the children engaged who work as child 
workers with their parents seasonally and the children who 
migrate with their parents. The Committee may be apprised of 
the action taken in the regard. 
-do- 
109.  7.49 The Committee find that there are 1,10,736 Sc heduled Tribes 
Main Workers in 5 -14 years age group in Madhya Pradesh; 
1,02,430 workers in Maharashtra; 66,191 workers in Andhra 
Pradesh; 50,832 workers in Gujarat; 47,030 workers in 
Rajasthan; similarly more than 30,000 workers in Jharkhand, 
Karnataka and Odisha. The Ministry also admitted that these 
States are with larger tribal population as compared to other 
States and are likely to have relatively higher numbers of 
working children. The Committee observe that the people of the 
-do- 

535 
 
tribal society are mainly engaged in agricultural business, minor 
forest produce, various other forest produce. This work is done 
by the entire family, therefore, alongwith the family their 
children have also been working as a help in these tasks. 
Although they are not engaged wit h any employer, they are 
marked as child workers and not as child labours. The 
Committee are concerned to find that even children of the age 5 
years are also engaged in child labour. The Committee are not 
happy with the current state of affairs prevalent i n the tribal 
majority areas and exhort the Ministry to issue proper directions 
to these State Governments specifically to Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and chalk out a robust strategy 
to deal with this problem.  The Committee also desire that 
sensitization/ awareness programmes should be organized in 
the interiors of these tribal areas to sensitize the parents of the 
children of age group of 5 -14 about hazards of bringing their 
small children into labour. Efforts should also be made to make 
them aware of the different Clauses as well as Rules and 
Regulations mentioned under the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986. 
110.  7.50 The Committee find that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs have taken 
commendable steps for reducing unemployment and generating 
livelihood opportunities in the tribal areas through Tribal Co -
Operative Marketing Development Federation of India (TRIFED), 
an aut onomous organization and National Scheduled Tribes 
Finance and Development Corporation (NSTFDC). TRIFED under 
the scheme of PMJVM provides Minimum Support Price (MSP) to 
Minor Forest Produce (MFPs) gatherers to supplement the 
livelihood of tribal people. All these efforts are being made by the 
Ministry to prevent tribal people to migrate to other places in 
search of better employment opportunities. The Committee note 
that despite taking all these measures the tribal population are 
still fleeing to other States and they face many problems in these 
destination States such as difficult working conditions, lack of 
documentation and identity issue, inadequate social security 
coverage, lack of awareness about Government Schemes, lack of 
support at destination leve l for migrants, difficulty in 
communicating in language of the host State, difficulty in 
obtaining education and health services, etc. The Committee feel 
that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should take immediate steps to 
pursue the destination State Governments to issue directions to 
the State Welfare Department for STs to frame specific 
guidelines to deal with the abovementioned problems faced by 
the tribal migrant workers. 
-do- 
111.  7.51 The Committee find that the Ministry have sanctioned a pilot 
project to  State of Goa for migrant labour support 
program.  This program is under implementation by the State 
Government of Goa and it was yet to be concluded. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should pursue the State 
Government of Goa to expeditiously conclud e this pilot project  
and come up with the findings/recommendations so that they 
can be applied to other destination States also where tribal 
population migrate. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the same. 
-do- 
112.  7.52 The Committee observe that the  Ministry of Tribal Affairs are 
one and only Ministry with the mandate of implementing Welfare 
Schemes for the tribal population across the Country. The 
Ministry are implementing a number of schemes and 
programmes for building education opportunities as we ll as 
-do- 

536 
 
creating employment prospects for the tribal population in the 
tribal areas of the Country. Taking note of the fact that raising of 
socio-economic status of the tribal population and providing 
them with ample employment opportunities is the only means to 
curb engaging small children and adolescents as workers, the 
Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry should also 
commence schemes or programmes for the skill development of 
the tribal adolescents and youth.  For this purpose, Ministry 
should iss ue proper directions to the State Governments to 
formulate and initiate such schemes/programmes. 
113.  8.18 The Committee note that the construction industry is one of the 
biggest employers of migrant labourers in the country. The 
workers coming from rura l areas are accompanied by their 
families that may include small children. They work under 
hazardous and difficult working conditions and live in makeshift 
accommodations near construction sites which usually lack 
even basic amenities. The Committee note w ith concern that 
since these migrant labourers belong to the lower economic 
strata of the society and do not have adequate resources or 
other means to access them, there is increased probability of 
these children being engaged as Child Labour to support meagre 
family incomes. The Committee desire that the primary method 
through which the incidence of child labour can be brought 
down among the construction workers is by strengthening the 
efforts towards their welfare - social and economic. In this 
regard, the Committee recommend that the executive agencies 
under the Ministry of Housing & Urban affairs, CPWD and 
NBCC, being principal employers in the case of a large number 
of projects, should take robust measures to ensure that workers 
get the benefits that they are entitled to under various statutory 
schemes and laws such as the Building And Other Construction 
Workers (Regulation Of Employment And Conditions Of Service) 
Act, 1996. Effective steps should also be taken to check that the 
contractors or the proj ect management companies ensure that 
the accommodation and other basic necessities required by the 
workers are adequately addressed. It is the considered opinion 
of the Committee that such activities and welfare measures 
should not just be considered as ac tivities falling under the 
responsibility of the respective labour departments and other 
related agencies.  
Ministry of 
Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
114.  8.19 The Committee observe that the children of migrant 
labourers may be enrolled in village schools near the locations of 
projects/work, but drop out when they move with their parents 
to other locations. This makes migrant workers a highly 
vulnerable group in respect of child labour with a high 
probability of their children being compelled to leave education 
due to inherent nature of their parents’ occupation. Keeping this 
in perspective, the Committee strongly urge the Ministry to take 
proactive steps to ensur e that the children of the migrant 
construction workers can continue their education when moving 
with their parents. In this regard the Ministry should coordinate 
with the Ministry of Education to facilitate the enrollment of 
these children in schools loca ted in the proximity to the 
construction/project sites. An arrangement for smooth 
enrolment of children of migrant labourers in schools wherever 
their parents find work has as well as access to mid day meals 
and other similar encouragements be facilitated through 
suitable measures. 
-do- 
115.  8.20 With regard to Building and Other Construction Workers, the -do- 

537 
 
Committee recommend that the Ministry shall devise a 
mechanism to provide a single social security identification to 
each registered worker. The card or other document(s) issued by 
the State Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare 
Board should bear this unique identity, which could be a 
number, and the data/information on this identity shall be 
made available on a shared platform accessible to all the State 
Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Boards so as 
to allow the workers to avail all the social security benefits to 
which they are entitled across all the States/UTs seamlessly. 
The Committee also feel that the data regarding the immediate  
family of the worker can also be captured as part of the 
registration since the same would be helpful in the endeavours 
towards creating a data bank of one set of children vulnerable to 
child labour.  The Committee also recommend that necessary 
rules shoul d be framed that place the responsibility on the 
Contractor/Sub-contractors to ensure that all the workers 
employed are in possession of such a card and in case of non -
availability, the Contractor has to provide assistance for 
registration and issuance of the card to the worker. 
116.  8.21 The Committee are at unease to note the lack of data concerning 
Child Labour in urban areas and want the Ministry to issue 
requisite guidelines to the urban local bodies   to establish a 
mechanism, with the assistance fro m the local Labour 
department, to survey and enumerate the number of Child 
Labourers, Children living in Street conditions and those 
engaged in beggary. In the opinion of the Committee, collection 
of data at regular intervals, even in a limited scale, will be the all 
important precursor to formulation of suitable policy directives 
at any level. Further, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should consider issuing guidelines to place 
responsibility upon the Urban Local Bodies to keep a check on 
employment of child labour in small construction works in their 
areas. The guidelines can also direct the ULBs to seek 
mandatory self certification concerning non-engagement of child 
labour from the builder/house owner undertaking construction 
activity. Surprise preventive checks can be carried out at various 
stages by officials of the Urban Local Bodies and provisions for 
penalizing the delinquent builder/contractor should also be 
incorporated suitably so as to provide a credible disincentive in 
respect of engagement of child labour. 
-do- 
117.  8.22 The Committee observe that many children can be found 
engaged in work on roadsides and small shops. The Committee 
recognize that in many cases these children may not be engaged 
in any hazardous activity but are participating in work to 
contribute towards s upporting the meager family income. It is 
important to ensure that these children do not drop out from 
education while helping their families with their work and later 
deviate towards working for non -family employers. Since they 
can serve as cheap labour, it needs to be ensured that these 
children are not being exploited and are forced to carry out any 
activity that can be detrimental to their physical and mental well 
being. In the considered view of the Committee, particular 
attention should be paid to str eet vendors who might be 
employing Child Labour so as to ensure that children are not 
exploited and assistance from the local Police 
Department should be taken in this regard.  The Ministry had 
launched the PM SVANidhi Scheme to provide credit for working 
capital to street vendors. The Street vendors to be assisted 
-do- 

538 
 
through the Scheme were identified through Certificate of 
Vending/Identity Card issued by Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should issue 
guidelines to all Urban Local Bodies to ensure that every street 
vendor has valid Certificate of Vending and seek an undertaking 
from the vendor to not employ/engage child labour in their 
work. Penal provisions like revocation of benefits under the PM 
SVANidhi Scheme can also be made applicable to secure 
adherence. 
118.  9.18 The Committee note that the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development) are not directly related with 
the implementation of the National Policy on Child Labour per 
se. The main objective of the Department of Rural Development 
is to promote Rural Development specifically carrying out anti -
poverty alleviation programmes. The Department, therefore, do 
not maintain any data regarding child labour persisting in the 
rural areas. The Department m aintain data about the families 
that are in the need of support, on the basis of the data based 
on the socio -economic caste census. Various schemes and 
programmes are drawn upon and implemented by the 
Department of Rural Development for the upliftment of s ocio-
economically backward target group. The Committee understand 
that the Department of Rural Development are not involved 
directly with the eradication of the child labour but nevertheless 
they are of the opinion that there are potential areas where they 
can coordinate with the Ministry of Labour & Employment being 
the nodal Ministry and other line Ministries for identification 
and rehabilitation of child labour with the larger objective of 
eliminating child labour . Therefore, the Department of Rural 
Development should also play their role by making concerted 
efforts in proper coordination and consultation with the nodal 
Ministries and respective State Governments to devise a 
mechanism to identify child labour in the rural areas. 
Ministry of 
Rural 
Development 
(Department of 
Rural 
Development) 
119.  9.19 The Committee note that the Department of Rural Development 
runs three major programmes viz. Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS); National 
Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM); and Deen Dayal Upadhyaya 
Grameen Kaushalya Yojana. Under NRLM 9 crore families have 
been identified as suffering from deprivation out of which t he 
Department had been able to cover 8.3 crore families. The 
Committee note that the target set was to cover 10 crore families 
under NRLM. As the issue of child labour is not taken up 
specifically by the Department of Rural Development, the 
Committee desir e that the Department should explore the 
possibility to take this issue in a focused manner under NRLM 
and by improving the economic conditions of the families 
encourage them to send their children to schools. For this 
purpose, the Department may come up w ith the specific clause 
under the Scheme which can provide incentives in the form of 
additional benefits to those families which were previously 
engaged in child labour but have now started to send their 
children to schools. 
-do- 
120.  9.20 The Committee furth er desire the Department of Rural 
Development to collect data on those villages where all the 
children and adolescents up to 18 years of age are enrolled in 
schools and they are regularly attending it too and there are no 
out of school children. The Depart ment may declare those 
villages as ‘Child Labour Free Villages’ and provide monetary 
incentives to the Gram Panchayats of these villages/Blocks. 
-do- 

539 
 
121.  9.21 The Committee note that there is no independent mechanism for 
identification of child labour with t he Department of Rural 
Development in any of their major Schemes viz. Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(MGNREGS); National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM); and 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana. The 
Department have decl ared that there is no provision for child 
labour under any of these Schemes, however, the Committee fail 
to fathom that without any data being maintained regarding 
number of children engaged in child labour, how the 
Department could come up with such a dec laration. The 
Committee are given to understand that under Pradhan Mantri 
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) which falls under the purview of 
the Department of Rural Development, the construction and 
maintenance of rural roads is taken up by the Department in 
coordination with the respective State Governments who are the 
implementing authorities of the Scheme. The Committee note 
that there is a scope for engagement of adolescent labours under 
this scheme. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the 
Department to issu e proper directions to the State/UTs 
Governments to layout a stringent mechanism for effective 
implementation of the directions/instructions as laid down 
under various Acts/Rules for identification and prohibition of 
child labour and maintain a proper data base for it. The 
Committee desire the Department to chalk out a robust action 
plan by taking up surveys to assess the families and the 
households where children are irregular in schools. In this way 
the households from where children are being sent for chi ld 
labour can be ascertained. The Committee urge the Department 
to seek the cooperation of the Ministry of Labour & Employment 
and the respective State Governments and explore the 
possibility of engaging Non -Governmental Organisations (NGOs) 
in this process so that the purpose may be achieved. 
-do- 
122.  9.22 The Committee find that under the Scheme of Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU -GKY), the target 
group are poor rural youth in the age group 15 -35.  Under this 
Scheme they are given Skill De velopment Training by 
Department of Rural Development. The Department apprised the 
Committee that the employers are employing only those 
candidates who are skilled and are minimum 18 years old.  The 
Committee are glad to find that the scope of employment o f the 
rescued child/adolescent labour is being created in this process. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department 
should create necessary relaxations for such rescued 
children/adolescents who are below 18 years of age and 
accommodate them in t he above mentioned Scheme of DDU -
GKY for imparting Skill Development Training  so that they can 
be brought under the mainstream of the society and a 
sustainable source of their income is created for them. 
-do- 
123.  9.23 The Committee find that in order to prevent children to dropout 
from their schools and curb child labour, sensitization of 
parents is extremely imperative. According to the Department of 
Rural Development, there are majorly two issues that drive 
families to offer their children for child labour. One is the poor 
economic condition. Second, the disasters like droughts, floods, 
cyclones etc. The Committee are of the considered view that the 
Ministry could best intervene to deal with these two potential 
issues with their focused and well coordinated efforts. 
Recognising that there is strong network of women organizations 
-do- 

540 
 
including Self Help Groups (SHGs) in the rural areas at 
village/block level, the Committee are of the considered opinion 
that the Ministry of Rural Development should take the initiative 
for organizing sensitization/ awareness programmes for families 
in rural and extremely remote areas at regular intervals. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should include these SHGs, 
other village women orga nizations and cluster level federations 
and take their help and cooperation for creating awareness 
amongst the parents,  specifically mothers of children upto 14 
years, at grass root level. As admitted by the Ministry, the 
Committee further urge upon the Ministry to include the issue of 
child labour in the instructional/ orientation curriculum 
disseminated to create sensitization amongst the economically 
backward households so that they do not send their children to 
work despite the economic necessity. In ad dition to it the 
Committee further recommend the Department to devise 
specific, focused projects and actionable models to act upon the 
issue of child labour, in proper coordination with Labour 
Departments of the respective States/UTs and NGOs who are 
working in this sector. 
124.  9.24 The Committee find that under MGNREGS, construction of 
Aanganwadi Centres (AWCs) is permissible with a maximum 
allocation of Rs. 5.00 lakh per AWC. Under Aanganwadi Services 
Scheme of Ministry of Women and Child Development u nder 
which AWCs are developed, all children of the age group of six 
months to six years are entitled to supplementary nutrition and 
early childhood care and education from AWCs. The Committee 
urge upon the Ministry to make concerted efforts with the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development and set up more 
AWCs as promised by the Department  during their deposition 
before the Committee and also devise a mechanism for ensuring 
enrolment of children of migrant workers in AWCs. The 
Committee further desire that s urveys should be taken up with 
all seriousness to identify economically backward families which 
are vulnerable enough to migrate to other places or the families 
which migrate to other places seasonally.  The Department may 
also create and maintain this data  which can be further shared 
with the Ministry of Labour & Employment for taking further 
action on it at PAN -India basis for better and effective 
implementation of the National Policy on Child Labour. 
-do- 
125.  10.20 The Committee are gravely concerned to note that the 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare neither have 
any data regarding number of children engaged in child labour 
nor do they have any mechanism to receive complaints on the 
issue of child labour  in agriculture sector. The Committee also 
note that the last large scale survey with data on child labour 
was the 2011 Census data and there is no latest survey of 
children engaged in child labour conducted by the Department 
or State Agriculture Departmen ts. The Committee further note 
that the Ministry of Labour & Employment at the Centre is 
responsible for administering and State/UT Governments are 
involved at implementation stage of the Child Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986. Taking note of the above 
facts, the Committee are of the considered view that albeit the 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare are not directly 
involved in the implementation of the 'Act', the Department 
should not turn a blind eye towards the problem. The 
Committee are dismayed to find that the latest available data 
with the Government is on the basis of Census 2011 which is 
Ministry of 
Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare 
(Department of 
Agriculture and 
Farmers 
Welfare) 

541 
 
more than ten years old and therefore, desire that the 
Department should at least issue directives to the State/UT  
Agriculture Departments to conduct survey on child labour and 
collect fresh data district -wise every two years for better and 
effective implementation of the Act . The Committee are glad to 
note that an IT platform is under consideration under the name 
of 'Digital Agri Stack' whic h would work in co -ordination with 
the State/UT Governments. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should leave no stone unturned to finalise it and make 
it functional at the earliest. 
126.  10.21 The Committee observe that there are different issues related 
with different Ministries other than the Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare such as issue of prevalence of 
child labour amongst the migrant agricultural workers and the 
enrolment of their children in Aanganwadi Centres which 
pertains to the Ministry of Women and Child Development. 
Further, collection of latest data regarding children working with 
the family vis-à-vis working on hired basis which pertains to the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI); 
proper implementation of Child Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986 is with the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment and respective State/UT Governments. The 
Committee, therefore, recom mend the Department to set up a 
well designed and well researched action plan in convergence 
with all the related Ministries/Departments of the Central 
Government which are directly or indirectly involved in 
eradication of child labour such as Ministry of Labour & 
Employment, Department of Rural Development, Ministry of 
Women and Child Development in order to implement the Act 
more effectively at District and village level in every State/UT 
with the help of concerned State/UT Agriculture Departments, 
District Magistrates, Local Institutions/ Panchayats at village 
level to effectively execute the action plan at the very grass -root 
level. 
-do- 
127.  10.22 The Committee note that improvement in agriculture eco-system 
in terms of higher incomes and better livelihood s reduces the 
engagement of child labour. The involvement of the child labour 
by agricultural households may only result in case of non -
availability of labour in agricultural activities and lack of 
sufficient income to sustain household expenditure. The 
Committee also find that for this, the Department of Agriculture 
have already been implementing various schemes for farmers' 
welfare. The Committee are constrained to find that these 
already existing Schemes are found to be inadequate to fulfill 
the above pu rpose of non -engagement of child labour in 
agriculture sector as child labour still persists in agriculture 
sector. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to 
come up with several other new initiatives which would aid in a 
more positive way in ach ieving the goal of income support and 
improvement of livelihood of farmers. The Committee desire that 
the Ministry should design a strong mechanism in consultation 
with the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of Labour & Employment in 
implementing NCLP and other line Ministries for providing better 
employment opportunities and improved livelihood which would 
emerge as a base for non -engagement of child labour in 
agriculture sector. 
-do- 
128.  11.32 The Committee note with concern that neither the Department 
of Fisheries nor the Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying have any provision to extend any financial support to 
Ministry of 
Fisheries, 
Animal 

542 
 
NGOs/ other organizations working towards the welfare of 
children of the marginalized workers in their respective 
sectors.  Both the Departm ents have informed that in the 
organised sectors coming under the purview, engagement of 
Child Labour has not been reported. In the studied opinion of 
the Committee, Child labour in   agriculture, particularly in the 
its sub sectors such as fisheries and li vestock sector, can be 
invisible and most often goes unreported particularly in the 
unorganised sector, especially in family work. The Committee do 
recognize that all the activities and household work performed 
by children may not necessarily be Child Labo ur and that there 
are certain tasks that are not harmful to children and could be 
necessary for their social and cultural development in their 
community. The Committee note that in the view of the ILO, 
Child Labour is work that interferes with compulsory e ducation 
and damages health and personal development of a child. Due 
to lack of data and non -reporting of instances of Child Labour, 
the Government finds it difficult to device suitable policy 
interventions. 
 Under the circumstances, the Committee recommen d that the 
Ministry may identify NGOs and similar entities working for the 
development of women and children belonging to communities 
engaged in the livestock and fisheries sectors and extend the 
financial and other necessary support. Such organizations ca n 
work at the ground level for sensitisation of families and 
education of Children thereby ensuring/encouraging their non -
participation in activities detrimental to their development . 
NGOs may collaborate with organizations of fishers, fish 
farmers, fish workers and employers and other groups to bring 
change in the attitude towards Child Labour. 
Husbandry & 
Dairying 
(Department of 
Fisheries); and 
Ministry of 
Fisheries, 
Animal 
Husbandry & 
Dairying 
(Department of 
Animal 
Husbandry & 
Dairying) 
129.  11.33 The Committee find that the mechanisation of tasks in the 
Fisheries and Animal Husbandry and Dairying sectors can boost 
production leading to an increase in income of households and 
small scale enterprises while at the same time have an indirect 
positive impact on addressing the issue of Child Labour by 
reducing the need and cost of labour. The Department of 
Fisheries have informed that the Department will, with 
assistance of States/UTs, identify areas such as aquaculture 
farms, fish f eed mills, fish markets, fish wholesale/retail shops 
including fish aquaria sale, fishing harbours and landing 
centres, fish pre -processing and fish processing centres where 
children are likely to be deployed as family labour. There is a 
continuous endeavo ur by both the Central and State 
Governments as well as the Private players towards technology 
infusion and mechanisation of identified activities in fisheries, 
wherever feasible. In line with the view of the Committee, the 
Department of Fisheries have inf ormed that such efforts are in 
general agnostic to engagement or other wise of Child Labour, 
but they do have a positive impact towards mitigation or 
elimination of Child Labour. The Department of Animal 
husbandry and dairying has also stated that it is pr omoting 
mechanization of all relevant animal husbandry and dairying 
activities which may be prone to engagement of Child Labour.  
The Committee while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry in 
this regard recommend that the Ministry may further augment 
its efforts towards the mechanisation of these sectors, with 
particular attention paid towards development and 
popularisation of affordable technologies that can be adopted at 
scale with a focus on making it accessible for small producers 
-do- 

543 
 
and other small sca le enterprises . Only then can the same 
simultaneously address the employment of children which such 
sectors are prone to. 
130.  11.34 The Committee find that both the Departments of the Ministry 
have not initiated any substantial awareness campaigns to 
sensitize parents about non -engagement of children along with 
the alternatives available to them. The Committee are not 
satisfied with th e response of the Department of Animal 
Husbandry and the Dairying, in this regard,  wherein they have 
submitted that the Department advises the States/UTs to create 
awareness among public for prohibition of Child Labour in the 
Animal Husbandry and the Dairy  Sectors. In the view of the 
Committee the Ministry should take a proactive role in this 
regard, and this should begin with initiating measures to 
secure/generate data related to child labour.   The lack of such 
data pertaining to these sub sectors of agriculture would make it 
difficult to design any suitable policy initiative. The Ministry may 
consult State departments of fisheries to ascertain 
areas/communities prone to Child Labour like small scale 
operations, family work and even in illegal activities. 
Institutional and financial support shall be provided to field 
offices in such areas for initiation of campaigns for creating 
awareness against Child Labour, with active participation from 
community leaders and other stakeholders. 
-do- 
131.  11.35 The Committee  appreciate the Ministry for ensuring that for 
execution of all schemes/programs the age criterion of above 18 
years is being strictly followed in all the States including for 
membership in Cooperative Societies, insurance coverage, 
subsidy availing, etc. At the same time, in the considered 
opinion of the Committee, the engagement of children in family 
work is an undocumented reality and the Ministry also 
recognise the same when they inform that India is a rural 
agrarian society which witnesses household ac tivities where 
children are also supporting their parents because of economic 
compulsion for sustenance and livelihood. Such a scenario 
implies that children are entwined in the production process in 
these sectors and are at risk of being engaged in hazard ous, 
exploitative and illegal activities, perhaps not at the level of the 
household, but in small scale enterprises which form the largest 
part of the informal economy of these sectors. Both the 
Departments have submitted that sectors under their purview 
are witnessing substantial growth rates with India being a 
leading exporter in both these spheres. Further, the Committee 
find that these sectors are dominated by unorganised, small -
scale and informal work where Child Labour is engaged in the 
lower levels o f the supply chain such as aquaculture farms, 
repairing equipment and processing, landing centres, etc., in the 
case of fisheries and herding, rearing and meat processing in the 
case of the livestock sector. At the same time these sectors are 
also characte rised by the presence of a large number of 
Cooperatives, particularly in the Dairy industry, which procure 
their produce from small family units.   The Committee observe 
that the Cooperatives play a major role in the economy of rural 
areas, where the fisher ies and livestock sector are 
predominantly located, and can thus play an instrumental role 
in elimination of Child Labour at the grass root level.  
The Committee recommend that the Ministry work in tandem 
with the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfar e and the 
Ministry of Cooperation to issue specific guidelines for the 
-do- 

544 
 
Cooperatives to ensure that exploitation of children in 
hazardous activity does not take place in the lower levels of the 
supply chain and their engagement is limited to assistance in 
minor tasks at the level of the family.  Cooperatives working at 
the grass root level are formed through participation of 
community members which also gives them the opportunity to 
restrict Child Labour through social coercion. The various 
benefits extended by Cooperatives to its members can also be 
made dependent on the parents certifying enrollment and 
attendance of children in schools. Further, 
assistance/facilitation extended through all the Schemes of the 
Government should be dovetailed with penalties fo r engagement 
of Child Labour, be it at the institutional or individual level. 
132.  12.23 The Committee note that there were one crore Micro, Small & 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) registered on the Udyam Portal of 
the Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises under which 
7.6 crore people are reported to have been employed. Udyam 
Registration Portal was launched by the Ministry of MSME on 
7th July, 2020 for registration of MSMEs which is free of cost. 
The Committee have been given to understand that in the 
Udyam Registration Portal, there is an option of registering of 
small and medium enterprises by the entrepreneur which is 
solely voluntary in nature. The Committee were also informed in 
evidence that as per National Sample Survey (NSS) conducted 
during 2015 -16 by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation, there are 6.33 crore MSMEs responsible for 
generating 11.09 crore employment. It is disquieting to find that 
despite accepting the fact that there is a categorical discrepancy 
in the d ata collected by Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation and those reported in the Registration Portal 
regarding total number of MSMEs and total employment 
generated, there is no inquiry or monitoring done by the 
Ministry of Micro, Small & Medi um Enterprises to ensure that 
the declaration done by the MSMEs are absolutely correct. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to make all 
concerted efforts to set up a monitoring mechanism without any 
further lapse of time to verify the data pro vided by the 
entrepreneurs in their declaration. For this purpose, if need be, 
the Ministry should also conduct surprise inspections of these 
MSMEs in co-ordination with the State/UT Governments and at 
the same time issue directives to the State/UT Governm ents to 
organise periodic inspections of some of these enterprises in a 
given period of time, so that the data base of Udyam Portal gets 
corroborated by the State/UT Governments. Moreover, it is 
imperative that in the absence of the authentic data, any pol icy 
intervention would have no tangible effect. 
Ministry of 
Micro, Small 
and Medium 
Enterprises 
133.  12.24 The Committee observe that pursuant to a meeting conducted 
by the Ministry of Labour & Employment on 7 th January, 2022 
on the issue of elimination of child labour, an action plan was 
envisaged by the Ministry of MSME. The main components of 
this action plan consisted of inclusion of a ‘mandatory self 
declaration provision’ on the Udyam Registration Portal th at the 
entrepreneur is not employing child labour in his MSME which 
came into effect from 01.07.2022; organizing awareness 
programmes to sensitize MSMEs on prohibition of child and 
adolescent labour; displaying provisions of Child Labour Act on 
websites; w indow for complaints redressal; vocational training 
for rescued adolescent labour; etc. The Committee note that till 
November, 2023, 1,16,05,294 MSMEs have provided ‘self 
-do- 

545 
 
declaration’ regarding not employing child labour in the 
enterprise concerned, out of  one crore MSMEs registered in the 
Udyan Portal. The Committee have been given to understand 
that no complaint of employment of child labour by any MSME 
has been received in the Ministry in the past three years. 
According to a Report of ILO, about one -fifth of child labour is 
concentrated in small, usually family run enterprises. Much of 
this activity occurs in informal economy and therefore operates 
outside of notional systems of enterprise registration and labour 
regulation. This vindicates the fact that self declaration by 
MSMEs can hardly act as a deterrent to check and curb child 
labour. In the given scenario, the Committee are constrained to 
print out that still there are no inspections or checks conducted 
by the Ministry to ensure that there is no chi ld labour engaged 
in the registered enterprises through Udyam Portal. The 
Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to strengthen their 
inspection mechanism and formulate special guidelines for the 
State/UT Governments to deal with this problem and implement 
them with immediate effect. 
134.  12.25 The Committee note that if any discrepancy or complaint is 
found in the claims regarding mandatory declaration about the 
child labour in MSMEs on Udyam Portal, the General Manager 
of the District Industries Centr e (DIC) of the concerned district 
undertakes an enquiry for verification of the details of Udyam 
Registration submitted by the enterprise and thereafter forward 
the matter to the Director or Commissioner or Industry 
Secretary concerned of the State Governm ent. After issuing a 
notice to the enterprise and after giving an opportunity to 
present its case, the case is recommended to the Ministry of 
MSME for cancellation of the Udyam Registration Certificate of 
that enterprise. The Committee are of the opinion t hat in the 
cases where the declaration is false, children working in these 
MSMEs are absent from the education which can help them to 
acquire the knowledge and skills they need to gain productive 
employment in the future which in turn negatively impacts th e 
development of civil societies, therefore, the guilty enterprises 
should not be left with only cancellation of registration but 
should be penalised according to the provisions of the Child 
Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986. The Committee 
desire that this action should be taken by the Ministry in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Labour & Employment with 
immediate effect. For this, if need be, co -operation from other 
line Ministries and State/UT Governments that are involved in 
eradication of ch ild labour may also be taken. The Committee 
further recommend the Ministry to incentivize the enterprises 
where child labour are not engaged by printing disclaimers on 
their products like "this MSME (name) does not engage child 
labour in any form". This will discourage other enterprises which 
are engaging child labour in a clandestine way. 
-do- 
135.  12.26 The Committee note that there are certain training centres 
under Khadi & Village Industries Commission (KVIC) and 
National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) for the benefit of 
rescued adolescent labour. For all these courses of General 
Engineering Sector and other relevant sectors these are set 
criteria like candidate qualification etc. As the rigid admission 
criteria would restrict the opportunities of vocational training for 
the rescued adolescent labours who have already missed their 
school education, the Committee exhort the Ministry to review 
their existing admission criteria and desire that the admission 
-do- 

546 
 
criteria for the rescued adolescent labours should be 
significantly relaxed on case to case basis so that they are also 
eligible for the number of courses and can also be benefitted by 
the courses run by the Ministry. As there are no specific courses 
designed so far for them , the Committee believe t hat in order to 
provide livelihood skills for their better future, the Ministry 
would explore the possibility to relax the admission criteria or 
create few courses specifically for them only. 
136.  12.27 The Committee are surprised to note that the Minist ry of MSME 
have not received any complaint on employment of child labour 
by any MSME in the past three years i.e. from 2019 till August, 
2022. As a consequence there was no MSME penalized by the 
Ministry of MSME till 29.08.2022. The Committee observe that 
the mandatory declaration regarding the non -employment of 
child labour on the Udyam Registration Portal was introduced 
from 01.07.2022. Before that there was no concrete measure to 
ascertain the presence of child labour in the registered MSMEs. 
The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to make concerted 
efforts to prepare an action plan to ascertain the presence of 
child labour in those MSMEs which had registered themselves 
on Udyam Registration Portal before 01.07.2022 as currently 
there is no informat ion on employment of child labour in these 
MSMEs with the Ministry. 
-do- 
137.  13.27 The Committee note that the State Government of Odisha have 
taken laudable initiatives under State Action Plan for proper and 
effective implementation of National Policy on Child Labour with 
the broad objective of eliminating child labour. These include 
issuing notification of Odisha State Child & Adolescent Labour 
Rules, 2018; issuing directions to the District Administration 
during Covid pandemic for taking appropriate action s for 
preventing child labour; notifying District Nodal Officers for 
coordinating activities under PENCIL (Platform for Effective 
Enforcement for No Child Labour) as instructed by Government 
of India; constitution of District Level Child and Adolescent 
Labour Rehabilitation Fund in all districts under the 
chairmanship of District Collectors; exclusive campaign in 
regular intervals for spreading awareness, etc. Following this 
State Action Plan 809 NCLP Special Schools in 24 districts of 
Odisha were set up till July 2014. In these 24 districts, 1,73,508 
students had been mainstreamed since inception. Since 2016 -
17, 111 Special Training Centres (STCs) were operational in 
Odisha which had enrolled 2882 rescued children. The 
Committee commend the State Government  to take these steps 
in the right direction and desire that a robust monitoring 
mechanism should be put in place to achieve proper 
coordination between all the agencies/Departments so that 
objectives may be achieved effectively in a planned manner. 
State 
Government 
of Odisha 
138.  13.28 The Committee find that the issue of prohibition and regulation 
of child labour requires proper coordination and conversion 
between different Departments of the State and the Central 
Government. The Committee believe that the purpose can only 
be solved whe n there is proper conversion mechanism set up 
which go down to the grass root level. Therefore, for proper 
coordination between the agencies, conversion at the Block level, 
Gram Panchayat level, Education Department as well as Labour 
and ESI Department is required to be set up at the earliest. The 
Committee recommend that at the Gram Panchayat level 
institutional mechanism for convergence to track “out of school” 
children, dropout children and children engaged as labourers 
-do- 

547 
 
should be devised with the help of  Panchayati Raj Institution 
(PRI) functionaries. For this purpose, Sarpanch and other 
members of the Gram Panchayat may be compulsorily trained 
on child labour with a module for specific interventions, in every 
PRI trainings conducted by the Institutes in each State/UT. If 
need be, cooperation from the Ministry of Rural Development 
may also be sought to accomplish this task. 
139.  13.29 The Committee are given to understand that the process of 
rescue and rehabilitation of children engaged in child labour is 
very cumbersome and includes several steps involving a number 
of agencies. One such step is identifying the accurate age of the 
rescued children with the help of medical team whether they are 
below 14 years or above 14 to 18 years of age. Further, 
counseling of the children also needs to be conducted 
imperatively so that they don’t go back to work and continue 
with school education. Thi s involves appointment of doctors/ 
psychiatrists/ psychologists and trained counselors at Primary 
Health Centres (PHCs) and Urban PHCs. The Committee find 
that there is no provision of appointment of such medical staff 
specific for this purpose. Therefore, they recommend that the 
Government should appoint medical staff including 
doctors/psychologists/ psychiatrists at least at Block/ 
Community Health Centre (CHC) level. The Committee desire 
that proper funds should be allocated for this purpose. 
-do- 
140.  13.30 The Committee find that in Odisha Self Help Group movement is 
very strong and these groups are capable of working at various 
fronts for social causes at village level. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the State Government should explore the possibility 
of engaging Self Help Groups/Civil Society Organisations at 
every Gram Panchayat level and declare them as nodal SHGs 
and train them to identify the children engaged in child labour 
practice by visiting each and every household and collecting 
data about children enrolled in schools and report back to Gram 
Sabha Committee/Gram Panchayat on a ‘Mission Mode’. These 
SHGs can be considered as social catalysts who can also play 
the role of whistle blowers on child labour. The Committee also 
exhort that proper awareness campaigns should be organized for 
the parents/mothers of the children up to 14 years of age for 
making them aware of hazards of child labour and not enrolling 
them in schools.  In this way parents will come to know about 
the benefits of education  for the future of child. The Committee 
believe that these social catalysts can also play a role in the 
urban or semi -urban areas with engagement of urban local 
bodies/civil society organizations. 
-do- 
141.  13.31 The Committee note that availability of Midday  Meals in the 
schools is one of the reasons for increase in enrollment of 
children in the school till Class VIII. The Midday Meal scheme of 
the Government, under the Ministry of Education, is a Centrally 
sponsored scheme under which cooked meals are provid ed to 
every child within the age group of 6 -14 years studying in class 
I-VIII who enrolls and attends the school with the aim of 
universalisation of primary education. Taking note of the fact 
that the adolescent labours who had been rescued and enrolled 
in the Schools have the possibility of going back to work 
specially within the age group of 14-18, the Committee are of the 
strong view that if the Scheme of Midday Meal is extended for 
upto the class X, it may certainly help in increasing and 
sustaining the enrollment and attendance in schools alongwith 
addressing hunger and mal -nutrition amongst the children of 
-do- 

548 
 
rural areas. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry 
of Education to work on taking a policy decision to extend the 
scheme of Midday Meal to  the students of class IX and X as a 
pilot project in aspiring districts and monitor for two years also. 
The Committee desire the Ministry of Education should work in 
tandem with the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of F ood & Public Distribution) to 
explore the possibility of serving meals of higher standards also. 
142.  13.32 The Committee find that in the last three years i.e. from 2020-21 
to 2022 -23, which were also Covid years, more than 100 
children were rescued from the field. Subsequently, more than 
1,73,000 children were mainstreamed into the regular schools 
which is one  of the main objectives of the National Policy on 
Child Labour apart from prevention, rescue and rehabilitation. 
The Committee appreciate these steps taken by the State 
Government of Odisha and believe that in order to ensure that 
the rescued children return to their parents and all of them are 
enrolled in schools, it is imperative that the National Policy on 
Child Labour is implemented effectively at the very grass root 
level of the civil society. For this purpose the Committee opine 
that the beneficiaries  may be asked to sign an undertaking 
before availing the benefits of the various schemes of the 
Government that their children have completed the required 
number of years during their primary school education and also 
that their child/children are not enga ged in child labour.  Those 
parents may be given favourable points while availing the 
benefits of scheme. 
-do- 
143.  13.33 The Committee observe that it is difficult to identify the correct 
age of the child when the child is rescued from its employer. 
When these children are referred to the doctors they can only 
come up with the age range i.e. between 12 -14 years or 12 -15 
years. In the absence of correct knowledge of the age of the 
child, it is very difficult to prosecute the employer in cases from 
where child labour has been rescued. In these cases where it is 
difficult to ascertain the age of the child/adolescent the penal 
amount of Rs. 20,000 is also left uncollected from the 
employers. In some cases, the fine amount is not realized even 
after few years which does not act as a penal measure, hence 
the employers do not deter to employ child labours in future. 
The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment to establish a concrete deterrence mechanism for 
employers of children which could be ‘spot penalty system’ or 
compounding of fine amount within 7 days at the level of 
District Collector for quick and maximum impact. The 
Committee also impress upon the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment to raise the penalty from Rs. 20,000 to Rs. 50,000 
for deterring the employers to employ child labours. 
-do- 
144.  13.34 The Committee find that the State Government of Odisha have 
taken a unique measure to deal with the Child 
Labour/Migration issues i.e. opening up of seasonal hostels. 
These hostels are meant for t he children whose parents and 
other family members migrate to other places in search of better 
livelihood. An exercise is taken up for mapping and 
identification of the migrant children with the help of Assistant 
Block Education Officer (ABEO), Cluster Res ource Centre 
Coordinator (CRCC), the School Management Committee, the 
PRI members and the district officials. These hostels are opened 
in the areas/pockets from where maximum migration takes 
place in the State. These hostels are managed by the NGOs and 
-do- 

549 
 
the local people and food and other support are provided to the 
hostel residents during their stay according to a provision under 
the Samagra Siksha. The Committee appreciate this step of the 
School and Mass Education Department, State Government of 
Odisha and recommend the Ministry of Education (Department 
of School Education and Literacy) to explore the possibility of 
setting up such seasonal hostels in other States from where 
migration occurs. 
145.  13.35 The Committee also note that in order to maintain the 
attendance of the rescued children in the schools, the Education 
Department of State Government of Odisha took up special 
drives at the village level and involved the school teachers in 
personally sending them to the houses of the drop -out children. 
With the sensitization of the parents and family members of 
these children the students were able to come back to school. 
This is a novel initiative, which in the opinion of the Committee 
needs to be replicated in other States. 
-do- 
146.  13.36 The Committee find that in Odisha, there are some 
villages/districts which have been declared as “Child Marriage 
Free” villages. The Government grant rewards to these villages 
which is a matter of pride for the villagers. The Committee desire 
that on the same lines District Administration should declare 
“Child Labour Free” villages/blocks and provide monetary 
reward to them.  This would act as an incentive for the village 
Sarpanch, Ward Members to keep the track of children i n 
school. 
-do- 
147.  13.37 The Committee note that the Government of Odisha have come 
up with a portal called PAReSHRAM. This portal is meant for 
licensing and functions for Labour Department’s regulatory 
activities. The Committee believe that this portal can be linked 
with the other portals of other Departments in the State and can 
be used as a tracking portal to track and register the children 
who are rescued and rehabilitated. As addressing child labour is 
a multi -stakeholder issue, an integrated real time I T Portal to 
cover the activities/responsibilities/deliverables of all converging 
Departments for concerted action will be helpful. The Committee 
observe that when the labour force migrate from one State to 
another their children also accompany them, the Committee find 
that the Inter -State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 which is in 
force for more than 40 years can be used to ensure separation of 
labour and child at the destination site i.e. other State/UT. It is 
a big challenge to ensure education for the children who migrate 
with their parents to other States, the Committee believe that for 
children upto 10 years of age the availability of text books and 
the medium of education should be the mother tongue of the 
child so as to ensure continuity of education. 
-do- 
148.  13.38 For the adolescents of the age 15 -18 years, the Committee 
recommend that placement linked skill development training 
should be provided and their placements should be effectively 
monitored by the concerned State Governments , the 
opportunities in Agriculture Sector are to be properly tapped to 
engage trained adolescents. 
-do- 
149.  13.39 The Committee note that State Government of Odisha have been 
undertaking exclusive campaigns in regular intervals in 
association with other stakeholders in the State for spreading 
awareness against child labour and promote child rights under 
their State Ac tion Plan. To achieve this purpose soft copies of 
leaflets, posters and wall paintings on elimination of child labour 
being circulated to District Administration for IEC activities. The 
-do- 

550 
 
Committee appreciate the State Government of Odisha for taking 
these steps for creating awareness amongst the common people 
in proper coordination with the District Administration, 
nevertheless the Committee desire that a stringent monitoring 
mechanism should be put in place to monitor conduct of these 
awareness programmes at village/block level and the families of 
the children between 8 -14 years specifically their mothers 
should be sensitized about the hazard of pushing child into 
labour and benefits of school education. 
150.  14.16 The Committee observe and appreciate that  the State 
Government has prepared a State Action Plan for the elimination 
of child labour and that District Task Forces (DTF) have been 
constituted in all the Districts with members from different 
Departments including Labour, Education, Women and Child 
Development, Police, Health and Local Government.   At the 
same time, the Committee feel that it is required to ensure that 
the DTFs meet at least every month to take stock of the 
situation with respect to child labour. Additionally, the State 
Government has  submitted that DTFs must also analyse and 
consider the recurrence of child labour with respect to the same 
child and should also emphasise on the rehabilitation part 
where lesser efforts are being made currently. The Committee 
want the State Government to  take urgent and specific 
measures to address these impediments that they have already 
identified in this connection and develop an effective mechanism 
to monitor the functioning of the DTF and ensure that regular 
meetings are held.  One of the important me asures would be to 
completely convert the data/information on the working of the 
DTFs to digital mode.   There should be a secure Web based 
platform accessible to all DTFs enabling the sharing of the 
data/information generated as part of the work of each DT F.  
Further, the Committee recommend that there should be a State 
level entity/agency, ideally headed by the Chief Secretary, to 
monitor and coordinate the implementation of the State Action 
Plan on Child Labour. There has to be compilation and analysis 
of all data related to child labour in the State to originate 
dependable and actionable information for the use of operational 
level agencies like the DTFs as well as for State Level policy 
makers. In the opinion of the Committee, the role of Local Self 
Government Institutions in generation of data on child labour, 
especially in the rural areas, should not be ignored. Such a 
mechanism would be pivotal to make the State Government 
effectively responsive to the varied and evolving issues relating 
to the fight against child labour. 
State 
Government 
of Punjab 
151.  14.17 Based on the data provided by the State Government about the 
raids conducted by the DTF and the raids conducted in the 
industrial belts of Amritsar, Ludhiana and Jalandhar, the 
Committee find that the fine(s) imposed by the Department is 
not commensurate w ith the number of violations detected and 
the number of prosecutions launched, and convictions made. 
The quantum of fine does not match with the stipulation that for 
every rescued child, Rs. 20,000/ - is to be recovered from the 
offending employer for rehabilitation of the child. The Committee 
thus desire that the State Government need to review this 
aspect as well as the functioning of the DTF and ensure that the 
amount of fine collected from the violators and deposited in the 
Child Labour rehabilitation and Welfare Fund is as per the legal 
provisions laid out. The Fund itself should be strictly monitored 
to ensure that the money deposited does not stagnate in the 
-do- 

551 
 
fund and is efficiently utilized for welfare of the rescued 
children. Further, in the opinion o f the Committee, 
rehabilitation of child labourers would hinge upon the 
knowledge and recognition of the financial/economic condition 
of the family of the child labourers. Hence, there has to be an 
institutional arrangement to keep track of this aspect als o as 
well as to handhold wherever required. 
152.  14.18 The Committee note that complaints regarding child labour can 
be lodged through PENCIL or PGRS portals or through a written 
complaint to the official concerned.  Whenever a complaint is 
received by a ny official concerned of the DTF, he/she intimates 
the other members of the DTF and a raid is planned accordingly 
as per the law. Moreover, other than receiving and acting on the 
complaints received, two child labour eradication weeks are also 
observed by the DTF every year so that complete attention of the 
Department is given to the task of eradication of child labour. 
The Committee are of the strong opinion that there is much 
more the DTF should do and it is recommended that apart from 
the raids conducted  based on complaints and during the child 
labour eradication week, the DTF shall also plan and undertake 
random raids every month. The frequency of the random raids 
should depend on the degree of prevalence of child labour in 
each District. For ascertaining this, credible data on child labour 
needs to be obtained and maintained.  Further, the Government 
should step up efforts to track and maintain record of employers 
who are repeat offenders in case of engagement of child labour 
and ensure their prosecution . Also, the Committee desire that 
the DTFs should also be mandated with tracking the children 
released from child labour as well as the progression of their 
rehabilitation. As already indicated by the State Government 
itself, it is imperative that the rele ased/rehabilitated children 
are tracked/ monitored for a period of at least two years to 
ensure that they do not relapse into child labour. In this context 
also the Committee would like to re -emphasis the criticality of 
maintaining updated data regarding a ll aspects of child labour 
so that endeavour towards eradication of child labour finds 
fruitful culmination. 
-do- 
153.  14.19 The Committee note that as per the submission of the State 
Government, rehabilitation and repatriation of the rescued 
children is done  according to the Punjab State Action Plan and 
the procedure of handing over the rescued Child Labour to their 
parents, shelter homes, or their repatriation to the parent State 
is followed by the District Child Protection Officer (Department 
of Women and Child Development). The Committee however note 
with concern the submission of the State Government that 
coordination with other States with respect to Child Labour 
where children have travelled from other States is lacking. The 
Committee therefore stress up on the need for creation of an 
entity of the State Government for coordination with other 
States especially for planning rehabilitation for migrant children. 
This will be crucial to the synchronization of efforts against child 
labour in the country since P unjab is considered as the 
destination of child labourers from many States. The Committee 
also desire in this direction that the State Government should 
realise the urgent need for an inter -State repatriation policy,  
particularly for children and women, wh ich could guide the 
proposed inter -State entity. Further, the Committee wants the 
State Government to draw up MoUs with such States from 
where substantial migrant population, which include child 
-do- 

552 
 
labourers also, arrives in Punjab . The MoUs could act as the 
base on which rehabilitation/mainstreaming could be built up. 
154.  15.14 The Committee recognise that the children in Jharkhand 
rescued from Child Labour are enrolled in the nearby 
Government Schools as per the provisions of Right to Education 
Act. They are provided with school uniforms, books, school kits, 
scholarship and Mid -Day Meal free of cost. In Jharkhand 
residential schools have been set up in almost all Districts for 
children from families affected from LWE activities and human 
trafficking, orphan/single parent children, run away children 
etc. These schools are from cla ss I-VIII and in 2022, the State 
has upgraded 20 schools up to class X for ensuring continuity of 
schooling of these children. The Committee are appreciative of 
these steps taken by the State Government but observe that 
there is still scope for improvement  in this area like optimising 
the proximity of residential facilities to the homes of children.  
Further, the Committee take note that the State government of 
Jharkhand are also  implementing Right to Education for all 
children including the children of trib al areas and provide 
children the entitlements provisioned in the RTE Act.  
The Committee would like to specifically mention that the State 
Government has also undertaken special initiatives to impart 
primary education in their mother tongue in the tribal areas to 
enhance the learning level at the primary grade, which is a very 
laudable initiative. Towards the accomplishment of effective 
sustenance of the efforts for rehabilitation and mainstreaming of 
the children rescued from child labour, trafficking, et c., the 
Committee recommend that the State Government should come 
out with more incentivising initiatives like special scholarships 
and graded/calibrated financial relief/assistance dovetailed with 
continuity of school attendance.  
 
State 
Government 
of Jharkhand 
155.  15.15 In the context of efforts to identify the Out of School Children in 
the State, the Committee note with appreciation that the State 
Department of School & Literacy has a regular feature of 
conducting surveys of these children. The Department have 
developed DAHAR (Digital Application for Holistic Action plan & 
Review) App for this purpose. As per the systematic surveys of 
Out of School Children including never enrolled and 
dropouts  conducted by the State Government before the Covid -
19 pandemic, the Committee find that very high percentage of 
such children identified were mainstreamed, 100% during 2018-
19, 96% during 2019-20 and 92 % in 2020 -21.  The Committee 
observe that there is a critical need to generate and maintain 
data in this regard and  want the State Government to ensure 
that the data generated through the DAHAR Application has 
high credibility and is also shared with other Government 
Departments engaged in action against Child Labour.  
-do- 
156.  15.16 The Committee are concerned to note that as per the submission 
of the State Government, during the period 2016 -2022, 599 
Child Labourers were rescued and 149 FIRs lodged against the 
offending employers. But, most of the cases are pending in the 
competent courts. The Committee observe that delay in trial and 
judgement in such cases makes the Child Labour (Prohibition & 
Regulation) Act ineffective in acting as a deterrent against the 
practice. The Committee therefore recommend that all the 
pending cases be pursued on a priority basis and suitabl e 
penalties and punishments as per law be sought to bring out the 
seriousness of the intent of the Government, both at the Central 
-do- 

553 
 
and State levels, towards eradication of Child Labour. The 
Committee also desire that these cases may be taken up in 
Special Courts.  
157.  15.17 The Committee would further like to point out that as submitted 
by the State Government, during the period 2016 to May 2022, 
706 FIRs were lodged against the people/agencies engaged in 
trafficking in which 1118 children were involved and a total of 
735 traffickers were arrested. Out of total FIRs lodged, charge 
sheets were filed in 346 cases, final reports were filed in 90 
cases whereas 270 cases are pending. In this context, the 
Committee would reaffirm their recommendation concerning the 
issue of pendency of child labour/trafficking cases and urge the 
State Government to take necessary steps with regard to the 
swift and effective prosecution under cases pertaining to Child 
Trafficking. The Committee observe that child trafficking and 
engagement of these children in labour are inalienably linked. 
Moreover, children trafficked under the promise of work are also 
susceptible to being further exploited in other worse forms 
including sexual exploitation and beggary.  
The Committee recommend that in addition to expediting and 
augmenting the prosecution timelines, the Government should 
also consider formulating a State specific Plan to deal with child 
trafficking involving all relevant Departments of the State.  An 
entity at the State level, sim ilar to the State Task Force created 
by the State Government of Bihar, may also be put in place  to 
coordinate the endeavours of the different Departments under 
the Plan as well as to constantly re -assess the requirements in 
the fight against Child Labour a ccording to the 
changing/emerging circumstances for Jharkhand.  
-do- 
158.  15.18 With regard to the employment of children in abandoned Mica 
mines especially by unlicensed middle men, the Committee 
observe upfront and with utmost concern, the contradiction 
between Media/NGO reports that indicate that illegal Mica 
mines are still operational in the State, and the submission of 
the State Government that engagement of child labourers in 
Mica mining areas have not been found ‘during the regular visit 
of Labour Supe rintendents of the District concerned’. The 
Committee recognise that since most of the illegal Mica mining 
operations reported in the media are small -scale operations 
limited to certain Districts and continue in abandoned mines, 
they might not have come un der scrutiny by the labour 
department. Most of the activities are now termed Mica 
scavenging, rather than Mica mining. Here, the Committee 
would like to mention the example of ‘Dhawa Dal’  or ‘Flying 
Squads’ formed by the Government of Bihar as an emulative  
idea. Such Squads may be able to find out  what couldn’t be 
found ‘during the regular visit of Labour Superintendents of the 
District concerned’ . Further in this regard, in the considered 
opinion of the Committee, a special project needs to be launched 
in the affected Districts through an initiative of the Government 
by involving the Local Self Government Institutions, the District 
machinery, the Police, Labour and Mines Departments along 
with the participation of community leaders and local 
NGOs/civil society organisations. Such specific project/initiative 
should have definite graded targets to be achieved within 
timeframes aimed at identification of hotspots, alleviating the 
impoverishment, immediate relief and sustained handholding of 
rescued children and their parents/family as well as enrolment 
in schools in order to eradicate the Child Labour from Mica 
-do- 

554 
 
mining/scavenging in the State of Jharkhand completely.  
159.  15.19 The Committee note that the State of Jharkhand is one of the 
more prone States to the incidence of Child Labour. To have a 
realistic assessment of the situation, generation of credible data 
on Child Labour would be a prerequisite. Accordingly, the 
Committee feel that the State Government should consider 
offering adequate and appropriate assistance to Urban and 
Rural Local Bodies, NGOs, Self Help Groups and other 
organisations of the Civil Society to help generate reliable data 
regarding the number of child labourers, the vulnerable 
geographical areas and socio -economic groups susceptible to it, 
work/projects/businesses that tend to employ child labour, etc.  
To begin with, the primary data about children has to be 
generated at the Village/Gram Panchayat level which would also 
be the ideal level to inter-alia identify the vulnerability of families 
and children due to various reasons, to child labour.  
Further, the Committee cognise that during the period of Covid -
19 lockdown, 4,96,202 migrant labourers returned  to their 
native places in Jharkhand from different States. The State 
Government has started a project called Safe and Responsible 
Migration (SRMI) with the help of NGO partners to conduct a 
detailed study about the migrant labourers in the state of Kerala 
and the Union Territory of Ladakh. In this regard, the 
Committee recommended that the State Government should 
consider establishing an office of coordination at New Delhi and 
offices in different States where migrant workers from 
Jharkhand are significant  in number to handhold the migrant 
labourers including child labourers. Further, the Committee 
desire that the State Government should consider entering into 
MoUs with other States where children/migrant population from 
Jharkhand are present in substantial  numbers.  These 
documents should delineate the mutually agreed upon 
measures to release and rehabilitate inter -State child labourers 
and can as such hasten the processes involved. 
-do- 
160.  16.24 The Committee are pleased to note that various programmes/ 
initiatives are being taken by the Government of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) in order to search, identify, 
rescue, rehabilitation and restoration of child/adolescent labour 
in Delhi. The Committee are impressed to note that even though 
Delhi Police is not directly under the Delhi Administration, still 
there is a very good coordination and cooperation between the 
Administration and Police Department in NCT of Delhi. For 
better implementation of Child & Adolescent Labour (Prohibition 
and Regulation) Act, 1986, Delhi Government has constituted 
District Task Force (DTF) specially for rescuing the child labour 
from their employers. It consists of Joint Labour 
Commissioner/Deputy Labour Com missioner as the Member 
Secretary. Other Members are from Department of Women and 
Child Development, Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD), 
Department of Education, Department of Health, Child Welfare 
Committee (CWC), New Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC),  
Delhi Police, Department of Labour and NGOs etc. This Task 
Force convenes its meeting on monthly basis under the 
chairmanship of the District Magistrate to review the action 
taken by the Stakeholders based on the information received 
from the Civic Societ y, NGO, Print Media, any citizen and other 
sources for eliminating the Child Labour from all the sectors 
where it is prohibited. The Committee find that from 2017 to 
2021, 197 rescue operations have been undertaken and total 
Government 
of NCT of 
Delhi 

555 
 
2,743 children/adolescent labou r were rescued by the Task 
Force. Taking into cognizance multi -level efforts by various 
Governmental and Non -Governmental agencies, the Committee 
are not satisfied with the total number of the rescued 
children/adolescent labour during the said period of fi ve years. 
As Delhi is the centre point where workers from surrounding 
States such as Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, West Bengal, etc. migrate to Delhi for better 
employment and livelihood opportunities with their children and 
there are a considerable number of children can be found as 
child labour which are out of school also. The Committee, 
therefore, advise the GNCTD to ascertain the gaps in their 
implementation and improvise it. The Committee recommend 
that the task force under the Chai rmanship of District 
Magistrate should act as a fulcrum in this endeavour and 
effectively guide and monitor the coordination and cooperation 
activities between the different State Departments and Police for 
better implementation of this Act. For this a Sta te Action Plan 
can be chalked out in consultation with all the concerned 
Departments of the UT. 
161.  16.25 The Committee note that the number of child labour in Delhi 
has gone down from 2001 Census to 2011 Census by 38 
percent. The reason for this lowering down of child labour cases 
is attributed to shifting of a large number of industries outside 
Delhi on the intervention of the Supreme Court. As a large 
chunk of child labour primarily works in unauthorized 
industries in various par ts of Delhi, the shifting of industries is 
the main reason behind lowering down of the cases of child 
labour in Delhi. The Committee are disappointed to find that the 
child labour has really not gone down but as a result of shifting 
of a large number industries outside Delhi their figure has come 
down by 38 percent. The Committee, therefore, recommend to 
chalk out a robust mechanism to ascertain the actual number of 
children employed illegally in these industries which should 
include those industries also w hich have shifted outside Delhi 
NCR. 
-do- 
162.  16.26 Under the rehabilitation measures carried out by the GNCTD a 
sum of Rs. 20,000 is required to be deposited by the defaulting 
employer in accordance with Hon’ble Supreme Court judgment 
in MC Mehta Vs. State of Tamil Nadu Case which was way back 
in 1996. The Committee observe that more than 25 years have 
passed since this judgment and the penal amount remains the 
same. The Committee, therefore, recommend the GNCTD to 
explore the possibility to revise the rates of this penal amount in 
consultation with the Ministry of Labour & Employment and 
raise it to such a level in proportion with the current Consumer 
Price Index (CPI) where it could be considered as a constraint. 
-do- 
163.  16.27 The Committee find that during the process of rescue and 
rehabilitation of child labour, the gap between the process of 
rescue and rehabilitation of the child labour in some cases, is 
upto the extent that the child returns to the same condition 
from where he was rescued. The  process of  prosecution which 
involves registration of the cases, charge sheeting and 
imposition of fine on the defaulting employers takes long time 
during which the child/adolescent has to wait and suffer. The 
Committee are of the considered opinion that the cases w hich 
involve child/adolescent labour should be transferred to Fast 
Track Courts so that the judgment can be expedited and the 
rehabilitation of the child/ adolescent takes place without much 
-do- 

556 
 
delay. The Committee further desire that a time limit should be 
fixed for prosecution of child labour cases so the child does not 
have to wait for his compensation money and his further 
rehabilitation process. The Committee also advise the GNCTD to 
explore the possibility of setting up of ‘Child Help Desk’ in Police 
Stations in Delhi on lines of ‘Women Help Desk’ which are 
already existing in the Police Stations. 
164.  16.28 The Committee find that there are a considerable number of 
Placement Agencies in NCR Delhi which are responsible for 
bringing children/adolescents from the States of Bihar, 
Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and the North Eastern 
States who are in search of employment opportunities and 
better life. These children are neither registered in their Home 
States from where they come nor they are registe red with any 
Government platform/Agency after reaching NCT of Delhi. These 
children often go unnoticed by the Government agencies 
involved in identification and rescue of child labour. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the GNCTD to formulate proper 
guidelines for the procedural requirements of these Placement 
Agencies. Proper registration of these placement agencies with 
the Government should be made imperative. Proper coordination 
with the State Governments should be made from where 
workers are brought in ord er to register them with their home 
State Governments as well with the destination States. Penal 
provisions should also be there in the guidelines where Child & 
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 is not 
followed. 
-do- 
165.  16.29 The Committee note that once the child is restored with his 
parents and leaves the home State with his parents, there is a 
possibility of his return to the destination State within a year or 
two with his parents in search of better employment 
opportunities. The Committee, therefore, urge the GNCTD to put 
in place robust coordination and conversion mechanism with 
the other State Governments from where the migration of 
workers originate. The Committee suggest that a blockchain 
system on a digital platform should be developed to bring all the 
stakeholders into that blockchain so that all the agencies 
concerned whether within Delhi or outside, can update their 
inputs on a periodic basis . There should be a nodal officer 
appointed by the State Government to head a nd monitor this 
digital platform. This would enable all the Stakeholders to know 
the position of the child at the identification level as well as 
rescue/ rehabilitation level. 
-do- 
166.  16.30 The Committee note that Rs. 20,000 have to be paid by the 
employer who is illegitimately engaging children/adolescent in 
child labour. The Committee appreciate the effort of the Delhi 
Government for taking meaningful steps for the rehabilitation of 
the rescued children. In addition to these Rs. 20,000 a sum of 
Rs. 2,000 is provided to the rescued child per month if the child 
is rehabilitated in Delhi NCR. If the child returns to his home 
State then a sum of Rs. 5,000 in addition to Rs. 20,000 is 
provided to the child. This is a unique feature and the 
Committee commend this  initiative of the GNCTD for better 
rehabilitation opportunities of the rescued child. The Committee 
are of the considered opinion that such initiative of extra 
compensation amount can be considered by other States also as 
an effective mechanism to bring a child into the mainstream. 
-do- 
167.  17.11 The Committee acclaim the fact that apart from the District 
Task Force (DTF) being  constituted under the chairmanship of 
State 
Government 

557 
 
the District Collector in all 52 Districts of the State, the Labour 
Commissioner appoints a La bour Inspector in each of the 
Districts as Nodal Officer to implement the decisions of the DTF. 
Moreover, a Nodal Officer has been appointed at the State level 
for coordination with the Districts. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that the District Nodal Officers can effectively 
coordinate with local stakeholders, identify and address child 
labour hotspots, and ensure that enforcement actions are 
carried out efficiently. The stakeholders should inter-alia include 
the Local Self Government Institutions, NGOs and other 
similarly placed civil society organisations who operate at the 
cutting edge level. The Committee consider the role of District 
Nodal Officers to be crucial in the effectiveness of the fight 
against child labour. They are that part of the State machinery 
which could project the grass root level reality before the 
decision/policy makers at the District/State level to aid them in 
calibrating the policy initiatives/directives accordingly. In view of 
this, the Committee want the State Government to equip the 
Nodal Officers at the District Level with enough resources to 
carry out such responsibilities.  The Committee expect that the 
District Nodal Officers would also invariably act as the agency to 
provide credible primary data and other feedback to the DTF. 
While coordinating the work of the District Nodal Officers, the 
Committee perceive that the State level Nodal Officer can 
facilitate the exchange of the best practices, identify emerging 
trends, an d ensure that resources are allocated optimally to 
address child labour issues across the State. 
of Madhya 
Pradesh 
168.  17.12 In this regard the Committee reckon that regular/periodic 
meetings of the District Task Force is necessary to ensure  that 
the stakeholders have a forum to discuss and coordinate 
strategies for preventing, rehabilitating, and enforcing child 
labour laws. Moreover, the action by the District Nodal Officers 
also hinge upon the directives of the DTF. It is also important to  
conduct periodic evaluation/review of the DTF mechanism and 
Nodal Officers’ roles to assess their effectiveness and identify 
areas in need of improvement. For this, aggregation of data 
regarding all aspects of child labour in digital format in a web 
based platform enabling sharing of actionable data between all 
stakeholders is a precursor.  Accordingly, the Committee 
recommend that the State Government should consider 
enhancing use of technology including ICT in the working of the 
DTFs and Nodal Officers  to augment data collection, analysis 
and monitoring. To further supplement the data assemblage, the 
Committee desire that surveys of the kind undertaken to identify 
Out of School Children in the State be conducted to identify 
child labourers.   The Committee  want the State Government to 
take specific steps in this direction on priority so as to sustain 
and amplify the current efforts . 
-do- 
169.  17.13 The Committee note that a Child Labour Cell has been 
constituted in the Madhya Pradesh Labour Commissioner's 
office and the action taken by the District Labour Officers is 
being regularly monitored by the Child Labour Cell and by 
Principal Secretary at Government level. The Committee praise 
the step of creating a Child Labour Cell and expect that it will 
enable centralized monitoring of the action taken by the District 
Labour Officers and help to ensure that all Districts are taking 
effective and regular action to eradicate child labour, and that 
enforcement efforts are not limited to sporadic drives during 
special occasions. The involvement of the Principal Secretary at 
-do- 

558 
 
the State Government level should ensure the accountability 
and effectiveness of the Child Labour Cell as the said 
supervision would enable expedited work negating the red tape.  
The Committee suggest  that the Cell may be further 
strengthened by optimising the number of officials and also by 
providing more funds and the status of State Level Coordination 
agency for convergence of the action of all Departments of the 
State in addition to the DTFs and No dal Officers engaged in the 
action to eradicate Child Labour.  The Cell's staff should be 
provided with regular training on the Child and Adolescent 
Labour Act, on the latest trends and practices in child labour 
eradication, data analysis and interpretation, etc and in all other 
necessary fields. There also has to be dedicated technical 
support for the Cell. 
170.  17.14 The Committee note that the number of inspections being 
carried out has drastically fallen from 2393 in 2019-20 to 505 in 
2022-23. The Stat e Government has not provided any reasons 
for the same but perhaps the decline was on account of the 
restrictions imposed during the Covid pandemic. Even so, the 
small number of inspection in 2022 -23 are a cause for concern. 
In the opinion of the Committee , increased  and periodic 
inspections are necessary to convey the intent of the 
Government to employers that child labour will not be tolerated. 
The Committee urge the State Government to identify tangible 
reasons for this decline in inspections so that the steps can be 
taken to address the same. The Committee, being particularly 
concerned about the relatively smaller number of inspections 
carried out in 2022 -23, want the State Government to take 
immediate steps to increase the number of inspections and to 
ensure that the Act is effectively enforced.  The Principal 
Secretary looking after the Child Labour Cell should ensure 
compliance in this regard and ensure that status report on this 
regard is timely received. 
-do- 
171.  17.15 The Committee find that the State Government has prepared a 
State Action Plan for eradication and rehabilitation of Child 
Labour. In this regard the Committee suggest that the St ate 
Government should also develop a comprehensive Child 
Protection policy.  A comprehensive child protection policy 
should provide a guiding framework for all institutions and 
officials who work with children to prevent and respond to child 
abuse, trafficking, exploitation, and neglect.  The policy should 
include clear definitions of child abuse, exploitation, and 
neglect, as well as procedures for reporting and investigating 
allegations of child abuse. It should also outline the roles and 
responsibilities o f different stakeholders such as Local Self 
Government Institutions, schools, hostels, ashram schools, 
CCIs, SJPUs, and NGO -run homes, etc in protecting children. 
The policy should mandate regular training for all functionaries 
who deal with children direc tly. It should envisage and promote 
awareness-raising campaigns among children and the 
community to prevent child abuse and encourage reporting 
through appropriate incentives/rewards and other similar 
means. Moreover, the policy should establish mechanisms  for 
monitoring its implementation and evaluating its effectiveness. 
-do- 
172.  17.16 The Committee cognise from the submission of the State 
Government that they propose to introduce a Comprehensive 
Action Plan which aims to rescue, rehabilitate or handover of 
children afflicted by child labour and child trafficking as well as 
to prosecute the offenders. The Action Plan also intends to have 
-do- 

559 
 
intra and inter Sta te coordination of the Departments 
concerned. The objectives under the Plan include empowerment 
of the families of affected children to prevent relapse of child 
labour, enrollment of children in school, skill training 
programmes along with employment/entre preneurship for 
empowerment of rescued adolescents and reduction of 
insecurity of the families through National Rural Livelihood 
Mission and other social security and schemes.  The 
Comprehensive Action Plan is to be introduced in 16 Districts of 
the State and would be considered for other Districts later. The 
target under the Plan is to rehabilitate 15,000 child labourers 
1000 bonded labourers by July, 2025. The Committee are 
pleased to note that, through the said Action Plan, the State 
Government has inter-alia realized the pressing need for inter -
State coordination to effectively stamp out child labour from the 
country. In this connection, the Committee desire that the State 
Government should consider entering into MoUs with other 
States where children/migrant population from Madhya Pradesh 
are present in substantial numbers .  Mutually agreed 
parameters can be drawn up to facilitate and quicken the 
release and rehabilitation of trafficked children and those 
compelled into child labour. Further, the Committee also note 
that the proposed Comprehensive Action Plan recognises the 
need to address the root causes of child labour like 
impoverishment of the family. The committee observe that this is 
the right line of thought as without the family of the child 
labourer being provided a sustainable livelihood and the 
rehabilitated children/adolescents being offered a path to secure 
future, child labour cannot be ended. Here, the Committee feel 
that it would be equally important that adolescents above 15 
years of age, who could not be covered under SSA, are also 
assisted through the Action Plan by imparting them with the 
requisite skill sets and vocational faculties so that the 
rehabilitation efforts are sustained to the last stretch of 
handholding. The Committee hence recommend that the State 
Government should implement the Comprehensive Action Plan 
keeping all this in its ambit and on the basis of its initial 
results/feedback, continuously improve and tailor the same 
according to the emerging needs of the St ate. Here, the 
Committee feel that it would be important that adolescents 
above 15 years of age are also assisted through imparting them 
with the requisite skill sets and vocational faculties so that the 
rehabilitation efforts are sustained to the last str etch of 
handholding. 
173.  18.15 The Committee note and appreciate that the Commissionerate of 
Labour, Assam under the Labour Welfare Department has 
released an amount of Rs. 2 lakh to all District Magistrates of 
Assam for creation of a Child Labour Rehab ilitation Fund and 
that all the Districts have created the same at their level. In the 
view of the Committee, such support would enable the districts 
to supplement existing schemes, expand rehabilitation 
programmes and strengthen enforcement mechanisms to 
combat child labour more effectively. The Committee desire that 
the Labour Welfare Department should devise a mechanism for 
the timely monitoring and periodic review of the expenditure 
from the fund to ensure the effective utilization of the fund. 
Feedback must also be sought from the District magistrates in 
the near future to ascertain whether Rs. 2 Lakh is sufficient for 
the purpose rehabilitation of the children and if found 
State 
Government 
of Assam 

560 
 
necessary, a proposal for upward revision may be favourably 
considered so that n o effort on the part of the DM with respect 
to rehabilitation of children is derailed due to paucity of funds. 
174.  18.16 The Committee observe that, with regard to the education of 
tribal children, during the two rounds of ‘gunotsav ’, which is a 
method for assessment of schools, one of the problems faced by 
them is the language of instruction in the tribal schools. As per 
the Ministry, the tribal languages are not developed enough for 
teaching of complex concepts as a result. Further , many of the 
tribal schools do not have the main State language used at these 
schools due to which, when students move to instruction in the 
English language in higher classes, they face difficulty in 
understanding leading to a negative impact on their le arning 
outcomes. Recognizing the important role played by the 
language used in classrooms in influencing the learning 
outcomes of children, particularly at the elementary level, the 
Committee emphasize the use of mother tongue as medium of 
instruction as much as possible in line with the RTE Act. At the 
same time, the Committee also take cognizance of the challenges 
reported by the State Government to focus on a Multilingual 
Education Programme under which State languages, including 
English, are introduced at early stages to mainstream the tribal 
children in state -wide education system. The Committee thus 
recommend that equal emphasis is required on the development 
of suitable curriculum, texts and capacity enhancement of 
teachers to ensure that retention of children in schools and that 
they are duly equipped to pursue higher education. 
-do- 
175.  18.17 The Committee observe that there has been a discrepancy in the 
number of teachers viz a viz students in several schools across 
the State. The Committee find that the State Government has 
undertaken an exercise to rationalize the number of teachers at 
the earliest in various schools so as to ensure an adequate 
teacher-student ratio . In the considered opinion of the 
Committee, an inadequate teacher student ratio lead s to 
overburdening of a small group of teachers and also adversely 
impacts the quality of education imparted. The Committee urge 
the State Government to expedite the exercise and ensure that 
there are sufficient number of teachers in every School in the 
State particularly in tribal areas. 
-do- 
176.  18.18 The views of the Committee are aligned with the submission of 
the State Government with regard to the fact that rescued 
children who are rehabilitated in family surroundings are much 
better off and their chances of relapsing as child labour are 
lower than those children who stay at Child Care Institutions 
(CCIs).The State Government submitted that during April 2021 
to March 2022, as per the figures furnished by the State Child 
Protection Society, about 437  children were rescued, out of 
which 424 children were restored to their families and only 13 
were referred to Child Care Institutions (CCIs) after the Child 
Welfare Committee (CWC) gave their views. The Committee find 
that despite most of the children hav ing been restored to their 
familiesobserve that CCIs continue to remain the primary choice 
for most children without parental care or orphans. The 
Committee affirm that a family environment, one where children 
experience love, happiness and understanding is  essential for 
their harmonious development and are pleased to note that CCIs 
are only being used a ‘a measure of last resort’ after due 
consideration by Child Welfare Committees. The shift towards 
de-institutionalisation is a step in the right direction a nd aligns 
-do- 

561 
 
with the mandate of the alternative family based Child care. 
 Further, the Committee find that childcare institutions in 
India cater for children up to 18 years old and the sudden 
withdrawal of support at 18 years leaves these young people, 
face heightened challenges and at times, adverse outcomes on 
leaving CCIs. The Committee are of the view that since present 
Aftercare services are insufficient, most of them are ill -prepared 
for transition from CCIs to independent living, and thus again 
fall in to the vicious cycle of vulnerability, homelessness, 
unemployment, poverty and exploitation.  Thus, there is a need 
to explore initiatives for alternative care and transition gradually 
towards achieving a safe and nurturing family environment for 
children in vulnerable situations. 
 
177.  18.19 The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Department of 
School Education which as per the submission of the State 
Government conducts survey every year and enroll the children 
who dropped out of school in a school nearest to their habitation 
so as to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education. In the 
aftermath of Covid -19, it is likely that number of out of school 
children has significantly increased owing to the economic woes 
brought about by the pandemic. In this regard, the Committee is 
pleased to note the steps taken by the State Government 
whereby education was imparted to drop -outs through 
residential bridge course in order to make them fit for admission 
in a class they deserve. Commending the steps taken by the 
State Government, the Committee further urge the State to take 
necessary steps to ensure the survey to ascertain drop -outs be 
taken up periodically so that commensurate steps can be taken 
for their rehabilitation and mainstream them under the ambit of 
education. At the same time, the  adolescents who are rescued 
should be linked to a skill development programme run by the 
Government for economically empowering them. 
-do- 
178.  18.20 The Committee are pleased to find that as per the submission of 
the State Government, the enrolment figures in schools 
especially in junior classes are high owing to successful 
intervention in the form of mid -may meals that is augmenting 
attendance of children and bringing out of school children back 
to school thereby enabling higher retention in schools. The 
Committee were given to understand that mid -day Meal scheme 
has reduced the burden of the parents for providing one time 
meal to their children and is great support to the families 
especially those from low socio -economic status. In view of its 
tangible bene fits, the Committee urge upon the State 
Government to conduct continuous inspections and periodically 
review the mid -may meal programme since the effective 
management of any programme depends on the its monitoring 
mechanism. Further, in the view of the Com mittee, the State 
Government may consider providing breakfast also in order to 
attract more children into the fold of education especially in 
areas of high incidence of child labour and to incentivize the 
children who have dropped out of school. The Committee further 
reckon that the mid -day meal scheme, typically covers Children 
between the age group 6 -14. In this regard, the Committee feel 
that inclusion of students of classes IX and X  will incentivize 
the children who are out of school and desire that ne cessary 
steps be taken towards extending the benefits of the scheme.  
The Committee wish to be apprised of developments in this 
regard. 
-do- 

562 
 
179.  18.21 The Committee are concerned to note that two major hotspots 
have emerged where incidence of child labour and  child 
trafficking is prevalent. As per the submission of the State 
Government, two regions viz, immigrants area who had come 
from Bengal and Bangladesh where children are employed in 
fields among others while the other hotspot concerns the tribal 
areas of  Assam where vulnerable children are lured into 
trafficking. The Committee affirm that child trafficking and 
engagement of these Children in labour are invariably linked. 
Moreover, children trafficked under the promise of work are 
vulnerable to being furth er exploited in other worse forms 
including sexual exploitation and beggary. The Committee urge 
the State Government to consider formulating a State specific 
plan to deal with Child trafficking integrating all concerned 
Departments of the State. Further, t he Committee stress the 
need for the State Government to institute a specialized task 
force for this endeavour in order to coordinate the efforts of all 
departments under the Plan as well as periodically review the 
framework in the wake of combating Child labour. The 
Committee also desire that anti -human trafficking units be set 
up in all districts in line with decision of Ministry of Home 
Affairs and made functional at the earliest in order to check 
incidence of human trafficking especially child trafficki ng. The 
Committee feel special attention need to be paid in districts 
situated in these hotspots viz, Inter -State border with West 
Bengal and the International border with Bangladesh where the 
incidence of child trafficking and child labour is maximum. 
Since, poverty and illiteracy are the root causes for child labour, 
it is incumbent on the State Government to take proactive 
interventionist steps to supplement Educational Rehabilitation 
of the children with economic rehabilitation of their families 
especially in the tribal areas of Assam to offset the economic 
compulsions of engaging children in labour. In so far as issues 
related to repatriation of children who are victims of 
international cross border trafficking is concerned, the 
Committee are of the view that a mechanism be devised with the 
Central Government to put in place for smooth repatriation of 
such children. 
-do- 
180.  19.8 The Committee welcome the efforts of the State Government to 
create awareness about the need for prevention of child labour. 
Further, the State Government, realising that it was a big task 
for the Labour Department alone to identify and rescuethechild 
labourers from the employers and to rehabilitate such children, 
has constituted Task Forces in every District of the State. The 
Committee note that the Task Force converges the anti -child 
labour actions of all t h e  Departments concerned like Police, 
Women and Child Welfare, Labour , Education, Public 
Health, Revenue as well as NGOs.  As a result, since 
2016, a total of 1439 raids were  conducted and 1052 child 
labourers were rescued.  During these operations, 398 FIR's 
were lodged against the defaulted employers. In the opinion  of 
the Committee, while the formation of a multi -departmental 
Task Force and its district -level implementation  are positive 
steps, the data presented about inspections and number of 
rescued labourers suggests that more needs to be done to 
identify and rescue child labourers. The Committee find in this 
regard that frequency of the awareness campaigns and the 
meetings of the Task Force is far from the desired measure. The 
awareness push is not supposed to be an affair happening on 
State 
Government 
of 
Maharashtra 

563 
 
special occasions like Children’s Day and Labour Day, it has to 
be a continuous and persistent affair. Further, the Committee 
perceive the current periodicity of only monthly meetings of the 
Task Force, awfully inadequate. The Committee are of the firm 
opinion that the Task Force should also comprise of a 
component like a flying squad, to effect random raids to detect 
and expose deviant emplo yers and to unfetter the incarcerated 
children. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that the State 
Government should immediately ramp up the activities of the 
Task Force to augment their ambit and make them the cutting 
edge of the action of the State against child labour. It is strongly 
felt that the awareness campaigns also need to be a more prolific 
affair.  Child labour is a multifarious social evil that needs to be 
tackled commensurately. The Committee want the State 
Government to take all steps required to tackle it effectively.  
Further, the State Government should analyse the data 
pertaining to the raids and identify the measure needed to 
increase effectiveness of raids and penal action . Steps should 
also be taken to target specific sectors with high child labour 
prevalence for increased inspections and surveillance. 
Technology solutions such as data management platforms and 
mobile apps can be implemented to enhance communication, 
coordination, and data analysis among the Task Force of 
districts. The Government can also consider establishing an 
independent oversight committee composed of experts 
possessing various expertise , including child rights activists, 
legal professionals, and repre sentatives of civil society 
organizations, to monitor the Task Force's activities and provide 
recommendations for improvement. 
181.  19.9 The Committee note that the Education Department of the State 
Government is taking proacti ve measures to ensure complete 
enrolment of children in the schooling system as a way to 
counter child labour. In this regard, volunteer workers called 
‘Bal Rakshaks’ have been appointed. Starting in 2017, 2600 Bal 
Rakshaks have been appointed. According t o the State 
Government, at the start of the initiative in 2017, the number of 
out of school children reported was 44,698 which has now come 
down to 9306. The Committee appreciate and congratulate the 
State Government for this achievement and feel that ever y child 
in school is one less on the streets.  Thus, appointing 2600 "Bal 
Rakshak" volunteers shows the commitment to community 
engagement and tackling the issue at the grassroots level. The 
initiative of the State Government can be strengthened by 
providing Bal Rakshaks additional resources in terms of 
financial incentives, awards, and recognition programs to 
acknowledge their contributions and motivate them.  Bal 
Rakshaks should also be trained and encouraged to gather 
comprehensive and dependable data rega rding out of school 
children that will help the Government improve their strategy 
against child labour . Other employees of the State Government 
than teachers can also be tasked with the important profile of 
being Bal Rakshaks . The State Government should f urther 
encourage collaboration with community leaders and local 
authorities to enhance community awareness, address local 
challenges, and build trust and support for the Bal Rakshaks 
program. The committee ae of the firm opinion that the possible 
role of t he Local Self Government Institutions cannot be 
discounted here. The success of the Bal Rakshak   initiative 
shows that involving the community through volunteer 
-do- 

564 
 
programs like the Bal Rakshaks  increases the programme's 
reach and effectiveness. The Committee feel that this initiative 
can be replicated in other States but needs careful consideration 
of the specific cultural, socio-economic conditions of the State to 
tailor the program to address local needs and challenges.  
 
182.  19.10 The Committee find that Maharashtra is the State with the 
largest population residing in the urban areas.   In this regard, 
according to the State Government, the biggest problem with 
respect to child labour that the authorities face is the case of 
abandoned children. These children end up working on the 
streets, on railway stations and in small shops. The Committee 
are relieved to note that the Government has run a pilot Project 
in partnership with Tata Institute of Social Sciences and BMC 
(Brihanmumbai Mun icipal Corporation (BMC)  for identification 
and mainstreaming of these children in schools. Moreover, in 
order to address the issue of urban child labour, BMC has also 
opened 16 night shelters exclusively for children. In the 
considered opinion of the Comm ittee, Child labour in urban 
areas is a complex challenge that requires a multipronged 
approach to address its root causes and protect children from 
exploitation. The Committee reckon that there is an emergent 
need to review and analyse the effectiveness o f the projects to 
identify and mainstream abandoned children and address any 
shortcomings. The State Government should replicate such 
initiatives in other Municipal Corporations of the 
State. Moreover, in mega cities like Mumbai, slums present a 
staunch ch allenge in tackling child labour because they have 
numerous informal and unregulated/illegal workplaces, such as 
small workshops, street vendors. These workplaces often escape 
the oversight of the authorities and are thus more prone to 
employing children d ue to weak superintendence and 
enforcement. The Committee want the State Government to 
immediately enhance child protection services specifically in 
these areas.  Community engagement in such areas is also 
crucial for prevention of child labour with an effe ctive system to 
secure information about delinquent employers. It’s critical to 
ensure the confidentiality of the informants as well as to reward 
them.  The success of such projects can be communicated to 
MoLE so that they can be adequately replicated in ot her cities 
across the country with adaptations required as per the local 
settings. 
-do- 
183.  19.11 The Committee appreciate that the State Government is 
promoting various educational and monetary welfare schemes so 
that the parents working in the construction field send their 
children to school. Efforts are being taken with the vision of 
preventing the children from engaging in labour with the parents 
at the construction fields/ brick -kilns. The State Government 
has also made it mandatory that every Police Station should 
form a Juvenile Aid Police Unit for the rescue and repatriation of 
children in stree t situations and those   working in vulnerable 
conditions. A lot of sensitisation of the Police personnel may also 
be needed in this connection. The Committee urge the State 
Government to take measures to ensure that these Juvenile Aid 
Police Units are well -trained and sensitised for tackling child 
labour and protecting vulnerable children . The Community 
should be informed about the functioning of these Units. Raising 
awareness about Juvenile Aid Police Units (JAPUs) is crucial for 
promoting their effectiven ess and encouraging community 
-do- 

565 
 
participation in combating child labour. As regards children 
working with their parents in construction sites and brick kilns, 
the Committee recommend that employers should be held 
accountable for violating child labour laws, including imposing 
stricter penalties and revoking business licenses. 
184.  19.12 The Committee further observe that the large urban 
infrastructure in Maharashtra creates a situation where there 
are a large number of migrant labourers from different parts  of 
the country particularly from states such as Bihar, Jharkhand 
and West Bengal. Migrant families face challenges with living 
arrangements such that most families live in informal 
settlements where children may be left unsupervised, making 
them more vulnerable to exploitation and child labour. Children 
from migrant families are particularly vulnerable to exploitation 
and child labour because of various factors including poverty 
and lack of education. The Committee firmly recommend that 
the State Government should establish coordination mechanism 
between various Government departments, including Labour, 
Housing, Education, Healthcare, and Social Welfare, to ensure 
comprehensive support for migrant families.The State 
Government should also consider signing M emoranda of 
Understanding (MoUs) with the State Governments from where 
the largest number of migrants originate with the aim to share 
data about the movement and location of these migrant workers. 
MoUs can facilitate joint enforcement efforts to combat chi ld 
labour and exploitation of migrant workers. The MoUs should 
focus on sharing of   information on the rescue of child 
labourers, their origin, and family details and facilitating the 
safe and swift repatriation of child labourers to their families or 
appropriate care institutions. Provisions must also be made for 
providing support to the families of repatriated child labourers 
for their reintegration and rehabilitation alongwith clear 
demarcation of the roles to be essayed by the respective State 
machineries. 
-do- 
185.  20.6 The Committee note that in Rajasthan, children from other 
States are mainly trafficked from the States of Bihar, 
Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Odisha. According 
to the Human Trafficking Cell of the State Government, these 
children are mostly fo und engaged as labour in Dhabas, Small 
Workshops, Auto Repair Shops and also in hazardous settings 
such as brick kilns which puts their health and safety at great 
risk. According to the State Government, these children when 
rescued are released in coordina tion with the Child Protection 
Committee of the District concerned and handed over to the 
family. In this regard a letter has  been written from the Chief 
Secretary, Rajasthan Government to the Chief Secretaries of the 
State Governments concerned. Since chi ldren from far away 
States are more likely to come by train, the Railways officials 
have been sensitized in this regard. The Committee appreciate 
the work of the State Government towards establishing 
coordination mechanisms with other State Governments and  
stress that Inter -State coordination is crucial for effectively 
combating trafficking and ensuring the safe return of children to 
their families. The State Government should organise regular 
meetings and workshops between officials from different States 
to share the best practices and update information on trafficking 
routes and hotspots. There is also a need to foster 
collabouration between State Governments and NGOs working 
on child protection to leverage their expertise and resources. In 
State 
Government 
of Rajasthan 

566 
 
this regard, the Committee are of the considered opinion that an 
MoU between the Rajasthan Government and other States can 
help establish an institutional mechanism for addressing the 
issue of child trafficking and child labour.  The MoU can clearly 
define the responsibilities of each State Government in terms of 
their rescue and post rescue roles. It should also provide for 
establishing dedicated teams, sharing of relevant data and 
information on child labour cases and trafficking patterns and 
standardized procedures for rescue and rehabilitation of 
trafficked children. 
186.  20.7 As submitted by the State Government, there is also cross 
border movement of children between Gujarat and Rajasthan for 
the work of cultivation of BT Cotton. The Governm ent has 
established Check Posts at these borders to curb such 
movement. The Committee feel that in such a scenario where 
the issue/problem has already been identified, there is a need 
for targeted interventions. Other such areas also require 
identification and by implementing targeted interventions 
alongside existing measures like border control, the Government 
can take a more comprehensive approach to address the issue of 
child labour in BT cotton cultivation and ensure the protection 
of vulnerable children. Engaging directly with communities and 
other stakeholders can incubate trust and increase cooperation 
in tackling the issue. In this regard, the Committee are of the 
firm belief that the Panchayats can play a vital role by mobilizing 
community members t o take action against child labour and 
trafficking and monitoring agricultural practices, and reporting 
suspected cases to authorities. 
-do- 
187.  20.8 The Committee observe that the number of child labourers 
released in Rajasthan has decreased from 1651 in 2019 to 1291 
in 2020. There is also a decrease in the total number of cases 
registered and number of challans presented from 801 and 769 
in 2019 to 648 and 597 in 2021, respectively. At the same time, 
the Committee are concerned to note the significant drop in the 
figures pertaining to punishment to the accused person where 
the number has decreased from 126 in 2019 to 18 in 2020. The 
Committee want the Government to investigate whether this 
decline is on account of a real drop in the incidence of child 
labour or whether this suggests that while efforts are being 
made to rescue child labourers, the enforcement of laws against 
child labour and prosecution of offenders might not be as 
effective. Further, there is also the possibility of the authorities 
not having  enough resources or manpower to effectively 
investigate and prosecute child labour cases or there could be 
corruption within the enforcement agencies. The Committee 
thus urge the Government to scrupulously investigate the 
reasons for the decline in these numbers. Data from different 
sources, such as Government agencies, NGOs, and research 
institutions must be compared to gain a comprehensive 
understanding of the situation. The State must also identify any 
gaps or weaknesses in the existing framework that m ay be 
contributing to the decline. The Committee stress upon the 
critical need for a robust monitoring mechanism for effectively 
combating child labour. The involvement of high-level officials in 
monitoring child labour is crucial since they can   facilitate 
coordination and collabouration between different Government 
departments and it also helps in building trust and confidence 
among stakeholders, including victims, communities, and civil 
society organizations. 
-do- 

567 
 
188.  20.9 The Committee find that, with reg ard to identification of out of 
school children, according to the State Government, provision 
has been made to inform the Labour Office of the District 
concerned in case any child is being absent for more than 30 
days. In relation to such absent children, information about 
being engaged in child labour is collected and if the child is 
found doing child labour, then an attempt is made to make 
them free from child labour and connect them to the main 
stream of education. In the considered opinion of the Committee 
the current mechanism of informing the Labour Office about 
children absent from school is a good starting point in 
prevention of child labour and it is justifiable that children who 
are not in school and lack access to education are more 
vulnerable to exploitation. By identifying out -of-school children 
and addressing child labour, the mechanism can also help in 
stopping child trafficking.   But there is a need to take further 
measures to strengthen the mechanism. The primary goal 
should be to ensure accu rate and complete data collection on 
student attendance and reasons for absence. The role of 
teachers is of paramount importance, particularly in rural areas, 
and the Committee appreciate the fact that teachers participate 
in the survey for out of school c hildren in the State of 
Rajasthan.  In this regard, there is also a need to implement a 
digital and easy to access system for sharing data between 
education, labour, and social welfare departments to identify 
children at risk of child labour. In case of ch ild trafficking, 
education and labour department officials need a mechanism to 
escalate the matter to the relevant law enforcement agencies. 
The Government should also partner with NGOs and other 
organisations to organize bridge courses and remedial classes to 
help out -of-school children bridge the gap in their knowledge 
and skills and reintegrate into the mainstream education 
system. 
-do- 
189.  20.10 With regard to the conviction in cases related to child trafficking, 
the State Government have informed that in the year 2019, 
there were two cases where the punishment awarded was 
exemplary. In one of the cases, the sentence of life imprisonment 
was award ed and in the other, a sentence of 14 years. The 
Committee acknowledge the Government's action but 
emphasizes the need for deeper analysis to consider the overall 
trends in convictions and punishments for child trafficking in 
the State. The State Governmen t need to prepare measures to 
strengthen the enforcement and legal framework in this regard.  
The Committee recognise the difficulty in prosecution of cases 
where it is required to bring people from other States to court. It 
can be addressed through greater  coordination between the 
States. All States need to agree to exchange information with 
each other and to bring accused persons to court. There should 
be effective coordination between law enforcement agencies, 
social welfare departments, and other relevan t stakeholders 
across the States. If there is a technological solution for the 
same, then it can be achieved in a shorter period of time. The 
Committee also feel that there is an urgent need to create an 
institutional mechanism to address this legal challe nge and it 
should be taken note of by the State and Central Governments. 
One of the solutions could be the establishment of fast track 
court(s) for dealing with all child related cases such as child 
trafficking and child Labour.  According to the State 
Government, the creation of the fast track court is the mandate 
-do- 

568 
 
of the Law Department and the High Court and such proposal 
for the same is under active consideration by the Government. 
The Committee recommend that a concrete timeline needs to be 
established for generating the administrative proposal for setting 
up the fast track court(s) and the Government should ensure 
requisite allocation of resources for the same. 
190.  21.20 The Committee note that the NCLP scheme is implemented in 21 
States across the country and the State of Kerala is not included 
in the National Child Labour Project Scheme. The justification 
possibly is due to the low incidence of Child labour in the State. 
It has been further stated that action is in the final stage to 
notify the Kerala  Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Amendment Rules, 2022 in accordance with the Child and 
adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment 
Rules, 2017 as notified by the Central Government. The 
Committee find that District task force and Ch ild Welfare 
Societies under the Chairmanship of the District Collector have 
been set up in all districts to review all exercises relating to 
Child Labour. The Committee note that a total of 622 children 
were identified and rescued from the perils of child exploitation 
during the last three years by the State Enforcement wing under 
the Labour Commissioner. The Committee were given to 
understand that periodic inspections by the Enforcement wing 
have led to timely identification and rescue of children in the 
State leading to low prevalence of Child labour in the State.  
Appreciating the progress made by the State machinery in 
checking the prevalence of child labour, the Committee would 
like to lay emphasis on further strengthening of District Task 
Force and Chi ld Welfare Societies through regular 
orientation/periodic review meetings and provision of adequate 
funds to bolster their effectiveness and help them work in a 
coordinated manner with other agencies for timely rescue and 
rehabilitation of child labour. At  the same time, the Committee 
also feel that the District Collector already has a wide range of 
responsibilities and may be constrained to perform all 
designated duties effectively and urge  that they  be provided 
with the necessary support and resources b y the State 
Government to do their job well. The Committee also desire that 
the State Government must contemplate carrying out wide 
consultations with other Non -Governmental stakeholders 
especially the Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) who may have 
the domain expertise on the subject of child labour to further 
supplement the existing robust institutional framework in order 
to comprehensively combat Child labour. 
State 
Government 
of Kerala 
191.  21.21 The Committee note that as per the submission made by the 
State Government, it has been mentioned that the children who 
are engaged in Child labour/ begging in the State can be traced 
from other States. The Committee observe that, regardless of 
their place of origin, most of these children fall prey to poverty 
and subsequent exploitation. In order to tackle the challenge of 
identification, rescue and rehabilitation of such children, the 
Committee take note of the various rehabilitative 
initiatives/partnerships viz, Sanadhabalyam (Foster Care 
programme), Kinship/Va cation Foster Care, Vijnanadeepthi 
scheme, Our Responsibility to Children Scheme and 
KAVAL/KAVAL PLUS Community based projects for children in 
conflict with law, which are all at the forefront of the States 
efforts to mainstream vulnerable Children. The va rious 
outcomes achieved by these schemes inter-alia include monetary 
-do- 

569 
 
support to retain children in their own homes, curb tendencies 
for juvenile delinquency, build capacity of teachers and parents 
to ensure care and protection of at risk children, impart l ife 
skills, holistic care through psycho -social intervention, need 
based financial assistance for continuing education to children 
leaving Child care institutions, shift towards de -
institutionalization etc. The Committee specifically commend the 
role of th e State Government in initiating the ‘Saranabalyam’ 
project, which was launched to ensure that the State is free from 
the clutches of child labour, child begging, trafficking and 
children in street situations and provide emergency services for 
such Children at risk. Statedly, the project has been extended to 
10 districts of the State and clear cut guidelines have been put 
in place to identify, rescue, repatriation as well as investigation 
and prosecution against the offenders prescribed under it. The 
Committee desire that efforts of the State Government be 
directed towards effective monitoring/ inspection protocols and 
implementation of these schemes in order to fully justify the 
idea behind these Community based rehabilitative partnership 
initiatives and bo lster the anti -Child labour framework of the 
State Government.  Further, under the Saranabalyam project, 
steps may be taken to integrate a child helpline for all child 
emergency cases so that emergency help can be provided to 
vulnerable children in distress  condition. At the same time, the 
Committee emphasize on the need for collection and analysis of 
data on the number of children benefitted from such schemes in 
order to streamline policy decisions and resource allocation and 
expand the ambit of such scheme s if need be, to offer coverage 
to more beneficiaries. 
192.  21.22 The Committee note that out of 817 Child Care 
Institutions(CCIs) registered under Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 
across the State , around 25,484 Children were residing in these 
homes, however, as of October 2022, only 404 CCIs are 
operational and house 5381 c hildren at these homes. The 
Committee find that this is indicative of a positive trend that the 
care of vulnerable children has been gradually transitioning 
from institutionalized care to community/family based care. 
Despite the shift towards de -institutionalisation, the Committee 
note that the CCIs are a vital component of the Juvenile Justice 
System for providing rehabilitative care and protection to 
vulnerable Children. The Committee therefore urge the State 
Government to accord due importance to the 
infrastructural/residential facilities to ensure improvement in 
the condition of children residing in CCIs/ Homes with respect 
to their continuous health assessment, regular check -ups, 
educational facilities based on the age and needs of the child 
etc. The Committee further desire that regular inspection audits 
of the CCIs need to be carried out by the Child Welfare 
Committees for periodic monitoring and assessment of their 
performance. The Committee are of the opinion that every child 
has a right to grow up w ith his / her family and commend the 
efforts of the State Government towards restoration of 
institutionalized children with their family as a step in the right 
direction. The Committee, however caution the State 
Government on exercising due diligence in ev aluating whether 
the risks faced by the child have been adequately  resolved 
before taking a decision to de -institutionalise the child so as to 
offset any adverse outcomes for the child, contrary to the 
envisaged objective of restoration.  Further, de -
-do- 

570 
 
institutionalization of the child must be conditional to the 
provision of financial support and if the follow-up indicates poor 
indicators, the child should be brought back to the Child Care 
institution. 
  The Committee were further  informed that with the help  
of UNICEF, the Women and Child Development Department of 
the State Government has designed a portal for Child Care 
Institutions to function as a database on the details of children 
being admitted at CCIs and steps taken to impart training to the 
staff dep loyed in these institutions. The Committee feel that 
these steps will help in empowering the CCIs and bolster their 
capacity to deliver. 
193.  21.23 The Committee note that the Kerala State policy for the 
rehabilitation of street children is currently in its final stages of 
development and steps are being taken to put it into effect as 
quickly as possible. The Committee hope that the policy once 
implemented would aid in the effective identification, tracking, 
rescue and rehabilitation of children in street  situations. 
Further, the Committee are of the opinion that necessary steps 
need to be put in place to explore the possibility of extending 
access to rehabilitative services as part of the policy by engaging 
private professionals and organizations who volunteer to extend 
help in the form of shelters, counselling services, medical 
services, sponsorships, de -addiction services, education 
services, legal/paralegal services, identification of street children 
hotspots or any other assistance that can be rendered to street 
children in need. Further, the Committee urge upon the State 
Government to analyse the factors/socio -economic compulsions 
for forcing children onto street situations and prepare an 
effective Standard Opera ting Procedure for Care and Protection 
of Children in Street Situations so as to wean them away from 
neglect, emotional abuse, sexual abuse, and exploitation. 
-do- 
194.  21.24 The Committee appreciate the efforts made the State 
Government in providing higher wages for migrant workers in 
comparison to the rest of the country and find that to be one of 
the significant reasons for rise in labour migration into the 
State.  The  Committee are of the opinion that in light of the 
economic woes brought about by the cri sis caused by COVID -
19, there is a strong possibility that a number of migrant 
children in the informal sector would have increased across all 
sectors in the State to supplement the income of their parents. 
The Committee were given to understand that several steps have 
been taken to mainstream these migrant children by the 
Education and Labour Departments of the State Government. In 
this regard, the attention of the Committee was drawn to 
‘Roshni’ project that has been run by the State Government 
since 2017 . As a result, children of migrant labours are 
mainstreamed under the Education system of the State through 
adaptive modules through a education cum vocation oriented 
curriculum by trained Volunteers. Under phase 1, 110 students 
from four schools were cove red under the scheme. During the 
phase 2, the project ran in 20 schools and 620 migrant children 
from Nepal, Lakshwadeep, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Orissa, UP, 
Bihar, Karnataka and Assam have benefitted under the Scheme. 
The project was scaled up to 38 scho ols covering 1235 students 
in phase 3. Further, the Committee find that the thematic, 
activity oriented, multi -graded modules designed under the 
programme have proven effective in improving the academic 
standards of the students. The Committee note that th e Project 
-do- 

571 
 
is currently in its 5th phase having 40 schools with 1050 
students. While taking due cognizance of the challenges posed 
by the pandemic, the Committee are pleased to note that despite 
the pandemic induced lockdown and the massive exodus of 
migrants back to their home State, the fact that most families 
whose children were enrolled under the Scheme, preferred to 
stay back/come back for the sake of education is testimony to 
the popularity of this Scheme. Further, in the case of such 
Children who have  gone back to their respective States and 
unable to continue their studies, the Committee appreciate to 
note that the Samagra Shiksha scheme has evolved schemes to 
trace and collect the details of 2258 such students and provided 
them with a bridge course i n order to compensate for the gap 
due to Covid. Further, attention of the Committee was drawn to 
the latest components under phase 6 of the Roshni project 
which include inter-alia  formulation of a comprehensive learner 
profile to track the students moveme nts from one place to 
another using the portal 'Sahitham and Kite', Vocation oriented 
package for migrant children and a tracking system for Health of 
children of migrant labours. The Committee appreciate that the 
efforts of the State Government under ‘Roshni’ project have been 
acknowledged as one of the best inclusive model and shortlisted 
for the Prime Ministers Award in innovation category. Further, 
the impact study/social audit conducted among migrant 
children revealed the significant decline in the drop-out rate and 
in raising the educational standard of these children. The 
Committee find that school dropouts across 20 schools reduced 
by nearly half (49 %) to 65 in 2018 -19 as compared to 2017 -18 
as per data furnished by schools. The Committee feel that these 
are praiseworthy initiatives and augur well for the children of 
migrant labour in future. Further, with the threat of the 
pandemic eased to a considerable extent, the Committee urge 
the concerned Departments viz, Education and Labour 
Departments  under the State Government to scale up their 
efforts to ensure cent percent enrollment of migrant children 
under the Scheme and ensure that there will be no let up in 
sustaining and upholding the spirit of the Roshni project. 
195.  21.25 The Committee app reciate the fact that Kerala has the 
distinction of having the lowest dropout rate among the Indian 
States currently in terms of the primary and secondary 
education. The Committee feel that this can be attributed to the 
timely social interventions undertak en by the Government  to 
tackle poverty and illiteracy which has in turn helped in 
mainstreaming Child labour. The Committee find that the State 
Government have identified 2588 children in 2022 -23 who had 
dropped out of the schools but were gradually track ed, enrolled 
back in schools and are currently being given education through 
108 Special Training Centres run by Samagra Shiksha scheme 
in various languages like Bengali, Tamil, Assamese etc. A tribal 
language handbook has also been developed for this purp ose. 
Further, as a result of schemes like 'Gothrasarathi', intended to 
provide transportation facilities to children living in distant and 
remote Schedule Tribe settlements to schools, the Committee 
find that drop -out rates  among children is being checked  to a 
considerable extent owing primarily to effective monitoring of the 
Scheme by Tribal Extension Officers. The Committee while 
appreciating the steps taken in this direction urge the State 
Government to tie up with Anganwadi workers and ICDS in 
utilising their services to identify Child drop outs and ensure 
-do- 

572 
 
they return to the educational fold. Further, the State 
Government may take up Information, Education & 
Communication (IEC) campaigns to create awareness and 
disseminate information regarding the bene fits of retention of 
Children in School and apprise parents/children of the benefits 
available under various schemes/programmes so as to continue 
to keep the low dropout rates under check. 
196.  21.26 The Committee are concerned to note that there is no s pecific 
convergence/collaborative mechanism with other State 
Governments to address issues of Child labour. As per the 
submission of the State Government, efforts are being taken to 
rehabilitate childrenfound in vulnerable situations from other 
States, either in the State owned Children's homes or they are sent 
to their own houses, if details are available, with the help of Police 
Departments and District Collectors of those States. The 
Committee have been informed that in the State of Kerala, the 
children engaged in child labour and begging activities are 
mostly from other States. Despite the best efforts of the State 
Government in their rehabilitation, in the considered opinion of 
the Committee, a robust inter -State convergence framework 
should be contemplated and operationalised at the earliest in 
the interest of Child welfare in order to help in devising a 
coordinated response and ensure sustained engagement 
between various States towards rehabilitation for  children 
rescued from vulnerable situations.  The Committee therefore 
urge the State Government to establish linkages with other 
States especially where there is a high prevalence of Child 
labour/migration of Child labour to supp lement their efforts 
against child labour/trafficking considering the inflow of 
migrant labour into the State.  In this regard, the  Committee 
stress to operationalise an Inter -State coordination 
department/Inter-State repatriation policy to cater to 
rehabilitation for migrant children. 
-do- 
197.  21.27 The Committee note the submission made by the State 
Government that ‘no Child has been seen to be engaged in the 
Hotel and Restaurant sectors’ across the State. The Committee 
express their appreciation for non-engagement of child labour in 
the aforementioned sector and feel it is indicative of the 
significant progress made by the State with respect to  
eliminating child labour by providing protective legislation and 
effectively enforcing both labour and education -related 
regulations. The Committee however, also caution the State 
Government, in view of the influx of migrant labour from other 
States to Kerala coupled with their economic vulnerability and 
legal restrictions barring their employment in the formal sector , 
it is quite likely that the migrant labour including their children 
find economic refuge in various low -key jobs of the 
informal/unorganized sectors. The Committee emphasise the 
pivotal role of  labour inspectors on the ground in timely 
detection of child  labour, monitoring and enforcing penal 
regulations. The Committee find it imperative that the State 
machinery conducts continuous inspections and awareness 
exercises to check any incidence of child labour and sensitise 
employers and workers against the de ployment of child labour 
at their workplaces. 
-do- 
198.  22.28 The Committee observe and appreciate that the State 
Government of Tamil Nadu has prepared a State Action Plan to 
combat Child Labour. Pursuant thereto, a Standard Operating 
Procedure has been drawn wherein various agencies, 
State 
Government 
of Tamil Nadu 

573 
 
departments of the State have be en assigned various tasks in 
order to achieve the stated objective of achieving a “State free of 
Child Labour in all occupations and Adolescent Labour in 
Hazardous occupations and  Processes by end of 2025. Under 
the Action plan, at the District level, in the 15 NCLP districts, 
NCLP Societies have been formed comprising of concerned 
departmental officers under the Chairmanship of the District 
Collector and are responsible for elimination of Child/Adolescent 
Labour, while the Child/Adolescent Labour Rehabili tation cum 
Welfare Societies have been constituted for identifying 
children/adolescent employed in hazardous/non -hazardous 
establishments and are responsible for elimination of Child 
labour in non -NCLP districts. The Committee find that the 
District Collector has been made the authority under which all 
work pertaining to implementation of provisions for child labour 
are supervised and will play a vital role in achieving convergence 
of all services. The Committee further find that the District 
Collector is a lso responsible for formation and holding monthly 
meetings of the District Task Force (DTF) to develop and plan for 
prevention activities in the district and track its progress along 
with survey and identification of Child/Adolescent Labour 
through the Dis trict task force and to coordinate with various 
agencies in this regard. The Committee while lauding the 
institutional initiative of the State  feel that it is required to 
ensure that the DTF meet every month in order to take stock of 
measures  to check Ch ild/Adolescent Labour. The Committee 
further note that since the District Task force has been made 
the fulcrum of all efforts to ultimately eradicate Child labour, it 
is imperative that it is commensurately strengthened and 
equipped to deal with the challe nges arising out of tackling the 
menace. The Committee also feel that the DTF should analyse 
and consider the recurrence of child labour with the same child 
and necessary steps in this regard need to be taken to 
rehabilitate them on priority. Further, the Committee stress on 
the role of local panchayats in generation of data in child labour 
at the rural level and a statement to this effect may be furnished 
to the State Government for use by District Task Force for 
effective and actionable intervention again st Child Labour.  The 
Committee thus hope that the coordination of all work of the 
different departments, inclusion of Local Self Government 
Institution, Community based organisation will guide the DTF in 
effectively tackling the range of child labour and a chieve the 
objective envisioned under the State Action Plan. 
199.  22.29 The Committee note that, as per the submission made by the 
State Government, the exact estimate of the total child labour in 
the State is not available. As per Census 2011 data, around 
1,50,000 Child Labour were identified in Tamil Nadu. As per the 
State Government, piecemeal surveys have been carried out in 
some districts which point that the incidence of Child Labour 
has reduced owing to strict enforcement of legal provisions and 
implementation of various socio -economic welfare measures for 
retaining them in school. The Committee note that despite the 
interventionist measures taken by the State Government in 
tackling the incidence of Child Labour, in the abs ence of exact 
data about the prevalence of Child Labour, it may be difficult to 
envisage an effective response for their rehabilitation. As a 
matter of fact, 2011 census serves the only authentic source of 
information and the data available is more than a decade old 
and is of limited utility in so far as implementation of specific 
-do- 

574 
 
schemes and their targeted beneficiaries in the current scenario 
is concerned. In the wake of delay in containing Census 2021, it 
becomes imperative on part of the State Governmen t to devise 
internal mechanism to independently conduct household 
surveys/data collection exercises so that adequate allocation of 
resources may be directed towards timely rescue and 
rehabilitation of Child Labour. 
200.  22.30 The Committee note that, NCLP is implemented in 15 districts in 
Tamil Nadu and Special Training Centres (STCs) are functioning 
in order to rehabilitate Child Labours. The Committee find that, 
in these STCs, the children inter-alia provided bridge education, 
vocational training, mid -day meal, stipend, healthcare, 
recreation etc, with an objective of preparing them to be 
mainstreamed in the formal fold of education. The Committee 
were given to understand that pursuant to the order of Union 
Government dated 14.03.2022, NCLP was subsumed under 
Samagra Shiksha of Ministry of Education and that no STCs 
would be functional after 31.03.2021. Subsequently, as part of 
the order, the children enrolled in STC’s of NCLP as on 
31.03.2021 would be mainstreamed and those enrolled after 
31.03.2021 would be immediately transferred to STC’s run by 
Samagra Shiksha. Furthermore, the Union Government allowed 
NCLP districts of Dharmapuri, Krishngiri and Vellore to 
continue operation during Financial Year 2022 -23. The 
Committee were further apprised that prior  to the receipt of 
Union Government Instructions, as on 14.03.2022, 203 STC’s 
were functioning in the 15 NCLP districts and a total of 3428 
rescued Child Labours were studying and a total of 474 
students had benefitted in year 2020-21, from the monthly cash 
assistance of Rs. 500 (revised from Rs. 250) given to children in 
NCLP schools who have been admitted to regular schools to 
pursue higher educations. The Committee, observe that 
henceforth the rescued child labours will be mainstreamed into 
formal education system through Special training centres under 
Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan and no more STC’s would be 
functional under NCLP Scheme. While emphasising the role and 
necessity of the STC’s in the rehabilitation of child labours into 
the formal fold of Educatio n in a holistic of manner, the 
Committee stress the need to accord priority on maintenance of 
STCs and consider increasing the number of such centres in 
areas with high incidence of child labour. Despite the onus of 
supervision of STCs being shifted to Sam agra Shiksha from 
NCLP, the Committee feel that proper monitoring for fund 
disbursal and utilisation will be the key to effective functioning 
of Special Training Centres. 
-do- 
201.  22.31 The Committee find that the State Government had set up a 
tracking system called ‘Education Management Information 
System (EMIS) to impart quality education to children in school 
which inter-alia also updates the status of School students who 
fail to rejoin classes. The Committee observe that, in the event of 
the childs details not appearing on the EMIS portal, the status is 
immediately shared with the Department of Labour which runs 
ITI and polytechnic courses and Department of Higher 
Education since some vocational courses are also run by them. 
Commending the digital database put in place by the State 
Government, the Committee are of the view that the EMIS 
ensures effective tracking of the child as he/she moves up the 
education ladder and help in detecting  drop-outs among 
children. Further, in order to address drop -outs, the Committee 
-do- 

575 
 
find the State Government undertakes survey round the year 
viz. April, May and September to identify out of school children 
and mainstream them. Further, during the Covid peri od, a 
special mass drive was undertaken between 10.08.2021 to 
15.10.2021 using a geo -tagged mobile application and 
integrated it with Department of School Education EMIS portal 
by involving Block Resource Teacher Education, head master, 
school teacher, vol unteers, Anganwadi workers and NGO’s etc., 
in order to identify children between class I to 12 who dropped 
out of school. The Committee were informed that the special 
focus was given to Girls/Children with Special needs 
/Transgender children who lost their  parents in Covid -19 and 
other children displaced due to pandemic. The Committee find 
that the survey resulted in identification of 1,90,593 children 
between Class I to 12. The Committee were informed that each 
of the aforementioned children were enrolled in age appropriate 
classes in nearby formal schools and provided books, uniforms, 
school bags, notebooks etc. The children were to be tracked 
using the EMIS portal till they complete higher secondary 
education. Appreciating the steps taken by the State 
Government, to identify out of school children and mainstream 
them, the Committee find that this to be main reason for high 
enrolment ratio of over 99 percent at primary level and more 
than 95 percent at secondary level. Further, the Committee also 
find that even in instances of drop -outs, it was noticed that the 
Children  had enrolled in other vocational courses especially 
such courses for Class 8 passouts. Commending the steps taken 
by the State Government, the Committee further urge the State 
to take necess ary steps to ensure that periodic survey be 
undertaken to ascertain drop -outs be taken up so that 
commensurate steps can be taken for their timely rehabilitation 
and mainstreaming under the ambit of education.  At the same 
time, with regard to other drop -outs especially, those who opted 
for vocational courses/skill development programmes after 
completion of class 8th, commensurate placement help must be 
provided to such adolescents by the State Government for long 
term economic empowerment/sustenance. 
202.  22.32 The Committee note that there has been a regular influx of 
migrants from rural areas in Tamil Nadu towards industrial 
hubs like Chennai, Trichy, Coimbatore and Erode as a result of 
which these pockets have been attracting child labour. 
According to the submission made by the State Government, 
necessary instructions have been issued to the Enforcement 
Officers of the aforementioned districts to conduct inspections 
with the District task force along with the Railway Department 
Officials to identify Children employed as child labour in Railway 
Stations and to take necessary follow up action for their 
rehabilitation. The Committee find that migration usually is a 
result of regional disparity in development and influx of 
migrants into districts like Chenna i, Trichy, Coimbatore and 
Erode has been exacerbated in the aftermath of the Covid -19 
pandemic. The Committee are of the view that there is a need for 
an Inter-State migration protection policy to look into the welfare 
of such migrants. 
-do- 
203.  22.33 The Co mmittee note that under the Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, penal action is 
taken against the employer who employs the Child Labour. 
Further, as per Sec 14 -A of the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, the offence committed by 
-do- 

576 
 
an employer is punishable under Section 3/ 3A and shall be 
cognizable. However, as per the submission of the State 
Government, contract Labour Act, 1976 and Inter State Migrant 
Workers Act, 1979 does not mention anythi ng to this effect. 
Furthermore, in the case of children brought from other States 
for employment through an agent, the Committee noted that 
joint liability is vested with several persons. In the view of the 
Committee, it becomes difficult to book cases und er the Child 
and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, 
since the details of the employers are not known. The Committee 
feel that the ambit of the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 be suitably 
amended/ambit widened to incorporate penal provisions in 
order to be able to take action against such employers for 
employing children from other States as labour.  The Committee 
also emphasize the role of the Police department in identifying 
such persons and initiate action on the principal employer. 
204.  22.34 The Committee note that the State Government has issued 
necessary instructions to the Directorate of Industrial Safety 
and Health to conduct regular inspections at Industries across 
the State where there is a likely prevalence of child labour, to 
check its  incidence. The Committee further note that District 
Collectors across the State have been requested to convene 
meetings with the Industrial bodies and ensure use of ‘no Child 
labour’ sticker on their products. The Committee while 
commending the use of ‘Ch ild Labour Free’ stickers as a novel 
initiative taken by the State Government to check incidence of 
Child labour and stress the need for pursuing Information, 
Education & Communication (IEC) campaigns to create 
awareness and disseminate information regardi ng the benefits 
for Children in School and apprise parents/children of the 
benefits available under various schemes/programmes of the 
State Government so as to wean them from economic 
compulsion of being employed as Child labour. 
-do- 
205.  23.20 The Committee  are highly pleased to note that the State 
Government of Bihar, considering the fact that child labour is 
just one manifestation of the level of socio -economic 
development of the State and society, is working on multiple 
fronts to achieve socio -economic up liftment of the masses. 
Programmes aimed at direct employment generation, 
entrepreneurship development, social security including that of 
people in the unorganised sectors, promoting rural livelihood 
through organization and empowerment of women, etc are p art 
of the strategy of the State Government in this direction. It is 
also impressive to see that more than 1 million groups akin to 
Self Help Groups have been formed in Bihar involving more than 
10 million women. Further, the Bihar State Action Plan for 
Elimination, Release and Rehabilitation of Child Labour was 
formulated in 2009. The purpose of the State Action Plan was to 
establish cooperation and coordination between various 
departments and other stakeholders so that the objective of 
"Child Labour Free Bihar" could be achieved. The State Plan was 
modified in 2017 in the wake of the Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2016 and 
the National Policy for Children, 2013, etc and a State Task 
Force has been constituted as per  the provision of the State 
Action Plan under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary, 
Bihar. The Committee observe that the institutional initiatives of 
the State Government of Bihar are in the right direction, aimed 
State 
Government 
of Bihar 

577 
 
ultimately at eradicating child labour  and recommend that the 
Task Force should act as the fulcrum in this endeavour. 
Coordination of the work of the different Departments, inclusion 
of Local Self Government Institutions, NGOs and other Civil 
Society organisations can be effectively guided and  monitored 
under the umbrella of the State Task Force.    
206.  23.21 The Committee find that Bihar had set up a Child Labour 
Tracking System as early as in 2016 and appreciate the efforts 
and work of the State Government in using tec hnology to tackle 
public policy issues. The Committee are informed that the 
upgraded version of CLTS 2.0 has been launched on the 
occasion of World Day against Child Labour in 2022.   The 
Committee recommend that the Central Government consider 
setting up a  national level child tracking system for which the 
basic framework can be adopted from the system operational in 
Bihar. The Tracking system should provide information 
pertaining to every child rescued across all the States on a 
single platform. Such a facility would be of immense importance 
particularly if the child is rescued in a State different from 
his/her home State. The system should allow all the 
participating authorities and stakeholders to access information 
pertaining to the rescue and rehabilita tion status of child 
labourers. 
-do- 
207.  23.22 The Committee are pleased to take into cognisance the 
formation of the Dhawa Dal by the State Government of Bihar 
that act as flying squads for rescue of child labourers from 
workplaces in the State. It is an important initiative towards the 
prevention and elimination of child labour as the Dhawa Dal, 
formed in each 38 Districts, are slated to conduct twice a week 
inspections at suspected child labour sites. The Committee note 
with appreciation that during 2022 , from 01st January to 03rd 
November, a total of 1113 Dhawa Dal movements have been 
reported from all districts of Bihar. Further, 333 child labourers 
were rescued from different districts through Dhawa Dal during 
the said period.  The Committee hope that the mobile 
application reported to be under development for Dhawa Dal has 
come into being as it can lend more effectiveness in gathering 
information about the incidence of Child labour and the same 
can be acted upon by the Dal. However, it would be of high  
importance to ensure that the identity of the persons passing on 
the information shall be kept strictly confidential . Further, the 
possibility of the Dhawa Dal being deployed against trafficking 
as well should also need to be explored. The Committee are o f 
the considered opinion that the formation of such flying squads 
can be considered by other States also as an effective step to 
combat child labour.   
-do- 
208.  23.23 The Committee greatly appreciate the efforts of the State 
Government in developing a mechan ism to locate school 
dropouts and ensure inclusive and equitable quality education 
at all levels of school education including the special program 
under "Muhim" aimed at preventing/tackling drop out and 
ensuring retention of children in school. It is notew orthy to 
mention that the number of Out of School Children has 
significantly come down from about 20 lakh in 2005 -2006 to 
1.34 lakh by 2021 - 2022. In the considered opinion of the 
Committee, the tracking of out of School Children in villages and 
rural areas is more effective while there is a need to strengthen 
the mechanism in urban areas considering the large number of 
migrant workers, who live under flyovers or shanties near 
-do- 

578 
 
railway stations, and do not have a residence, which makes it 
difficult to track  such families and their children .  The 
Committee urge the State Government to take urgent and 
specific steps to identify such out of school children living in 
street conditions and ensure that they return to the educational 
system. Also, the adolescents who are rescued should be linked 
to a skill development program run by the Government that 
should have a mechanism to ensure their placement. 
 
209.  23.24 The Committee find that there is an office of Joint Labour 
Commissioner at Bihar Bhawan, New Delhi f or monitoring and 
facilitating the release and rehabilitation of rescued child labour 
who have gone outside from Bihar. This is a proactive welcome 
step from the State Government towards setting up an effective 
counter front to tackle child labour . The Committee recommend 
that the State Government should also consider opening similar 
offices in all States with substantial migrant population from 
Bihar since such a step can ensure that rescued children receive 
the necessary support expeditiously and are rehabilitated in the 
shortest possible time. Additionally, the Government should 
collaborate with the respective State Governments to ensure 
seamless coordination and effective implementation of 
rehabilitation programs. The Committee are of the firm opinion 
in this regard that entering into Memoranda of Understanding 
(MoU) with States that have considerable presence of migrant 
labourers from Bihar would go a long way in the release and 
rehabilitation of child labourers . The victims of child trafficking 
should a lso be covered by such MoUs and emancipated in a 
sustainable manner.  The Committee recommend that an 
umbrella mechanism from the Union Government also needs to 
be initiated in this direction bringing all the States/UTs into its 
fold. The Committee also su ggest that all bodies of the 
Governments set up to eradicate child labour can be 
strengthened by allocating additional personnel with expertise in 
child labor issues which may involve roping in the help of 
credible NGOs. Providing adequate financial resour ces to 
support the their operations, including data collection, 
monitoring, and outreach activities would be the prerequisite. 
 
-do- 
210.  23.25 The Committee are concerned to note that there is no specific 
assistance from the Central Government for child labour issues 
to the State Government. In the considered opinion of the 
Committee, additional resources and targeted support from the 
Central Gov ernment are pivotal to effectively address the 
scourge of child labour in States such as Bihar that report the 
largest number of child labourers in the country.   They should 
be provided with special grants and other logistical and 
infrastructural support s pecifically to aid the schemes for 
eradication of child labour . These grants/support would enable 
these States to supplement existing schemes, expand 
rehabilitation programs, and strengthen enforcement 
mechanisms to combat child labor more effectively. The 
Committee therefore urge the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment to make the necessary provisions in the budget to 
provide the States prone to child labour such as Bihar   with 
additional resources, to bolster their efforts against child 
trafficking, eradica tion of child labour and for the overall 
development of children . Meanwhile, transparency and 
accountability in the utilisation of funds would be crucial to 
-do- 

579 
 
ensure that funds actually benefit the children in distress on the 
ground. States should also, on t heir part, establish lucid 
reporting mechanisms to inform the Central Government and 
the public about the utilization of funds and the progress of 
efforts to stamp out child labour. 
211.  23.26 The Committee are concerned to note that as per the submission 
of the State Government, the only four Special Training Centers 
in the State run by Non Governmental Organizations with 
financial support of the Government of Bihar for educational 
and vocational rehabilitation of rescued child labourers before 
Covid pan demic are currently non -operational. The Committee 
desire to highlight the role and necessity of such centres in the 
rehabilitation of child labourers in a holistic manner and urge 
the State Government to take immediate steps for re -opening of 
these centre s. The Committee also want the Government to 
consider increasing the number of such centres in areas with 
high incidence of child labour. The State Government may also 
consider enhancing the financial support being provided to the 
NGOs for their operation while ensuring proper monitoring for 
fund disbursal and utilisation.  
-do- 
212.  Overv
iew 
OVERVIEW 
 To sum up, the National Policy on Child Labour, though 
rolled out in the year 1987, its implementation gained 
momentum after the amendment to the Act came in the 
year 2016, when for the first time the term ‘adolescent’ was 
included in the Act and complete ban was imposed on 
employment of children below 14 years.  Major follow up 
action commenced from the year 2017 onwards, when 
standard operating procedure was launched on 26 
September, 2017 providing for legal provisions pursuant to 
issuance of Child Labour  (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Amendment Rules 2017 which came into effect from 2nd 
June, 2017.  These rules broadly provide for prevention, 
rescue and rehabilitation of child and adolescent labour.  
The Committee took up  the subject ‘National Policy on 
Child Labour —An Assessment’ for comprehensive 
examination in November, 2021. It is significant to mention 
that after deliberation with the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment, it came to light that there is very little data 
being collected relating to child labo ur, annually. Whatever 
information and data is there it comes from Census, which 
is done in every 10 years. Therefore, it was felt necessary to 
collate upto date data biannually, if not annually through a 
dedicated method by the Government. The nodal minis try 
for implementation of this policy agreed with the view of the 
Committee that any effective plan against child labour has 
to be centred round ‘whole -of-government approach’ so as 
to make this policy a success story.  In pursuance thereof, 
an inter -ministerial meeting was held to discuss the child 
labour related issues under the chairmanship of Secretary, 
Ministry of Labour and Employment on 7 January, 2022 
and the line ministries  were advised to draw plan of action 
to combat  scourge of child labour.    
 There is no denying the fact that child labour is a multi -
dimensional phenomenon requiring a multitude of solutions 
to be planned and delivered in harmony and coherence by a 
range of stakeholders from the policy makers to the families 
and children at the grass-root level.   Recognizing the 
inextricable link between the abolition of child labour and  
Ministry of 
Labour & 
Employment 

580 
 
the right to education, mainstreaming should be the key 
strategy for ensuring that child labour issues  and  
concerns are included in policies, plans and budge ts, 
appraisals, feasibility studies, evaluations, economic -
development targets/goals, etc. at the national, sub -
national, sectorial levels and with regional bodies.   
 In the context of implementation of the national programme, 
it is observed that despite t he economic and social gains in 
the country, ending child labour, together with addressing 
other forms of child rights issues, has remained a challenge.  
Indications are that the majority of these working children 
are coping with numerous contextual challe nges, including 
household poverty, extensive informal economies, 
unregulated agriculture sector, vulnerabilities caused by 
conflicts and natural disasters, movement of persons in the 
form of migration/trafficking from rural and agricultural 
areas to cities  and cross borders as well as internal 
displacement of persons, bonded labour and exclusion, 
insufficient reach of social protection measures, youth 
unemployment, inadequate capabilities for enforcement, 
uninformed public, and coordination and delivery 
bottlenecks.   
 Among the key Ministries being the major stakeholders, are 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment, Ministry of Women 
and Child Development, Ministry of Social Justice & 
Empowerment, Ministry of Education and a host of 
Ministries focusing  on sec tors which are confronted with 
the problem —agriculture, mining, tourism, and urban 
development, as well as agencies dealing with internal and 
external migration and trafficking.   
 The Ministry of Labour and Employment shall be the nodal 
Ministry for implem enting the programme in coordination 
with other line ministries, state governments/UTs and other 
stakeholders.  
 With a view to conduct performance review of all the 
stakeholders on regular basis, an accountability framework 
should be developed for each sta keholder involved in the 
entire convergence process of the rescued children. 
 All requisite and foolproof measures should be taken by the 
Government entities to promote and secure the socio -
economic and physical well being of the children and their 
families in all spaces within the informal sector so as to 
prevent exploitation of the child. 
 As the meaningful realization of the policies of the 
Government for securing the rights of the children could 
only be achieved through rigorous monitoring and 
evaluation compliance, the Committee exhort the 
Government entities to embark upon seamless collaboration 
and coordination strategies with the help of IT-enabled tools 
and robust tracking system for every rescued child so as to 
ensure that no child is re-victimized. 
 The Committee are of the firm opinion that the quality 
implementation of the Child Labour Policy should be 
ensured through timely and transparent allocation and 
release of adequate financial material and human resources 
to the implementing agencies. 
 In its  endeavour to exhibit zero tolerance to child labour, 
the Government should ensure that supply chains in the 

581 
 
Government procurement are free from child labour or any 
form of violation of child rights. 
 The Government besides integrating ‘Child Budgeting’ in to 
all the budgets and programmes of the Central and State 
Governments and their Undertakings, should also ensure 
optimum utilization of budget allocated for children while 
periodically increasing the allocation keeping in mind the 
evolving needs. 
 The prim ary focus of the Government must be on the 
prevention of any form of violation of the rights of children 
as well as to create and preserve a robust safety net around 
every child. The primary objective of the Government should 
be to ensure access to quality  healthcare, education and 
social security to the child and his/her families. Developing 
technological strategies that involve active monitoring of 
cluster areas that are prone to child labour will go a long 
way in the rescue and rehabilitation of children  in a 
planned and comprehensive manner. 
 The Government should ensure that all out of school 
children such as child labourers, trafficked and street 
children, orphans, children with disability, children in areas 
of civil unrest, children of migrant labours,  prisoners and 
manual scavengers etc. are tracked, rescued, rehabilitated 
and have access to their right to education. 
 It is imperative to ensure consistent coordination among 
various agencies at the District Level such as District Child 
Protection Unit (DCPU), Special Juvenile Police Unit (SJPU), 
District Magistrate, Child Welfare Committee, Village Level 
Child Protection Committee under ICPS, District level 
Vigilance Committee under ITPA Act, 1986, Schools and 
Panchayats through the District Task Force (DTF), etc. 
 One of the most critical prerequisites to prevent child labour 
and adolescent labour in hazardous employment is to put in 
place prescribed institutional mechanisms and build 
capacity of institutions to carry out designated tasks 
assigned to each of them. 
 Analyzing information collected from the database of the 
missing children and previously rescued survivors as well 
as forming a strong network with all the stakeholders and 
law enforcement agencies engaged in the transit points and 
destination are as will go a long way in ensuring accurate 
data collection and effective child labour prevention.  
 Victim Protection mechanisms including logistic and 
medical supports and access to legal aid are very crucial to 
rehabilitate the rescued children. 
 Counseling must be provided to the victims by trained and 
certified counselors, community social workers, NGOs so as 
to assess the mental trauma caused to the victims and 
determine the required support to them. 
 It is absolutely essential to strengthen the whole pro cess of 
investigation and prosecution and conducting the trial in a 
time bound and victim friendly manner. 
 Social, educational and economic rehabilitation of the child 
and adolescent labourers who have been rescued must be 
done through coordinated and convergent efforts by a series 
of stakeholders. 
 Convergence mechanism must be developed between NDMA 
and NCPCR to protect children in times of natural and 

582 
 
manmade disaster and other humanitarian crisis. Similarly, 
focus must be on interdepartmental coordinatio n at State 
and District levels and their SOP so that effective 
monitoring is done for prevention, rescue and rehabilitation 
of child labours. 
 In line with the aim of the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) 8.7, the Government should take immediate and 
effective measures to eradicate forced labour and modern 
slavery and human trafficking and secure the prohibition 
and elimination of the worst forms of child labour, including 
recruitment and use of child soldiers and by 2025 end child 
labour in all its fo rms. With the ratification of International 
Labour Organisation (ILO) Conventions 138 and 182 in 
2017, the successful implementation of National Policy on 
Child Labour would be critical in enhancing the image of 
the country in global scenario and positioni ng its status 
with pride among developed countries. 
 
 
 
 
 
 