i 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2023-24) 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fiftieth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Welfare Schemes and Social 
Security Measures for Textile Workers in Organised and Unorganised 
Sectors’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI   
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka)  
57 

ii 
 
 
 
FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2023-24) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fiftieth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Welfare Schemes and Social 
Security Measures for Textile Workers in Organised and Unorganised 
Sectors’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles. 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.02.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2024 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
13 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply 
 
27 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
28 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which  replies of the Government  are interim 
in nature    
30 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix- I* Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on           
05 February, 2024. 
 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Fiftieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)          31 
 
__________________________________________________________________  
 
 * Not appended with this cyclostyled copy. 
  
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2023-24) 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
5. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
6. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
7. Shri Bache Gowda B.N. 
8. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
9. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
10. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
11. Shri Pakauri Lal 
12. Prof. Sanjay Sadashivrao Mandlik 
13. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori  
14. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
15. Dr. D. Ravikumar 
16. Shri Naba (Hira) Kumar Sarania 
17. Shri Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Nayab Singh 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan 
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24.  Shri R. Dharmar 
25. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
26.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
27. Ms. Dola Sen 
28.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
29.  Shri Shibu Soren 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31. Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.     Shri Jadumani Baisakh  -  Joint Secretary 
 2.  Shri Sanjay Sethi   - Director 
 3. Shri Sandeep Kumar Malhotra - Assistant Executive Officer 
  
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2023-24) having been authorized by the Committee, present on 
their behalf this F ifty-Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Fiftieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Welfare Schemes and Social 
Security Measures for Textile Workers in Organised and Unorganised Sectors’  
pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles. 
2. The Fiftieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and  laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 4th August, 202 3. The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies on 10th 
November, 2023 indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report. The Committee considered 
and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 5th February, 2024.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
05 February, 2024                                  CHAIRPERSON,     
16   Magha, 1945  (Saka )                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  
 

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fiftieth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Welfare Schemes and Social Security 
Measures for Textile Workers in Organised  and Unorganised Sectors’  of the 
Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Fiftieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
4thAugust, 2023. It contained 16 Observations/ Recommendations. Replies of 
Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as under:- 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government – Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13  and15 
 
Chapter-II 
Total:13 
Percentage: 
81.25 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – Nil 
 
Chapter-III 
Total:00 
Percentage: 00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para Nos. 14 and 16 
 
Chapter-IV 
Total:02 
Percentage: 
12.50 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect  of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature - Rec. Para No.12 
 
Chapter-V 
Total:01 
Percentage: 
06.25 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final action 
taken reply in respect of the Recommendation contained in Chapter V of 
this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the Government, be 
furnished to them at the earliest. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/ Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit 
further comments. 
  

2 
 
I. Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY) and Pradhan 
MantriSuraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY) 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 1and 2) 
5. In their Fiftieth Report, the Committee had noted that the number of 
enrolments of Handloom weavers under Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima 
Yojana (PMSBY) declined substantially from 1,09,108 beneficiaries in 2021 -22 
to 43,421 in 2022 -23 with major decrease being in Manipur from 1,07,565 in 
2021-22 to 27,488 i n 2022-23. The Committee had also noted that there was 
‘nil’ enrolment of handloom workers under PMJJBY/PMSBY and converged 
Mahatma Ga ndhi Bunkar Bima Yojana (MGBBY)  in 2020 -21 following the 
transition to full payment regime w.e.f. 01.04.2020.  The Ministry also admitted 
that due to increase in share of contribution of State Government/Beneficiary 
under PMJJBY and PMSBY, lesser enrolment was observed in Several States. 
The Committee had noted that discontinuation of premium share of Rs. 100 
under Social Sec urity Fund w.e.f. 01.04.2020 with consequent increase in 
contribution of State Governments/beneficiary is the primary reason for 
decline in enrolment under PMJJBY and PMSBY. The Committee also found 
that only 03 States i.e. Karnataka, Kerala and Sikkim wer e contributing 
premium share under PMJJBY. As informed by the Ministry, despite taking up 
the matter with the State Governments on numerous occasions, the States had 
not been contributing their share. Observing that the outcome of the Schemes 
is not upto t he desired level, the Committee had exhorted the Ministry to 
strengthen their monitoring and coordination mechanism and continue to 
pursue the matter with the State Governments so that the intended social 
security benefits are made available to the benefic iaries. The Committee also 
desired that such modifications, as may be appropriate may also be considered 
for being carried out in the Schemes so as to ensure their viability in providing 
social security benefits.  
6. The Committee appreciated that a new initiative was introduced in 
October, 2021 under which, scholarship upto Rs.2.00 lakh per annum is 
provided to handloom worker’s children (upto 2 children) for pursuing 
Diploma/Under Graduate/Post Graduate courses from recognized Textiles 
Institutions. The Committee, however, found that only 45 applicants were 
sanctioned the scholarship. Observing that for effective implementation of the 
initiative, more coordination and cooperation from State Governments at 
District/ Block level is required, the Committee had urged upon the Ministry to 
strengthen the coordination and monitoring mechanism and also vigorously 
pursue the State Governments to spread awareness about the scheme at the 
grass root level and motivate the eligible  Handloom workers at the village 
level/most rural/backward areas to avail the facility so that the targeted 
persons are actually benefitted. The Committee had also emphasized that 

3 
 
periodical reviews of such exercise be undertaken so that the laudable inten t of 
providing scholarships to the eligible children is well served. The Committee 
had further desired that the possibility of introducing a scholarship scheme for 
handicraft workers’ children on lines similar to the Scheme already in place for 
children of the handloom workers be considered. 
7. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“(a)  Handlooms: For monitoring and coordination mechanism, the office of 
DC(Handloom) has written on 24.05.2023 to Additional Chief Secretary/ 
Principal Secretary, In -charge of Handlooms of all States/UTs Government to 
personally intervene in the matter towards implementation of scheme 
components (PMJJBY, PMSBY, Financial support to Awardee weavers and 
Scholarship to weavers’ children) in 100% saturation mode and to ensure that 
awareness camps are organized in coordination with the field offices of this 
office and banks in all handloom pockets in their respective State/UT. 
Also, a letter dated 16.06.2023 h as been sent to all field offices of this 
office to take expeditious steps to achieve the targets assigned for improving the 
performance of the welfare schemes which will, in turn, encourage the 
livelihood of handloom weavers/workers. 
(b) Handicrafts: The suggestions of the committee for modification in the 
scheme so as to ensure their viability in providing social security benefits has 
been noted for compliance and would be placed before the EFC committee at 
the time of revision of scheme.”  …. 
 
”……The sug gestion of the Committee for possibility of introducing 
scholarship scheme for handicraft artisan’s children to ensure their viability for 
providing benefits to the artisans has been noted for compliance and would be 
placed before the EFC committee at the time of revision of scheme.” 
 
8. The Committee , in their earlier Report, had noted that 
discontinuation of premium share of Rs. 100 under Social Security Fund 
w.e.f. 01.04.2020 with consequent increase in contribution of State 
Governments/beneficiary was the primary reason for decline in enrolment 
under Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY) and Pradhan 
Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY). The Committee also found that 
only 03 States i.e. Karnataka, Kerala and Sikkim were contributing 
premium shar e under PMJJBY. Observing that the outcome of the 
Schemes is not upto the desired level, the Committee had desired the 
Ministry to strengthen their monitoring and coordination mechanism and 
pursue the matter with the State Governments. The Committee have now 
been apprised that in May, 2023 , the Ministry had requested Additional 
Chief Secretaries and Principal Secretary in charge of handlooms of all 

4 
 
States/UT Governments to personally intervene in the matter.  The reply 
furnished to the Committee in October, 2023, however, does not mention 
anything about the outcome of communications sent to all concerned 
especially whether the remaining States/UTs have started contributing 
their share . The Committee feel that the response received from the 
States/UTs need to  be shared so that the Committee is kept apprised of 
the developments/shortcomings so as to suggest further course of action.  
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to continue to pursue the 
matter with States/UTs so as to increase enrolments under  the Scheme 
and thereby achieve the objective of providing universal and social 
security in case of natural/accidental death and total or partial disability 
to the intended beneficiaries. 
9. In the context of recommendation of the Committee regarding 
introducing a Scholarship Scheme for handicraft workers’ children on 
lines similar to the Scheme already in place for children of the handloom 
workers, the Ministry have stated that the matter would be placed before 
the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). As t he Scheme proposed to be 
introduced would immensely help handicraft workers’ children, the 
Committee desire that the matter be not kept pending for indefinite 
period of time and decided in a time bound manner.  The Committee wish 
to be apprised of the progress in this regard. 
II. Mudra Loans 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
10. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that a centralized online 
claim disbursement system “Handloom Weavers Mudra Portal” was developed 
in association with the Nodal Bank viz. Punjab National Bank (PNB), which 
separately captures the data on loans sanctioned to weavers and artisans. 
Observing that the portal does not capture data on the loan amount disbursed  
and the Ministry had taken up the matter of re -customizing the portal with the 
Bank,the Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to ensure that the re -
customization is completed in a time bound manner so that the data on 
disbursals etc. is comprehensively made available on the portal.  

5 
 
11. In their Action Taken Note furnish ed to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“Feature for capturing the disbursement data has been incorporated in the 
Handloom Weaver MUDRA Portal in August, 2023. So far, disbursement data is 
not available on the portal.” 
12. While appreciating that the feature for capturing the disbursement 
data has now been incorporated in “Handloom Weavers Mudra Portal” in 
August, 2023, the Committee desire that the data on loan amount 
disbursed to weavers and artisans be made available on t he portal in a 
time bound manner through issuance of appropriate instructions to all 
Banks through Punjab National Bank/Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services) so as to ensure online availability of data of loans 
sanctioned as well as disbursed to the beneficiaries. 
III. Pahchan Card to weavers/artisans 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
 
13. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted thatas on 04.06.2023, 
out of 35.22 lakh handloom workers, comprising 26.73 lakh weavers and 8.49 
lakh allied workers, Pahchan cards were issued only to 17.15 lakh workers and 
the remaining 18.07 lakh workers  (more than 50%) were to be issued Pahchan 
cards. The Committee also noted that the situation is, however, better in the 
case of handicraft artisans as out of 30 lakh identified artisans, 26.72 lakh 
artisans were issued Pahchan Cards. Observing that a size able number of 
weavers/artisans were to be issued Pahchan Cards,the Committee had 
impressed upon the Ministry to chalk out a robust mechanism to identify the 
causes behind non -issuance of Pahchan Cards to all the eligible Handloom 
weavers/handicraft artisans and expedite the procedure of issuing the Cards to 
all the eligible weavers/artisans so that they can avail the benefits of all social 
security and welfare schemes intended for them. Further, considering the fact 
that the process of manufacturing being time consuming during which there is 
no income generated to support livelihood to handicraft astisans,the Committee 
had desired the Ministry to explore the possibility of issuing a ‘credit card’ to 
the artisans on lines similar to Kisan Credit Card so that  these artisans can 
also derive the benefit of some form of financial assistance under indigent 
circumstances.  
  

6 
 
14. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“(a)  Handlooms: 17.38 lakh Pahc han cards have been issued to eligible 
handloom workers as on 10.09.2023. Details of Pahchan cards of all handloom 
workers of 4th All India Handloom Census 2019 -20 are accessible from website 
of this office i.e. www.handlooms.nic.in as below:- 
https://tricorniotec.com/webapp/portal 
User ID:- ministry 
Password:- ministry@ 2022 
Handloom workers may avail the benefits of handloom schemes, implemented 
by Ministry of Textiles, Government of India for procurement of raw materials, 
common infrastructure development, skilling, marketing of handloom products 
in domestic/overseas markets, concessional credit etc. 
(b) Handicrafts: The mobilization of handicrafts artisans across the country is 
regular process of the Handicrafts Service Centre by organizing Chaupals 
/Shivirs/ Craft Awareness programmee for issuance of PAHCHAN card to 
handicrafts artisans. The handicrafts artisans enrolled under PAHCHAN would 
be eligible for all the benefit of the scheme implemented for promotion and 
development of handicrafts sector. Thes e artisans can also avail the interest 
subsidy and margin money on MUDRA loan amount. However, the suggestions 
of the committee to issuance of Credit card has been noted similar to Kisan 
Credit card and would be placed before the Committee at the time of r evision of 
EFC for their consideration.” 
 
15. The Committee note that , as on 10.09.2023 , out of 35.22 lakh 
handloom workers, Pahchan Cards were issued to only 17.38 lakh workers 
(approx. 50%) and almost equal number of P ahchan Cards are yet to be 
issued.  Observing that the progress continues to be very slow and still a 
lot needs to be done , t he Committee  impress upon the Ministry to 
identify the causes behind non -issuance of P ahchan Cards to all the 
eligible beneficiaries with a sense of urgency and commit ment, iron out 
the bottlenecks, and, thereafter, take all possible measures to ensure 
issuance of Pehchan Cards to all the handloom workers for development 
and promotion of the handloom sector.  
16. As the matter relating to issue of Credit Cards to the artisans on the 
lines similar to Kisan Credit Cards is proposed to be placed before 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) for their consideration, the 

7 
 
Committee impress upon the Ministry to ensure that the guidelines for 
formulation, appraisal and approval of the proposal are strictly adhered to 
and the matter is placed before EFC in the stipulated time frame.  
IV. Pension to Awardee Weavers/Artisans  
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
17. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that another new 
initiative was taken in October, 2021, under which pension of Rs.8,000 per 
month is granted to awardee weavers/artisans above 60 years of age, in 
indigent circumstances and having annual income below Rs.1 lakh. Observing 
that the Scheme had eventually benefitted only such awardees whose income is 
less than the per day minimum wages,  the Committee had recommended 
reviewing the ceiling of Rs. 1 lakh per annum and raise it to a reasonable 
amount so that more persons avail the benefits of this Scheme which provides 
old ag e protection. The Committee further noted that in 2022 -23, in the 
handloom sector, 80 handloom awardees were benefitted whereas in the 
handicrafts sector, 339 handicraft awardees were benefitted.  Noting that one 
of the reasons for selection of low number of beneficiaries is the dearth of 
awareness, the Committee had desired the Ministry to put in extra efforts to 
create awareness in the rural and backward areas of the country through print, 
electronic and social media and also make concerted efforts with t he State 
Governments through the Chaupals organized at village/block level. 
18. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“(a)  Handlooms: Review for enhancement of annual income ceiling of Rs.1.00 
lakh per awardee has been noted for further consideration.  
This office has written a D.O. letter to Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal 
Secretary, In-charge of Handlooms of all States/UTs Government to personally 
intervene in the matter towards implementation of scheme components 
(PMJJBY, PMSBY, Financial support to Awardee weavers and Scholarship to 
weavers’ children) in 100% saturation mode and to ensure that awareness 
camps ar e organized in coordination with the field offices of this office and 
banks in all handloom pockets in their respective State/UT. 
Also, a letter dated 16.06.2023 has been sent to all field offices of this office to 
take expeditious steps to achieve the tar gets assigned for improving the 
performance of the welfare schemes. 
 
(b) Handicrafts: The suggestion of the Committee has been noted for its 
compliance at the time for forming the EFC. To cover a greater number of 
artisans under the component of Financial support to artisans in indigent 
circumstances, wide publicity would be made through leading newspaper 
/social media/village /block level as well as by organizing the camps in the 
craft cluster pockets/DICs/State Handicrafts Development Corporations.” 
 
  

8 
 
19. The Committee, in their earlier Report, had recommended for 
enhancement of annual income ceiling of Rs. 1  lakh so as to cover more 
awardee weavers/artisans above 60 years of age for grant of pension of Rs. 
8000 per month.  The Committee, however, find that the Ministry have 
simply responded that the observations of the Committee have been 
noted.  The Committee had also emphasized for the need to create 
awareness of scheme amongst the intended beneficiaries in the rural and 
backward areas.  In this context, in the case of handloom sector, the reply 
mentions about the action taken by the Ministry whereas in the case of 
handicrafts sector, an assurance has been given that ‘awareness campaign 
would be launched.  The Committee impress upon the Ministry that ,in 
future, while responding to the observations/recommendations, it may be 
ensured that in cases, where action has been initiated, the outcome of the 
same may be indicated to the extent possible and in cases, where the 
action is proposed to be taken or an a ssurance is given, the tentative 
timeline by which the action /assurance would be initiated  or 
completed/met at the ground level be provided so as to make Committee 
aware of the status of progress of implementation of their 
recommendations/observations.  
V. Conversion of Plain Powerlooms into Automatic Powerloom 
(Recommendation Para No. 12) 
20. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that most of the 
powerlooms are plain powerlooms with outdated technology, which needed to 
be upgraded into automatic looms for improving the quality and quantity of the 
fabric. Considering the constraint s faced on this aspect viz. dearth of working 
capital with the powerloom workers and lack of raw material,  etc., t he 
Committee, while recommending the Ministry to chalk out an infallible strategy 
to overcome these challenges, had desired that a fresh scheme may be 
formulated for providing low cost financial assistance and credit facility 
especially to Powerloom workers for upgrading their looms and also provide 
adequate support to acquire raw materials besides providing market linkages 
through development of e -Portal on the lines of the portal developed for 
Handloom Weavers/Handicraft Workers. The Committee had also desired the 
Ministry to set up a mechanism to sensitize a nd instruct the powerloom 
workers regarding procedure of upgradation of plain looms into the 
shuttleless/automatic looms and train them to operate them. 

9 
 
21. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“The Ministry is in an advanced stage for conducting a fresh base -line 
survey on Powerloom sector. In addition, it is considered to strengthen 
raw material availability support besides providing market linkages 
through development of e -Portal on the  lines of the portal developed for 
Handloom Weavers/Handicraft Workers. To have traceability of support, 
a robust survey can help implement any focused /IT enabled verifiable 
initiatives from the Public resources, may be in partnership with State 
Governments. These can be feeders to sector as are the Mega Infra 
initiatives being done in partnership with state Governments. 
22. The Committee had desired that a fresh scheme be formulated for 
providing low cost financial assistance and credit facility to Powerl oom 
workers for upgrading their looms.  The Ministry have, however, stated 
that they are in an advanced stage of conducting a fresh base -line survey 
on Powerloom  Sector.  The Ministry also propose to strengthen raw 
material support to workers and market li nkages through development of 
e-Portal on the lines of Portal developed for Handloom 
Weavers/Handicraft Workers.  The Committee desire that the base line 
survey and other initiatives proposed for the benefit of powerloom 
workers be completed /provided in a time bound manner and, thereafter, 
measures be initiated to provide financial assistance to them for 
upgrading plain looms into automatic looms and also train them to 
operate such looms. 
VI. Women Workers in Powerloom Sector 
(Recommendation Para No. 14) 
23.   The Committee in their earlier Report had observed that most of the work 
in Powerloom Sector is being undertaken by the women workers, as such, it 
becomes obligatory on the part of the Ministry to pay special attention to the 
needs of the female workers  and day-to-day problems/challenges being faced 
by them so as to ensure that remedial steps are taken to provide them basic 
amenities viz. restrooms, separate wash areas, crèche facilities besides 
healthcare facilities, etc. Observing that around 90% of al l major looms 
installed are concentrated mainly in four States viz. Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, 
Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh, the Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to 
make concerted efforts with these States to conduct field visits to the 
powerloom clusters so as to have a realistic idea of the problems being faced by 
women workers and take corrective or remedial measures.  
  

10 
 
24. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“Once the baseline survey on Powerloom sector is completed, while 
formulating new policy/ scheme for Powerloom sector, the observations 
made by the Committee would be looked into.” 
25. The reply of the Ministry is silent on the recommendation of the 
Committee to conduct field visits to the powerloom clusters in four States 
viz. Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh to gauge the 
problems/challenges being faced by women workers. The Ministry have, 
however, stated that while formulating new policy/ scheme for Powerloom 
Sector, the observations made by the Committee would be looked into.  
This indicates a casual approach in responding to the observations of the 
Parliamentary Committee advising the Ministry to pay special attention 
to the needs of female workers.  Consi dering the fact that urgent steps 
need to be taken to address day -to-day problems being faced by women 
workers in powerloom sector, the Committee exhort the Ministry to 
accord priority in conducting field visits to four States and take remedial 
measures to address the issue. 
VII. Jute Sector 
(Recommendation Para No. 16) 
26. The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that the Jute Sector 
provides direct employment to 40 lakh farm families, 2 lakh workers in 
organized mills, 2 lakh in value added diversification activities, 3 lakh in 
tertiary and allied sectors and a large number of persons engaged in t he trade 
of jute. The Committee were apprised that the final report of the study 
conducted in 2014/2015 by National Jute Board (NJB) on ‘Occupational 
Health of the Workers in the Jute producing units in India’, which inter-alia 
suggested extending Provident Fund and maternity benefits for female workers, 
was forwarded by NJB to Indian Jute Mills Association (IJMA) for 
dissemination among the Jute Mills and taking necessary action. The 
Committee were also apprised that permanent workers are provided with 
Provident Fund and ESIC benefits as also maternity benefits by the jute mills. 
Observing that the Ministry of Textiles is  the nodal agency for safeguarding the 
overall interest of jute workers , t he Committee had desired  the Ministry to 
make concerted efforts and ensure that all jute mills implement the 
recommendations on social security measures so as to improve overall health 
condition of jute workers irrespective of the nature of their employment viz. 
permanent or temporary, which would be in tune with the p rovisions of the 

11 
 
Code on Social Security, 2020 and The Occupational, Safety, Health and 
Working Conditions Code, 2020. 
27. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows:- 
“Action taken report on the observation taken by Jute Mills on Welfare 
Scheme and Social Security Measures are given below:  
 
• Introduction of face mask to workers working in Jute selection 
department. 
• Installation of high power dust extraction & collection system in 
Spreader machine which restricts dust particles to mix in breathable 
air. 
• Reduction of Noise level by introducing shuttle less looms 8S 
putting covers in all machines including reduction of accidents. 
• Replacing old Tube lights by LED in the production area which has 
increased illumination & thus better visibility. 
• IJIRA has introduced Protective Gloves which are being used. 
• Introduction of Sprinklers in Drawing, Spinning & Weaving 
department, has restricted fibre dust mix with air. 
• Introduction of Fork Lift in transportation of heavy bales, has reduced 
loads on workers. 
• Introduction of Shuttle-less loom connected with Warp Winding 
Machine, has replaced 
manuallyoperatedCopwindingmachineforweavingHessianandSacki
ngclothfabric. 
• Making of multiple Hygienic sanitation units for workers. 
 Workers quarters have been renovated for healthy living.” 
28. The Committee take cognizance of the facilities/amenities like face 
masks, installation of high power dust extraction and collection system, 
replacing old tube lights by LEDs, Protective Gloves, Hygienic Sanitation 
Units, renovation of workers quarters, et c. provided by Jute Mills to 
workers.  The reply of the Ministry, however, does not touch upon the 
need expressed by the Committee for providing social security measures 
viz. Provident Fund, medical and maternity benefits to jute workers by 
Jute Mills irrespective of the nature of their employment viz. permanent 
or temporary.  The Committee desire that appropriate action be taken by 
the Ministry for providing medical facilities, old age protection and 
improving working conditions in tune with the provisions Code on Social  
  

12 
 
Security, 2020 and the Occupational Safety Health and Working 
Conditions Code, 2020.  
****** 
 

13 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
 For providing universal and affordable Social Security in case of Natural/ 
accidental death and total or partial disability, the Ministry of Textiles runs 
three Schemes/ Programmes viz. Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana 
(PMJJBY); Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY); and C onverged 
Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana (MGBBY). Under PMJJBY Scheme, 
renewable life insurance cover is provided for death due to any reason for one -
year, for those in the age group of 18 -50 years. PMSBY Scheme provides 
renewable accidental insurance co ver on death or disability for one -year, for 
persons in the age group of 18 -70 years. MGBBY provides renewable life and 
accidental insurance cover on death or disability for a closed group of 
handloom workers in the age group of 51 -59 years. As informed, a  clarification 
was issued by the Ministry of Finance that the insurance schemes be 
implemented with full premium payment regime with effect from 01.04.2020. 
The Ministry further stated that Social security share of Rs.100/ -, which was 
earlier borne by LIC will henceforth be borne by State Government/Beneficiary. 
Accordingly, the share of State Government/Beneficiary has increased to 
Rs.180/- from Rs.80/- w.e.f. 01.04.2020. Also, premium of PMJJBY increased 
from Rs.330/- to Rs.436/ - w.e.f. 01.06.2022 resulti ng in increased premium 
share of State Government/Beneficiaries from Rs.180/ - to Rs.286/ -. In this 
regard, the Ministry further informed that  premium amount of PMJJBY has 
been revised in the ratio 5:6 between Government of India (Rs.198) and State 
Government/Beneficiary (Rs.238) during 2023 -24. The Committee note that 
the number of enrolments of Handloom weavers under PMSBY declined 
substantially from 1,09,108 beneficiaries in 2021-22 to 43,421 in 2022-23 with 
major decrease being in Manipur from 1,07,565 in 2021-22 to 27,488 in 2022-
23. The Committee also note that there was ‘nil’ enrolment of handloom 
workers under PMJJBY/PMSBY and converged MGBBY in 2020 -21 following 
the transition to full payment regime w.e.f. 01.04.2020.As stated by the 
Ministry, due t o increase in share of contribution of State 
Government/Beneficiary under PMJJBY and PMSBY, lesser enrolment was 
observed in Several States. The Ministry also stated that only 3 States i.e. 
Karnataka, Kerala and Sikkim are contributing premium share under PMJJBY. 
The Committee note that discontinuation of premium share of Rs. 100 under 
Social Security Fund w.e.f. 01.04.2020 with consequent increase in 
contribution of State Governments/beneficiary is the primary reason for 
decline in enrolment under PMJJBY a nd PMSBY. The Committee also find that 
only 03 States are presently contributing premium share under PMJJBY. As 

14 
 
informed by the representative of the Ministry during evidence, despite taking 
up the matter with the State Governments on numerous occasions, t he States 
have not been contributing their share. As the outcome of the Schemes is not 
upto the desired level, the Committee would exhort the Ministry to strengthen 
their monitoring and coordination mechanism and continue to pursue the 
matter with the State Governments so that the intended social security benefits 
are made available to the beneficiaries. Such modifications, as may be 
appropriate may also be considered for being carried out in the Schemes so as 
to ensure their viability in providing social security benefits.  
 
(Reply of Government) 
(a)  Handlooms: For monitoring and coordination mechanism, the office of 
DC(Handloom) has written on 24.05.2023 to Additional Chief Secretary/ 
Principal Secretary, In -charge of Handlooms of all States/UTs Government to 
personally intervene in the matter towards implementation of scheme 
components (PMJJBY, PMSBY, Financial support to Awardee weavers and 
Scholarship to weavers’ children) in 100% saturation mode and to ensure that 
awareness camps are organized  in coordination with the field offices of this 
office and banks in all handloom pockets in their respective State/UT. 
Also, a letter dated 16.06.2023 has been sent to all field offices of this office to 
take expeditious steps to achieve the targets assign ed for improving the 
performance of the welfare schemes which will, in turn, encourage the 
livelihood of handloom weavers/workers. 
(b) Handicrafts: The suggestions of the committee for modification in the 
scheme so as to ensure their viability in providing  social security benefits has 
been noted for compliance and would be placed before the EFC committee at 
the time of revision of scheme.   
 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see Para Nos. 8-9 of Chapter I. 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 The Committee are appreciative of the fact that a new initiative was 
introduced in October, 2021 under which, scholarship upto Rs.2.00 lakh per 
annum is provided to handloom worker’s children (upto 2 children) f or 
pursuing Diploma/Under Graduate/Post Graduate courses from recognized 
Textiles Institutions. The Committee, however, find that only 45 applicants 

15 
 
have been sanctioned the scholarship till date. The Ministry have reportedly 
taken steps to enhance the num ber of beneficiaries through awareness 
camps/chaupals besides conducting review meetings with State Governments 
and seeking details of weavers/workers’ children studying in Indian Institutes 
of Handloom Technology (IIHTs) and National Institute of Fashion Technology 
(NIFT). As admitted by the Ministry, for effective implementation of the 
initiative, more coordination and cooperation from State Governments at 
District/ Block level is required. While taking note of the efforts, the Committee 
urge upon the Min istry to strengthen the coordination and monitoring 
mechanism and vigorously pursue the State Governments to spread awareness 
about the scheme at the grass root level and motivate the eligible Handloom 
workers at the village level/most rural/backward areas  to avail the facility so 
that the targeted persons are actually benefitted. The Committee also 
emphasize that periodical reviews of such exercise be undertaken so that the 
laudable intent of providing scholarships to the eligible children is well served. 
The Committee further desire that the possibility of introducing a scholarship 
scheme for handicraft workers’ children on lines similar to the Scheme already 
in place for children of the handloom workers be considered.  
(Reply of Government) 
 (a) Handlooms:For monitoring and coordination mechanism, t he office of 
DC(HL) has written to Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary, In -
charge of Handlooms of all States/UTs Government to personally intervene in 
the matter towards implementation of sc heme components (PMJJBY, PMSBY, 
Financial support to Awardee weavers and Scholarship to weavers’ children) in 
100% saturation mode and to ensure that awareness camps are organized in 
coordination with the field offices of this office and banks in all handl oom 
pockets in their respective State/UT. 
Also, a letter dated 16.06.2023 has been sent to all field offices of this office to 
take expeditious steps to achieve the targets assigned for improving the 
performance of the welfare schemes which will, in turn, encourage the 
livelihood of handloom weavers/workers. 
(b) Handicrafts: The suggestion of the committee for possibility of introducing 
scholarship scheme for handicraft artisan’s children to ensure their viability for 
providing benefits to the artisans has been noted for compliance and would be 
places before the EFC committee at the time of revision of scheme. 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see Para Nos. 8-9 of Chapter I. 

16 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
 
 The Committee note that since 2019 -20, 48,124 Handloom 
weavers/Handloom Organizations have been sanctioned concessional credit 
under the Mudra Loan Scheme with the total amount of credit extended being 
Rs. 275.31 crore. On the other hand, only Rs. 4.25 crore of credit has been 
sanctioned to 825 handicraft artisans during the period. Thus, there is a huge 
variation in the number of beneficiaries and, consequently, the amount of loan 
sanctioned in handloom sector vis -à-vis handicr aft sector, thereby implying 
that the weavers and artisans are not getting at par benefits of the Scheme. 
The Committee note in this regard that an evaluation study conducted during 
2019-20inter-alia indicates that the reasons for less number of loans exte nded 
to artisans include inter -alia disinterest of the Bank Branch concerned (47%), 
insufficiency of loan related documents (29%) and inadequacies in Project 
report (16%). More significantly, the Committee note that absence of the facility 
of extending Mud ra Loans to the handicraft organizations i.e. Producer 
Companies is a major factor for fewer loans being extended to the handicraft 
sector. As informed by the Ministry, efforts are underway for extending the 
facility of Mudra Loans to artisan Producer Comp anies, in which the artisans 
will be the stakeholders and verification of the company by the State 
Government concerned would be necessary. As per the assurance given, the 
Committee expect that appropriate action would be taken urgently by the 
Ministry/DC (Handicrafts) for providing the benefits of Margin Money 
Assistance etc. to producer companies in the handicraft sector in a manner 
similar to the companies in the handloom sector. This would translate into 
contributing to the development of the handicraft sector.  
(Reply of Government) 
 The suggestions of the committee for extending MUDRA loan to the 
handicraft’s organizations i.e. Producer Companies in the line of weavers of 
Handloom organizations has been noted and action in this regard has been 
initiated. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
 
  

17 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
 
 The Committee are also constrained to note that there has been a steady 
decline in the number of Mudra Loans extended in the last few years i.e. 2019 -
20 onwards. Also, there has been a decline in margin money claims (22353 in 
2019-20 to 8397 in 2022 -23), a s also credit guarantee and interest subsidy 
which clearly indicate that the scheme has not yielded the desired results. 
Decrease in the number of loans granted, being a matter of concern, the 
Committee would impress upon the Ministry to act in unison with  State 
Governments, Ministry of Finance and Banks including Private, Co -operative 
and Gramin Banks so that the procedural rigmaroles are addressed 
expeditiously and the financial benefits of the scheme are extended to the 
weavers/artisans. The Committee al so feel that it would be appropriate to fix 
annual targets for the banks to cover a specific number of weavers/artisans 
under the Mudra Loan Scheme. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. Further, the Committee also desire to be apprised 
of the progress of the proposals for running a special drive for Mudra loans in 
coordination with State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) and District Level 
Bankers Committee (DLBC). The Committee also feel it to be appropriate on the 
part of t he Ministry to carry out an assessment of the Mudra Loan scheme in 
promoting entrepreneurship amongst handloom weavers/ handicraft artisans.  
(Reply of Government) 
(a) Handlooms: The following remedial steps taken with 
Chairman/CEO/MD/President of all Bank s including 
Private/Cooperative/Gramin Banks to extend the scheme benefits to maximum 
number of handloom weavers and to improve the scheme performance:- 
 
 Bank branches should be sensitized about the scheme. 
 Bank branches should be asked to register on the portal. 
 Once Bank branches are registered on the portal, they should ensure to 
lodge the claims in respect of margin money assistance, interest subsidy 
and credit guarantee fee through the portal.  
 Expeditious sanction/disbursement of loan to the handloom weavers. 
 Make aware the participating banks to sanction fresh loan to the 
handloom weavers, who availed the loan in past and have re-paid. 
 For resolving any issues faced to lodge the claims on Portal, details of 
concerned PNB Officials have been shared to all banks. 
 
Annual targets have been assigned to WSCs to enhance the number of loan  
beneficiaries under Concessional Credit/Weaver MUDRA Scheme and directed 

18 
 
to take expeditious steps to achieve the targets for improving the performance 
of the scheme which  will encourage the livelihood of handloom 
weavers/workers. 
(b) Handicrafts: Noted for compliance.  All the field offices have been issued 
an order to forward the applications to the Banks for sanction of Mudra Loan 
and Margin money to handicrafts artisans.  The applications of handicrafts 
artisans for sanction of Mudra Loan are being collected by organizing the 
Chaupals / Shivirs /Camps in the craft clusters by inviting the representative 
of the Banks. 
     The Regional Offices and Headquarters office would monitor the progress 
made in this regard regularly and well as issues would be discussed in the 
State Level Bankers (SLBC) and District Level Bankers Committee (DLBC). The 
progress would be apprised to the Committee in due course of time. 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
 The Committee note that a centralized online claim disbursement system 
“Handloom Weavers Mudra portal” has been developed in association with the 
Nodal bank viz. Punjab national bank (PNB), which separately captures the 
data on loans sanctioned to weavers and artisans. However, the portal does not 
capture data on the loan amount disbursed owing to which the Ministry has 
taken up the matter of re-customizing the portal with the Bank. The Committee 
impress upon the Ministry on the need for ensuring that the re -customization 
is completed in a time bound manner so that the data on disbursals etc. is 
comprehensively made available on the portal. The Committee wish to be 
apprised of the progress in this regard. 
(Reply of Government) 
 Feature for capturing the disbursement data has been incorporated in 
the Handloom Weaver MUDRA Portal in August, 2023. So far, disbursement 
data is not available on the portal. 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see Para No. 12  of Chapter I. 
 

19 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry has launched an e -portal viz. 
indiahandmade.com, where the producers, sellers, producer companies, etc. 
can directly upload products and the expenditure on shipping bills, shipments, 
documents, taking photographs, etc. is borne by the Ministry. The Committee 
further note that weavers are facilitated to sell their products on -line for which 
23 e -commerce platforms have been associated and 1.50 lakh weavers have 
been registered on Government e -Market Place (GeM). Further, the Ministry is 
continuously on boarding the artisans on GeM portal/e -commerce platforms. 
The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry to create an 
intermediary-free marketing space for the handicraft artisans. In view of the 
large scale use o f online platforms by sellers/buyers for selling/purchasing 
various products, especially after the outbreak of Covid-19 pandemic, the steps 
taken by the Ministry would immensely help weavers/artisans by way of 
providing them a marketing platform, which wil l make their presence felt at 
global level besides, eliminating the intermediaries and thereby resulting in 
increasing income levels and ensuring them a better livelihood. The Committee 
impress upon the Ministry to continue their efforts, spread awareness and 
ensure that education/training is provided to the beneficiaries especially the 
illiterate and untrained workers in the remote rural areas so that they are not 
deprived of the benefits of ecommerce platforms in the changing marketing 
scenario of on -line transactions. Further, as not many workers have been 
registered on GeM, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to take 
immediate steps to intensify their efforts to substantially increase the number 
of weavers/artisans on e -commerce platforms without com promising with the 
marketing events held across the country in rural and urban areas. Also, 
simultaneously, the Government Departments/Organizations need to be 
encouraged to make use of handloom/handicraft products available on GeM 
Portal.  
(Reply of Government) 
(a) Handlooms: In order to provide e-marketing platform to weavers & artisans, 
continues efforts are being made to on-board them on e-commerce platforms to 
sell their products directly to consumers including Government 
Departments/Organizations, eliminating the intermedi aries and to grab better 
income & livelihood. 26 need based virtual training sessions were conducted 
for weavers & artisans with Weavers Service Centres (WSCs) & Handicrafts 
Service Centres (HSCs) after the launch of India Handmade Portal on on -
boarding, u ploading their products, orders processing etc. These training 

20 
 
sessions have been well -received by our weavers & artisans and witnessed 
significant improvements in their skills, confidence, and business acumen.  
 
Further, additional sessions have been plan ned to on -board more weavers & 
artisans on e-commerce platform. These sessions will have focus on specialized 
topics such as correct pricing, taxation, GST compliance etc. Also, regular 
marketing events are being organized across the country to sell their products 
directly to consumers. 
(b) Handicrafts: Efforts are being made to provide training for e -marketing 
in live interactive video sessions & seminar making those videos available as 
reference videos in multilingual formats to the artisans/weavers. The various 
field officers are also trained to provide handholding support to 
artisans/weavers. Measures to create awareness amongst artisans/weavers 
about e-commerce platforms offered by the Ministry of Textiles is being done by 
participating in various fairs , Haats etc, to interact directly with the 
artisans/weavers. A collaborative effort is being made by Gem & Ministry of 
Textiles on -board more artisans/weavers by data sharing & coordinated 
awareness campaigns. 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
  The Committee note that Identity Cards known as Pahchan Cards are 
issued to the handloom weavers/handicrafts artisans which entitle them to 
avail benefits of various schemes run by the Ministry. As on 04.06. 2023, out of 
35.22 lakh handloom workers, comprising 26.73 lakh weavers and 8.49 lakh 
allied workers, Pahchan cards have been issued only to 17.15 lakh workers 
and the remaining 18.07 lakh workers (more than 50%) are yet to be issued 
Pahchan cards. The sit uation is, however, better in the case of handicraft 
artisans as out of 30 lakh identified artisans, 26.72 lakh artisans have been 
issued Pahchan Cards. Thus, a sizeable number of weavers/artisans are yet to 
be issued Pahchan Cards. The Committee, therefor e, impress upon the 
Ministry to chalk out a robust mechanism to identify the causes behind non -
issuance of Pahchan Cards to all the eligible Handloom weavers/handicraft 
artisans and expedite the procedure of issuing the Cards to all the eligible 
weavers/artisans so that they can avail the benefits of all social security and 
welfare schemes intended for them. The handloom weavers/handicraft artisans 
mostly belong to the socio -economically backward section of the society, and, 
may require financial assistance  on an urgent basis mainly on account of the 
fact that their products are painstakingly time-consuming to produce and there 
is a long gestation period before income is generated. During the process of 

21 
 
manufacturing, there is no income generated to support their livelihood. The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to explore the possibility of issuing a 
‘credit card’ to the artisans on lines similar to Kisan Credit Card so that these 
artisans can also derive the benefit of some form of financial assista nce under 
indigent circumstances.  
(Reply of Government) 
(a)  Handlooms: 17.38 lakh Pahchan cards have been issued to eligible 
handloom workers as on 10.09.2023. Details of Pahchan cards of all handloom 
workers of 4th All India Handloom Census 2019 -20 are accessible from website 
of this office i.e. www.handlooms.nic.in as below:- 
https://tricorniotec.com/webapp/portal 
 
User ID:- ministry 
Password:- ministry@ 2022 
 
Handloom workers may avail the benefits of handloom schemes, implemented 
by Ministry of Textiles, Government of India for procurement of raw materials, 
common infrastructure development, skilling, marketing of handloom products 
in domestic/overseas markets, concessional credit etc. 
(b) Handicrafts: The mobilization of handicrafts artisans across the country is 
regular process of the Handicrafts Service Centre by organizing Chaupals 
/Shivirs/ Craft Awareness prog rammee for issuance of PAHCHAN card to 
handicrafts artisans. The handicrafts artisans enrolled under PAHCHAN would 
be eligible for all the benefit of the scheme implemented for promotion and 
development of handicrafts sector. These artisans can also avail the interest 
subsidy and margin money on MUDRA loan amount. However, the suggestions 
of the committee to issuance of Credit card has been noted similar to Kisan 
Credit card and would be placed before the Committee at the time of revision of 
EFC for their consideration. 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see Para Nos. 15-16 of Chapter I. 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
  The Committee note that another new initiative was taken in October, 
2021, under which pension of Rs.8,000 per month is granted to awardee 
weavers/artisans above 60 years of age, in indigent circumstances and having 
annual income below Rs.1 lakh. The Committee were apprised that the amount 
of pension for handicraft awardees was recently increased from Rs. 5,000 to 
Rs. 8,000.The Committee, in this regard, note that the ceiling of income at Rs.1 

22 
 
lakh per annum as the criterion for awarding this pension which translates to 
less than the per day minimum wages restricts the entitled beneficiaries to a 
bare minimum. The representative of the Ministry, during evidence, also 
admitted that the Scheme has eventually benefitted only such awardees whose 
income is less t han the per day minimum wages. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends reviewing the ceiling of Rs. 1 lakh per annum and raise it 
to a reasonable amount so that more persons avail the benefits of this Scheme 
which provides old age protection. The Committee further note that in 2022-23, 
in the handloom sector, 80 handloom awardees were benefitted whereas in the 
handicrafts sector, 339 handicraft awardees were benefitted. As informed by 
the Ministry, one of the reasons for selection of low number of ben eficiaries is 
the dearth of awareness. While taking note of the measures initiated by the 
Ministry to address the issue, the Committee desires the Ministry to put in 
extra efforts to create awareness in the rural and backward areas of the 
country through p rint, electronic and social media and also make concerted 
efforts with the State Governments through the Chaupals organized at 
village/block level.  
(Reply of Government) 
(a)  Handlooms: Review for enhancement of annual income ceiling of Rs.1.00 
lakh per awardee has been noted for further consideration.  
This office has written a D.O. letter to Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal 
Secretary, In-charge of Handlooms of all States/UTs Govern ment to personally 
intervene in the matter towards implementation of scheme components 
(PMJJBY, PMSBY, Financial support to Awardee weavers and Scholarship to 
weavers’ children) in 100% saturation mode and to ensure that awareness 
camps are organized in co ordination with the field offices of this office and 
banks in all handloom pockets in their respective State/UT. 
Also, a letter dated 16.06.2023 has been sent to all field offices of this office to 
take expeditious steps to achieve the targets assigned for  improving the 
performance of the welfare schemes. 
(b) Handicrafts: The suggestion of the Committee has been noted for its 
compliance at the time for forming the EFC. To cover a greater number of 
artisans under the component of Financial support to artisan s in indigent 
circumstances, wide publicity would be made through leading newspaper 
/social media/village /block level as well as by organizing the camps in the 
craft cluster pockets/DICs/State Handicrafts Development Corporations. 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I. 

23 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that at present 72 crafts have been included in the 
list of recognized crafts. The Ministry have also identified 35 crafts as 
endangered category. The Committee further note that preference is given to 
promote and preserve such endangered crafts. Also, the benefits of various 
schemes, including imparting skill training are provided to new entrants 
besides encouraging them to practice these crafts and thereby increase the 
number of artisans. In addition, assistance under the marketing scheme is also 
provided to them for participation in various marketing events organized by the 
Ministry of Textiles and other Ministries. The Committee believe that there may 
be more such traditional handicrafts being produced in the 
interior/rural/hinterland areas of the country, like Bell Metal handicrafts of 
Odisha, which have heritage value and the requisite ‘skill sets’ are  passed on 
from generation to generation. These may be on the brink of extinction due to 
lack of resources or related reasons. The Committee feel that these crafts/arts, 
which are a reflection of carefully preserved culture and tradition of the 
country, ne ed to be identified and given due recognition. The Committee, 
therefore, impress upon the Ministry to undertake a comprehensive exercise to 
review and update the recognized crafts, identify the ‘dying arts’ and include 
them in the endangered category so th at the benefits of various schemes run 
by the Ministry are provided to the handicraft workers. 
(Reply of Government) 
 Various studies and surveys are being conducted related to craft under 
the National Handicrafts Development Programme (NHDP), wherein the 
historical and cultural significance, tradition, making process, socio -economic 
condition of craftsmen etc. are thoroughly explained. 
In connection with tradition handicrafts of rural interior area studies & survey 
are being carried out time to time. For the Bell metal handicraft of Odisha, A 
study on “definition of craft languishing, its survey and Identification of craft” 
has been conducted in the past year where 35 endangered crafts were 
identified and included in the list in which copper snake of Odish a has been 
identified as Languishing/Endangered craft as per the criteria defined. 
  
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
 
  

24 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 
 The Committee note that the challenges faced in the unorganized 
Powerloom Sector which is the largest in the world include inter -alia outdated 
technology, inadequate capital for modernization and working capital, lack of 
vertical integration, fluctuating raw material prices, etc. As per Nielson Survey 
2012-13, there are 24.86 l akh powerlooms in the country employing 45 lakh 
workers, who include a large number of women employees; and data regarding 
number of powerloom owners is not being maintained by the Ministry. The 
Committee understand that with a view to ensuring holistic de velopment of the 
entire Powerloom Sector, the Ministry is in an advanced stage of conducting a 
fresh base line survey so that actual gaps of the sector are identified, on the 
basis of which a new scheme would be proposed for capacity building of the 
workers of Powerloom Sector.  
(Reply of Government) 
  In order to ensure holistic development of the entire Powerloom Sector, 
the Ministry is in an advanced stage of finalizing for conducting a fresh base -
line survey on Powerloom sector so that actual gaps of the sector are identified. 
Ministry has assigned Textiles Committee to conduct fresh baseline Powerloom 
survey. Thereafter, on the basis of the report, a new scheme would be proposed 
for capacity building of the workers of Powerloom Sector. 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
 The Committee are of the view that the steps taken by the Ministry, 
although after a gap of more than 10 years, are in right direction and hope that 
in addition to updating the data base of workers in Powerloom Sector, the 
exercise will also help in addressing the challenges being faced in the Sector. 
The Committee trust that the data regarding number and locations of plain 
powerloom owners will also be collected during the survey. The Committee 
would like to be kept apprised  of the progress of the survey and formulation 
and implementation of policy measures for capacity building of the workers of 
the Powerloom Sector. Conversion of Plain Powerlooms into Automatic 
Powerloom.  
(Reply of Government) 
  The data regarding number and locations of plain powerloom owners will 
also be collected during the survey. The Committee would be kept apprised of 

25 
 
the progress of the survey exercise and formulation and implementation of 
policy measures for capacity building of the workers of the Powerloom Sector. 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 13) 
 The Committee observes that under the umbrella scheme of Textile 
Cluster Development Scheme (TCDS), outlay under the head ‘In -situ 
upgradation of Plain Powerlooms’ is only Rs. 1.90 crore during the year. As 
most of the plain Powerlooms require immediate upgradation along with other 
infrastructural support, the Committee recommends that the Ministry re -visit 
the modal ities of the Scheme inter -alia with a view to improving the scheme 
and obtaining additional funds that would be required for upgradation of Plain 
Powerlooms.  
(Reply of Government) 
 The fund allocated by Department of Expenditure for In -situ upgradation 
scheme for Plain Powerloom (Rs.1.90 cr) has already been paid to the eligible 
beneficiaries. Committee’s suggestions have been duly noted and Ministry will 
take appropriate action.     
 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 15) 
 The Committee note that presently the work relating to fibre, yarn, 
processing of cloth, printing, garmenting, etc. is spread over various places 
across the country. The Committee have been apprised that lack of integration 
decreases competitiveness and also minimizes diversification, which has direct 
impact on the cost of product thereby resulting in import of cheaper cloths. The 
Committee are of the considere d opinion that establishment of PM -MITRA 
Parks would take care of the issue of lack of vertical integration faced by 
Powerloom Sector. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to leave no 
stone unturned to expedite the process of setting up the PM -MITRA Parks and 
make them functional at the earliest so as to transform Powerloom Sector from 
Unorganised to the Organised one in a phased manner and thereby enable in 
providing social security and ensuring the welfare of the workers as envisaged 
in the Code on Social Security, 2020.  

26 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 The Government has approved setting up of 7(seven) PM Mega Integrated 
Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks with world class infrastructure 
including plug and play facility with an outlay of Rs. 4445 crore for a period of 
seven years from 2021-22 to 2027-28.  
The Government has finalised 7 sites viz. Tamil Nadu (Virudhnagar), Telangana 
(Warangal), Gujarat (Navsari), Karnataka (Kalaburagi), Madhya Pradesh (Dhar), 
Uttar Pradesh (Lucknow) and Maharashtra (Amravati) for setting up PM MITRA 
Parks. 
The Ministry is in touch with PM MITRA States and regularly taking the matter 
with State Government and wherever necessary, the matter is being taken at 
highest level of State Government.  The Ministry has executed MOA with all the 
States and process of formation of SPV in all 7 states are undergoing. It is 
expected that formation of SPV will be completed shortly. Some of PM MITRA 
states has already started work towards trunk infrastructure and also allotted 
plots to investors.   
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
 

27 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 14) 
 The Committee observe that the Powerloom Sector has a large number of 
workforce of women. As most of the work in Powerloom Sector is being 
undertaken by the women workers, it becomes obligatory on the part of the 
Ministry to pay special attention to the needs of the female workers and day-to-
day problems/challenges being faced by them so as to ensure that remedial 
steps are taken to provide them b asic amenities viz. restrooms, separate wash 
areas, crèche facilities besides healthcare facilities, etc. Further, as around 
90% of all major looms installed are concentrated mainly in four States viz. 
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh, th e Committee impress 
upon the Ministry to make concerted efforts with these States to conduct field 
visits to the powerloom clusters so as to have a realistic idea of the problems 
being faced by women workers and take corrective or remedial measures. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard within 
two months of presentation of this Report to Parliament.  
(Reply of Government) 
 Once the baseline survey on Powerloom sector is completed, while 
formulating new policy/ scheme for Powerloom sector, the observations made 
by the Committee would be looked into.  
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see Para No. 25  of Chapter I. 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 16) 
  The Committee note that the Jute Sector provides direct employment to 
40 lakh farm families, 2 lakh workers in organized mills, 2 lakh in value added 
diversification activities and 3 lakh in tertiary and allied sectors. In addition, 
there are a large numbe r of persons engaged in the trade of jute. The 
Committee note that the Ministry had, in the year 2014/2015, conducted a 
study through National Jute Board (NJB) on ‘Occupational Health of the 
Workers in the Jute producing units in India’ with an objective t o assess the 
impact of occupational hazards on the health of the workers of Jute 
Mill/Industry and to develop the baseline data on the probable health hazards 
due to work environment and to arrive at an index value representing the 

29 
 
overall health of worker s in Jute Mills. The final report which inter -alia 
suggested extending Provident Fund and maternity benefits for female workers, 
was forwarded by NJB to Indian Jute Mills Association (IJMA) for 
dissemination among the Jute Mills and taking necessary action . The Ministry, 
after the perusal of Annual Reports of some jute mills and following up with 
IJMA, have merely stated that permanent workers are provided with Provident 
Fund and ESIC benefits as also maternity benefits by the jute mills. From the 
information made available, the Committee cannot help noting that the 
approach of the Ministry has been lukewarm in taking positive action on the 
findings and observations of the study which is of importance from the view 
point of health of the jute workers. The Co mmittee desire that the Ministry of 
Textiles, being the nodal agency for safeguarding the overall interest of jute 
workers, should make concerted efforts and ensure that all jute mills 
implement the recommendations on social security measures so as to impr ove 
overall health condition of jute workers irrespective of the nature of their 
employment viz. permanent or temporary. This would be in tune with the 
provisions of the Code on Social Security, 2020 and The Occupational, Safety, 
Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020. 
(Reply of Government) 
 Action taken report on the observation taken by Jute Mills on 
Welfare Scheme and Social Security Measures are given below:  
 
• Introduction of face mask to workers working in Jute selection  
department. 
• Installation of high power dust extraction & collection system 
in Spreader machine which restricts dust particles to mix in 
breathable air. 
• Reduction of Noise level by introducing shuttle less looms 
8s putting covers in all machines. 
• Reducing accidents by putting covers i n all machines. 
• Replacing old Tube lights by LED in the production area which 
has increased illumination & thus better  visibility. 
• IJIRA has introduced Protective Gloves which are being  used. 
• Introduction of Sprinklers in Drawing, Spinning & Weaving 
department, has restricted fibre dust mix with  air. 
• Introduction of Fork Lift in transportation of heavy bales, has 
reduced loads on workers. 
• Introduction of Shuttle -less loom connected with Warp 
Winding Machine, has replaced manually  operated Cop 
winding machine for weaving Hessian and Sacking cloth 
fabric. 
• Making of multiple Hygienic sanitation units for  workers. 
• Workers quarters have been renovated for healthy  living. 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I. 

30 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 12) 
 The Committee has been apprised that most of the powerlooms are plain 
powerlooms with outdated technology, which need to be upgraded into 
automatic looms for improving the quality and quantity of the fabric. The major 
constraint faced on this aspect is, dearth of working capital with the powerloom 
workers, as a consequence of which, there is lack of raw material and 
consequently they are compelled to take up other jobs. The Committee believe 
that this is a vicious circle in which one event is leading to ano ther and 
recommend the Ministry to chalk out an infallible strategy to overcome these 
challenges. The Committee desire that a fresh scheme may be formulated for 
providing low cost financial assistance and credit facility especially to 
Powerloom workers for  upgrading their looms and also provide adequate 
support to acquire raw materials besides providing market linkages through 
development of e -Portal on the lines of the portal developed for Handloom 
Weavers/Handicraft Workers. The Committee also desire the Ministry to set up 
a mechanism to sensitize and instruct the powerloom workers regarding 
procedure of upgradation of plain looms into the shuttleless/automatic looms 
and train them to operate them.  
(Reply of Government) 
 The Ministry is in an advanced stage for conducting a fresh base -line 
survey on Powerloom sector. In addition, it is considered to strengthen raw 
material availability support besides providing market linkages through 
development of e -Portal on the lines o f the portal developed for Handloom 
Weavers/Handicraft Workers. To have traceability of support, a robust survey 
can help implement any focused /IT enabled verifiable initiatives from the 
Public resources, may be in partnership with State Governments. Thes e can be 
feeders to sector as are the Mega Infra initiatives being done in partnership 
with state Governments.  
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No.2/24/2023-Parl., dated 26/10/2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I. 
 
New Delhi;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
05 February, 2024                        CHAIRPERSON,  
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
            TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 

31 
 
Appendix-I 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTIETH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT  
 
      Total Percentage 
   
I. Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
– Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 
9, 10, 11, 13,  and 15 
 
13 81.25% 
II. Recommendations/Observations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply – Nil 
 
00 00% 
III. Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para Nos. 14 and 16 
 
02 12.50% 
IV Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature - 
Rec. Para No. 12 
 
01 06.25% 
    
   100% 
 
 