 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
Action Taken by the Government 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty
Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
Manmade Fibre’ pertaining to the 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
July, 202
45 
i 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Development of 
pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles
 
FORTY-FIFTH REPORT 
     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI   
, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL on the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty- ‘Development of Textiles. (Saka)  

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
Action Taken by the Government 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty
Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Development 
Manmade Fibre’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles.
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
ii 
FORTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty
th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Development 
Manmade Fibre’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles.
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.07.202
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.07.2023
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
TEXTILES AND SKILL on the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty- th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Development of Manmade Fibre’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles. .2023 3 July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)  

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report  
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which  replies of the Government  are interim 
in nature    
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix- I* Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on           
17th July, 2023. 
 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty–Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
 
 * Not appended with this cyclostyled copy. 
  
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
5. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
6. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
7. Shri Bache Gowda B.N. 
8. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
9. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
10. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
11. Shri Pakauri Lal 
12. Prof. Sanjay Sadashivrao Mandlik 
13. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori  
14. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
15. Dr. D. Ravikumar 
16. Shri Naba (Hira) Kumar Sarania 
17. Shri Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Nayab Singh 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan 
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24.  Shri R. Dharmar 
25. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
26.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
27.  Ms. Dola Sen 
28.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
29. Shri Shibu Soren 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.     Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  -  Additional Secretary 
 2  Shri Sanjay Sethi   - Director 
 3. Ms. Shilpa Kant   - Executive Officer 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2022-23) having been authorized by the Committee, present on 
their behalf this Forty-Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty- 
Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Development of Manmade Fibre’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles. 
2. The Thirty-Seventh Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on           
5th September, 2022 and presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
8th December, 2022. The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies on 5th 
December, 2022 indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report. The Committee 
considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 17 July, 2023.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
17 July, 2023                                   CHAIRPERSON 
26 Ashadha, 1944 (Saka )                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  
 

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in theirThirty-
seventhReport (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Development of Manmade Fibre' of 
the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Thirty-seventh Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 5th 
September, 2022 and presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 8 th December, 2022. It contained 18 Observations/ 
Recommendations. Replies of Government in respect of all the 
Recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:- 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government – Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 18 
Chapter-II 
Total:16 
Percentage: 
88.88 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observationswhich the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – Nil 
 
Chapter-III 
Total:00 
Percentage:0 
(iii) Recommendations/Observationsin respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Rec. Para No. 17 
 
Chapter-IV 
Total:01 
Percentage: 5.56 
(iv) Recommendations/Observationsin respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature  -
Rec. Para No. 12 
 
Chapter-V 
Total:01 
Percentage:5.56 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action 
taken reply in respect of the Recommendation contained in Chapter V of 
this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the Government, be 
furnished to them at the earliest. 

2 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/ Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit 
further comments. 
I. INDIA’S TEXTILE VALUE CHAIN 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
5. In their Thirty-seventh Report, the Committee noted that the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, in association with the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas and the Industry was in the process of finalization of a 
Perspective Plan for bridging the demand supply gap of various 
polymers/petrochemicals including Purified Terephthalic Acid (PTA) and 
Monoethylene Glycol (MEG). Observing that it was crucial and essential to put 
in place a better planning for ensuring domestic availability of PTA and MEG 
which are the basic inputs of MMF, the Committee desired that the proposed 
Perspective Plan be finalized at the earliest which would facilitate the 
formulation of a specific policy required for the growth of domestic capacity of 
PTA and MEG value chain.  
6. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“As per the data, India’s share of raw material for the MMF industry is 
7.38%, which even through makes us 2nd largest producer of raw material as a 
whole, but the overall share is not very significant as compared to China. ……. 
Man Made Fibre (MMF) i.e. synthetic fibre is classified broadly in five 
categories  used for making textiles; namely polyester fibre, polyamides(nylon) 
fibre, polyacrylonitrile (acrylic) fibre, elastomeric (spandex) fibre& Viscose fibre 
(derived from wood pulp)  i.e. Rayon. Currently out of total MMF requirement, 
there is about 90% contribution of polyester fibre (MMF).   Petrochemicals 
based Purified Terephthalic Acid (PTA) and Mono Ethylene Glycol (MEG) are 
basic inputs (synthetic fibre intermediates) required for production of polyester 
based MMF. In order to meet the growing demand of MMF and to augment the 
production of the basic synthetic fibre (polyester) intermediates namely PTA & 
MEG, Department of Chemicals and petrochemicals in association with 
MoP&NG and industry are in the process of finalization of a perspective Plan. 
The plan includes various polymers/Petrochemicals apart from PTA& MEG 
forecasting, likely demand-supply scenarios over the next 10-15 years.  
This would help in formulation of policy/prescriptions required for 
growth of domestic capacity of PTA and MEG value chain.” 

3 
 
 
7. The reply of the Ministry does not indicate the efforts being made to 
pursue with the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas the matter of early finalisation of the 
Perspective Plan to augment the production of the basic synthetic fibre 
(polyster) intermediates, namely Purified Terephthalic Acid (PTA)& Mono 
Ethylene Glycol (MEG). The proposed plan is vital as it would impact 
demand supply scenario over the next 10-15 years and also help in 
formulation of policy/prescriptions required for growth of domestic 
capacity of PTA and MEG value chain. The Committee, therefore, impress 
upon the Ministry to make rigorous efforts to establish proper co-
ordination with the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for finalizing the Perspective Plan 
at the earliest. The Committee desire to be kept apprised of the progress 
made in this direction within a period of two months from the 
presentation of this report to Parliament. 
II. FINALIZATION OF FREE TRADE AGREEMENTS 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
8. In their earlier Report, the Committee had expressed concern to note that 
India is facing tariff disadvantage in some of the markets such as EU and UK 
whereother countries like Bangladesh and Vietnam have an advantage since 
they either get the benefits of Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) or enjoy 
lower import duty in the European and UK markets. The Ministry have 
submitted that Indian textile products are not performing well owing to the 9.5 
percent to 10 percent duty that has to be borne by Indian exporters. Hence, 
Indian products are at a price disadvantage and are not able to increase their 

4 
 
share in such markets. The Committee while appreciating the progress made 
with the recently signed Comprehensive Economic Partnership 
Agreement(CEPA) between India-UAE and India-Australia Economic 
Cooperation and Trade Agreement (ECTA) on 18.02.2022 and 02.04.2022 
respectively, desired that the negotiating formalities be concluded at the 
earliest in the case of ongoing deliberations with European Union, United 
Kingdom, Canada, Israel and other markets/regions so as to offer seamless 
access to markets in the respective countries and to obviate discriminative 
pricing and competitive disadvantages faced by India 
9. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“Access to international market is being worked on through various 
FTAs. India and UAE have signed Comprehensive Economic Partnership 
Agreement (India-UAE CEPA on 18.02.2022). This CEPA is likely to boost 
exports of Indian textile and apparels. India-Australia Economic Cooperation 
and Trade Agreement (Ind-Aus ECTA) was signed on 02.04.2022. This ECTA 
can boost Indian export of Home Textiles, Readymade Garments, Carpets and 
Flooring to Australia.  India is currently in the process of negotiating FTAs with 
EU, UK, Canada, Israel and other countries/region.”  
10. The Committee express concern over the fact that no substantive 
progress has been made with regard to negotiating Free Trade Agreements 
(FTAs) with EU, UK, Canada, Israel as well as other countries/regions.  
More than a year has passed since the signing of the last two trade 
agreements with Australia and UAE. The Committee, therefore, impress 
upon the Ministry to expedite the consultation process and take up the 
matter with a sense of urgency and commitment so that the mutual 
agreements are signed and established at the earliest and seamless access 
is offered to the markets in countries such as UK, Canada, Israel and  
European Union, and thereby obviate the competitive disadvantages 
presently faced by India. 
III. INVERTED DUTY STRUCTURE 
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
11. In their earlier Report, the Committee had expressed concern to note that 
the differential GST structure in place at various stages of the MMF value chain 

5 
 
whereby raw materials, man-made fibre and MMF Yarn across the Indian 
textile value chain were taxed at 12 percent, 5 percent and 12 percent 
respectively. The Committee found that pursuant to the Ministry of Textiles 
taking up the matter with the Ministry of Finance, the issue was discussed by 
the GST Council in its 39th, 40th and 43rd meetings.  In its 45th meeting, the 
GST Council recommended for GST rate changes in order to correct the 
inverted duty structure in footwear and textile sector with effect from 
01.01.2022 but the change in rates was represented against and the decision 
was deferred by the GST Council in its 46th meeting. Consequently, the 
existing rates in textile sector including manmade fibres were continued 
beyond 01.01.2022. The Committee felt that there was a need to rationalize 
duties on raw material inputs to man-made textiles. Further, since the 
differential tariff rates and inverted duty structure are hindering the Indian 
textile and apparel industry to compete with global counterparts, the 
Committee urged the Ministry to follow up the matter at the appropriate fora so 
that systemic improvements could be ushered in for leveraging the export 
potential of the industry.  
12. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“It is to mention that the GST rates and their correction fall under the purview 
of GST Council which consists of representatives from Central and various 
State Governments. To have uniformity in GST rates and to remove inverted 
duty structure, it has been recommended for single GST rates on complete 
textile value chain. The textile value chain based on cotton is having 5% GST, 
whereas in MMF based textile value chain there are three slabs; from raw 
material to Garments PTA & MEG at 18%, filaments at 12% and fabric at 
5%. This issue of inverted duty structure has been taken up with MoF.” 
 
13. In order to have single GST rates on the complete textile value 
chain, the issue of doing away with the inverted duty structure has been 
taken up by the Ministry of Textiles with the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee note from the action taken reply that the decision to defer 
making changes in the tax rates was taken at the 46th meeting of GST 
Council held on 31.12.2021. As considerable time period has passed since 
then,it is imperative on the part of the Ministry to pursue the matter with 
the Ministry of Finance without any further lapse of time so that a firm 
and positive decision is taken expeditiously and the endeavor is drawn to 
its logical end. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 

6 
 
made in regard to doing away with the shortcomings in the existing duty 
structure. 
IV. PRIME MINISTER MEGA INTEGRATED TEXTILE REGION AND 
 APPAREL (PM MITRA) PARKS  
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
14. In their earlier Report, the Committee noted with appreciation the setting 
up of 7 textile parks under the Prime Minister Mega Integrated Textile Region 
and Apparel  (PM MITRA) scheme in 2021-22 to enable the textile industries to 
achieve the size and skills required to be globally competitive and  impressed 
upon the Ministry to expedite all the necessary procedural formalities to 
prepare an effective action plan for their implementation in order to promote an 
ecosystem encouraging employment generation, investment infusion and 
product diversification. 
15. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
“State Governments were requested to submit proposal under PM MITRA 
for consideration. A total of 18 proposals from 13 State Government were 
received. Various teams comprising Senior Officers from Ministry were 
constituted for physical inspection of site to check topography. In addition, a 
National Conference on PM MITRA was held on 04.05.2022 for sensitizing 
Industry/Investors as well as State Government concerned. The matter is being 
followed up with respective State Governments. “ 
 
 “The Government has approved Setting up of 7 Pradhan Mantri Mega 
Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (MITRA) Parks in 
Greenfield/Brownfield sites across the country on 06.10.2022 with a 
budgetary outlay of ₹ 4,445 crores for a period 2021-22 to 2027-28. The 
Scheme would lead to creation of a modern, integrated large scale, world 
class industrial infrastructure including plug and play facilities”. 
16. The Committee are appreciative of the fact that 7 PradhanMantri 
Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (MITRA) Parks would be set 
up in Greenfield/Brownfield sites across the country with a budgetary 
outlay of Rs 4,445 crore for the period 2021-22 to 2027-28. The 
Committee have also been apprised that Project Approval Committee has 

7 
 
finalised 7 sites viz. Tamil Nadu (Virudhnagar), Telangana (Warangal), 
Gujarat (Navsari), Karnataka (Kalaburagi), Madhya Pradesh (Dhar), Uttar 
Pradesh (Lucknow) and Maharashtra (Amravati) for setting up PM Mitra 
Parks.  The Committee urge the Ministry to maintain the momentum for 
setting up and making functional all 7 PM Mitra Parks in a time bound 
manner and thereby help in achieving the objectives that include inter-
alia employment generation, investment in fusion and product 
diversification.  
V. PREVENTION OF MICRO FIBRE POLLUTION 
(Recommendation Para No. 17) 
17. The Committee feltthat as synthetic apparels are gradually capturing 
substantial market shares in the Country, it becomes imperative on the part of 
the Ministry while promoting MMF to bring together key stakeholders and 
institutionalize ways to curb and prevent microfibre pollution which can 
significantly impact the environment and human health due to its minuscule 
size and capacity to penetrate different ecosystems. 
18. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Textiles have stated as follows :- 
"Nil information." 
 
19. The concern expressed by the Committee in earlier Report is on the 
need for institutionalizing ways to curb and prevent microfibre pollution, 
which can significantly impact the environment and human health. The 
concern expressed has not been addressed by the Ministry which is 
indicative of adopting a casual approach in responding to the observation 
of a Parliamentary Committee. Considering the fact that urgent steps 
need to be taken to address the issue of microfibre pollution, the 
Committee exhort the Ministry to take up this issue seriously in 
consultation with key stakeholders so that the environment and human 
health could be protected.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the 

8 
 
concrete measures taken in this direction within three months of the 
presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
17 July, 2023                                   CHAIRPERSON 
26 Ashadha, 1944 (Saka )                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
  

9 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
 
      Total Percentage 
   
I. Total number of Recommendations 18 
 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
– Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 
9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 18 
16 88.88% 
III. Recommendations/Observations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply – Nil 
 
00 00% 
IV Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para No. 17 
 
01 5.56% 
V Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature  -
Rec. Para No. 12 
 
01 5.56% 
   100% 
 
 