 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Action Taken by the Government 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship
FO
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
July, 202
44 
i 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Implementation of 
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship. 
 
FORTY-FOURTH REPORT 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI   
, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP on the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty- ‘Implementation of pertaining to the 
(Saka)  

 
FORTY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & 
Action Taken by the Government 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Implementation of 
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship.
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
ii 
FORTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Implementation of 
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)’ pertaining to the 
stry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship. 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.07.202
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.07.2023
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL ENTREPRENEURSHIP on the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty- Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)’ pertaining to the .2023 3 July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)  

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report  
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which  replies of the Government  are interim 
in nature    
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix- I* Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on           
17th July, 2023. 
 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty–Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
 
 * Not appended with this cyclostyled copy. 
  
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2022-23) 
  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Pallab Lochan Das 
5. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
6. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
7. Shri Bache Gowda B.N. 
8. Dr. Umesh G. Jadhav 
9. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
10. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
11. Shri Pakauri Lal 
12. Prof. Sanjay Sadashivrao Mandlik 
13. Shri Dayakar Pasunoori  
14. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
15. Dr. D. Ravikumar 
16. Shri Naba (Hira) Kumar Sarania 
17. Shri Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Nayab Singh 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan 
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24.  Shri R. Dharmar 
25. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
26.  Shri Elamaram Kareem 
27.  Ms. Dola Sen 
28.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
29. Shri Shibu Soren 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.     Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  -  Additional Secretary 
 2  Shri Sanjay Sethi   - Director 
 3. Shri Aditya Runthala  - Assistant Executive Officer 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2022-23) having been authorized by the Committee, present on 
their behalf this Forty-Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Thirty- Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Implementation of Pradhan 
Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship. 
2. The Thirty-Sixth Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 5th 
September, 2022 and presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 8th 
December, 2022. The Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
furnished their replies on 10th January, 2023 indicating Action Taken on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Sixth Report. The 
Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 17 
July, 2023.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
  
New Delhi;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
17 July, 2023                                   CHAIRPERSON 
26 Ashadha, 1944 (Saka )                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  
 

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Implementation of Pradhan Mantri 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)” relating to the Ministry of Skill Development 
and Entrepreneurship. 
 
2. The Thirty-Sixth Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 5th 
September, 2022 and presented to Lok Sabha/ laid in Rajya Sabha on 8th 
December, 2022. It contained 17 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of 
Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as under:- 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government – Rec. Para Nos.  
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 
17 
 
Chapter II 
Total:15 
Percentage:88.24 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – Nil 
 
Chapter III 
Total:00 
Percentage:00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para No. 9 
 
Chapter IV 
Total:01 
Percentage: 5.88 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature - Rec. Para No. -  11.   
Chapter  V 
Total:01 
Percentage:5.88 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action 
taken reply in respect of the Recommendations contained in Chapter V of 

2 
 
this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the Government, be 
furnished to them at the earliest. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/ Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit 
further comments. 
I. MODIFICATIONS UNDER PMKVY/FUND ALLOCATION AND 
UTILISATION  
 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 1 & 2) 
5. In their Thirty-Sixth report, the Committee, while appreciating the efforts 
of the Ministry in redesigning PMKVY 3.0 with a demand driven bottom up 
approach to skill development by encouraging candidates to opt for local skills 
with local jobs, found that despite the revamping of the Scheme in its 3.0 
version, some of the core issues, such as poor placement figures and 
underutilization of allocated funds, that plagued PMKVY 2.0, continue to 
persist in PMKVY 3.0. Observing that out of 3,99,860 certified candidates, only 
30,599 were reportedly placed and against the total amount of Rs. 686.02 crore 
released, the actual utilization of fund was Rs. 294.98 crore only as on 30th 
June, 2022, the Committee desired that the Ministry ought to pay serious 
attention towards addressing the impediments so as to leverage the 
placement/self-employment of the trained/certified candidates to a sizeable 
extent as well as to maximize utilisation of the earmarked funds. 
 
6. The Committee also noted with concern that for the financial year 2021-
22 against the allocated amount of Rs.1,438 crore under PMKVY 3.0, the 
actual utilization of fund was Rs. 1,043.21 crore only. While taking note of the 
reasons for decrease in the number of enrolments resulting in low 
disbursement and underutilization and also the measures initiated by the 
Ministry in this direction, the Committee desired that the efforts be further 
fortified with sustained emphasis on regular monitoring and strict follow up 
action so as to ensure optimal utilisation of the earmarked funds for smooth 
implementation of PMKVY 3.0 and PMKVY 4.0. 
 
7.   In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 

3 
 
“Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) has launched 
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana 3.0 (PMKVY 3.0) on 15.01.2021 with an 
aim to provide skilling to 8 lakh youth of the country. 
COVID-19 pandemic caused disruptions in economy, livelihood and labour 
market. The overall skill ecosystem was impacted due to COVID-19 induced 
lockdown. The implementation of the PMKVY 3.0 was also impacted due to 
restrictions during COVID-19 pandemic and training was paused/temporarily 
suspended from time to time subject to the State specific lockdowns/directives. 
In order to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 pandemic and to restore the 
skilling activities, MSDE has taken various initiatives under the skill ecosystem 
such as introduction of On-line skill training through e-Skill India portal and 
Bharat Skill portal, Customized Crash Course Programme for COVID Warriors 
(CCCP for CW), Skill Hubs Initiative (SHI), Operation and Maintenance of 
Pressure Swing Absorption (PSA) Oxygen Plants, On-line/Digital (Blended) 
Mode of training, etc. 
Additionally, in order to achieve the envisaged target of PMKVY 3.0, the last 
date of enrollment of candidates was extended multiple times during FY 2021-
22 and the last date was 31.03.2022. 
 
……Placements under PMKVY 3.0:  
…….PMKVY has two training components, namely; Short Term Training (STT) 
and Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL). Under PMKVY, placement 
opportunities are being provided to STT certified candidates and, since RPL 
involves the process of certification of already existing skills, it is not linked 
with placements. Under STT of PMKVY 3.0, around 1.12 lakh candidates have 
been certified and out of which, 30,853 candidates have been reported placed. 
 
……Financials under PMKVY 3.0: The financial performance was also 
impacted due to the disruptions caused by COVID-19 pandemic. Funds were 
not utilized by the States/UTs as it was earmarked in the scheme. 
The financial outlay of PMKVY 3.0 was Rs. 948.90 crore, out of which, Rs. 
692.68 crore was disbursed to the implementing agencies which is around 73% 
of the total outlay. Out of the total outlay of the scheme, 75% i.e. Rs. 712 crore 
(approx.) was for Central component and 25% i.e. Rs. 237 crore was for State 
component. Under Central component, Rs. 644.27 crore was disbursed to the 
implementing agency i.e. National Skill Development Corporation which is 
around 90% of allocation (i.e., Rs. 712 crore). Under State component, Rs. 
48.41 crore was disbursed to State Govt./State Skill Development Mission 
(SSDM) as per their demand which is around 20% of allocation (i.e., Rs. 237 
crore). 
Ministry has rationalized the training cost under pilot SHI to Rs. 7,300/- per 
candidate, which is less than the STT cost under PMKVY 3.0. The cost was 
rationalized considering the sharing of available infrastructure and 
trainers/assessors of Central/State Boards/Departments. This rationalization 
of cost under SHI resulted in savings of the earmarked funds. 
 
In addition, under PMKVY 3.0, there was a provision to carry-forward unspent 
funds of PMKVY 2.0 to PMKVY 3.0. Few States/UTs have utilized the unspent 
funds of PMKVY 2.0 for the implementation of PMKVY 3.0, which resulted in 
further savings of the earmarked funds for PMKVY 3.0. 
 
The component-wise funds disbursed and utilized under PMKVY 3.0, as on 
30.09.2022, are given below: 

4 
 
 
Component Disbursed [In Cr.] Utilized (As reported) [In 
Cr.] 
Central Component Rs. 644.27 Rs. 334.77 
State Component Rs. 48.41 Rs. 14.06 
Total Rs. 692.68 Rs. 348.83 
 
Steps taken for optimal utilization of funds under PMKVY: 
 
i) With regard to utilization of funds under PMKVY 3.0, it is submitted that 
the Ministry has made multiple communications with the States/UTs and has 
requested them to ensure optimal utilization of allocated funds in order to 
achieve the objective of the Scheme. Furthermore, States/UTs have been 
repeatedly requested to clear liabilities under PMKVY 2.0 by utilizing the 
existing funds available with them. If the States/UTs have surplus funds 
available after clearing all liabilities of PMKVY 2.0, the same may be utilized for 
clearing liabilities under PMKVY 3.0. 
 
ii) Further, a dedicated team at MSDE has been constituted for continuous 
monitoring of the implementation of PMKVY 3.0 and to connect regularly with 
the State Govt. / State Skill Development Mission (SSDMs) for providing 
assistance on all issues including utilization of funds. 
 
 In addition to the above, it is submitted that the PMKVY 3.0 was 
implemented during the COVID-19 pandemic. Though, the Ministry made all 
sincere efforts to mitigate its impact through various initiatives, the physical 
and financial performance of the PMKVY 3.0 was hugely impacted due to 
disruptions caused by the pandemic. Presently, based on the learning from 
implementation of earlier phases of PMKVY (i.e. 1.0, 2.0 & 3.0), Ministry has 
redesigned and upgraded the new version of PMKVY, i.e., PMKVY 4.0. Further, 
it is submitted that Ministry will take all necessary steps for the successful and 
effective implementation of the upcoming PMKVY 4.0, both in terms of physical 
achievements and financial utilization. At present, the proposal of PMKVY 4.0 
has been appraised and recommended by Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC). The note for approval of PMKVY 4.0 has been submitted to Cabinet. 
 
8. The Committee take cognizance of the submission of the Ministry 
that despite their sincere efforts to mitigate the huge impact of COVID-19 
pandemic, when PMKVY 3.0 was under implementationsss, the physical 
and financial targets, as envisaged, could not be achieved. The Committee 
also take cognizance of the fact that despite repeated requests of the 
Ministry to ensure optimal utilisation of allocated funds and make use of 
the unspent allocation of PMKVY 2.0, very few States/UTs have 
responded, thereby adding to the shortfall in utilization of funds. The 
Committee, in this regard, recommend that special and focused attention 

5 
 
ought to be paid towards strengthening coordination with States/UTs, 
particularly such States/UTs which did not utilize the unspent funds of 
PMKVY 2.0 for PMKVY 3.0 so that the bottlenecks are ironed out and 
utilization of funds earmarked for PMKVY is maximized in the coming 
years. 
9. Now that the COVID-19 situation has normalized substantially, the 
Committee expect the Ministry to take appropriate measures for ensuring 
successful and effective implementation of the upcoming PMKVY 4.0, by 
way of effective utilization of the financial allocation for achieving the 
targets envisaged. 
 
II. TRAINING, CERTIFICATION AND PLACEMENT 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3, 4 & 5) 
10.    In their earlier Report, the Committee, expressed concern regarding the 
placement figures for PMKVY 2.0 and 3.0, as in the case of PMKVY 2.0, out of 
the 91,38,665 certified candidates, only 21,32,715 candidates were reportedly 
placed, whereas, in the case of PMKVY 3.0, out of the 3,99,860 certified 
candidates, only 30,599 had reportedly got placed. Observing that the 
placement statistics is the real barometer for measuring the success of the 
Scheme, the Committee desired the Ministry to make more concerted efforts in 
unison with all the stakeholders to ensure that the placement of the certified 
candidates is enhanced to an appreciable extent. The Committee also 
impressed upon the Ministry to endeavour to make the certification process 
more transparent and effective so that it facilitates more self employment 
besides ensuring fair wages to the skilled candidates.   
 
11. The Committee were equally concerned to note that in the case of the 
placements under the CSSM component of PMKVY 3.0 out of the 97,288 
candidates certified, only 7,956 reportedly got placed. One of the changes 
envisaged under PMKVY 3.0 was the decentralization of implementation at the 
District and State level. Based on the number of candidates placed, the 
Committee observed that the changes had not had the desired impact on 
creating employment, though, the Ministry had been supporting States & other 
stakeholders for promoting placement by organizing Rozgar Melas/ Kaushal 
Melas; by developing the ASEEM portal with linkages to other job aggregator 
portals and entrepreneurship support agencies; undertaking Apprenticeship 

6 
 
promotion programmes and Special Projects with captive placement 
opportunities, etc. The Committee exhorted the Ministry to intensify their 
efforts in supporting and hand holding the States and other Stakeholders so 
that the placement/self-employment of the Trained/Certified candidates was 
enhanced to a greater extent. 
 
12. The Committee further noted that Aatmanirbhar Skilled Employee 
Employer Mapping (ASEEM) was envisaged and conceived to align Skilled 
Employees and the Employers through a collaborative platform with the 
objective to provide a platform that matches supply of skilled workforce with 
the market demand, thereby facilitating better livelihood opportunities. As 
intimated by the Ministry, around 29 lakh Skilled Candidates/ Jobseekers 
were mapped with more than 350 Employers and around 56,000 candidates 
had reported to have secured Employment through ASEEM Portal. Observing 
that the functioning of the portal being not upto the mark due to large gap in 
the number of candidates registered vis-à-vis those who actually secured 
employment, the Committee desired the Ministry to make earnest efforts to 
take further corrective action so as to boost the number of employers, across 
all the sectors, registered on the portal and encourage them to make use of the 
portal for the purpose of hiring/employing more skilled candidates. 
 
13.   In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 
 “The Observation/recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
…… Placements under PMKVY 3.0:The main objective of the implementation of 
PMKVY is to deliver skills to youth of the country to make them employable for 
better livelihood. Ministry through various initiatives has facilitated the 
placement of the short term certified candidates. 
 
PMKVY has two training components, namely; Short Term Training (STT) and 
Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL). Under PMKVY, placement opportunities are 
being provided to STT certified candidates and, since RPL involves the process 
of certification of already existing skills, it is not linked with placements. Under 
STT of PMKVY 3.0, around 1.12 lakh candidates have been certified and out of 
which, 30,853 candidates have been reported placed. 
 
In order to enhance the placement opportunities in the scheme, following steps 
have been taken: 
 
i. Under STT Component of PMKVY, placement is linked with payout to 
training providers. The last tranche, i.e., 30 percent of total payout is 
disbursed to training providers only on ensuring placement of the 
candidates. 

7 
 
ii. Under Common Norms, post-placement support @ Rs. 1,500 per month for 
Special Areas / Special Groups for wage employment is being provisioned.  
iii. Rozgar Melas are organized with the support of Sector Skill Councils (SSCs), 
training providers and implementing agencies to directly link the candidates 
with the potential employers. 
iv. In addition, Ministry has launched Aatmanirbhar Skilled Employee 
Employer Mapping (ASEEM) portal, which acts as a central directory of 
skilled workforce registered and certified under Skill India Portal (SIP), 
across all schemes at the central and state level. 
v. Under PMKVY, training is provided to candidates as per the skilling demand 
of industry. Ministry through NSDC has facilitated the setting up of 37 
Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) as autonomous industry led bodies to develop 
National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF) aligned job roles and course 
curriculum, conduct skill gap studies and assess and certify trainees. 
vi. Ministry through National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) has been 
constantly working towards ensuring higher participation from employers, 
staffing companies, third-party aggregators etc. to increase the placement 
opportunities. 
vii. Further, it is submitted that Ministry has also launched special training 
programmes under PMKVY 3.0 namely Customized Crash Course 
Programme for COVID Warriors (CCCP for CW)and Skill Hubs Initiative 
(SHI)....... 
 
The details of transparency in certification process under PMKVY 3.0 are given 
below: 
 
In order to make the scheme transparent and effective, the life cycle of training 
process of candidates (enrolment – training – assessment – certification - 
placement) is monitored on real-time basis through the Skill India Portal (SIP) 
which is linked with Aadhaar-enabled biometric attendance. 
 
Further, to make the certification process more transparent, trained candidates 
go through assessment process which is conducted by a third party assessment 
agency empanelled by Sector Skill Councils. On clearing the assessment 
process, each candidate is given a certificate which has unique QR code in 
individual Digi Locker of the candidates”. 
 
“…..Under CSSM Component of PMKVY 3.0, out of 45,040 trained candidates, 
9,223 have been reportedly placed in STT. Further, it is submitted that the 
overall implementation of the scheme was impacted due to COVID pandemic. 
However, the performance of the State component is not as it was envisaged 
during the formulation of the scheme. Ministry has decentralized the scheme 
and targets were allocated based on the demands received from District Skill 
Committees (DSCs). 
 
Also, apart from the budgetary support, the Ministry assists the States/UTs 
through Monthly/Weekly Review Workshops/ Meetings of the State Training 
Providers (TPs), Capacity building workshops for SSDMs, deployment of State 
Engagement Officers (SEOs) / State Engagement Coordinators (SECs) in 
States/UTs for technical and information support to District Skill Committees 

8 
 
(DSCs). A dedicated team at MSDE has been constituted for continuous 
monitoring of the implementation of PMKVY 3.0 and to connect regularly with 
the State Govt. / State Skill Development Mission (SSDMs) for providing 
assistance on all issues including utilization of funds 
 
“ ….. it is submitted that interlinking of Udyam, e-Shram, National Career 
Service (NCS) and Atmanirbhar Skilled Employee-Employer Mapping (ASEEM) 
has been envisaged by Hon’ble Finance Minister in Budget Speech 2022-23 to 
widen the services which may further formalize the economy and enhance 
entrepreneurial opportunities for all. 
 
A meeting was held under the Joint Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of SDE 
and Education, and Hon’ble Minister of Labour& Employment on 19.10.2022 to 
discuss the integration of Portals. During the meeting, it was resolved that 
ASEEM portal is to be subsumed under Skill India Digital (SID) and NCS would 
act as primary government portal for jobs and employment. Further, all portals 
(including Udyam and e-Shram) would be interlinked with each other”. 
 
  
14.    The placement figures under Central Component in general and 
State Component in particular under PMKVY has been a cause of concern 
for the Committee since long. As admitted by the Ministry, the 
performance of the State Component of the Scheme has not been as it 
was envisaged. The Committee observe from the reply that 
decentralization of the Scheme and allocation of targets based on the 
demands received from the District Skill Committees (DSCs) have not 
yielded the desired results by way of improving placements. Also, the 
outcome of the other efforts being made by the Ministry to assist the 
States/UTs through measures that include inter-alia holding 
Monthly/Weekly Review Workshops, Capacity building workshops for 
SSDMs etc., do not seem to have yielded positive results by way of 
making the Scheme popular and placement oriented. The Committee, 
therefore, impress upon the Ministry to intensify the measures and 
strengthen collaborative efforts so as to reverse the trend of low level of 
placements under the Scheme. 
15. The Committee further note that the process of interlinking of 
UDYAM, e-Shram, National Career Service (NCS) and Aatamanirbhar 
Skilled Employee- Employer Mapping (ASEEM) portal is underway. 

9 
 
Further, the ASEEM portal is also to be subsumed under Skill India Digital 
(SID).  As the interlinking of portals will facilitate candidates to 
seamlessly register for skilling, training and apprenticeship opportunities 
and avail these facilities as per their requirements, the Committee desire 
that coordinated efforts be made in consultation with all stakeholders 
with a view to completing the interlinking of portals in a time bound 
manner and thereby facilitate in enhancing entrepreneurial opportunities 
for all, as announced in the Budget Speech, 2022-23. 
III. STATE/DISTRICT LEVEL RESPONSIBILITY 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
16. In their earlier report, the Committee noted that in PMKVY 3.0, District 
Skill Committees (DSCs) were established for decentralization and better 
implementation of the Scheme. Apart from the budgetary support, the Ministry 
also assist the States through Monthly/Weekly Review Workshops/ Meetings of 
the State Training Providers (TPs), Capacity building workshops for SSDMs, 
deployment of State Engagement Officers (SEOs)/State Engagement 
Coordinators (SECs) in States/UTs for technical and information support to 
DSCs. DiSPAK (District Skill Planning Aid Kit) has also been developed by the 
Ministry to support and enable DSCs to make comprehensive District Skill 
Development Plans (DSDPs). DiSPAK application is planned to be deployed in a 
phased manner in two phases. The registration Module was live and 673 
districts had been registered. While Phase I was made live on 25.07.2022, 
Phase II was in development stage. The Committee urged the Ministry to 
expedite the operationalization of the second phase and ensure that all the 
districts are onboarded on the application so as to submit their detailed DSDPs 
within a specific timeline. The Committee further desired the Ministry to make 
extensive use of ICT tools for improving co-ordination, monitoring and 
implementation of the Scheme particularly since it has been decentralized to 
the District level. 
17.   In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 
“The Observation/recommendation of the Committee is noted for 
compliance. 
Further, it is submitted that as on 17.11.2022, 696 district have 
been on-boarded on DiSPAK portal. Ministry is coordinating with other 

10 
 
districts (and States/UTs concerned) for on boarding the remaining 
districts on DiSPAK portal. 
Phase-II of the DiSPAK portal has also been developed and its User 
Acceptance Test is being done.” 
18. While taking note of the Ministry’s collaborative efforts with 
States/UTs to on-board all Districts on DiSPAK portal, the Committee find 
that as on 17.11.2022, 696 Districts have been on-boarded but still a lot 
needs to be done in this direction as the remaining Districts are yet to be 
on-boarded. The Committee desire that coordination and monitoring 
mechanism be further strengthened so as to ensure that all Districts are 
on-boarded on DiSPAK portal in a time bound manner and thereby enable 
District Skill Committees (DSCs) to submit their respective 
comprehensive District Skill Development Plans (DSDPs). The Committee 
also note the progress made with regard to developing Phase-II of DiSPAK 
portal and call upon the Ministry to operationalize the plan at the 
earliest. 
IV. CHALLENGES REPORTED BY INDUSTRY 
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
19. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that various constraints 
had been reported by the industry partners/stakeholders in increasing the 
uptake of the trained candidates in the respective job roles. The industry 
partners had apprised that the training course and curriculum under PMKVY 
have not been aligned with the actual industry requirements and the practical 
skills imparted under PMKVY training are not as per the industry needs.  On 
their part, the Ministry stated that they are taking several measures to address 
these issues which inter-alia include encouraging the Industry for buy-in and 
contribution for skilling, including sharing of training infrastructure, demand 
aggregation, and introduction of On-Job-Training (OJT); providing flexibility in 
course curriculums by introducing courses in partnership with industry, 
Government Ministries/Departments; and Enhancement of apprenticeship 
opportunities for candidates. The Committee desired that the Ministry continue 
to align their efforts with the needs of the Industry through regular 
consultation and take all requisite steps to address the concerns expressed by 

11 
 
the Industry so as to maximise uptake/placement of the trained/certified 
candidates. 
20.   In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 
“The Observation/recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
Further, in respect of industry alignment of courses and documents for 
placement verification, the following is submitted: 
i) Industry Alignment of Course Curriculum:Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) 
have been setup as autonomous industry-led bodies with domain knowledge to 
create Occupational Standards or Qualification Packs (QPs), develop 
competency framework, conduct Training for Trainers Programs, conduct skill 
gap studies and assess and certify trainees. 
The Governing Council of the SSCs has senior representatives from relevant 
Industry and Corporate. During the approval process of a Qualification Pack, 
the curriculum undergoes industry validation and review before the approval 
from NCVET (National Council of Vocational Education and Training). 
Further, SSCs have been suggested to prioritize upgradation of Qualification 
Packs (QPs) for PMKVY 4.0, including mandatory On-Job Training Component 
(OJT) in all relevant QPs and to revise QPs in bracket of 30 hours, as 
mandated by NCVET, for easy and standardized credit transfer linkages. 
ii) Placement Verification Process under PMKVY: The placement verification 
process under PMKVY entails capturing only relevant proofs of placements 
such as salary slips, bank statements, appointment letters and others. The 
process also includes Training Partners to verify a continuous placement of a 
candidate for a period of 3 months. The same is carried out through uploading 
the said placement documents on the Skill India Portal.” 
21. The Committee note that despite establishing the institutional 
mechanism of Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) as autonomous industry-led bodies for 
creating Occupational Standards or Qualification Packs etc., the training courses 
and curriculum are not in alignment  with the actual requirements of the 
industry. As this raises concerns on the effectiveness of SSCs, the Committee 
express the need for re-assessing and reviewing the measures initiated/taken by 
the Ministry/NSDC towards making the training courses suitable and in tune 
with the requirements of the industry. The Ministry/ NSDC need to take a lead 

12 
 
role in strengthening the coordination mechanism with the 
Industry/stakeholders providing regular feedback on the training curriculum, 
practical skills, process of placement verification and other related issues; and 
the Ministry/NSDC should take timely and speedy action on such feedback. The 
Committee reiterate that the Ministry/NSDC, training providers as well as the 
fora representing the industry need to work together with a sense of 
commitment so as to ensure that the training imparted is appropriate and 
relevant. 
V. DROPOUTS 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
22. In their earlier report, the Committee noted with serious concern that 
during the implementation of PMKVY 1.0, 2.0 & 3.0, approx. 20% of the total 
enrolled candidates dropped out of the training programme. According to the 
evaluation study report of the Scheme conducted by Indian Institute of Public 
Administration (IIPA), New Delhi most of the reasons identified for dropping the 
courses emanated from medical grounds, family issues, social problem, 
distance from residence to training centres, upgradation of social status as 
married and attached livelihood demands, accessibility to a job, and no 
improvement noticed on skills, etc. A number of female candidates had 
reportedly left the course for reasons owing to pregnancy, marriage and short 
duration of the courses. Agreeing with the Ministry's contention that they 
cannot control all of the factors that are leading to candidates dropping out, 
the Committee opined that earnest efforts be made to identify the areas where 
the Ministry could effectively intervene and lend support to prevent dropouts. 
Further, in case of the female drop outs, the Committee suggest that the 
Ministry may rope in ASHA and Anganwadi Centres to create awareness about 
the benefits of skilling and encourage the female members who drop out owing 
to pregnancy, to resume training as soon as possible post delivery. 
23. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
“The Observation/recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
Currently, PMKVY 4.0 Scheme is in the process of redesigning and launching. It 
intends to be more candidate centric and consider reasons for candidate 
dropouts post enrollment into the skill training programme. The following 
measures are intended to be introduced in the fourth version of the scheme to 
overcome the challenges in dropouts: 

13 
 
 
i) The focus of PMKVY 4.0 would be on implementing up-skilling/re-skilling 
type courses which are shorter duration courses. 
ii) Focus on introduction of digital/blended type learning to give flexibility to 
the candidates. 
iii) As the scheme is candidate centric,  On Job Training (OJT), cluster based 
programme, flexibility in course curriculum with focus on digital content 
through blended mode of training  and special focus on new age, multi 
skilling courses and vernacular content will be incorporated.” 
 
24. The reply of the Ministry is silent on the specific recommendation 
of the Committee with regard to engaging ASHA and Anganwadi Centres 
to pursue/convince female dropouts to resume training post delivery. The 
concern highlighted by the Committee has not been addressed. Also, 
considering the fact that the re-designed PMKVY 4.0 will be more 
candidate centric, the Committee reiterate and stress that all out efforts 
be made to pursue/encourage female dropouts to resume post delivery 
training through ASHA and Anganwadi Centres and also provide other 
necessary assistance to them to the extent possible in order to have a 
skilled female workforce. 
VI. KAUSHAL AND ROZGAR MELAS 
 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 12 and 13) 
25. The Committee noted that the Ministry seek to increase the employment 
opportunities available for the youth by organizing Kaushal and Rozgar Melas. 
While Kaushal Mela is a camp-based approach, used for mobilization of 
candidates, building awareness, and enrolling suitable candidates whereas 
Rozgar Mela is part of an employment strategy to fast-track the meeting of job 
employers and job seekers. As intimated by the Ministry, Regular offline and 
online media channels are used for creating publicity around Kaushal and 
Rozgar Melas. Observing that around 1,669 Kaushal Melas and 1,577 Rozgar 
Melas were organized in the process of implementation of the Scheme, the 
Committee desired that the publicity for conducting the Melas be scaled up, 
particularly in remote and backward areas and local public representatives be 
invited to participate in the process to increase the coverage and trust. The 
Committee also desired that the Kaushal and Rozgar Melas should be 
integrated with cultural and national events as well as local festivals in order to 
increase the rate of participation. 

14 
 
26. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
“The Observation/recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
Further, it is submitted that organizing Kaushal and Rozgar Melas is an 
on-going process. National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) under the 
aegis of the Ministry is organizingKaushal and Rozgar Melas with the support of 
Sector Skill Councils and private players. Recently, Kaushal Melas have been 
organized at Kamakhaya Nagar, Dhenkanal, Odisha, Bundi, Rajasthan and 
Koderma, Jharkhand. 
 Also, Ministry is organizing Pradhan Mantri National Apprenticeship 
Mela (PMNAM) across the country. States/UTs have been advised to organize 
PMNAM every 2ndMonday in 1/3 of total number of districts with the flexibility 
for choosing the district/location and the day of Mela based on local 
conditions/festivals, etc. so that all districts are covered once in a quarter, and 
four times in a year. 
 
So far, 6 PMNAM have been organized since its inception in June 2022. 
Apprenticeship Melas create opportunities for apprenticeship for youth in the 
establishments / industries to bridge the skill gap by imparting on-the-job 
training and to make them industry-ready and employable. The status of 
PMNAM is given below: 
S. No. Parameters Numbers 
1 No of PMNAM 6 
3 Locations/ Districts 1,180 
4 Establishments participated 10,273 
5 Candidates Foot fall   2,13,508 
6 Shortlisted candidates 82,188 
7 Contracts generated in the portal from day of 
Mela* 
2,47,686* 
*Pan India data –Apprenticeship Contract tracked for 20 days after Mela 
day which may also include contracts generated outside PMNAM.” 
 
27. Observing that only 2,57,767 candidates got shortlisted by the 
participating employers in the 1,577 Rozgar Melas organized by the NSDC, the 
Committee opined that the number of candidates finding employment through 
Rozgar Melas could be substantially increased by encouraging the 
industries/establishments and other employers to participate in such Melas 
and offer employment opportunities. Further, as Rozgar Melas can be 
instrumental in opening up employment opportunities for candidates coming 
from rural/remote areas, the Committee called upon the Ministry and other 
Stakeholders to leverage their efforts towards that end. 
28. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
“The Observation/recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 

15 
 
Further, it is submitted that Ministry along with NSDC has been constantly 
working towards ensuring higher participation from employers, staffing 
companies, third-party aggregators etc. In addition, NSDC is also planning to 
organize a workshop with various employers, staffing companies, associations, 
etc. to understand their needs and challenges by ensuring continued 
participation in the upcoming Kaushal Melas and Rozgar Melas. 
NSDC is also encouraging employers to register on NSDC digital and post their 
vacancies on regular basis and is in the process of collaborating with various 
Job portals, with the aim of increasing job opportunities for candidates.  NSDC 
will focus on executing Kaushal Melas and Rozgar Melas in remote and rural 
location to provide job opportunities to the youth. 
In addition to the above, the following steps are being undertaken by NSDC to 
ensure higher placement numbers during the event: 
i. Pre-screening of candidates before the event. 
ii. Group counselling and motivational sessions during the event to guide 
candidates. 
iii. Candidate and job profile matchmaking (AI intervention). 
iv. Candidates’ registration on NSDC digital along with access to the 
employer database.” 
29. The Committee are pleased to observe that pursuant to their 
recommendations, the Ministry/ National Skill Development Corporation 
(NSDC) has taken/proposed to initiate a number of steps to increase 
employment opportunities for candidates through Kaushal Melas, Rozgar 
Melas and other means which include inter alia organizing workshops 
with various employers, staffing companies, associations, etc.; 
encouraging employers to register and post vacancies on NSDC portal on 
regular  basis; executing Kaushal Melas and Rozgar Melas in remote and 
rural locations; registration of candidates on NSDC portal with access to 
employer database; candidate and job profile match making through AI 
intervention, etc.  The Committee urge the Ministry to maintain the 
momentum for increasing job opportunities for candidates and 
simultaneously meeting the requirement of employers keeping in view the 
needs and challenges faced by them. The Committee further desire that 

16 
 
the process of collaborating with various job portals be expedited and 
completed in a time bound manner, and thereby help both the employers 
and the job seekers. The Committee also impress upon the Ministry to 
launch awareness campaigns about organizing Kaushal Melas and Rozgar 
Melas to attract more candidates as well as employers so as to ensure 
achieving the objectives of these Melas. 
30. The Committee also note that the reply of the Ministry does not 
touch upon the need expressed for inviting local public representatives at 
Kaushal and Rozgar Melas. The Committee desire that appropriate action 
be taken by the Ministry in this regard with a view to gainfully utilizing 
their feedback and suggestions during the Melas. 
 
New Delhi;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
17 July, 2023                                   CHAIRPERSON 
26 Ashadha, 1944 (Saka )                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
  

17 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
 
      Total Percentage 
   
I. Total number of Recommendations 17 
 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government – 
Rec. Para Nos.  
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 
16 and 17 
 
15 88.24% 
III. Recommendations/Observations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply – Nil 
 
00 00% 
IV Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration – Rec. Para 
No. 9 
 
01 5.88% 
V Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the Government 
are interim in nature - Rec. Para No.  11.   
01 5.88% 
   100% 
 
 
 
 