i 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Fifty-First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on the Employees State Insurance Corporation – Applicability and benefits 
under ESI Scheme, Functioning of ESI Hospitals and Management of Corpus 
Fund of the Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
      
August, 2025/Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
7 

ii 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Fifty-First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on the Employees State Insurance Corporation – Applicability and benefits 
under ESI Scheme, Functioning of ESI Hospitals and Management of Corpus 
Fund of the Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06.08.2025 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025/Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
  


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                               PAGE No. 
       
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
26 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply 
 
67 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
 
68 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature  
72 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix- I Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the 
Committee held on 31st July, 2025. 
76 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by the 
Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-First Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
78 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
 
 
     COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2024-25) 
 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Mani A. 
3 Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
4 Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
5 Shri Partha Bhowmick 
6 Shri Yogender Chandolia 
7 Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary 
8 Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
9 Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
10 Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
11 Shri Kali Charan Munda 
12 
13 
Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
Shri Kartick Chandra Paul 
14 Shri Tanuj Punia 
15 Shri Pradeep Purohit 
16 Shri Mukesh Rajput 
17 Shri Raja Ram Singh 
18 Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
19 Shri V. K. Sreekandan 
20 Shri Manoj Tigga 
21 Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Smt. Jaya Amitabh Bachchan  
23 
24 
Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
Shri Naresh Bansal  
25 Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia  
26 Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
27 Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
28 Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
29 Shri Shibu Soren 
30 Vacant 
31 Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1 
2 
Shri Lalkithang                          -        Joint Secretary 
Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut       -        Director 
3 Ms. Mili Dinesh                         -        Deputy Secretary 

v 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee, present on their 
behalf this Seventh Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-First 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the Employees State Insurance Corporation – 
Applicability and benefits under ESI Scheme, Functioning of ESI Hospitals and 
Management of Corpus Fund of the Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
2. The Fifty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 20th September, 2023. The Ministry of Labour and Employment furnished their 
replies on 18th October, 2024 indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-First Report. The Committee considered 
and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 31st July, 2025. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
31st July, 2025 
09 Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
BASAVARAJ BOMMAI 
CHAIRPERSON, 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER- I 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-First 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘The Employees State Insurance Corporation – 
Applicability and benefits under ESI Scheme, Functioning of ESI Hospitals and 
Management of Corpus Fund’ of the Ministry of Labour & Employment.  
 
2. The Fifty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 20 th September, 2023. It contained 29 Observations/ 
Recommendations. Replies of Government in respect of all the 
recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:- 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government – 
Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 
12, 13, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 26, 
27, 28 and 29.        
 
Chapter-II 
Total:23 
Percentage:79.31 
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply – Rec. Para No.  
25    
      
Chapter-III 
Total:01 
Percentage:3.45 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration – Rec. Para Nos. 8, 14 
and 17  
 
Chapter-IV 
Total:03 
Percentage:10.34 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature - Rec. Para Nos. 7 and  22    
Chapter-V 
Total:02 
Percentage:6.90 
 
 

2 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action 
taken reply in respect of the Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of 
this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the Government, may 
be furnished to them at the earliest. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier Observations/ 
Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further 
comments. 
 
I. COVERAGE OF THE ESI SCHEME 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
 
5. The Committee, in their Fifty-First Report, had noted that the ESI Act, 1948 
applies to factories employing 10 or more persons. The Central Government is fully 
responsible for running the Scheme and ESIC does not receive subsidy from the 
Government.  Presently, the employees of factories and establishments covered 
under the Act drawing wages up to Rs.21,000 per month (Rs.25,000 for Persons 
with Disabilities) are covered under the Scheme. The Employees’ and Employers’ 
contribution was reduced from 1.75% to 0.75% and 4.75% to 3.25% of the wages 
w.e.f. 01.07.2019. There was overall reduction in contribution from 6.5%to 4% 
(2.5% decrease). The proceeds are utilized to provide medical care and various cash 
benefits to the Insured Persons (IPs). The average daily wages during a wage period 
for exemption from payment of employee’s contribution which was Rs.137 earlier 
was raised to Rs.176 w.e.f. 06 September 2019. 
 
6. The Committee had further noted that the number of IPs in 2018-19, 2019- 
20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 was 3.50, 3.41, 3.39 and 3.10 crore respectively, and 
the number of beneficiaries during the corresponding period was 13.56, 13.24, 
13.16 and 12.04 crore.  Thus, there is noticeable decrease in IPs as well as 
beneficiaries since 2018-19. The reasons for decrease in the number of IPs as well 
as beneficiaries, as intimated by the Ministry, include, inter-alia out-break of the 
Covid-19 Pandemic owing to which the companies/ factories were completely shut 
down and employees working in such companies were compelled to leave the place 
of work for some period. 
 
7. The Committee had also noted that the net revenue for two years prior to 
reduction of the contribution was Rs.43,274 crore and for three years following the 

3 
 
reduction, it was Rs.44,587 crore. Thus, the average annual revenue prior to, and 
after the reduction of the contribution is Rs.21,637 crore and Rs.14,862 crore 
respectively. Thus, the average annual reduction of ESIC’s revenue following the 
cutting down of the contribution was to the extent of Rs.6775 crore. 
 
8. As intimated by the Ministry, presently, there is no proposal to change the 
wage limit for coverage under the ESI Scheme. 
 
9. The Committee had wished to highlight the fact that with the passage of time, 
wages have increased. The last revision of the wage ceiling was affected from 01 
January 2017 viz. approx. 6 years 9 months back and the prevailing wage limit of 
Rs.176 per day for exemption from paying contribution was effected w.e.f. 06 
September 2019. In the light of the changing economic scenario, the Committee 
had impressed upon the Ministry/ESIC the need for reviewing the provisions 
relating to coverage, contribution and entitlement of wages.  An expert Committee 
could be constituted for suggesting the changes ‘required’ in the provisions with a 
view to increasing coverage by a considerable extent and provide benefits to 
maximum number of IPs and beneficiaries. The Committee had wished to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
  
10. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
 
 “The decision regarding upward revision of wage ceiling for ESI coverage 
 and other issues are taken after comprehensive exercise to assess as to 
 whether the existing ESI infrastructure would be able to meet the 
 requirement of the employees and families, which are likely to increase 
 consequent upon of the enhanced wage ceiling.  At present, there are 165 
 ESI hospitals, 1695 ESI dispensaries and 869 Insurance Medical 
 Practitioners (IMPs) across the country.     
 
 For the purpose, a committee comprising the officers and members of the 
 ESI Corporation had been constituted for examination of the issue and 
 make suitable recommendations.  The report of the committee has been 
 received recently and issue is under examination”. 
 
11. Impressing upon the Ministry/ESIC the need for reviewing the 
provisions relating to coverage, contribution and entitlement of wages under 
the Employees State insurance (ESI) Scheme, the Committee had desired that 

4 
 
an expert committee be constituted for suggesting the changes ‘required’ in 
the provisions. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry have intimated that a committee comprising of officers and 
members of the ESI Corporation had been constituted for the purpose. 
Further, the report of the committee has since been received and the issue 
is under examination. However, there is no specific decision taken by the 
Ministry/ESIC. Given the increase in wages over the passage of time and the 
fact that the last revision of wage ceiling was effected in 2017 while the wage 
limit for exemption from paying contribution was last revised in 2019, the 
Committee stress the urgency for an upward revision of wage ceiling and 
exemption limit under the ESI Scheme and urge the Ministry/ESIC to 
examine the report in all urgency and in the least possible time so that the 
wage ceiling and exemption limit are enhanced accordingly with a view to 
substantially increase coverage and provide benefits to maximum number of 
IPs and beneficiaries. The action taken in this regard may be communicated 
to this Committee immediately. 
 
II. EXTENDED COVERAGE UNDER CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY, 2020 
  
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 
12. The Committee had noted that the ESI Act, 1948 along with 8 other Central 
Labour Acts has been subsumed in the Code on Social Security, 2020 (Act 36 of 
2020) which was notified on 29 September, 2020. The code is, however, yet to be 
enforced. The Central Government has notified the Code on Social Security 
(Central) Rules, 2020 in the Gazette of India on 13 November 2020 for stakeholder 
consultation; and the final rules are yet to be notified. 
 
13. The benefits currently available under the ESI Act will be retained in the 
Code. All the benefits relating to medical, sickness, maternity, disablement and 
dependence benefits are proposed to be retained.  The coverage of ESI will expand 

5 
 
pan India to all establishments employing ten or more employees under the Code 
as against only the notified district areas currently. 
 
14. The Committee had further noted that as per Section 1(4) of the Code on 
Social Security, 2020 read with its First Schedule, provision has been made for 
voluntary coverage of establishments with less than 10 persons.  At present, the 
ESI Act does not contain this provision.  Coverage of plantations as an 
establishment, on opting for the same by the employer has been provided for in the 
Code. As per the proviso of First Schedule of the Code, ibid, establishments 
engaged in hazardous or life-threatening occupations will have to cover every single 
employee. Provision for formulating special scheme for unorganized workers, gig 
workers, platform workers and other beneficiaries have been included in the Code. 
As per the provisions of Section 142 of the Code on Social Security, 2020, the 
establishment of identity through Aadhaar for the employees or unorganized 
workers or any other person, either for himself or dependents, has been made 
mandatory for availing services, seeking benefits, receiving payment, etc. Further, 
the definition of ‘wages’ under ESI Act, 1948 is proposed to be replaced with the 
definition of ‘wages’ as contained under Code on Social Security 2020.  The Code 
defines ‘wages’ under Section 2(88) as basic pay plus dearness allowance plus 
retaining allowance.  The definition excludes bonus, conveyance allowance, 
PF/pension contribution, payment towards special expenses because of the nature 
of the job, HRA, remuneration payable under settlement between parties or the 
order of the Tribunal, overtime allowance, commission, etc. The proviso to the 
section in the Code states that if the total of the components that are excluded is 
more than 50% of gross remuneration, then such percentage of remuneration, 
which is in excess of 50% will be added to the wages. 
 
15. The Committee had noted that with the implementation of the Code, the 
coverage of ESI is to expand pan-India. The Ministry have admitted that 
considering the existing infrastructure, expanding the coverage without proper 
development/ augmentation of facilities will not be in the interest of Insured 
Persons/beneficiaries.  The Committee were also concerned to note that out of 3.73 
crore Insured Persons (IPs) as on 12 May 2023, Aadhaar numbers of only 17,531 
IPs have been seeded by ESIC. 
 
16. The Committee had expressed concern to note that at present the 
Ministry/ESIC is not fully geared up to provide extended coverage as envisaged 
under the Code on Social Security, 2020. The Committee were of the considered 
view that preparatory work for implementation of the plan of action already 
identified by ESIC, viz conduct of extensive surveys; collection of data from 
Government Departments; identification of common  business identifiers for 
establishments by the ESIC in consultation with EPFO; use of Aadhar for 

6 
 
identification of members/insured persons, etc. need to be undertaken in right 
earnest. The Committee had also urged upon the Ministry to seriously have a re-
look at its approach for gearing up the medical/health infrastructure, prepare a 
‘Vision Document’ and ensure that administrative, infrastructural, legal, technical 
and financial hurdles do not in any way dilute the spirit of Code on Social 
Security, 2020 for pan India coverage  of  ESI  Scheme  in  the larger   interest  of 
present  and  future beneficiaries including those in the Unorganized Sectors, as 
also gig workers,  platform workers and similar other beneficiaries. 
  
17. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
 
“In order to identify the uncovered factories/establishments/employees 
 under the ESI scheme, field offices are  advised to liaise with EPFO, other 
departments of the state and central government, local offices like  Central   
Board of Secondary Education, universities, Food and Drugs 
 Administration, field offices of Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of 
 Industries, Ministry of Corporate affairs, MSME, GST,  Confederation of 
 Indian Industry, etc. and obtain data available with them regarding 
 factories/establishment registered with them. 
 
 The data as collected is scrutinized at the level of the field offices of the 
 ESIC (regional and sub-regional offices) across the country and to units, 
 which are found to be coverable under ESI scheme, letters are issued to 
 them explaining the benefits under the scheme and requesting for 
 coverage under it.  
 
 The field offices were again communicated on 21.09.2023 for liaisoning 
 with EPFO and other departments/ offices for obtaining data available 
 with them regarding factories/establishment registered thereon.  As per 
 the data received, there were a total of 291283 factories/ establishments 
 identified for coverage under the ESI scheme and 92089 were non-
 coverable. 
  
At present, the ESI scheme has been notiﬁed in 674 districts out of 778 
 districts of the country, which includes 571 fully notiﬁed districts under 
 ESI coverage and 103 partially notiﬁed districts under ESI coverage. 
 There are remains 104 districts where the ESI scheme is yet to be  notiﬁed. 
Thus, there is a total of 207 districts (103 partially notiﬁed  districts and 
104 non-notified districts) which are awaiting full coverage  under ESI 
scheme. 
  

7 
 
For implementation of ESI scheme in non-notified areas/districts of the 
country, instructions have been issued by the ESIC to all its field offices 
 and state governments to make necessary medical arrangements through 
 dispensaries, empanelment of Modified Insurance Medical Practitioner 
 (m-IMP)/ Modified Employer Utilization Dispensary (mEUD) for providing 
 primary care medical services to insured persons and their families. Apart 
that tie-up arrangements have also been made by the  ESIC with 
public/private and PMJAY empanelled hospitals for arrangement of 
secondary and tertiary care medical services to IPs and their families. Despite 
all out eﬀorts by the ESIC, the goal of achieving pan India implementation of 
the ESI scheme in all districts by the end of 2022 could not be realized so 
far.  In this regard, necessary collaboration with the regional oﬃces and 
medical institutions are being made to expedite infrastructure creation to 
ensure completion of medical arrangements in the pending districts as early 
as possible., As the creation of medical infrastructure is a time-consuming 
process and inﬂuenced by various factors also, it has aﬀected the expansion 
plan of the ESI Scheme. However, consistent efforts are being made to 
expedite in the remaining districts also to implement the scheme the pan-
India implementation at the earliest.  
 
 Recruitment process for existing vacancies in respect of medical 
 officers/nursing/paramedical staff is already underway.  This will further 
 improve medical/health infrastructure of the ESIC. 
 
 Following steps have also been initiated with futuristic vision to gear up 
 and strengthen medical infrastructure: - 
i. Dashboard monitoring regarding procurement, purchase, installation, 
maintenance and condemnation of the medical equipment has been started.  
ii. Comprehensive Medical Manual covering all the aspects of Medical 
Equipment, i.e. procurement, purchase, installation, maintenance and 
condemnation is also under finalisation.  
iii. Enhancement of DOP for procurement of medical equipment to empower 
HoDs of ESIC user institutions has also been carried out for procurement of 
medical equipment. 
iv. Revised and updated medical equipment norms have been issued for 
facilitating ESIC user institutions for procurement of medical equipment.  
v. In order to have a uniform criterion for provision of Human Resource in the 
existing and upcoming new ESIC Hospitals and Dispensaries.  Human 
Resource norms were approved on 15.12.2023. These norms aim to guide 
ESIC in enhancing the delivery of healthcare services to its beneficiaries, 
ensuring efficiency, quality and responsiveness to the evolving healthcare 
landscape. The manpower norms pertain to all category of Hospitals from 

8 
 
100 bed Hospitals to 1000 bed Hospitals and Dispensaries (02 doctor, 03 
doctor and 05 doctor Dispensary). 
vi. The ESIC has strong commitment to provide good quality medical services of 
primary, secondary and tertiary levels to its beneficiaries in best possible 
ways. Goal is to develop in-house speciality and super-speciality services by 
incorporating modern technologies in ESI Hospitals. It has embarked on a 
significant expansion of the Health Scheme to cater to the growing demands 
of ESI Beneficiaries. The aim is to make the most efficient use of existing 
medical infrastructure and establish additional hospitals and dispensaries 
in close proximity to the beneficiaries’ locations. The ESIC referral policy-
2023 (ESIC Operational manual 2023 for Super Speciality and Speciality 
Services) has been framed accordingly, which will act as a reference 
document for situations where referrals to tie-up Hospitals are required to 
offer services that are not available in-house.   
 
For further strengthening its health infrastructure, ESIC and National 
 Health Authority (NHA) have entered into a collaboration to cover a total  of 
157 districts in the country for providing medical care to respective 
 beneficiaries. Besides, 26 ESIC hospitals have been selected for providing 
 medical services to Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY) 
 beneficiaries. 
 
As of now, total 26 ESIC hospitals have been approved (15 ESIC 
 hospitals had been approved in the year 2019 and 11 new ESIC hospitals 
 had been approved in the year 2024)  for opening In-house secondary 
 and tertiary medical care services to PJMAY beneficiaries, so that the 
 benefit of health facility in these Hospitals can also be Utilized by PMJAY 
 beneficiaries and the health and simultaneously the human resource 
 infrastructure of these ESIC hospitals can be optimally utilized.  
 
Further, for the mutual benefit of ESI beneficiaries and PMJAY 
 beneficiaries, ESIC and NHA have decided to take the collaboration 
 forward, Pan-India integration of ESIC and NHA has been approved by 
 ESIC. Technical integration of NHA’s and ESIC’s digital platform is 
 underway to devise modalities for Pan India integration and 
 implementation. 
  
ESIC’s own infrastructure is also being developed in a time bound 
 manner.  A five-year plan for construction activities to augment the 
 medical infrastructure has also been prepared. 
 
 Aadhar Seeding of IPs/beneficiaries: 
 

9 
 
Section 142 of the Social Security Code, 2020 relating to applicability of 
Aadhaar authentication has been notified on 13.01.2023 by the 
 Government. The notification has enabled ESIC to collect Aadhaar detail 
 for the database of beneficiaries on voluntary basis as per the provisions  of 
the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies  Benefits 
and Services) Act, 2016, read with Rule 5 of the Aadhaar 
 Authentication for Good Governance (Social Welfare, Innovation, 
 Knowledge) Rules, 2020. 
 
The Aadhaar seeding of the beneficiaries has accordingly been initiated 
 by the ESIC and it is continuously monitoring the progress. 
 Directions/instructions are being issued by the ESIC from time to time to 
 its field offices across the country to expedite, on priority basis, the 
 Aadhaar seeding of the beneficiaries. In this regard, special kiosks have 
 also been setup at various ESIC/ESI Scheme (ESIS) hospitals and 
 dispensaries across the country. All regional and sub-regional offices of 
 the ESIC are encouraging the employers, employees and beneficiaries to 
 achieve the target of Aadhaar seeding.  
 
 The following steps have also been taken for completion of the tasks:  
i. Aadhaar seeding through biometric devices, because a number of the IPs 
do not have any mobile phone or have changed their registered mobile 
number. 
ii. Coordinating with the EPFO with request for sharing the Aadhaar details 
of common beneficiaries in both ESIC and EPFO databases for faster 
Aadhaar seeding. 
iii. Face-recognition based Aadhaar seeding module is also under 
development. 
  
 The work of Aadhaar seeding of the IPs is going on at a fast pace by the 
 corporation. Till 30.09.2024, more than 1.26 Crore Aadhaar of IPs and 
 beneficiaries have been seeded by the ESI Corporation.   
 
 Extended coverage of ESI scheme to Unorganized worker, gig and 
 platform workers under the Code on Social Security, 2020: 
i. As per section 45 of CoSS, 2020, ESIC has been entrusted with the work of 
providing benefits as per chapter IV of the Code to unorganized/gig/platform 
workers on payment of user charges under the scheme to be notified by the 
central govt as per Section 109(1) and 114(1) of the Code. 
ii. Accordingly, once such a scheme is notified, the ESI Corporation will take 
necessary action to decide the modalities towards it viz. scale of benefits, 

10 
 
amount of contribution and financial implication etc. for platform workers to 
avail the benefits under the scheme.  
iii. ESI Regulations will accordingly be finalized and notified by the ESIC.”  
18. The Committee acknowledge the measures taken by the Ministry/ESIC 
towards extending the coverage of the ESI Scheme as envisaged under the 
Code on Social Security 2020.  However, as far as implementation of the ESI 
Scheme in non-notified areas/districts, recruitment process of existing 
vacancies in respect of medical officers/nursing/paramedical staff, 
augmenting medical infrastructure, work of Aadhaar seeding of IPs and 
beneficiaries, etc. are concerned, a lot of groundwork needs to be done. In 
the Action Taken Note of the Ministry, it is mentioned that the official Rules 
for the Code on Social Security has to be notified. The Committee feel that 
the Rules should be notified immediately. The Committee, also desire that 
the Ministry in co-ordination with ESIC undertake a phased and strategic 
capacity building initiative to ensure preparedness for the extended coverage 
mandated under the Code.  Infrastructure expansion, digital integration viz., 
developing and implementing a robust centralized IT system for real-time 
data,  processing of claims and beneficiary tracking, human resource 
strengthening, awareness campaigns for employers and workers, pilot 
projects in select States/districts to test systems, identify bottlenecks and 
refine operational procedures, establishing a dedicated task force to monitor 
and evaluate implementation progress and readiness as well as addressing 
gaps on real-time basis, etc. may be taken up on priority. The Committee are 
of the firm opinion that these steps will ensure the evolution of ESIC into a 
more agile and capable institution ready to fulfill the broader mandate as 
envisioned under the Social Security Code. The Committee are deeply 
concerned to note that out of 3.73 crore Insured Persons (IPs), only 1.26 crore 
Aadhaar of IPs (as on 30.09.2024) have been seeded by ESIC which is very 
dismal. Since the provision of formulating a special scheme for 
unorganized/Gig and platform workers have been included in the Codes, the 

11 
 
seeding process has to be expedited on war footing. Despite the numerous 
challenges that need to be overcome in this exercise, well planned and 
targeted strategies can mitigate each of these hurdles thus paving way for 
guaranteed success in preparing the groundwork before the Social Security 
Code actually comes into effect.  
III. MEDICAL FACILITIES UNDER ESI SCHEME 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
19. The Committee had noted that the Ministry had initiated efforts to extend 
medical facilities in the Union Territory of Lakshadweep in the year 2016. As 
intimated by the Ministry, building the medical infrastructure in the Union 
Territory having population of 60000, area of 32 square km., 8 islands which are 
upto 302 km. apart from each other has been a challenge. The Committee have, 
from time to time, emphasized the need for providing medical facilities under the 
Scheme in the Union Territory. The Committee were appreciative of the fact that, 
the challenges have been met and as emphasized upon them, the ESI Scheme has 
now been implemented in the entire area of Kavaratti, Agatti and Minicoy Islands 
of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep w.e.f. 01May, 2023. The Committee had also 
been apprised that the Ministry has to depend upon the State Governments for 
opening dispensaries and hospitals under the ESIS so that the coverage can be 
notified. 
 
20. The Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to pursue the State 
Governments the matter of covering new districts and the Scheme, which is 
presently applicable in 610 districts (492 fully notified and 118 partially notified) 
is notified in all the districts of the country in a time bound manner and thereby 
achieve the objective of providing medical facilities under the Scheme to all parts 
of the country. The Committee had wished to be apprised of the progress in this 
direction. 
  
21. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
“Currently, the ESI scheme has been notiﬁed in 674 districts out of 778 
districts in the country, which includes 571 fully notiﬁed and 103 partially 
notiﬁed districts. However, there are still 104 districts where the scheme 
has not yet been notiﬁed. Therefore, a total of 207 districts (103 partially 
notiﬁed districts and 104 non-notified districts) are yet to be fully covered 
under the ESI scheme.  As the creation of medical infrastructure is a time-

12 
 
consuming process and inﬂuenced by various factors also, it has aﬀected 
the expansion plan of the ESI Scheme and the coverage of all districts by 
2022 could not be met. However, consistent efforts are being made to 
expedite in the remaining districts also to implement the scheme the pan-
India implementation at the earliest.  
 
 In this regard, ESIC is consistently pursuing the matter with respective 
 state governments for arrangement of the medical care as early as 
 possible.  In this regard, brief about the action taken by the ESIC are as 
 under:  
 
1. A communication was issued on dated 30.09.2022 to the respective Regional 
Directors of ESIC for making special eﬀorts for expediting the creation of 
infrastructure for the operationalization of Dispensary-cum-Branch Offices 
(DCBOs) and Branch Offices (BOs). 
2. A letter was also issued by the ESIC again on 22.11.2022 to all the Regional 
Directors of ESIC requesting for the submission of proposals within the 
stipulated timeline. 
3. A D.O letter from the Director General, ESIC was also sent on 01.11.2022 to 
22 Chief Secretaries of the states, emphasizing the need for the completion 
of primary care medical arrangements in the non-notified areas of the 
districts of the country. 
4. A letter was also sent to all the Regional Directors of ESIC on 22.05.2023 for 
expedite the implementation of the ESI scheme in the non- notified districts. 
5. Communication was also sent on 21.08.2023 to all Regional Directors, ESIC 
with a request to make special eﬀorts for operationalization of approved 
DCBOs/BOs/ Modified Insured Medical Practitioners (mIMP) /PMJAY 
empanelment for implementation of ESI scheme in non-notified areas and 
submission of proposals to ESIC Headquarters at the earliest. 
6. Let te r 14.02.2024 again issued to the respective Regional Directors for 
submission of proposal to ESIC for implementation of ESI Scheme in pending 
districts. 
7. DO letter dated 23.04.2024 - issued to the respective Regional Directors for 
taking up the matter with State Govt. 
8. DO letter dated 05.07.2024 issued to Chief Secretary of the State for 
necessary medical arrangements in non-notified areas. 
 
 For implementation of ESI scheme in non-notified areas/districts of the 
 country, instructions have been issued to all the field offices of 
 ESIC/state governments to make necessary arrangements through 
 dispensaries and/or empanelment of Modified Insurance Medical 
 Practitioner (m-IMP)/ Modified Employer Utilization Dispensary (mEUD) 
 for providing primary care medical services and tie-up arrangement with 
 public/private and PMJAY hospitals for arrangement of 
 secondary/tertiary care medical services. Despite the eﬀorts made by the 
 ESI Corporation, the goal of achieving pan-India implementation of the 

13 
 
 ESI Scheme in all districts by the end of 2022 could not be realized. 
 Further actions and collaboration with the regional oﬃces and medical 
 services are being made to expedite infrastructure creation and to ensure 
 the completion of medical arrangements in the pending districts.  
 
 As creation of medical infrastructure is a time-consuming process 
 inﬂuenced by various factors, the expansion plan of the ESI Scheme has 
 been affected. However, efforts are being made to expedite the pan-India 
 implementation of the ESI scheme as early as possible.” 
 
22. The Committee note that the ESI Scheme has been notified in 674 
districts out of 778 districts in the country, which includes 571 fully notified 
and 103 partially notified districts.   A total of 207 districts (103 partially 
notified districts and 104 non-notified districts) are yet to be fully covered 
under the ESI Scheme.  The Committee understand that creation of medical 
infrastructure is a time-consuming process, influenced by various factors and 
the expansion plan of the ESI Scheme and the coverage of all districts by 
2022 could not be met. Despite the setbacks, the Committee urge the 
Ministry/ESIC to remain unwavering in their focus to cover all the remaining 
207 districts in a stipulated time period and ensure timely access to 
healthcare and social security for unorganised and underserved workers. 
Providing basic healthcare facilities to the myriad unorganised workers being 
a pre-requisite for ensuring equitable and inclusive  growth, the Committee 
desire that the Government  should temporarily fill the gap in non-notified 
areas/districts of the country by involving State Government health 
services/private providers, establish a dashboard to monitor district-wise 
implementation and beneficiary feedback, launch mobile ESI clinics in 
remote and rural areas, etc. to promptly cater to                                                              

14 
 
the medical necessities of these non-notified areas/districts.  The lessons 
learnt so far in the efforts for expansion of the ESI Scheme and coverage of 
all districts by 2022 may be utilised to adopt a fresh strategy for the pan-
India implementation of the Scheme expeditiously. 
IV. INSURANCE MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS    
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
23. The Committee, in their Fifty-First Report, had noted that to supplement 
the ESI dispensary network, 1003 Private Medical Practitioners have been 
empanelled as Insurance Medical Practitioners (IMPs). Each IMP is allowed to 
register upto 2000 IP family units.The IMPs under the panel system are paid 
capitation fee of Rs.500/-per IP per year, since 8th September 2016, for providing 
medical care to the ESI beneficiaries which include consultation, basic lab 
investigation and cost of medicine. 
24. The Committee had observed that the capitation fee being paid to the IMPs 
at Rs. 41 per IP per month is meagre and needs to be revised considering the 
inflation rate and also the fact that the last revision was affected was back in 
2016. The Committee had desired that an appropriate administrative decision in 
this regard be taken by the Ministry/ESIC on prioritv. 
25. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
 “To augment the resources of the ESIC & ESIS ecosystem, a revised 
 Insurance Medical Practitioner (IMP) scheme to enrol doctors in areas 
 where ESIC doesn't have its own presence has been prepared. 
 Accordingly, a proposal for revised policy of IMP was submitted before 
 the 85' h meeting of the Medical Benefit Council of the ESIC, which 
 recommended the following: - 
1. One IMP for 1000 IPs (two IMPs for 1000 IPs for Northeast) 
2. Remuneration has been recommended to be changed from existing Rs 
500 to Rs 700 with minimum consultation 1.5 times the number of IPs 
enrolled. 
3. Provision of Annual Health check-up camp has been recommended. 
4. The enhancement of the remuneration is proposed keeping in view the 
recent hike in OPD consultation rates by CGHS, MoHF&W. 
 
Action has been taken on recommendation regarding annual health 
check and remaining recommendations are also under consideration”. 

15 
 
 
26. Observing that the capitation fee being paid to the Insurance Medical 
Practitioners (IMPs) at Rs 41 per IP per month is meagre and needs to be 
revised, the Committee had desired that an appropriate administrative 
decision be taken by the Ministry/ESIC on priority. In their Action Taken 
Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have stated that a proposal 
for revised policy of IMP was submitted before the 85'h meeting of the 
Medical Benefit Council of the ESIC, which recommended one IMP for 1000 
IPs (two IMPs for 1000 IPs for Northeast), change in remuneration from the 
existing Rs. 500 to Rs. 700 with minimum consultation 1.5 times the 
number of IPs enrolled, provision of annual health check-up camp, etc. The 
Ministry have also intimated that action has been taken regarding annual 
health check-up while the remaining recommendations are under 
consideration. The Committee emphasize the need to enrol doctors in areas 
where ESIC does not have its presence for providing medical care to the IPs 
and urge the Ministry/ESIC to implement the remaining recommendations, 
particularly the enhanced remuneration for IMPs, at the earliest. 
V. EMPLOYER UTILIZATION DISPENSARIES  
  
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
  
27. In their Fifty-First Report, the Committee had noted that the Employer 
Utilization Dispensaries (EUDs) were set up where the employer agreed to have 
their own infrastructure and ESIC pays capitation fees to the employer based on 
per IP family unit per annum. In this Scheme, the employer opens the dispensary 
in the premises and provides the primary care services to the workers of its own 
establishment and is paid @ Rs.450/- per IP per annum. 
  

16 
 
28. The Committee had also noted that out of 15.94 lakh Establishments, only 
04 EUDs have been approved for which the capitation fee of Rs. 38 per IP per 
month is being paid to the employer. 
  
29. The Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to take urgent steps to 
encourage the employers, having requisite infrastructure, to establish EUDs so 
that the medical care is available to the workers at their workplace. The Committee 
had also desired that the Scheme be suitably revised so as to cover the workers of 
nearby establishments, which do not have the necessary infrastructure on some 
mutually agreed terms and conditions. Concurrently, the capitation fee be suitably 
increased keeping in view the rise in prices. 
  
30. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
“Employer Utilization Dispensaries (EUDs) were also a mechanism of 
providing medical care to IPs and their families, where the employer agreed 
to have their own infrastructure and ESIC pays capitation fees to the 
employer based on per IP family unit per annum. Besides, ESIC also provide 
medical, surgical equipment and drugs and dressing through nearest ESIC 
hospital. Other facilities such as rent for space, furniture, non-medical 
equipment, computer, printers, telephone and internet connectivity etc. were 
also being provided through respective Regional Offices. 
  
At present 20 EUD / m-EUD are functioning in ESIC across the country. No 
proposal is pending from the States for opening of a new  
EUD/m-EUD.” 
 
31. The Committee are deeply concerned that the reply of the Ministry had 
not indicated any pro-active steps taken to facilitate setting up of Employer 
Utilization Dispensaries (EUDs) to ensure medical care to the workers at their 
workplace, provide coverage to workers of nearby establishments which do 
not possess the necessary infrastructure through revision of the ESI Scheme 
and bring about suitable enhancement in the capitation fee in respect of the 
IP family, as desired by them. Being of the firm view that implementation of 
their recommendation would provide IPs and their families easy access to 
basic medical care, especially in underserved areas, the Committee reiterate 

17 
 
their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry/ESIC to act upon it in 
right earnest. In addition to enhancement of the capitation fee, the 
Committee desire that incentives may also be provided to employers to 
establish their own dispensaries in their premises, wherever there is a 
shortage of ESI dispensaries, thereby supplementing the efforts of ESIC and 
ensuring coverage of more IPs. The Committee, therefore, call upon the 
Ministry to seek the collaboration of all the States along with undertaking a 
special drive so that employers are motivated to come forward and utilise the 
scheme. The specific steps taken in this direction may be communicated to 
the Committee. 
 
VI. HOSPITAL DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEES  
  
(Recommendation Para No. 14) 
 
32. The Committee were happy to note that the composition of ESIC/ESIS 
Hospital Development Committees (HDCs) had been revised whereby one of the 
members of the Committee was a local member nominated by Member of 
Parliament of the area. The Committee, however, found that HDCs have been 
constituted only in 36 of 51 ESIC hospitals and 57 of 109 ESIS hospitals. Of these, 
the nominees of local Member of Parliament have been nominated in 19 ESIC and 
24 ESIS HDCs.   
 
33. The Committee had desired that the HDCs in the remaining ESIC and ESIS 
hospitals be constituted expeditiously and  nomination of local representatives of 
Member of Parliament of the area be ensured. The Committee had further desired 
that the meetings of HDCs of both ESIC and ESIS hospitals be held at regular 
intervals. 
  
34. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
 
“In view of constitution of the Hospital Development Committee (HDC) and 
nomination of local representatives of Member of Parliament of the area, 
instructions on 15.01.2020 have been issued to all Medical Superintendents 
of ESIC/ESIS hospitals regarding revision of the composition of ESIC/ESIS 
HDCs accordingly. 

18 
 
 
Further, instructions have also been sent on 15thMay 2023 to the Zonal 
Medical Commissioners of the ESIC to ensure constitution of HDCs in every 
ESIC/ESIS hospitals of their zone. Accordingly, consistent efforts are being 
made to ensure constitution of HDCs in all ESI hospitals at the earliest as 
well as to hold their meetings regularly. 
 
As per the information available HDC is existing in 46 ESIC Hospitals 80 
meetings have been conducted in ESIC Hospitals. Further 36 HDC are 
existing in ESIS Hospitals and 105 meetings of HDC have been conducted 
post formation of HDC Committee.”  
 
35. The Committee had desired expeditious constitution of Hospital 
Development Committees (HDCs) in the remaining ESIC and ESIS hospitals, 
nomination of local representatives of Member of Parliament of the area to 
the HDCs and holding of HDC meetings of both ESIC and ESIS hospitals at 
regular intervals. While providing the number of existing HDCs and the 
number of HDC meetings held, the reply of the Ministry is silent regarding 
nominees of local representatives of Members of Parliament of the area and 
the frequency of HDC meetings. The Committee, hence reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to take immediate steps to nominate 
local representatives of Member of Parliament of the area in the HDCs, 
wherever necessary and ensure that HDC meetings in ESIC and ESIS hospitals 
are conducted at regular/periodic intervals. 
 
VII. TELE-CONSULTATION THROUGH E-SANJEEVANI PORTAL  
  
(Recommendation Para No. 17) 
 
36. In their earlier Report, the Committee were happy to note that all ESI 
hospitals along with 1950 Doctors have been on-boarded on e-Sanjeevani Portal of 

19 
 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for providing tele-consultation services. As 
on July 2023, more than 70,000 patients have been provided tele-consultation 
through this platform. The Committee had been apprised that, at present, there is 
no demarcation of ESI/non-ESI patients on the portal. In this context, the 
Committee found that in the e-Sanjeevani application, a provision exists for CGHS 
beneficiaries to enter beneficiary ID and also to upload CGHS Card at the time of 
availing services. 
 
37. The Committee had urged the Ministry/ ESIC to approach the Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare to provide facility of entering beneficiary ID and also 
uploading Card at the time of availing services to ESI beneficiaries so that the data 
regarding online tele-consultation provided by ESI doctors to ESI & non-ESI 
beneficiaries is readily available. The Committee had also desired that awareness 
campaigns be launched through ESIC/ESIS hospitals/dispensaries as well as 
through employers regarding availability of online tele-consultation facility and IPs 
may be encouraged to utilize the same. 
 
38. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
 
“Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHF&W) has launched e-sanjeevani 
2.0 in August 2023.  Accordingly, the ESIC hospitals are being onboarded 
on e-sanjeevani 2.0 and taking necessary action for increasing the utilization 
of this portal for tele-consultation. 
  
A staggered media campaign on various initiatives of ESIC including the tele 
consultation through e-sanjeevani are part of its efforts towards facilitating 
the easy availability and accessibility of the medical services, which includes 
the following:  
 
1. Drug Delivery to Homes of ESI Beneficiaries  
2. Preventive Health Check-Up camp for Senior Citizens  
3. Chemotherapy Facilities at ESIC Hospitals  
4. 5G enabled Ambulance Services 
5. AAA Mobile App  
6. Dhanwantri Module  
7. Hub & Spoke Model 
8. E-Sanjeevani App 
9. Convergence with PMJAY, etc.” 
 
 

20 
 
 
39. The Committee find that the reply of the Ministry has not addressed 
the core issue of providing facility of entering beneficiary ID and also 
uploading card at the time of availing services through the e-Sanjeevani 
Portal of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for ready availability of 
the data regarding online tele-consultation provided by ESI doctors, 
specifically to ESI beneficiaries.  As regards launching of awareness 
campaigns regarding availability of the online tele-consultation facility and 
encouraging IPs to utilize the same, the Ministry have stated that a staggered 
media campaign on various initiatives of ESIC including the tele-consultation 
service are part of its efforts towards facilitating the easy availability and 
accessibility of the medical services. Emphasizing the need for easy 
availability of data regarding online tele-consultation provided by ESI doctors 
specifically to ESI beneficiaries, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare so that the data is made available at 
the earliest. For wide publicity of the online tele-consultation facility through 
e-Sanjeevani Portal, the Committee desire that ESIC/ESIS 
hospitals/dispensaries as well as employers be pursued to launch vigorous 
awareness campaigns through print and electronic media as well as social 
media platforms so that the benefits of the facility and health care services 
due to IPs and their families are disseminated to them and they are 
encouraged to avail the same.  
 

21 
 
VIII. EMPLOYEES STATE INSURANCE SCHEME    
(Recommendation Para No. 22) 
40. The Committee, in their Fifty-First Report, had noted that ESIC, from 
time-to-time approaches State Governments to take over low performing ESIS 
hospitals. The Committee appreciate that ESIC has recently taken over ESIS 
hospital at Kota (Rajasthan) and the proposal to take over three more hospitals 
at Vijayawada (Andhra Pradesh), Maithan (Jharkhand) and Bhopal (Madhya 
Pradesh) is under process. 
41. The Committee had desired the Ministry/ESIC to expedite the formalities 
of taking over these hospitals on priority. The Committee had also appreciated 
the efforts made by the ESIC requesting all the State Government to provide 
their consent for taking over such State Government ESI hospitals where State 
is willing. The Committee had further recommended that the ESI hospitals at 
Jagadhari, Haryana; Chaudwar, Odisha; and Bhilwara, Rajsthan be taken over 
by ESIC. The Committee had urged the Ministry/ESIC to continue their efforts 
in this direction and apprise them of the outcome of the same. 
42. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
 “It is mentioned that ESIS hospital, Sonagiri, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh 
 and ESIS hospital, Maithan, Jharkhand have been taken over by ESIC 
 on 20.06.2023 and 29.08.2023 respectively. For taking over the ESIS 
 hospital, Vijayawada (Andhra Pradesh), ESIC has requested the State 
 Government to nominate a representative for signing of MoU and 
 complete other formalities of handing/taking over of the hospital. 
 Regarding recommendation of Committee in respect of the taking over of 
 ESIS hospitals at Jagadhari (Haryana), Chaudwar (Odisha) and 
 Bhilwara, (Rajasthan), the following is conveyed: 
 ESIS Hospital, Jagadhari, Haryana- In response to this office 
 DO letter dated 02.01.2023, Principal Secretary, Labour 
 Department, Government of Haryana vide DO letter dated 
 19.06.2023 has informed that requisition to fulfil vacant posts 
 for the post of medical officers in ESIS hospitals, Haryana has 
 already been sent to Haryana Public Service Commission and the 
 advertisement for the same has also been floated.Once the 
 required appointments are done, there will be no scarcity of 
 doctors in hospitals and hospitals will run efficiently. 
2. ESIS Hospital, Chaudwar, Odisha-ThePrincipal Secretary, Govt. of 
 Odisha, on 29.09.2023, has been requested again to convey 
 consent of the State Government to hand over the state-run ESI 
 hospitals including the ESIS hospital, Chaudwar to ESI  
 Corporation. 

22 
 
 
3. ESIS Hospital, Bhilwara, Rajasthan-Earlier,ESIC vide letter dated 
25.05.2022 requested the State Government to send their consent 
for handing over ESIS hospital, Bhilwara as per terms and conditions 
of MoU. Again, State Government of Rajasthan vide DO letter dated 
02.01.2023 was requested to handover ESIS hospitals to ESIC. 
Principal State Government of Rajasthan has been requested again 
on 29.09.2023 to convey consent of the StateGovernment to hand 
over the state-run ESI hospitals including ESIS hospital, Bhilwara to 
 the ESI Corporation.” 
 
43. In pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee for taking over 
of ESIS hospitals at Jagadhari, Haryana; Chaudwar, Odisha; and Bhilwara, 
Rajasthan by ESIC, the Ministry have conveyed that advertisement for 
filling the vacant posts of medical officers in ESIS hospitals, Haryana has 
been floated and once the required appointments are done, there will be no 
scarcity of doctors and hospitals will run efficiently. In respect of the ESIS 
hospitals in Odisha and Rajasthan including Chaudwar and Bhilwara, 
Principal Secretaries of the State Governments have again been requested 
on 29.09.2023 to convey consent for handing over the hospitals to the ESI 
Corporation. The Committee are deeply concerned at the delay in taking 
over such hospitals by ESIC as the vulnerable workers are unnecessarily 
made to suffer on account of poor or lack of medical services. The 
Committee, hence urge the Ministry/ESIC to pursue the State Governments 
concerned for filling up the vacant posts of medical officers in ESIS 
hospitals expeditiously and complete the process of handing over the low 
performing ESIS hospitals across the country without further loss of time 
so that such hospitals are run efficiently and no worker is deprived of proper 
medical care.  

23 
 
 
IX. SPECIAL AWARENESS CAMPAIGNS ON ESI SCHEME 
(Recommendation Para No. 29) 
 
44. In their earlier Report, the Committee were surprised to find that ESIC does 
not organise any special awareness campaigns about their Scheme and facilities. 
Raising awareness involves the process of informing the general public about a 
policy or scheme, increasing levels of consciousness for obtaining optimum 
benefits of the scheme or policy, for which awareness campaigns need to be 
organized. 
  
45. The Committee, therefore, desired that the Ministry should come up with 
guidelines for organizing special awareness campaigns about the ESIC Scheme, 
highlighting its benefits, for covering more workers. The Committee also desired 
that local public representative should also be involved in the awareness 
campaigns. The Committee appreciated the idea of involving other wings of the 
Ministry like EPFO, etc. and work in coordination with them while organizing these 
campaigns. The Committee had liked to be apprised of the progress made in that 
regard. 
  
46. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
 
“The ESIC undertakes various activities to make Insured 
workers/beneficiaries aware about the ESI scheme and benefits, which 
inter-alia includes: 
i. ESIC undertakes periodic publicity about various benefits available 
under the ESI Scheme pan-India using mediums of Print, Outdoor and 
Radio. “Awareness campaign in NE States”. “Aadhar Seeding of 
beneficiaries on voluntary basis has also been started.   
ii. The Field Offices/Hospitals/MCHs undertake various outreach 
programs including Awareness Camps, Seminars, Health Check-up 
Camps, Health Talks, etc.  to make Insured Workers/beneficiaries 
aware. 
iii. Suvidha Samagams/ Grievance Redressal Days are used as tool to 
spread awareness about various benefits amongst the visitors. 
iv. A Special Services Fortnight is observed every year throughout all the 
offices/hospitals /MCHs of ESIC, under which various outreach 
programs, awareness activities are undertaken. 

24 
 
v. Initiatives undertaken by ESIC is publicised through Press 
Release/Media Briefings. PIB is roped in for release of press release 
invariably. 
vi. Official Social Media Handles of ESIC are used to spread awareness 
about ESI Scheme/benefits/initiatives on regular basis through 
images, creatives, AVs, testimonials, etc.  
vii. Recent initiatives, benefits etc. regularly updated on ESIC website i.e. 
www.esic.gov.in for viewing by the visitors of website.  
viii. Brochure, pamphlets, magazines, samachar, etc. are designed and 
printed for publicising the ESI Scheme. These are also made available 
on official website for further viewing and downloading.  The field 
offices/hospitals get these brochures, pamphlets, etc. translated in 
respective vernaculars for printing and further distribution amongst 
beneficiaries.” 
 
47. The Committee acknowledge the various initiatives taken by the ESIC 
to make Insured Workers/beneficiaries aware about the ESI Scheme and 
benefits. However, the Committee find that their recommendation for 
framing guidelines for organizing special awareness campaigns, involving 
local public representatives in such awareness campaigns and coordination 
with other wings of the Ministry like EPFO, etc. in organizing such 
campaigns, have not been addressed in the reply of the Ministry. The 
Committee genuinely perceive that such efforts would ensure widespread 
dissemination of information, build trust among beneficiaries and enhance 
the outreach and effectiveness of ESIC services, particularly among 
unorganised and vulnerable workers. Workers being the backbone of the 
economy, their good health goes a long way in strengthening the overall 
development of the country. The Committee, therefore, seek immediate 
intervention of the Ministry for coming up with guidelines for organizing 
special awareness campaigns on the ESI Scheme and its benefits, garnering 

25 
 
assistance/support from every quarter including local public representatives 
and various wings of the Ministry for execution of such campaigns so that the 
benefits of the ESI Scheme reach every corner of the country as well as  each 
and every worker.   
  

26 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
  
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
  
 
The ESI Act, 1948 applies to factories employing 10 or more persons. The 
Central Government is fully responsible for running the Scheme and ESIC does 
not receive subsidy from the Government. Presently, the employees of factories and 
establishments covered under the Act drawing wages up to Rs.21,000 per month 
(Rs.25,000for Persons with Disabilities) are covered under the Scheme. The 
Employees’ and Employers’ contribution was reduced from 1.75% to 0.75% and 
4.75% to 3.25% of the wages w.e.f. 01.07.2019. There was overall reduction in 
contribution from 6.5% to 4% (2.5% decrease). The proceeds are utilized to provide 
medical care and various cash benefits to the Insured Persons (IPs). The average 
daily wages during a wage period for exemption from payment of employee’s 
contribution which was Rs.137 earlier was raised to Rs.176 w.e.f. 06 September 
2019. 
 
The Committee further note that the number of IPs in 2018-19, 2019- 20, 
2020-21 and 2021-22 was 3.50, 3.41, 3.39 and 3.10 crore respectively, and the 
number of beneficiaries during the corresponding period was 13.56, 13.24, 13.16 
and 12.04 crore.  Thus, there is noticeable decrease in IPs as well as beneficiaries 
since 2018-19. The reasons for decrease in the number of IPs as well as 
beneficiaries, as intimated by the Ministry, include, inter alia out-break of the 
Covid-19 Pandemic owing to which the companies/ factories were completely shut 
down and employees working in such companies were compelled to leave the place 
of work for some period. 
 
The Committee also note that the net revenue for two years prior to reduction 
of the contribution was Rs.43,274 crore and for three years following the reduction, 
it was Rs.44,587 crore. Thus, the average annual revenue prior to, and after the 
reduction of the contribution is Rs.21,637 crore and Rs.14,862 crore respectively. 
Thus, the average annual reduction of ESIC’s revenue following the cutting down 
of the contribution was to the extent of Rs.6775 crore. 
 
As intimated by the Ministry, presently, there is no proposal to change the 
wage limit for coverage under the ESI Scheme. 
 

27 
 
The Committee wish to highlight the fact that with the passage of time, wages 
have increased. The last revision of the wage ceiling was affected from 01 January 
2017 viz. approx. 6 years 9 months back and the prevailing wage limit of Rs.176 
per day for exemption from paying contribution was effected w.e.f. 06 September 
2019. In the light of the changing economic scenario, 
the   Committee   impress   upon   the   Ministry/ESIC   the   need   for 
reviewing the provisions relating to coverage, contribution and entitlement of 
wages.  An expert Committee could be constituted for suggesting the changes 
‘required’ in the provisions with a view to increasing coverage by a considerable 
extent and provide benefits to maximum number of IPs and beneficiaries. The 
Committee wish to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
The decision regarding upward revision of wage ceiling for ESI coverage and 
other issues are taken after comprehensive exercise to assess as to whether the 
existing ESI infrastructure would be able to meet the requirement of the employees 
and families, which are likely to increase consequent upon of the enhanced wage 
ceiling.  At present, there are 165 ESI hospitals, 1695 ESI dispensaries and 869 
Insurance Medical Practitioners (IMPs) across the country.     
 
For the purpose, a committee comprising the officers and members of the 
ESI Corporation had been constituted for examination of the issue and make 
suitable recommendations.  The report of the committee has been received recently 
and issue is under examination. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I 
  
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 
The ESI Act, 1948 along with 8 other Central Labour Acts has been 
subsumed in the Code on Social Security, 2020 (Act 36 of 2020) which was notified 
on 29September, 2020.The code is, however, yet to be enforced. The Central 
Government has notified the Code on Social Security (Central) Rules, 2020 in the 
Gazette of India on 13 November 2020 for stakeholder consultation; and the final 
rules are yet to be notified. 
 

28 
 
The benefits currently available under the ESI Act will be retained in the 
Code. All the benefits relating to medical, sickness, maternity, disablement and 
dependence benefits are proposed to be retained.  The coverage of ESI will expand 
pan India to all establishments employing ten or more employees under the Code 
as against only the notified district areas currently. 
 
The Committee further note that as per Section 1(4) of the Code on Social 
Security, 2020 read with its First Schedule, provision has been made for voluntary 
coverage of establishments with less than 10 persons.  At present, the ESI Act does 
not contain this provision.  Coverage of plantations as an establishment, on opting 
for the same by the employer has been provided for in the Code. As per the proviso 
of First Schedule of the Code, ibid, establishments engaged in hazardous or life-
threatening occupations will have to cover every single employee. Provision for 
formulating special scheme for unorganized workers, gig workers, platform workers 
and other beneficiaries have been included in the Code. As per the provisions of 
Section 142 of the Code on Social Security, 2020, the establishment of identity 
through Aadhaar for the employees or unorganized workers or any other person, 
either for himself or dependents, has been made mandatory for availing services, 
seeking benefits, receiving payment, etc. Further, the definition of ‘wages’ under 
ESI Act, 1948 is proposed to be replaced with the definition of ‘wages’ as contained 
under Code on Social Security 2020.  The Code defines ‘wages’ under Section 2(88) 
as basic pay plus dearness allowance plus retaining allowance.  The definition 
excludes bonus, conveyance allowance, PF/pension contribution, payment 
towards special expenses because of the nature of the job, HRA, remuneration 
payable under settlement between parties or the order of the Tribunal, overtime 
allowance, commission, etc. The proviso to the section in the Code states that if 
the total of the components that are excluded is more than 50% of gross 
remuneration, then such percentage of remuneration, which is in excess of 50% 
will be added to the wages. 
 
The Committee note that with the implementation of the Code, the coverage 
of ESI is to expand pan-India. The Ministry have admitted that considering the 
existing infrastructure expanding the coverage without proper development/ 
augmentation of facilities will not be in the interest of Insured 
Persons/beneficiaries.  The Committee are also concerned to note that out of 3.73 
crore Insured Persons (IPs) as on 12 May 2023, Aadhaar numbers of only 17,531 
IPs have been seeded by ESIC. 
 
The Committee express concern to note that at present the Ministry/ESIC is 
not fully geared up to provide extended coverage as envisaged under the Code on 
Social Security, 2020. The Committee are of the considered view that preparatory 

29 
 
work for implementation of the plan of action already identified by ESIC viz. 
conduct of extensive surveys; collection of data from Government Departments; 
identification of common   business identifiers for establishments by the ESIC in 
consultation with EPFO; use of Aadhar for identification of members/insured 
persons, etc. need to be undertaken in right earnest. The Committee also urge 
upon the Ministry to seriously have  a re-
look  at  its  approach  for  gearing  up  the medical/health infrastructure, 
prepare a ‘Vision Document’ and ensure that administrative, infrastructural, legal, 
technical and financial hurdles do notin any way dilute the spirit 
of  Code  on  Social Security,  2020  for  pan  India 
coverage   of   ESI   Scheme   in   the   larger   interest   of present  and  future 
beneficiaries including those in the Unorganized Sectors, as also gig 
workers,  platform workers and similar other beneficiaries. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
In order to identify the uncovered factories/establishments/employees 
under the ESI scheme, field offices are  advised to liaise with EPFO, other 
departments of the state and central government, local offices like Central Board 
of Secondary Education, universities, Food and Drugs Administration, filed offices 
of Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Industries, Ministry of Corporate affairs, 
MSME, GST,  Confederation of Indian Industry, etc. and obtain data available with 
them regarding factories/establishment registered with them. 
 
The data as collected is scrutinized at the level of the field offices of the ESIC 
(regional and sub-regional offices) across the country and to units, which are found 
to be coverable under ESI scheme, letters are issued to them explaining the benefits 
under the scheme and requesting for coverage under it. The field offices were again 
communicated on 21.09.2023 for liaisoning with EPFO and other departments/ 
offices for obtaining data available with them regarding factories/establishment 
registered thereon.  As per the data received, there were a total of 291283 factories/ 
establishments identified for coverage under the ESI scheme and 92089 were non-
coverable. 
  
At present, the ESI scheme has been notiﬁed in 674 districts out of 778 
districts of the country, which includes 571 fully notiﬁed districts under ESI 
coverage and 103 partially notiﬁed districts under ESI coverage. There are remains 
104 districts where the ESI scheme is yet to be notiﬁed. Thus, there is a total of 
207 districts (103 partially notiﬁed districts and 104 non-notified districts) which 
are awaiting full coverage under ESI scheme. 
  

30 
 
For implementation of ESI scheme in non-notified areas/districts of the 
country, instructions have been issued by the ESIC to all its field offices and state 
governments to make necessary medical arrangements through dispensaries, 
empanelment of Modified Insurance Medical Practitioner (m-IMP)/ Modified 
Employer Utilization Dispensary (mEUD)for providing primary care medical 
services to insured persons and their families. Apart that tie-up arrangements have 
also been made by the ESIC with public/private and PMJAY empanelled hospitals 
for arrangement of secondary and tertiary care medical services to IPs and their 
families. Despite all out eﬀorts by the ESIC, the goal of achieving pan India 
implementation of the ESI scheme in all districts by the end of 2022 could not be 
realized so far.  In this regard, necessary collaboration with the regional oﬃces and 
medical institutions are being made to expedite infrastructure creation to ensure 
completion of medical arrangements in the pending districts as early as possible., 
As the creation of medical infrastructure is a time-consuming process and 
inﬂuenced by various factors also, it has aﬀected the expansion plan of the ESI 
Scheme. However, consistent efforts are being made to expedite in the remaining 
districts also to implement the scheme the pan-India implementation at the 
earliest.  
 
Recruitment process for existing vacancies in respect of medical 
officers/nursing/paramedical staff is already underway.  This will further improve 
medical/health infrastructure of the ESIC. 
 
Following steps have also been initiated with futuristic vision to gear up and 
strengthen medical infrastructure: - 
vii. Dashboard monitoring regarding procurement, purchase, installation, 
maintenance and condemnation of the medical equipment has been started.  
viii. Comprehensive Medical Manual covering all the aspects of Medical 
Equipment, i.e. procurement, purchase, installation, maintenance and 
condemnation is also under finalisation.  
ix. Enhancement of DOP for procurement of medical equipment to empower 
HoDs of ESIC user institutions has also been carried out for procurement of 
medical equipment. 
x. Revised and updated medical equipment norms have been issued for 
facilitating ESIC user institutions for procurement of medical equipment.  
xi. In order to have a uniform criterion for provision of Human Resource in the 
existing and upcoming new ESIC Hospitals and Dispensaries.  Human 
Resource norms were approved on 15.12.2023. These norms aim to guide 
ESIC in enhancing the delivery of healthcare services to its beneficiaries, 
ensuring efficiency, quality and responsiveness to the evolving healthcare 
landscape. The manpower norms pertain to all category of Hospitals from 
100 bed Hospitals to 1000 bed Hospitals and Dispensaries (02 doctor, 03 
doctor and 05 doctor Dispensary). 

31 
 
xii. The ESIC has strong commitment to provide good quality medical services of 
primary, secondary and tertiary levels to its beneficiaries in best possible 
ways. Goal is to develop in-house speciality and super-speciality services by 
incorporating modern technologies in ESI Hospitals. It has embarked on a 
significant expansion of the Health Scheme to cater to the growing demands 
of ESI Beneficiaries. The aim is to make the most efficient use of existing 
medical infrastructure and establish additional hospitals and dispensaries 
in close proximity to the beneficiaries’ locations. The ESIC referral policy-
2023 (ESIC Operational manual 2023 for Super Speciality and Speciality 
Services) has been framed accordingly, which will act as a reference 
document for situations where referrals to tie-up Hospitals are required to 
offer services that are not available in-house.   
 
For further strengthening its health infrastructure, ESIC and National 
Health Authority (NHA) have entered into a collaboration to cover a total of 157 
districts in the country for providing medical care to respective beneficiaries. 
Besides, 26 ESIC hospitals have been selected for providing medical services to 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY) beneficiaries. 
As of now, total 26 ESIC hospitals have been approved (15 ESIC hospitals 
had been approved in the year 2019 and 11 new ESIC hospitals had been approved 
in the year 2024)  for opening In-house secondary and tertiary medical care 
services to PJMAY beneficiaries, so that the benefit of health facility in these 
Hospitals can also be Utilized by PMJAY beneficiaries and the health and 
simultaneously the human resource infrastructure of these ESIC hospitals can be 
optimally utilized.  
Further, for the mutual benefit of ESI beneficiaries and PMJAY beneficiaries, 
ESIC and NHA have decided to take the collaboration forward, Pan-India 
integration of ESIC and NHA has been approved by ESIC. Technical integration of 
NHA’s and ESIC’s digital platform is underway to devise modalities for Pan India  
integration and implementation. 
ESIC’s own infrastructure is also being developed in a time bound manner.  A five-
year plan for construction activities to augment the medical infrastructure has also 
been prepared. 
Aadhar Seeding of IPs/beneficiaries: 
Section 142 of the Social Security Code, 2020 relating to applicability of 
Aadhaar authentication has been notified on 13.01.2023 by the Government. The 
notification has enabled ESIC to collect Aadhaar detail for the database of 
beneficiaries on voluntary basis as per the provisions of the Aadhaar (Targeted 
Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies Benefits and Services) Act, 2016, read 
with Rule 5 of the Aadhaar Authentication for Good Governance (Social Welfare, 
Innovation, Knowledge) Rules, 2020. 

32 
 
The Aadhaar seeding of the beneficiaries has accordingly been initiated by 
the ESIC and it is continuously monitoring the progress. Directions/instructions 
are being issued by the ESIC from time to time to its field offices across the country 
to expedite, on priority basis, the Aadhaar seeding of the beneficiaries. In this 
regard, special kiosks have also been setup at various ESIC/ESI Scheme (ESIS) 
hospitals and dispensaries across the country. All regional and sub-regional offices 
of the ESIC are encouraging the employers, employees and beneficiaries to achieve 
the target of Aadhaar seeding.  
The following steps have also been taken for completion of the tasks:  
iv. Aadhaar seeding through biometric devices, because a number of the IPs do 
not have any mobile phone or have changed their registered mobile number. 
v. Coordinating with the EPFO with request for sharing the Aadhaar details of 
common beneficiaries in both ESIC and EPFO databases for faster Aadhaar 
seeding. 
vi. Face-recognition based Aadhaar seeding module is also under 
development. 
 The work of Aadhaar seeding of the IPs is going on at a fast pace by the 
corporation. Till 30.09.2024, more than 1.26 Crore Aadhaar of IPs and 
beneficiaries have been seeded by the ESI Corporation.   
Extended coverage of ESI scheme to Unorganized worker, gig and 
platform workers under the Code on Social Security, 2020: 
iv. As per section 45 of CoSS, 2020, ESIC has been entrusted with the work of 
providing benefits as per chapter IV of the Code to unorganized/gig/platform 
workers on payment of user charges under the scheme to be notified by the 
central govt as per Section 109(1) and 114(1) of the Code. 
v. Accordingly, once such a scheme is notified, the ESI Corporation will take 
necessary action to decide the modalities towards it viz. scale of benefits, 
amount of contribution and financial implication etc. for platform workers to 
avail the benefits under the scheme.  
vi. ESI Regulations will accordingly be finalized and notified by the ESIC.  
  
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter-I 
 
 
 

33 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
The Committee note that the Ministry had initiated efforts to extend medical 
facilities in the Union Territory of Lakshadweep in the year 2016. As intimated by 
the Ministry, building the medical infrastructure in the Union Territory having 
population of 60000, area of 32 square km., 8 islands which are upto 302 km. 
apart from each other has been a challenge. The Committee have, from time to 
time, emphasized the need for providing medical facilities under the Scheme in the 
Union Territory. The Committee are appreciative of the fact that, the challenges 
have been met and as emphasized upon them, the ESI Scheme has now been 
implemented in the entire area of Kavaratti, Agatti and Minicoy Islands of the Union 
Territory of Lakshadweep w.e.f.  01May, 2023. The Committee have also been 
apprised that the Ministry has to depend upon the State Governments for opening 
dispensaries and hospitals under the ESIS so that the coverage can be notified. 
The Committee impress upon the Ministry to pursue the State Governments 
the matter of covering new districts and the Scheme, which is presently applicable 
in 610 districts (492 fully notified and 118 partially notified) is notified in all the 
districts of the country in a time bound manner and thereby achieve the objective 
of providing medical facilities under the Scheme to all parts of the country. The 
Committee wish to be apprised of the progress in this direction. 
(Reply of Government) 
Currently, the ESI scheme has been notiﬁed in 674 districts out of 778 
districts in the country, which includes 571 fully notiﬁed and 103 partially notiﬁed 
districts. However, there are still 104 districts where the scheme has not yet been 
notiﬁed. Therefore, a total of 207 districts (103 partially notiﬁed districts and 104 
non-notified districts) are yet to be fully covered under the ESI scheme.  As the 
creation of medical infrastructure is a time-consuming process and inﬂuenced by 
various factors also, it has aﬀected the expansion plan of the ESI Scheme and the 
coverage of all districts by 2022 could not be met. However, consistent efforts are 
being made to expedite in the remaining districts also to implement the scheme 
the pan-India implementation at the earliest.  
In this regard, ESIC is consistently pursuing the matter with respective state 
governments for arrangement of the medical care as early as possible.  In this 
regard, brief about the action taken by the ESIC are as under:  
1. A communication was issued on dated 30.09.2022 to the respective Regional 
Directors of ESIC for making special eﬀorts for expediting the creation of 
infrastructure for the operationalization of Dispensary-cum-Branch Offices 
(DCBOs) and Branch Offices (BOs). 
2. A letter was also issued by the ESIC again on 22.11.2022 to all the Regional 
Directors of ESIC requesting for the submission of proposals within the 
stipulated timeline. 
3. A D.O letter from the Director General, ESIC was also sent on 01.11.2022 to 
22 Chief Secretaries of the states, emphasizing the need for the completion 

34 
 
of primary care medical arrangements in the non-notified areas of the 
districts of the country. 
4. A letter was also sent to all the Regional Directors of ESIC on 22.05.2023 for 
expedite the implementation of the ESI scheme in the non- notified districts. 
5. Communication was also sent on 21.08.2023 to all Regional Directors, ESIC 
with a request to make special eﬀorts for operationalization of approved 
DCBOs/BOs/ Modified Insured Medical Practitioners (mIMP) /PMJAY 
empanelment for implementation of ESI scheme in non-notified areas and 
submission of proposals to ESIC Headquarters at the earliest. 
6. Let te r 14.02.2024 again issued to the respective Regional Directors for 
submission of proposal to ESIC for implementation of ESI Scheme in pending 
districts. 
7. DO letter dated 23.04.2024 - issued to the respective Regional Directors for 
taking up the matter with State Govt. 
8. DO letter dated 05.07.2024 issued to Chief Secretary of the State for 
necessary medical arrangements in non-notified areas. 
 
For implementation of ESI scheme in non-notified areas/districts of the 
country, instructions have been issued to all the field offices of ESIC/state 
governments to make necessary arrangements through dispensaries and/or 
empanelment of Modified Insurance Medical Practitioner (m-IMP)/ Modified 
Employer Utilization Dispensary (mEUD) for providing primary care medical 
services and tie-up arrangement with public/private and PMJAY hospitals for 
arrangement of secondary/tertiary care medical services. Despite the eﬀorts made 
by the ESI Corporation, the goal of achieving pan-India implementation of the ESI 
Scheme in all districts by the end of 2022 could not be realized. Further actions 
and collaboration with the regional oﬃces and medical services are being made to 
expedite infrastructure creation and to ensure the completion of medical 
arrangements in the pending districts.  
As creation of medical infrastructure is a time-consuming process inﬂuenced 
by various factors, the expansion plan of the ESI Scheme has been 
affected. However, efforts are being made to expedite the pan-India implementation 
of the ESI scheme as early as possible. 
 
 [Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I 
 
 
 

35 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that under the ESI Act, the employers are under 
obligation to ensure that their share of contribution is paid to ESIC within six-
monthly intervals in a financial year.  In case of default by the employer in payment 
of contribution, recovery is affected after following the procedure laid down. If the 
employer is not contributing deliberately and if the stipulated time period is 
exceeded, there is no provision for the employee to voluntarily contribute his 
share.  The Committee note that despite penal provisions being available under 
ESI Act, Negotiable Instruments Act and various Sections of IPC for taking action 
against wilfull defaulter employers, there are occasions where the employee, 
despite having contributed his share, is made to suffer on account of default on 
the part of the employer. 
  
The Committee express concern in this regard and desire that the Ministry 
strengthen the monitoring mechanism, ensure strict enforcement of the penal 
provisions so as to deter violators and also devise a suitable mechanism to prevent 
such instances, which would minimize the sufferings of the employees. 
  
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
To ensure strict enforcement of the penal provisions in order to deter 
violators vis-a-vis devise a suitable mechanism to prevent such instances, and 
minimizing the sufferings of the employees, following changes have been proposed 
in online module to strengthen the monitoring mechanism: 
 Automated SMS/ communication to employers for non-filing of contribution, 
non-payment of contribution and confirmation of payment of contribution at 
their registered mobile number and email id. 
 Alert for pending notices in the online application of employers. 
 Automatic generation of demand notices in case of non-generation of challan 
till 30th of next month by the employer. 
 To make available Radio button in the login of the revenue officer which 
automatically delivers the revenue notices directly to the employer via email. 
 Automated SMS to be sent to IP’s regarding non-filing of contribution & non- 
payment of contribution by the employer at their registered mobile number. 
 Provision for validation of data such as email, phone number at the time of 
filing the contribution for the months of April and October respectively in the 
Insurance Module is being made so that the database can be cleaned, and 
the communication may directly reach the employer.  
 System driven verification of the same email id and mobile number with 
multiple employers and same mobile number with multiple IPs and email, 

36 
 
SMS along with physical communication for sending to employers and IPs 
for correction of data. 
 Defaulter action may be given top priority by Regional/Sub Regional Offices. 
 Up dation of GSTIN in the employer database may be done to assist them in 
times of closure of the unit (surrendering of GST number may be taken as a 
concrete source of closure information). 
 SMS to defaulters and connected insured persons have been started from 
01.05.2024.  
 Automatic generation of Demand Notices/Defaulter Notices is also under 
development.   
  
Notice to the employer in case of default is also under consideration through 
batch process by each region from the defaulter list (automatically drawn by the 
module) and dispatched to the employer to make defaulter action automated. 
  
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
(Recommendation Para No. 5)  
 
The Committee noted that in  order  to  address  the  issue  of  non- 
allocation  of  funds  through  State   Budget   for   running   the   ESI   Scheme, 
ESIC had  encouraged  the  States  to  form  State  ESI  Societies, which will 
provide autonomy in terms of availability and utilization of funds; timely 
engagement of medical  manpower  on  contract  till  the  time  regular manpower 
is made available; timely settlement of reimbursement bills of the insured persons/ 
beneficiaries without waiting for state budgetary release; better availability of 
drugs/ dressings in ESIS hospitals and dispensaries; procurement of equipment 
to upgrade medical services due to better decision making by the Society, repair & 
maintenance of State-run hospitals and dispensaries, etc. Further, in the case of 
ESI Society, the entire expenditure up to maximum ceiling is being borne by ESI 
Corporation, whereas in other cases, where a society has not been formed, the 
expenditure is shared in the ratio of 7:1 by ESI Corporation and the States 
respectively. 
  
The Committee further note in this  regard  that  as  on  04May,  2023, while 
22 States/UTs have consented to form the ESI Societies; 04 States viz. Andhra 
Pradesh, Kerala, Telangana, West Bengal have refused  to  form Societies; 08 
States/UT viz. Assam, Bihar, Dadra Nagar Haveli &  Daman  Diu, Goa, Haryana, 
Ladakh, Manipur and Rajasthan have not responded; and the provision is not 
applicable in the case of 02 Union Territories viz. Delhi and Lakshadweep. The 
Committee have also been apprised that the Societies have been operationalized in 

37 
 
04 States viz.  Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Tripura and Himachal Pradesh and the 
funds are directly transferred to the bank account of these Societies since 2019 
except in the case of Himachal Pradesh, where, though the Society has been 
registered, the matter is continuing under correspondence. The Committee have 
also been apprised that formation of a Society depends on the States which have 
to register the Society as per Societies Registration Act and State Specific Public 
Trust Act. The Committee find that although the Ministry have taken up the matter 
with the States, which have given consent to constitute the Societies, a lot remains 
to be done. 
  
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to vigorously pursue the matter 
regarding constitution of the Societies with those 22 States, which have consented 
to constitute the Societies so as to ensure timely operationalization of Societies and 
thereby contribute to the betterment of the medical facilities provided under the 
ESI Scheme. The Committee also urge the Ministry to make sincere efforts to 
resolve the concerns expressed by the 04 States which have not agreed to form the 
Societies. The Committee further desire the Ministry/ESIC to pursue the     matter 
with the 08 States which have not yet responded so that the laudable intent with 
which formation of State Level Societies has been conceived is      truly served. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
ESIC is working towards the constitution of ESI societies across states 
through proactive measures. The Corporation is engaged with stakeholders for 
early formation of ESI societies. Stakeholders have been requested to form the 
societies which will bring positive outcomes in the improvement of medical facilities 
for IPs and their dependents. Following communications have also been issued to 
Chief Secretary and Regional Offices for formation of the society in the states: 
i. Letters dated 19.07.2022 & 22.07.2022 from DG, ESIC issued to the Chief 
Secretaries of States/UTs requesting to complete formation of State ESI 
Society by 31.03.2023 in order to be eligible for the incentive of 100% 
expenditure up to the ceiling.  
ii. Letters from Insurance Commissioner, ESIC were also issued on 06.10.2023 
to all Regional Directors to follow up with states for formation of the 
societies.   
iii. Letters by DG, ESIC were issued again on 05.12.2023 to Chief Secretaries of 
respective states/UTs with a request for completion of the formation of the 
society in their states. 
iv. Communication from DG, ESIC was also issued on 16.01.2024 to Chief 
Secretary, Tamil Nadu with a request for operationalization of society in the 
state. 

38 
 
v. Regular follow-up with the States/UTs through official 
communications/meetings with Principal Secretary (Labour/Health) of the 
Departments dealing ESIS. 
   
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
   
The Committee note that at present, medical services to ESI beneficiaries are 
provided through a network of 160 ESI hospitals (51ESIC and 109 ESIS) in25 
States/UTs. Of these, 6 are non-functional due to decrease in number of 
beneficiaries in the area.  Further, 1502 Dispensaries (36 ESIC and 1466 ESIS) are 
also presently functional in 33 States/UTs. The Committee have been apprised 
that ESIC has given in-principal approval for setting up 76 new ESI hospitals (18 
ESIC and 58 ESIS) in 24 States/UTs. In addition, 47 Dispensary-cum-Branch 
Offices (DCBO) and 180 ESIS Dispensaries have also been sanctioned.  Besides, 
ESIC has entered into tie- up arrangements with 2204 public/private hospitals 
across the country for providing cashless secondary/tertiary medical services that 
are not available in ESI hospitals. 
 
The Committee find that out of 76 hospitals proposed to be set up, 39 
hospitals were sanctioned in 2019. Of these, only 2 Hospitals at Angul (Odisha) 
and Bikaner (Rajasthan) have been completed and operationalized; 16 are under 
construction; 02 under tendering; 07 under estimation and in respect of the 
remaining 12 hospitals, allotment of land is under process. In respect of the 37 
hospitals sanctioned after 2019, the Ministry/ESIC has not provided information 
regarding the target date of completion and operationalization despite being 
specifically asked for, which is improper and regrettable. 
 
The Committee are dissatisfied with the pace of progress of setting up of new 
hospitals. The Committee are of the view that the constraints that may be impeding 
the estimation/allotment of land/ tendering/ construction process need to be 
looked into with a sense of urgency and commitment. 
  
The Committee, impress upon the Ministry/ESIC to fix targets, chalk-out 
year-wise plan and gainfully utilize the earmarked funds for the purpose and 
ensure that the hospitals are operationalized in a time bound manner so as to meet 
the present as well as future requirements. This is essential as the coverage of ESI 
is to expand pan India after implementation of the Social Security Code, 2020. 
  

39 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
ESIC has formulated a comprehensive plan for year-wise completion of the 
sanctioned ESI hospitals. The focus is on optimizing utilization of earmarked funds 
to ensure timely operationalization of the hospitals. ESIC is committed to a time-
bound approach and will strive to meet the objectives of the Social Security Code 
2020 on priority basis:in this regard, as on 30.05.24, there are 120 projects, 
comprising ESI Hospitals, Dispensaries, Dispensary-cum-Branch Offices (DCBOs), 
etc. are being executed by the ESIC, which are at the different stages s detailed 
below: - 
  
a. On-going projects                  :  46 
b. Tendering by CPWD             :  15 
c. Tendering by ESIC for PSUs  :  18 
d. Estimation stage                  :  05 
e. Concept plan stage               :  07 
f. Land under consideration      :  32 
  
The ESIC has taken various efforts/steps to monitor the early completion of 
the aforesaid projects including the projects which are to complete in 2023-24: -  
 
a. The construction work is being executed by the appointed government 
agencies, i.e., PSU’s/CPWD. ESIC has constituted a Project Monitoring Unit 
(PMU) at the level of ESIC Regional Offices. The PMU regularly visits the 
construction sites and also reports the progress of the project to ESIC Hqrs. 
The reports of the PMU are reviewed at ESIC Hqrs. and accordingly, 
instructions/directions are issued to the construction agency on time for 
early completion of project. 
b. PMU of ESIC also reports the other issues which obstructs early completion 
of projects. Accordingly, instructions/directions are to issueto the appointed 
construction agencies from time to time for necessary follow up action. 
c. ESIC has launched its own Construction Dashboard for monitoring the 
progress of all the on-going construction projects.    
d. The monitoring of projects is done at the ESIC Hqrs. through regular reviews 
at various levels including Director General, ESICInsurance Commissioner 
(PMD) and Chief Engineer, ESIC. 
e. Further all Deans/Medical Superintendents have also been instructed vide 
letter dated 21.02.2023 for monthly progress report. 
f. Periodically site visits are undertaken by the engineers posted at Hqrs. as 
well as those posted at the regional offices. If any issues observed, then 
instructions are issued to the construction agency. 
g. ESIC has also made efforts for obtaining suitable land, occupancy certificate, 
fire NOC, approvals from local authorities, etc., after liaising with the state 
govt. so that the projects could be completed in time.  

40 
 
h. ESIC has also approved the SOP with the prescribed timelines for various 
construction activities for construction agencies (CPWD & PSUs) as well as 
for ESIC and the same was circulated to all concerned. 
i. A committee has been formed for finalization of standard norms for 
drawings, designs, layouts, etc. for construction of hospitals. The standard 
norms are under finalisation. 
j. Further, construction projects are also distributed into 5 zones, i.e., North, 
South, East, West &Northeast Zone, which are headed by Zonal Medical 
Commissioners & Zonal Insurance Commissioners for monitoring of projects 
which are under execution in their respective zones. This will improve the 
monitoring activities at PMD level. 
k. Five-year plan 
ESIC has prepared a plan upto 2028-29 for completion of the projects, as 
follows: - 
 
 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
 
The Committee were apprised in November, 2019 of the decision of ESIC to 
open a Dispensary cum Branch Office (DCBO) in each of the covered districts. 
However, in the light of the recommendations made at meeting of Committee of 
Secretaries (CoS) held on 27.12.2019 to discuss measures for improving efficiency 
and accessibility in EPFO and ESIC  through  IT,  ESIC revised the criteria and 
derived new norms for setting up of DCBOs, which inter-alia included, DCBOs 
shall be opened only  on  need  basis  and  in  only such districts which 
have  no  ESI  Dispensary;  and  where  the  IP  population has achieved the 
threshold limit of 3000 or more; DCBO are to be located at such a place which is 
easily accessible by public transport from every corner of the district and have the 
maximum IP population within 10 kilometres range. Subsequently, the ESIC 
approved that DCBO will be opened considering both covered and coverable 
number of IPs and if the number of IPs (both coverable and covered) crosses the 
threshold limit of 3000, DCBO will be set up subject to the consent/ NOC from the 
State Government concerned. As intimated by the Ministry, in addition to the 
existing 89 DCBOs, 47new DCBOs have been sanctioned. 
  
The Committee had been apprised by the representatives of the Ministry 
during evidence held in November 2020 that there are some Districts which have 
2024-25 2025-26 2026-27 2027-28 2028-29 
37 64 131 150 185 

41 
 
very less number of IPs especially in the North-Eastern States and Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. The Committee also note that IMPs have not been empanelled in 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. The Committee feel that there 
is scope for rationalization of criteria for setting up of DCBOs on the basis of IPs. 
Considering the fact that relaxation has already been provided to the North-
eastern/Hilly areas for setting up 100 bedded hospitals. 
  
The Committee desire the Ministry have a re-look on this aspect. The 
Committee also call upon the Ministry to ensure that 47 new DCBOs are set up on 
priority and in a time bound manner and the norms for providing medical facility 
through IMPs are strictly adhered to so that the benefit of providing medical 
assistance is timely provided to the IPs. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
It is submitted that instructions have already been issued by the ESIC to all 
its regional and sub-regional offices to make efforts for finalizing accommodation 
by acquiring land including hiring of building for opening of Branch Office/ 
Dispensary-cum-Branch Office, as the alternatives, in accordance with the ESIC 
policy. The matter is regularly follows up with the field units. 
  
An Agenda for Expansion of ESIC Medical Services and Infrastructure in 
Northeast Region and Sikkim has been approved in 193rd Corporation Meeting of 
ESIC, which includes:  
 
1.  Establishing of RO/SRO in each state of NER including Sikkim: The 
agenda will be submitted separately after completion of pre-implementation 
survey. The setting up of RO/SRO will be prioritized in terms of the number of IPs 
and geographical necessities. However, Camp Cum liaison office at Gangtok in 
Sikkim has been established.  
2.  Two Doctor Dispensary: All one doctor dispensary may be upgraded to two 
doctor dispensaries with same minimum criteria of 1000 IPs. This will also enable 
the dispensary to be designated as hub dispensary which can provide medical 
facilities to surrounding areas within reasonable commuting time, including 
medical services through mobile van. In areas where there are no alternative, 
primary care services may be provided through IMP and tie-up arrangement with 
PMJAY empanelled private hospitals.  
3.  Relaxation of Norms for Catchment Area (Medical Infrastructure): The 
IP population in North Eastern States is very sparse and much below even the 
approved norms. The catchment area may be increased or kept fluid in order to 
enable clubbing of 2-3 or more districts in one catchment area.  

42 
 
The ESIC has also decided that acquiring of land or hiring of building on rent will 
be done in a priority manner keeping in view using ESIC’s own land for 
construction, hiring accommodation in govt./ PSU offices, identification of land 
parcels under Gatishakti, etc.  
  
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 
The Committee note that the norms for setting up of ESI Hospitals in the 
country depend upon the minimum number of IPs in the catchment area ranging 
from minimum of 50,000 to 5,00,000 IPs. For 100 bedded hospitals, the catchment 
area should have at least 50,000 IPs, and for 600 bedded hospitals, the catchment 
area should have at least 5,00,000 IPs.  The Committee further note that the IP 
population is taken in a radius of 25 Km and there should not be any other ESI 
Hospital within a radius of 50 Km. Further, if there is another ESI Hospital existing 
within 50 Km, then each ESI Hospital should fulfill these norms in the respective 
catchment area viz., if the two hospitals are at a distance of 40 Km, then each 
hospital should meet these norms within the 20 Km radius. The Committee have 
also been apprised that the norms have since been updated in June 2022, which, 
inter alia provide that instead of considering the present IP population, health 
facilities may be created based on projected number of IP population in future viz., 
upcoming 05 years in case of hospitals, and 03 years in case of dispensaries. 
 
In case of non-notified districts or non-notified areas of partially 
implemented districts, new dispensaries may be established based on number of 
coverable employees instead of Insured Persons, as ascertained in the pre-
implementation survey data. 
   
(Reply of Government) 
 
ESI Corporation during its 188th meeting held on 18/19th June 2022 has 
approved for the updation of guidelines regarding ESIC norms for setting up of new 
hospitals/dispensary based on futuristic IP population/geographical necessity 
throughout the country. The health facilities are now created based on projected 
futuristic number of IP Population in upcoming 05 years in case of hospitals and 
03 years in case of dispensaries. 
  

43 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that based on projected number of IP 
population in the future, two places, i.e.,Iddukki (Kerala) and Agartala (Tripura) 
have been identified for setting up a 100 bedded hospital at each location.   
The Committee desire that formalities for setting up the hospitals at these two 
places be completed on priority and the endeavour be drawn to its logical end so 
that the targeted IPs are benefitted. The Committee would also like to be apprised 
of the outcome of the survey conducted at various places across the country and 
the action taken by the Ministry/ESIC thereon. The Committee further desire that 
the examination of the matter of setting up of ESI hospital at Bulandshahr be 
expedited. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
Regarding setting up of ESI hospital, Bulandshahar, Uttar Pradesh, it is 
informed that ESIC has accorded in-principal approval for setting up of a 30 
bedded ESI hospital, Bulandshaharin Uttar Pradesh vide letter dated 05.06. 2023.. 
  
Status of 100 bedded ESI Hospital, Idukki (Kerala): 
 
 ESIC has given in-principal approval for setting up of 100 bedded ESI 
Hospital at Idukki in its 189th meeting held on 03.12.2022. Kattappana 
Municipality vide their letter dated 07.09.2023 has given willingness to hand 
over 4.60 acres of land to ESIC free of cost Accordingly, The matter has been 
taken up with the state government for allotment/transfer of 4.60 acres of 
land at the earliest. 
  
Status of 100 bedded ESI Hospital at Agartala (Tripura): 
 
ESIC has given in-principal approval for setting up of 100 bedded ESI 
Hospital at Shyamlibazar, Agartala on 03.12.2022. Thereafter, the state govt. 
offered 5 acres of land at R.K.Nagar, Khayerpur, possession of which was taken up 
by the ESIC on 13.01.2023  Further action is being taken by the ESIC for 
construction of the Hospital.  
  
 
 

44 
 
Status of 30 bedded ESI Hospital at Bulandshahr (Uttar Pradesh): 
 
ESIC has given in-principal approval for setting up of a 30 bedded ESI 
Hospital at Bulandshahr, Uttar Pradesh on 05.06.2023. Thereafter the matter was 
taken up with the state government for allotment of suitable and the same is 
awaited.  
  
Status of 100 bedded ESI Hospital, Idukki (Kerala): 
 
The NIT for assigning the construction work to PSU has been floated on 
16.03.2024 and technical bid is also opened.  The same is under process. 
  
Status of 100 bedded ESI Hospital at Agartala (Tripura): 
 
The NIT for assigning the construction work to PSU has been floated on 
05.03.2024 and Technical Bid also opened.   Technical bid has been opened on 
05.04.2024.  The same is under process. 
  
  In order to identify the uncovered factories/establishments/employees, field 
offices were advised vide letter dated 22.09.2023 to liaise with EPFO, other 
departments of the State and Central Government or their local offices like Central 
Board of Secondary Education, universities, Food and Drugs Administration, field 
offices of Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Industries, Ministry of Corporate 
affairs, MSME, GST,  Confederation of Indian Industry, etc. and obtain data 
available with them regarding factories/establishment registered with them. 
  
The data received is then scrutinized at the level of ROs/SROs and already 
covered units are segregated and units which are found to be coverable, letters are 
sent to such employers explaining benefits of ESI scheme for their coverage under 
it. During the year 2023-24 till November 1748 such surveys were conducted by 
the field offices of ESIC. 
   
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 12) 
 
The Committee feel that in view of the diversified nature of concentration of 
Industrial Hubs at different parts of the country, it may not be appropriate to have 
a uniform criterion for setting up new hospitals across the country. 
  
The Committee, therefore, desire that for setting up new hospitals, the 
criteria should also include the aspect of concentration of Industrial Hubs at 
various geographical locations. Further, instead of taking into account the number 
of IPs, it would be preferable to consider the number of coverable employees. The 
Committee also feel that the norms pertaining to IP population in a radius of 25 
Km and the criteria that there should not be any other ESI Hospital within a radius 
of 50 Km also needs to be   reviewed   with   the   intent   to   provide   medical 
facilities to maximum number of IPs. Access to medical assistance/treatment, in 
near vicinity, can, at times, prove to be lifesaving. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
It is submitted that setting up of ESI hospital is an ongoing process, which 
is based on specified number of Insured Persons (IPs) in an area in accordance 
with the ESIC norms.As perthe norms, minimum 50000 IP population isrequired 
within a radius of 25 kms. of the proposed location for setting up of a 100 bedded 
hospital.  
  
Further, ESI Corporation, in its meeting held on 18-19th June 2022, decided 
that “health facilities may be created based on projected futuristic number of IP 
population in upcoming 05 years for setting up of new hospital”. 
  
  At present, there are 165 ESI hospitals are functioning across the country. 
ESI Corporation has also given in-principal approval for setting up of 104 new ESI 
hospitals across the country. 
   
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
 
 
 
  
 

46 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 13) 
The Committee are pleased to note that ESIC and National Health Authority 
(NHA) collaboration has expanded to cover a total of 157 districts of the country. 
Besides, 15 ESIC hospitals have been selected for providing medical services to 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY) Beneficiaries and as on February 
2023, 1608 beneficiaries have availed medical treatment services amounting to 
Rs.2.97 crore. Further, it has been proposed to expand the convergence to the 
remaining areas of the country and explore providing primary care/ OPD 
consultation services to PM-JAY beneficiaries through ESIC hospitals. 
  The Committee are of the considered view that the steps taken by the 
Ministry/ESIC are in right direction and need to be pursued earnestly. 
  The Committee would call upon the Ministry to expedite the proposal of 
convergence with PM-JAY in more districts so as to provide primary care/ OPD 
consultation services to PM-JAY beneficiaries. 
(Reply of Government) 
ESIC and National Health Authority (NHA) have entered into a collaboration 
to cover a total of 157 districts in the country for providing medical care to 
respective beneficiaries. Besides, 26 ESIC hospitals have been selected for 
providing medical services to Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY) 
beneficiaries. 
  As of now, total 26 ESIC hospitals have been approved (15 ESIC hospitals 
had been approved in the year 2019 and 11 new ESIC hospitals had been approved 
in the year 2024)  for opening In-house secondary and tertiary medical care 
services to PJMAY beneficiaries, so that the benefit of health facility in these 
Hospitals can also be Utilized by PMJAY beneficiaries and the health and 
simultaneously the human resource infrastructure of these ESIC hospitals can be 
optimally utilized. (List of the 26 hospitals is attached as Annexure-I).  
Further, for the mutual benefit of ESI beneficiaries and PMJAY beneficiaries, 
ESIC and NHA have decided to take the collaboration forward, Pan-India 
integration of ESIC and NHA has been approved by ESIC. Technical integration of 
NHA’s and ESIC’s digital platform is underway to devise modalities for Pan India  
integration and implementation. 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
 

47 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 15) 
The Committee are appreciative of the fact that so far, approximately 7 lakh 
non-insured persons have been treated in underutilized ESI hospitals and there 
has been increase in availing OPD & IPD facilities at such hospitals from 76,914 
in 2019-20 to 2,44,369 in 2022-23. 
The Committee impress upon the Ministry to launch an awareness campaign 
through all possible means so as to enable the general public in availing the facility 
in larger      numbers. This step will not only be in the interest of non-insured persons 
but also help in utilizing the infrastructure and manpower in the underutilized 
hospitals. The Committee further desire that the State Governments should also 
be advised to adopt similar approach in respect of underutilized hospitals that are 
run by them. 
(Reply of Government) 
Under the convergence of ESIC with PMJAY, 26 ESIC hospitals have been 
approved for opening in-house secondary and tertiary medical care services to 
PJMAY Beneficiaries, so that the benefit of health facility in these hospitals can 
also be utilized by PMJAY beneficiaries and simultaneously the human resource 
infrastructure of these ESIC Hospitals can be optimally utilized. 
The collaboration aims to enhance the overall efficiency and resource 
utilization within the healthcare sector. ESIC has planned to launch an extensive 
awareness campaign to educate the general public in this regard.  
At present 07 ESIC Hospitals are providing medical services to the persons 
other than the Insured Persons, whose details are as under:  
i. ESIC Hospital Alwar, Rajasthan 
ii. ESIC Hospital Bihta, Bihar 
iii. ESIC Hospital Kalaburagi (Gulbarga), Karnataka 
iv. ESIC Hospital Sarojini Nagar, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 
v. ESIC Hospital Jajmau, Kampur, Uttar Pradesh 
vi. ESIC Hospital Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 
vii. ESIC Hospital Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh 
 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
 
 
 
   
 

48 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 16) 
 
The Committee note that with a view to providing facilities for early detection 
and diagnosis of Occupational Diseases among ESI beneficiaries, ESIC has at 
present established Occupational Disease Centres (ODCs) in only 07 States/UTs. 
While 02 ODCs are located in ESIC hospitals at Basaidarapur (New Delhi) and 
Indore (Madhya Pradesh), the other five ODCs are located in medical colleges at 
Faridabad (Haryana), Joka (Kolkata), Alwar (Rajasthan), Bihta (Patna) and K. K. 
Nagar (Chennai). These ODCs also cater to the needs of ESI beneficiaries of the 
neighbouring States, which refer the suspected cases. The Committee have also 
been apprised that State run ESIS hospitals are being identified to develop ODCs 
in States where ESIC hospitals are not available. The Committee further note that 
an MoU with ICMR-National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad has 
been signed to undertake research. 
  
The Committee find that there are inherent provisions in the ESI Act, 1948, 
which recognize occupational disease as an employment injury and insured 
persons become eligible for permanent disability benefit on the basis of 
identification of occupational disease. Considering the provisions contained in the 
Act, it is imperative on the part of the Ministry/ESIC to pay special and focused 
attention on early detection and diagnosis of occupational diseases. This can be 
achieved in the real sense by increasing the ODCs in various parts of the country, 
especially where the number of cases reported are on the higher side. 
  
The Committee also desire that the process of identification of ESIS hospitals 
for the purpose of development of ODCs be expedited. Further, as no laboratory 
has been established in ESIC or ESIS Hospitals for the purpose of research, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry/ESIC to consider setting up their own 
laboratories for undertaking research activities so as to minimize the dependence 
on other sources for medical services. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
The ESIC is taking steps to address the requirement of better monitoring, 
surveillance and timely diagnosis of occupational diseases in the IP population for 
promoting workplace safety and ensuring the welfare of workers across industries. 
  
In this regard, a Public Health Unit (PHU) has been set up at ESIC Hqrs in 
the month of April 2023 which is examining the work-related illness data on 
regular basis.Based on the outcome of work-related illness profiling and outcomes, 
ESIC will take stock of requirement of establishing more ODCs in future. The scope 

49 
 
of work of existing ODCs has been extended in hub and spoke model for wider 
coverage.  
  
The standard operating procedures (SOP) for ODCs have also been 
formulated recently which inter-alia consists of issue of directions for setting up 
necessary laboratory services for the detection of occupational diseases. The key 
responsibilities of Occupational Disease Centres in new SOPs are as under: - 
  
1. Equip ESIC Health Facilities for Management of Occupational Disease.  
2. Occupational Disease Prevention.  
3. Health Promotion.  
4. Promote Safety Measures. 
5. Research and Education.  
6. Reporting and Documentation.  
7. Data Sharing amongst ODCs and Other Institutions.  
8. Injury and Illness Compensation.  
9. Monitoring and Evaluation.  
10. Ethical Consideration.  
  
Further, the key responsibility of the ESIC hospitals in new SOPs are as 
under: 
i. Establishment of a dedicated occupational health division or clinic to 
facilitate incident reporting and maintaining records.  
ii. The hospitals will also collaborate with the ODCs in identifying and enlisting 
healthcare professionals, including doctors, nurses, and auxiliary personnel, 
for training in the field of occupational health.  
iii. The hospitals will also collaborate with the ODCs to ensure the 
establishment or arrangement of essential laboratory services. 
iv. ESIC Hospitals should regularly conduct screening camps to actively detect 
health issues related to occupational exposures among workers. 
v. ESIC health facilities endeavour to enhance worker awareness of various 
occupational diseases by developing Information Education Communication 
(IEC) materials or informative charts/audio-visual aids and the placement of 
informative charts and audio-visual aids in patient waiting areas. 
  
An MoU has also been signed with ICMR in September 2023 to strengthen 
the disease surveillance and epidemiological analysis of disease prevalence in ESIC 
in coordination with PHU at the ESIC Hqrs. 
  
The Public Health Unit ( PHU ) has been established in ESIC Hqrs. Office in 
coordination with ICMR-NIE.   An epidemiological analysis of disease prevalence in 
ESIC has also been conducted and presented to the Labour Secretaries of the 

50 
 
States in conference of the State Labour Secretaries held in Delhi in Nov-2023.   An 
SOP for disease data sharing with States and strengthening of functioning of the 
Occupational Disease Centres (ODCs) have been framed by the PHU to strengthen 
the disease surveillance in ESIC.  
  
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
   
(Recommendation Para No. 18) 
 
The Committee have, time and again, expressed concern on the existence of 
large number of vacancies in the ESIC/ESIS hospitals and dispensaries, which 
adversely impacts the health services. The steps taken by the Ministry/ESIC to fill 
up the vacancies have not yielded the desired results and the situation continues 
to be bleak at the ground level. On in- depth analysis of the data furnished by the 
Ministry, the Committee find that in the 51 hospitals run by ESIC, 35% of posts of 
doctors, 26 % of posts of nurses and 53% posts of para-medical staff were vacant 
as on July 2023. In the case of 109 ESI hospitals run by State Governments, 35% 
posts of Specialists, GDMO, Nurses and para-medical staff continued to remain 
vacant as on March 2023. In the case of 36 dispensaries run by ESIC, 43% posts 
of doctors were vacant as on July 2023 (65% in U. P& 23% in Delhi).In the case of 
1466 dispensaries run by State  Governments, 21% posts of Doctors were vacant 
in July, 2023. (Jharkhand 72%, Bihar 64%, Goa 57% & Odisha 52%). It is equally 
a matter of concern that 45% of the posts in various cadres of the ESIC remained 
vacant as on July 2023. 
  
The Ministry/ESIC have attempted to rationalize their position by indicating 
the progress of recruitment exercise undertaken/under process / proposed to be 
undertaken to fill up the vacancies at various levels. The Committee are, however, 
not convinced with the response of the Ministry/ESIC. Very glaringly, in some 
cases, make shift arrangements have been made through contractual engagements 
against regular vacancies. 
  
The Committee trust that the orders of DoPT, Government of India with 
regard to the time period for which the sanctioned posts in various cadres could 
be   kept vacant are being complied with by the Ministry. 
  
 
 
 

51 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
ESIC is consistently taking necessary steps to compile and collate necessary 
data about vacancies at several levels in ESIC and advertising them from time to 
time to fill up these vacancies in various cadres including in medical cadres. During 
the completion of the process of regular recruitment against such vacancies in 
ESIC, contractual staff are engaged at unit/field level, as per their delegation of 
power. 
  
ESIC has completed the recruitment process for the post of Associate 
Professor, Assistant Professor, Specialist Gr. II (Jr. Scale & Sr. Scale), Insurance 
Medical Officer (IMO) Gr. II and 1038 Gr ‘C’ Paramedical posts.  The details of 
recruitment / recruitment processes are elaborated below: - 
  
Status of Recruitment in ESIC (Group A level Medical Posts / Group B level 
Nursing Officer / Group C level Paramedical cadres) 
  
Sl. No. Name of post Status / Action Plan 
Group A level Medical Posts 
1.   Associate 
Professor 
115 vacancies (Medical College -103, Dental College 
-12) advertised for the post of Associate Professor, 50 
candidates were selected and offer of appointment to 
49 candidates have been issued. 
2.   Assistant 
Professor 
Out of 491 vacancies advertised for the post of 
Assistant Professor, 349 candidates were selected 
and offer of appointment to 348candidates have been 
issued. Candidature of 01 candidate has been 
cancelled. 
3.   Specialist Gr.II 
(Sr. Scale) & 
Specialist Gr. II 
(Jr. Scale) for 16 
Regions 
Out of 334 vacancies advertised for the post of 
Specialist Gr. II (Jr. Scale & Sr. Scale) in 16 regions, 
150 candidates were selected, and 62 candidates 
have joined. 
4.   Specialist Gr.II 
(Jr./ Sr. Scale) 
for 4 States 
(Madhya 
Pradesh, Delhi, 
Telangana 
&Tamil Nādu 
Regions) 
Out of 72 vacancies advertised for the post of 
Specialist Gr. II (Jr. Scale & Sr. Scale) in 4 states 
(Madhya Pradesh, Delhi, Telangana &Tamil Nādu 
regions), 38 candidates were selected and offer of 
appointment to 37 candidates have been issued. 
Candidature of 01 candidate has been cancelled. 

52 
 
5.   Insurance 
Medical officer 
(IMO) Gr.II 
Out of 1120 vacancies advertised for the post of IMO 
(Gr.II), 890 candidates were selected and offer of 
appointment to 860 candidates have been issued. 
Candidature of 01 candidate has been cancelled. 
6.  GDMOs 
recruitment 
GDMO recruitment Matter has been taken up with 
DoP&T and UPSC on their advice on the mechanism 
framed by ESIC for recruitment of GDMOs through 
reserve list of Combined Medical Services 
Examination conducted annually by UPSC. 
   
A meeting has been held on 28.08.2024 with AIIMS functionaries for 
recruitment of Doctors/Paramedical Posts for ESIC which resulted in following 
action: 
 
Paramedical Staff 
1. Paramedical 
Staff 
Vacancies of Paramedical staff 1247 posts in 14 cadres 
have been forwarded to AIIMS for recruitment of the 
Paramedical staff. 
Nursing Officer 
2. Nursing Officer Vacancies of Nursing Officer 574 posts have been 
forwarded to AIIMS for recruitment for Nursed through 
AIIMS NORCET exam. 
Non-Medical Cadres 
 Gr. A and Gr. B 
cadres 
DPC for promotion of Dy. Directors against 149 posts 
of Joint Directors has been held and minutes received 
from UPSC on 13.09.2024. 
Status of recruitment of 15 posts of Additional 
Commissioners: 50 applications have been received 
which are under scrutiny. 
Post of directors: 69 posts of Directors are vacant. 
Interviews are being conducted by UPSC for 33 posts. 
Recruitment Regulations in the grade of Regional 
Director Grade 'B'/Joint Director, Regional Director 
Grade 'A'/Director, Additional Commissioner, 
Insurance Commissioner in ESIC have been notified in 
Gazette of India as on 28.03.2024 for expediting the 
recruitment as per new RRs. 
 Gr .C and Gr. D 
cadres 
Indent for filling up of 1257 Vacancies for the post of 
MTS was sent to SSC on 25.07.2024. SSC has included 
the same in their current advertisement and exam has 

53 
 
been scheduled from 30 September to 14 November, 
2024. 
Action is being taken to  align RRs of Group C staff with 
those of the Central Govt. so that SSC can undertake 
recruitment for these posts on regular basis. 
   
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 19) 
 
From the information made available, the Committee also note that since 
2020, 349 vacancies of Specialists/Super Specialists in ESIC were advertised, and 
of these only168 could be filled. Even after completion of the recruitment exercise, 
48% vacancies could not be filled up.  In the case of ESI hospitals run by 15 State 
Governments, following the recruitment exercise vacancies of Specialists/Super 
Specialists that remained unfilled were to the extent of 75% in 2020, 58% in 2021, 
63% in 2022 and 73% in 2023. As admitted by the Ministry, the shortage of 
manpower and lack of proper and up-to-date infrastructure 
in most of the ESI hospitals are the major constraints 
being  faced  by  them  in  the  smooth and  effective running of ESI 
Hospitals/Dispensaries.  As informed by the Ministry, this is also one of the major 
reasons for referral of beneficiaries, in many cases, to ESI empanelled hospitals; 
and overcrowding in the hospitals and consequent rise in the number of 
grievances. 
  
In case of ESIS Hospitals run by the State Governments, the Committee feel 
that the Ministry/ESIC cannot evade from their responsibility by merely stating 
that the deployment/recruitment of staff comes under the administrative control 
of the State Governments concerned. 
  
ESIC needs to play a proactive role in pursuing with the State Governments 
for filling up vacancies in the Hospitals/Dispensaries run by them. The matter also 
needs to be taken up with the recruiting agencies at the highest level, so as to 
ensure that the vacancies are filled on priority. 
  
 
 
 
 

54 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
The observation has been noted for necessary action. 
  
ESIC is also proactively following with the states to reduce manpower 
shortage in ESIS hospitals.  Letter dated 02-Nov-2023 have been sent by the ESIC 
to all the Directorate of Medical Services (DIMS) to fill the vacancies and address 
shortcomings, if any, in the medical services due to them, 
  
Further to sensitize the states to improve medical services, two meetings with 
all State /UT Labour & Employment Secretaries have been organized, one at Agra 
in June 23 and the other at Delhi in November 23 deliberations held to resolve 
various issues of the states.  
  
State Governments have also been encouraged for formation of State ESI 
society, which will give themmore autonomy in administration and management of 
funds. 
  
Further, State Governments vide letter dated 02-Jan-2023 have also been 
requested to hand over the ESIS hospitals to ESIC, in cases where the states are 
facing difficulty in smooth running of these hospitals.  
  
The Common Support Mission (CSM) has been formed with objective to 
improve the existing ESIS Medical Facilities by incentivizing those working better 
and to provide required support to those who are in need of hand holding for 
betterment of facilities.  
  
The CSM is mandated to evaluate and assess the State, ESIS Hospitals and 
Dispensaries on the various parameters, which inter-alia includes availability of 
existing land and building infrastructure, need of new infrastructure, health 
service delivery assessment, implementation of Dhanwantari including hardware 
and connective issues, availability of necessary drugs/ dressings, consumable, 
equipments, etc.   So far, CSM has visited ESIS hospitals and dispensaries in 11 
states. 
   
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
 
 
 

55 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 20)  
 
Considering the shortage of manpower and lack of proper infrastructure, the 
Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to leave no stone unturned to fill up 
the vacancies in ESIC as well as ESIC/ESIS hospitals and dispensaries. If required, 
the Recruitment Rules be amended and restructuring, wherever considered 
necessary, be done so as to have requisite manpower in position and thereby 
enable in meeting the stipulations of the Code on Social Security, 2020. The 
Committee impress upon the Ministry/ESIC that the recruitment process already 
initiated and, at whatever stage, be completed with a sense of urgency and 
commitment. The committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Ministry/ESIC within a period of two months from the date of presentation of the 
Report. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
Consequent upon approval of revision in the Employees’ State Insurance 
Corporation (Staff and Condition of Service) regulations, 1959 in 190th meeting of 
ESI Corporation, and the publication of Employees’ State Insurance Corporation 
(Staff and Condition of Service) Regulations, 2023 in the Gazette of India dated 
19.06.2023, as a follow up action, a Committee was constituted for revising 
Recruitment Regulations in ESI Corporation. In the process, revision of 70 RRs of 
medical, nursing and paramedical posts (Medical-38, Paramedical-27 & Nursing-
5) has been undertaken and the process for finalisation of RRs is underway. 
  
ESIC has completed the recruitment process for the post of Associate 
Professor, Assistant Professor, Specialist Gr. II (Jr. Scale & Sr. Scale), Insurance 
Medical Officer (IMO) Gr. II and 1038 Gr ‘C’ Paramedical posts.  The details of 
recruitment / recruitment processes are elaborated below: - 
  
Status of Recruitment in ESIC (Group A level Medical Posts / Group B level 
Nursing Officer / Group C level Paramedical cadres) 
  
Sl. No. Name of post Status / Action Plan 
Group A Medical Posts 
1.   Associate 
Professor 
115 vacancies (Medical College -103, Dental College -
12) advertised for the post of Associate Professor, 50 
candidates were selected and offer of appointment to 
49 candidates have been issued. 
2.   Assistant 
Professor 
Out of 491 vacancies advertised for the post of 
Assistant Professor, 349 candidates were selected, 

56 
 
however, candidature of 01 candidates has been 
cancelled.  Offer of appointment to 348 candidates have 
been issued. 
3.   Specialist Gr.II 
(Sr. Scale) & 
Specialist Gr. II 
(Jr. Scale) for 16 
Regions 
Out of 334 vacancies advertised for the post of 
Specialist Gr. II (Jr. Scale & Sr. Scale) in 16 regions, 
150 candidates were selected, and 62 candidates have 
joined. 
4.   Specialist Gr.II 
(Jr./ Sr. Scale) 
for 4 States 
(Madhya 
Pradesh, Delhi, 
Telangana 
&Tamilnadu 
Regions) 
Out of 72 vacancies advertised for the post of Specialist 
Gr. II (Jr. Scale & Sr. Scale) in 4 states (Madhya 
Pradesh, Delhi, Telangana & Tamil Nādu regions), 38 
candidates were selected however, candidature of 01 
candidate has been cancelled. Offer appointment to 37 
candidates have been issued. 
5.   Insurance 
Medical officer 
(IMO) Gr.II 
Out of 1120 vacancies advertised for the post of IMO 
(Gr.II) , 890 candidates were selected however, 
candidature of 01 candidate has been cancelled.  Offer 
of appointment to 860 candidates have been issued. 
6.  GDMOs 
recruitment 
GDMO recruitment Matter has been taken up with 
DoP&T and UPSC on their advice on the mechanism 
framed by ESIC for recruitment of GDMOs through 
reserve list of Combined Medical Services Examination 
conducted annually by UPSC.  
 
A meeting has been held on 28.08.2024 with AIIMS functionaries for 
recruitment of Doctors/Paramedical Posts for ESIC which resulted in following 
action: 
Paramedical Staff 
1. Paramedical 
Staff 
Vacancies of Paramedical staff 1247posts in 14 cadres 
have been forwarded to AIIMS for recruitment of the 
Paramedical staff. 
Nursing Officer 
2. Nursing Officer Vacancies of Nursing Officer 574 posts have been 
forwarded to AIIMS for recruitment through AIIMS 
NORCET. 
Non-Medical Cadres 
 Gr. A and Gr. B 
cadres 
DPC for promotion of Dy. Directors against 149 posts of 
Joint Directors has been held and minutes received from 
UPSC on 13.09.2024. 

57 
 
Status of recruitment of 15 posts of Additional 
Commissioners: 50 applications have been received 
which are under scrutiny. 
Post of directors: 69 posts of Directors are vacant. 
Interviews are being conducted by UPSC for 33 posts. 
Also, it is informed that the Recruitment Regulations in 
the grade of Regional Director Grade 'B'/Joint Director, 
Regional Director Grade 'A'/Director, Additional 
Commissioner, Insurance Commissioner in ESIC have 
been notified in Gazette of India as on 28.03.2024 for 
expediting the recruitment as per new RRs. 
 Gr .C and Gr. D 
cadres 
Indent for filling up of 1257 Vacancies for the post of MTS 
was sent to SSC on 25.07.2024. SSC has included the 
same in their current advertisement and exam has been 
scheduled from 30 September to 14 November 2024. 
General Administration & Medical Administration have 
been requested to align RRs of Group C staff with those 
of the Central Govt. so that SSC can undertake 
recruitment for these posts. 
   
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
   
(Recommendation Para No. 21)  
 
The Committee note that during 2021-22, in the ESIC hospitals, while 12705 
beds were sanctioned, 9678 beds were actually commissioned thereby resulting in 
shortfall in commissioning of 3027 beds (23.82%beds). During the corresponding 
period, 43% of the sanctioned beds were not commissioned in ESIS hospitals. The 
reasons adduced for commissioned beds being less than the sanctioned beds 
include inter-alia, hospital buildings being under construction/renovation, 
inadequate manpower, shortage of space, etc. Had the gap between sanctioned and 
commissioned beds been minimal, more number of needy beneficiaries could have 
availed IPD facilities.   
  
The Committee, therefore, in the interest of beneficiaries, impress upon the 
Ministry/ESIC to resolve all issues responsible for the mismatch between 
sanctioned and commissioned beds in ESIC as well as  ESIS hospitals. 
  
 

58 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
As per recommendations of the Committee, ESIC vide letter dated 
28.09.2023, requested all Directors of State ESI Scheme and Medical 
Superintendents of ESIC hospitals to resolve all issues responsible for the 
mismatch between sanctioned and commissioned beds and ensure commissioning 
of beds at par with the sanctioned bed capacities in all the ESI hospitals in order 
to optimally utilize the hospital infrastructure, thereby benefitting more Insured 
Persons/ ESI beneficiaries.     
 
As mentioned in earlier reply, the Common Support Mission (CSM) has been 
implemented by the ESIC in 2024 with the objective of assessing health facilities 
in the states and provide necessary hand holding to states in the development of 
these health facilities. Gaps between commissioned and actual sanctioned beds in 
health facilities are also a part of this assessment and such gaps are discussed 
during debrief with states on conclusion of the Mission for corrective action in this 
regard. Six such Missions have already been conducted this year in the month of 
June and July-24. 
   
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
(Recommendation Para No. 23)  
 
The Committee note that the State Governments are entitled for 
reimbursement of expenditure at a ceiling rate of Rs. 3000 per IP per annum. 
During the year 2021-22, while the entitlement of the State Governments was Rs. 
7719.13 crore, the expenditure incurred was Rs. 4670.61 crore and, out of 30 
States/UTs, 24 States/UTs had incurred less expenditure as compared to their 
entitlement.  Further, Rs. 1439 per IP per annum was spent by State Governments 
during 2021-22 against the entitlement of Rs. 3000 per IP per annum. 
 
The Committee have also been apprised that the State Governments are also 
entitled to an incentive of Rs. 200 per IP per annum over and above the ceiling of 
Rs. 3000 per IP per annum, if bed occupancy in all State ESI hospitals is more 
than 70% during the concluded financial year.  The Committee note that West 
Bengal is the only State which has been provided bed occupancy incentive of Rs.20 
crore in the year 2018-19 and Rs.  38.44 crore in the year 2019-20. 
 

59 
 
The Committee impress upon the Ministry/ESIC to encourage the State 
Governments to maximize utilization of funds as per their entitlement, which in 
turn would lead to better and updated medical facilities to the beneficiaries.  The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to take urgent steps to persuade the State 
Governments to avail the benefits of bed occupancy incentive in the larger interest 
of beneficiaries. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
ESI Corporation is committed towards improvement of service delivery in 
State ESI medical institutions and in order to facilitate State Governments for 
making adequate provisions of medical services, better infrastructure and facilities, 
financial provisions/norms are revised by the ESIC from time to time. Recently, all 
State Governments have been communicated by DG, ESIC vide DO letter dated 
10.07.2023 about their fund entitlements and incentive schemes for operation of 
ESI Scheme. 
 
For awareness, a booklet, containing all the details about entitlements and 
incentive scheme available to State Governments has also been circulated and 
uploaded on the ESIC website. During its meetings with the State representatives, 
the ESIC, on several occasion, conveyed about the details of ‘On Account’ payment 
and incentive schemes. Incentive claims of State Governments are also processed 
expeditiously by the ESIC and settled. 
  
Discussions on improvement of Services have taken place with state 
governments during conferences of Principal Secretaries in Agra and Delhi. ESIC 
has committed full support to states for the development of medical services in 
ESIS hospitals. States are urged to submit projects under Project Implementation 
Plans, where ESIC offers incentives under specific categories.  
 
ESIC has established a Common Support Mission (CSM) to assist in the 
evaluation of ESIS hospitals in terms of functionality and competency as 
healthcare facilities. The mission is designed to provide guidance and support in 
the development of deficient services within ESIS hospitals 
  
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
 
 
  

60 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 24)  
 
The Committee note that ESIC started ‘ESIC Covid-19 Relief Scheme’ to 
provide help and succor to the families of the IPs who died due to Covid- 19 and 
90% of wages of deceased IPs were paid to the eligible dependents. The Scheme 
was in operation from 24.03.2020 to 23.03.2022 and, upto 31.03.2023, 38,203 
beneficiaries (149, 15,855 and 22,199 beneficiaries in 2020-21, 2021-22 and 
2022-23 respectively) were paid Rs.  151.16 crore.  A total of 1,91,191Covid 
patients were provided treatment in the Covid waves. As intimated by the Ministry, 
ESIC hospitals provided reasonable care to its beneficiaries and the general public 
during all three waves of Covid-19 pandemic. 22 ESIC hospitals were declared 
dedicated Covid hospitals to provide secondary and tertiary care to Covid affected 
patients. RTPCR tests were conducted in all ESIC medical colleges. 26 PSA plants 
were installed to make up for the increased oxygen demand during the second 
wave. All guidelines of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) were 
adopted by ESIC for convenience of the public.  ESI hospitals and dispensaries 
conducted Covid-19 vaccination drive under the guidelines of MoHFW. 
  
While appreciating the efforts made by ESIC during unprecedented Covid-19 
pandemic, the Committee desire that the lessons learnt and shortcomings noticed 
in providing medical care/facilities to the beneficiaries including  Doctors,  Nurses 
and paramedical  staff  of  ESIC  and general public be rectified and it should be 
ensured that all arrangements including infrastructure development, equipment, 
manpower, medicines, etc. are in place and ESIC is fully geared up to handle such 
eventualities in future so as to provide service to the common people. The 
Committee trust that all claims received from dependents of Insured Persons (IPs) 
have been settled and monthly pay outs to the dependents is continuing as per the 
terms of the Scheme. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
The following measures have already been taken by ESIC to prevent such 
adversary, if any, in future and handle difficulties/eventualities smoothly.  In this 
regard, all ESIC user units have been instructed to ensure readiness of equipment 
including: 
i. Comprehensive Maintenance Contract/Annual Maintenance Contract 
ii. Optimum utilization of the equipment. 
iii. Availability of all essential equipment for delivery of medical services. 
iv. Monitoring of the status of equipment through online medical dashboard. 
  

61 
 
Many other steps are also being taken for rectification of issues arisen during 
the pandemic. 
  
As far as the manpower is concerned, major recruitment process has already 
been started to fill the vacant posts in various cadres including the medical 
/nursing / paramedical cadres, details of which have already above   in reply to 
the observations/ recommendations of the committee in preceding paras. 
   
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
(Recommendation Para No. 26) 
 
The Committee were apprised that the dispensaries mainly provide primary 
care medical services and in-house laboratories are provided in hospitals where 
secondary care/tertiary care medical services are available. The Committee note 
from the data furnished by the Ministry that out of 1502 dispensaries run by 
ESIC/ESIS in 31 States/UTs, in-house laboratory service is available in 270 
dispensaries in only 14 States/UTs. While no laboratory facility is available in 102 
dispensaries in Gujarat, 68 in Maharashtra and 98 in Dispensaries Uttar Pradesh, 
laboratory facility is available in only 01 out of 113 dispensaries in Karnataka. 
Further, only Telangana has laboratory facility in all the 70 dispensaries. While 
agreeing with the contention of the Ministry that the dispensaries mainly provide 
primary care medical services, the Committee feel that providing laboratory facility 
in the dispensary itself is an added advantage to the beneficiaries. Such a step 
would also minimize the cases of referral to empanelled hospitals for investigations 
and would also minimize the inconvenience being faced by the beneficiaries for 
undergoing tests at far away ESIC/ESIS/ empanelled hospitals. 
  
The Committee, call upon the Ministry to explore the possibility of providing 
laboratory facilities in all the 1502 dispensaries run by ESIC/ESIS especially in 
view of the fact that the coverage of ESIC is to be expanded to cover the entire 
country. 
  
 
 
 
 
 

62 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
The ESIC has advised all the Directorate of Insurance Medical Services 
(DIMS) on 02.11.2023 to address the issue of non-availability of lab facilities in the 
dispensaries in state and provide necessary equipment, reagents, manpower, etc. 
as required. 
 
For ESIC hospitals and dispensaries, the facility of home sample collection 
is being provided to the ESI beneficiaries by 8 ESIC Medical colleges on a pilot 
project basis. Home blood sample collection facility is also now being considered to 
be extended to all the ESIC hospitals for all the senior citizens andto other ESIC 
beneficiaries above 40 years annually as a part of annual health check-up, 
registered through AAA+ app of ESIC for home sample collection. 
  
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 27)  
 
As per section 26 of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, all 
contributions paid under the Act and all other money received on behalf of   the 
Corporation shall be paid into a fund called the Employees State Insurance Fund 
which shall be held and administered by the corporation. All money accruing or 
payable to the said fund is to be paid into the Reserve Bank of India or such other 
bank as maybe approved by the central government to the credit of the Employees' 
State Insurance Fund. In accordance with the provisions of the Act, expenditure is 
met and the funds which are not immediately required are invested through a 
Portfolio Manager appointed by ESI Corporation as per investment policy of ESIC. 
Apart from utilisation of the employees and employers share contribution for 
providing medical care and various cash benefits to the Insured Persons (IPs) for 
the contingencies like sickness, disablement, maternity benefit, dependent benefit 
and other charges required to administer the ESI scheme envisaged in the ESI Act, 
the surplus funds are kept invested in accordance with the investment policy 
approved by the Standing Committee of ESIC from time to time. According to the 
Ministry, the current Investment Policy of ESIC includes (i) Government Securities 
and related instruments (Government bonds) which ranges from 45% to 75%; (ii) 
Debt instruments (Fixed Deposits of scheduled commercial banks for more than 
one year) and AAA rated PSU Bonds ranging from 20% to 45%; and (iii) Short Term 
debt instruments and related instruments ranging from 5% to 10%. The Committee 
find that the investment amount has been constantly increasing during the last 7 

63 
 
years. As on 30th November 2022, 73.69% of investment was in Government 
Securities (G-sec, SDL, Government guaranteed and Government serviced bonds), 
21.16% was s AAA rated PSU bonds and 5.14% in short term debt instruments. 
The Committee note that PSU bonds may carry credit risk and there is decreasing 
trend in interest received in the last few years. Under the head ‘Government 
Securities’ the interest received decreased from Rs.5115.04 crore in 2020- 21 to 
Rs.  4711.22 in 2021-22. Similarly, under the head ‘Bank Fixed Deposits and SDA’ 
the returns decreased from Rs.4075.48 crore in 2019-20 to Rs.1290.93 crore in 
2021-22.  The Ministry have, however, stated that none of the investments in 
ESIC's portfolio has seen a downgrade or default till date. Nevertheless, mainly on 
account of the downward trend in the interest money received, the Committee 
suggest that the investment policy should be reviewed annually without fail and 
more robust and productive strategy of investing the hard-earned money of the IPs 
should be chalked out. 
 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
Based on the review, the invest committee is formed from time to time by the 
ESIC.  On the basis of the recommendation of this Investment Committee, 
investment policy is reviewed by the ESIC for necessary follow up action. from time 
to time. Standing Committee, followed by the ESI Corporation accords the approval 
for the revision in investment policy on the recommendations of the Investment 
Sub-Committee. 
  
At present also, an investment committee has been formed by the ESIC to 
review the present policy.  The committee has members representing employees’ 
and employers from the ESI Corporation and officers from the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment and ESIC.  
  
The observations of the Standing Committee will also be brought to the notice of 
the Investment Committee reviewing the investment patter presently. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
 
 
 
  

64 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 28) 
 
The Ministry further informed the Committee that for inclusion of investment 
options in equity and related investments, asset backed, trust- structured and 
miscellaneous investments, as per the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance, the 
matter was placed before the ESI Corporation in December 2022 for revision. The 
Ministry also stated that the options of considering institutions like EPFO and NPS 
trust-PFRDA are also being examined by ESIC. The Corporation has accorded 
approval for initial investment starting at 5% and gradual increase up to 15% after 
review of two quarters in Exchange Trade Funds (ETFs) i.e.  Nifty and Sensex only. 
The Committee note that there are issues relating to construction of more hospitals 
and Dispensaries, filling up of vacancies of doctors and medical staff, upgrading 
infrastructure in the hospitals in rural areas, failure to provide adequate medical 
services to IPs of newly covered areas, etc. all of which require a substantial 
amount of funds. The Committee expect that whatever roadmaps the Corporation 
has been working on is for the optimum benefit for the most deserving workers of 
the organised and unorganized sectors whose requirements should be given 
utmost importance by the Ministry. 
 
The Committee are of the opinion that before making changes in the 
percentage of the amount of the investment, the Corporation should make diligent 
efforts to address these issues so as to meet the requirements of the Insured 
Persons. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
The ESI Corporation, in its 189th meeting dated 3rd& 4th December 2022, 
approved the investment in equity, restricted to Exchange Traded Funds (ETF) with 
the objective to earn high rate of return by diversification. To mitigate the risk 
exposure, investment has been allowed in index-based funds only, i.e., Nifty50 and 
Sensex.   
 
Further, as per the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance, upto 15% of total 
funds may be invested in equities and related instruments.  However, ESIC has 
decided to start investment in ETF to the extent of 5% of new funds available for 
investment and increase up to 15% gradually, after review. Based on previous 
investment trends, total new funds available for investment may be approx. 
Rs.10,000 crores.  The ESIC is also considering to start investment in ETF through 
the Asset Management Companies. 
 

65 
 
After review of 2 quarters by Investment Committee, proposal to increase the 
allocation (up to maximum 15% gradually) will also be considered by the ESIC.  The 
direction of the Standing Committee will also be brought into the notice of the 
present investment committee.  
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
   
(Recommendation Para No. 29) 
 
The Committee are surprised to find that ESIC does not organise any special 
awareness campaigns about their Scheme and facilities. Raising awareness 
involves the process of informing the general public about a policy or scheme, 
increasing levels of consciousness for obtaining optimum benefits of the scheme or 
policy, for which awareness campaigns need to be organized. 
  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should come up with 
guidelines for organizing special awareness campaigns about the ESIC Scheme, 
highlighting its benefits, for covering more workers. The 
Committee   also   desire   that   local   public   representative   should   also   be 
involved in the awareness campaigns. The Committee appreciate the idea of 
involving other wings of the Ministry like EPFO, etc. and work in coordination with 
them while organizing these campaigns. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the progress made in this regard. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
The ESIC undertakes various activities to make Insured 
workers/beneficiaries aware about the ESI scheme and benefits, which inter-alia 
includes: 
ix. ESIC undertakes periodic publicity about various benefits available under 
the ESI Scheme pan-India using mediums of Print, Outdoor and Radio. 
"Awareness campaign in NE States”. “Aadhar Seeding of beneficiaries on 
voluntary basis has also been started.   
x. The Field Offices/Hospitals/MCHs undertake various outreach programs 
including Awareness Camps, Seminars, Health Check-up Camps, Health 
Talks, etc.  to make Insured Workers/beneficiaries aware. 
xi. SuvidhaSamagams/ Grievance Redressal Days are used as tool to spread 
awareness about various benefits amongst the visitors. 

66 
 
xii. A Special Services Fortnight is observed every year throughout all the 
offices/hospitals /MCHs of ESIC, under which various outreach programs, 
awareness activities are undertaken. 
xiii. Initiatives undertaken by ESIC is publicised through Press Release/Media 
Briefings. PIB is roped in for release of press release invariably. 
xiv. Official Social Media Handles of ESIC are used to spread awareness about 
ESI Scheme/benefits/initiatives on regular basis through images, creatives, 
AVs, testimonials, etc.  
xv. Recent initiatives, benefits etc. regularly updated on ESIC website i.e. 
www.esic.gov.in for viewing by the visitors of website.  
xvi. Brochure, pamphlets, magazines, samachar, etc. are designed and printed 
for publicising the ESI Scheme. These are also made available on official 
website for further viewing and downloading.  The field offices/hospitals get 
these brochures, pamphlets, etc. translated in respective vernaculars for 
printing and further distribution amongst beneficiaries. 
 
 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 47 of Chapter-I 
 
 
  

67 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY  
(Recommendation Para No. 25)  
The Committee note that the ESIC has taken a number of steps to promote 
and strengthen AYUSH (Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Sidha& Homoeopathy) facilities/ 
services. The Committee, however, note that the ESIC has hired 21 Ayurvedic and 
35 Homoeopathic Doctors on Contract basis since 2020-21, when the Covid-19 
pandemic was at its peak. The Committee, in their 41st Report on Demands for 
Grants (2023-24) had impressed upon the Ministry to take appropriate measures 
for regularization of the services of doctors and paramedical staff working on ad-
hoc or contractual basis. Subsequently, the Committee in their 46th Action Taken 
Report have desired that while undertaking the exercise to fill up regular posts, the 
doctors/nursing/para medical staff appointed on contractual basis, especially 
during COVID-19 pandemic, be granted due weightage and accorded priority in 
regular appointment. 
 The ESIC have, in this context, submitted that as per recruitment rules, 
contractual doctors cannot be regularized, however, they are eligible for 
participating in the procedure for recruitment on regular basis. The Committee 
note that in the light of judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court, the Allopathic and 
Homeopathic doctors of NDMC, appointed on contract basis during Covid-19 
pandemic, have been regularized. The Doctors engaged by ESIC on direct 
contractual basis on or before Covid-19 pandemic have served in a most testing 
time.   
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry/ESIC to 
sympathetically consider the case of regularization of AYUSH doctors, who are 
direct contractual appointee/recruited uptill or during the spread of Covid-19 
pandemic, by granting them suitable relaxation, as a onetime measure, which may 
not be treated as precedent. 
(Reply of Government) 
The matter has already been examined and the appointment of the 
contractual doctors on regular basis is always open for recruitment as per 
provisions under the Recruitment Rules through participation in the procedure. 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
 

68 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
The Committee note that the Employer Utilization Dispensaries (EUDs) are 
set up where the employer agrees to have their own infrastructure and ESIC pays 
capitation fees to the employer based on per IP family unit per annum. In this 
Scheme, the employer opens the dispensary in the premises and provides the 
primary care services to the workers of its own establishment and is paid @ 
Rs.450/- per IP per annum. 
The Committee note that out of 15.94 lakh Establishments, only 04 EUDs 
have been approved for which the capitation fee of Rs. 38 per IP per month is being 
paid to the employer. 
The Committee impress upon the Ministry to take urgent steps to encourage 
the employers, having requisite infrastructure, to establish EUDs so that the 
medical care is available to the workers at their workplace. The Committee also 
desire that the Scheme be suitably revised so as to cover the workers of nearby 
establishments, which d o  not have the necessary infrastructure on some mutually 
agreed terms and conditions. Concurrently, the capitation fee be suitably increased 
keeping in view the rise in prices. 
(Reply of Government) 
Employer Utilization Dispensaries (EUDs) are also a mechanism of providing 
medical care to IPs and their families, where the employer agrees to have their own 
infrastructure and ESIC pays capitation fees to the employer based on per IP family 
unit per annum. Besides, ESIC also provide medical, surgical equipment and drugs 
and dressing through nearest ESIC hospital. Other facilities such as rent for space, 
furniture, non-medical equipment, computer, printers, telephone and internet 
connectivity etc. are also being provided through respective Regional Offices. 
At present 20 EUD / m-EUD are functioning in ESIC across the country. 
No proposal is pending from the States for opening of a new EUD / m-EUD.   
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para Nos. 31 of Chapter-I 
 
 

69 
 
(Recommendation Para No.14) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the composition of ESIC/ESIS 
Hospital Development Committees (HDCs) has been revised whereby one of the 
members of the Committee is a local member nominated by Member of Parliament 
of the area. The Committee, however, find that HDCs have been constituted only 
in 36 of 51 ESIC hospitals and 57 of 109 ESIS hospitals. Of these, the nominees of 
local Member of Parliament have been nominated in 19 ESIC and 24 ESIS HDCs.  
 
The Committee desire that the HDCs in the remaining ESIC and ESIS 
hospitals be constituted expeditiously and  nomination of local representatives of 
Member of Parliament of the area be ensured. The Committee further desire that 
the meetings of HDCs of both ESIC and ESIS hospitals be held at regular intervals. 
  
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
In view of constitution of the Hospital Development Committee (HDC) and 
nomination of local representatives of Member of Parliament of the area, 
instructions on 15.01.2020 have been issued to all Medical Superintendents of 
ESIC/ESIS hospitals regarding revision of the composition of ESIC/ESIS HDCs 
accordingly. 
 
Further, instructions have also been sent on 15thMay 2023 to the Zonal 
Medical Commissioners of the ESIC to ensure constitution of HDCs in every 
ESIC/ESIS hospitals of their zone. Accordingly, consistent efforts are being made 
to ensure constitution of HDCs in all ESI hospitals at the earliest as well as to hold 
their meetings regularly. 
 
As per the information available HDC is existing in 46 ESIC Hospitals 80 
meetings have been conducted in ESIC Hospitals. Further 36 HDC are existing in 
ESIS Hospitals and 105 meetings of HDC have been conducted post formation of 
HDC Committee. 
  
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para Nos. 35 of Chapter-I 
 

70 
 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 17) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that all ESI hospitals along with 1950 
Doctors have been on-boarded on e-Sanjeevani Portal of the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare for providing tele-consultation services. As on July 2023, more than 
70,000 patients have been provided tele-consultation through this platform. The 
Committee have been apprised that, at present, there is no demarcation of 
ESI/non-ESI patients on the portal. In this context, the Committee find that in the 
e-Sanjeevani application, a provision exists for CGHS beneficiaries to enter 
beneficiary ID and also to upload CGHS Card at the time of availing services. 
 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry/ ESIC to approach the Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare to provide facility of entering beneficiary ID and also 
uploading Card at the time of availing services to ESI beneficiaries so that the data 
regarding online tele-consultation provided by ESI doctors to ESI & non-ESI 
beneficiaries is readily available. The Committee also desire that awareness 
campaigns be launched through ESIC/ESIS hospitals/dispensaries as well as 
through employers regarding availability of online tele-consultation facility and IPs 
may be encouraged to utilize the same. 
 
 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHF&W) has launched e-sanjeevani 
2.0 in August 2023.  Accordingly, the ESIC hospitals are being onboarded on e-
sanjeevani 2.0 and taking necessary action for increasing the utilization of this 
portal for tele-consultation. 
  
A staggered media campaign on various initiatives of ESIC including the tele 
consultation through e-sanjeevani are part of its efforts towards facilitating the 
easy availability and accessibility of the medical services, which includes the 
following:  
1. Drug Delivery to Homes of ESI Beneficiaries  
2. Preventive Health Check-Up camp for Senior Citizens  
3. Chemotherapy Facilities at ESIC Hospitals  
4. 5G enabled Ambulance Services 
5. AAA Mobile App  
6. Dhanwantri Module  

71 
 
7. Hub & Spoke Model 
8. E-Sanjeevani App 
9. Convergence with PMJAY, etc. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para Nos. 39 of Chapter-I 
  

72 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE  
(Recommendation Para No.7) 
Committee note that to supplement the ESI dispensary network, 1003 
Private Medical Practitioners have been empanelled as Insurance Medical 
Practitioners (IMPs). Each IMP is allowed to register upto 2000 IP family units. The 
IMPs under the panel system are paid capitation fee of Rs.500/- per IP per year, 
since 8th September 2016, for providing medical care to the ESI beneficiaries which 
include consultation, basic lab investigation and cost of medicine. 
The Committee observe that the capitation fee being paid to the IMPs at Rs. 
41 per IP per month is meagre and needs to be revised considering the inflation 
rate and also the fact that the last revision was affected way back in 2016. The 
Committee desire that an appropriate administrative decision in this regard be 
taken by the Ministry/ESIC on priority. 
(Reply of Government) 
To augment the resources of the ESIC & ESIS ecosystem, a revised Insurance 
Medical Practitioner (IMP) scheme to enrol doctors in areas where ESIC doesn't 
have its own presence has been prepared. Accordingly, a proposal for revised policy 
of IMP was submitted before the 85th meeting of the Medical Benefit Council of the 
ESIC, which recommended the following: - 
1. One IMP for 1000 IPs (two IMPs for 1000 IPs for Northeast) 
2. Remuneration has been recommended to be changed from existing Rs 500 
to Rs 700 with minimum consultation 1.5 times the number of IPs enrolled. 
3. Provision of Annual Health check-up camp has been recommended.  
4. The enhancement of the remuneration is proposed keeping in view the recent 
hike in OPD consultation rates by CGHS, MoHF&W.    
Action has been taken on recommendation regarding annual health check 
and remaining recommendations are also under consideration. 
  
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para Nos. 26 of Chapter-I 
 
 
 

73 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 22) 
 
The Committee note that ESIC, from time-to-time approaches State 
Governments to take over low performing ESIS hospitals. The Committee 
appreciate that ESIC has recently taken over ESIS hospital at Kota (Rajasthan) and 
the proposal to take over three more hospitals at Vijayawada (Andhra Pradesh), 
Maithan (Jharkhand) and Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh) is under process. 
 
The Committee desire the Ministry/ESIC to expedite the formalities of taking 
over these hospitals on priority.  The Committee also Appreciate the efforts made 
by the ESIC requesting all the State Governments to provide their consent for 
taking over such State G o v e r n m e n t  ESI hospitals where State is willing. The Committee 
further recommend that the ESIS hospitals at Jagadhari, Haryana; Chaudwar, 
Odisha; and Bhilwara, Rajasthan be taken over by ESIC. The Committee urge the 
Ministry/ESIC to continue their efforts in this direction and apprise them of the 
outcome of the same. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
 
It is mentioned that ESIS hospital, Sonagiri, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh and 
ESIS hospital, Maithan, Jharkhand have been taken over by ESIC on 20.06.2023 
and 29.08.2023 respectively. For taking over the ESIS hospital, Vijayawada 
(Andhra Pradesh), ESIC has requested the State Government to nominate a 
representative for signing of MoU and complete other formalities of handing/taking 
over of the hospital.   
  
Regarding recommendation of Committee in respect of the taking over of 
ESIS hospitals at Jagadhari (Haryana), Chaudwar (Odisha) and Bhilwara, 
(Rajasthan), the following is conveyed: 
  
1. ESIS Hospital, Jagadhari, Haryana- In response to this office DO letter 
dated 02.01.2023, Principal Secretary, Labour Department, Government of 
Haryana vide DO letter dated 19.06.2023 has informed that requisition to 
fulfil vacant posts for the post of medical officers in ESIS hospitals, Haryana 
has already been sent to Haryana Public Service Commission and the 
advertisement for the same has also been floated. Once the required 
appointments are done, there will be no scarcity of doctors in hospitals and 
hospitals will run efficiently. 
2. ESIS Hospital, Chaudwar, Odisha- The Principal Secretary, Govt. of 
Odisha, on 29.09.2023, has been requested again to convey consent of the 
State Government to hand over the state-run ESI hospitals including the 
ESIS hospital, Chaudwar to ESI Corporation. 

74 
 
3. ESIS Hospital, Bhilwara, Rajasthan- Earlier, ESIC vide letter dated 
25.05.2022 requested the State Government to send their consent for 
handing over ESIS hospital, Bhilwara as per terms and conditions of MoU. 
Again, State Government of Rajasthan vide DO letter dated 02.01.2023 was 
requested to handover ESIS hospitals to ESIC. Principal State Government 
of Rajasthan has been requested again on 29.09.2023 to convey consent of 
the State Government to hand over the state-run ESI hospitals including 
ESIS hospital, Bhilwara to the ESI Corporation. 
  
Annexure-I 
  
List of 26 ESIC Hospitals approved for Opening of In-House 
secondary and tertiary Medical Care Services to PMJAY 
Beneficiaries 
  
S. 
No. 
Approved in 2019 S. No. Approved in 2024 
1. ESIC Hospital Bihta, Bihar 16. ESIC Hospital Tinsukia, 
Assam 
2. ESIC Hospital Naroda, 
Gujarat 
17. ESIC Hospital Korba, 
Chhatisgarh 
3. ESIC Hospital Ankleswar, 
Gujarat 
18. ESIC Hospital Raipur, 
Chhatisgarh 
4. ESIC Hospital Gulbarga, 
Karnataka 
19. ESIC Hospital Bapunagar, 
Gujarat 
5. ESIC Hospital Andheri, 
Maharashtra 
20. ESIC Hospital Bari 
Brahmna , J&K 
6. ESIC Hospital Kolhapur, 
Maharashtra 
21. ESIC Hospital Maithan, 
Jharkhand 
7. ESIC Hospital Bibvewadi, 
Maharashtra 
22. ESIC Hospital Bhopal, 
Madhya Pradesh 
8. ESIC Hospital Bhiwadi, 
Rajasthan 
23. ESIC Hospital Angul, 
Orrissa 
9. ESIC Hospital Jaipur, 
Rajasthan 
24. ESIC Hospital Udaipur, 
Rajasthan 
10. ESIC Hospital Alwar, 
Rajasthan 
25. ESIC Hospital Bikaner, 
Rajasthan 
11. ESIC Hospital Lucknow, 
Uttar Pradesh 
26. ESIC Hospital Kota, 
Rajasthan 
12. ESIC Hospital Kanpur, Uttar 
Pradesh 
    
13. ESIC Hospital Varanasi, 
Uttar Pradesh 
    
14. ESIC Hospital Bareilly, Uttar 
Pradesh 
    

75 
 
15. ESIC Hospital Rudrapur, 
Uttrakhand 
    
  
[Ministry of Labour and Employment, Officer Memorandum No. H-
11021/14/2020-SS-I dated 18.06.2024] 
  
  
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para Nos. 43 of Chapter-I 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
31st July, 2025 
09 Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
BASAVARAJ BOMMAI 
CHAIRPERSON, 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  

76 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) HELD ON 31 July, 2025 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 31st July, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in 
Committee Room No.1, Block ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe-Extension Building, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai-  Chairperson 
 MEMBERS  
  LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
  3. Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary 
  4. Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
  5. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
  6. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  7. Shri Kartick Chandra Paul 
  8. Shri Tanuj Punia 
  9. Shri Pradeep Purohit 
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11. Shri Raja Ram Singh 
12. Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
13. Shri Manoj Tigga 
14. Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
16. Shri Naresh Bansal 
17. Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia 
18. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Lalkithang   - Joint Secretary   
2. Ms. K.Muanniang Tunglut  - Director 
3. Ms. Mili Dinesh    -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri S. Lalengzau Ngaihte  - Deputy Secretary 
  

77 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports on:  
          (i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Fifty- First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on the subject ‘The Employees State Insurance Corporation-Applicability and 
Benefits under ESI Scheme, Functioning of ESI Hospitals and Management 
of Corpus Fund’ pertaining to the Ministry of Labour and Employment;  
 
         (ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Fifty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on the subject ‘Development and Promotion of Jute Industry pertaining to 
Ministry of Textiles’;  
         (iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Fifty- Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on the subject ‘Implementation of Skill Acquisition and Knowledge 
Awareness for Livelihood Promotion (SANKALP) Project’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship; and  
          (iv)   Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship. 
 3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports with 
some modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports and present 
the same to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

78 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTY-FIRST REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
             
    Total 
 
Percentage 
   
I. Total number of Recommendations 29 
 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
– Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 
11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 
24, 26, 27, 28 and 29.               
 
Total:23 
 
79.31 
III. Recommendation/Observation which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply – Rec. 
Para No. 25    
      
Total:01 
 
3.45 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para Nos. 8, 14 and 
17 
 
Total:03 
 
10.34 
V. Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature-  
Rec. Para Nos. 7 and 22 
Total:02 
 
6.90 
   100% 
***** 