PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

STANDING COMMITTEE
ON

Human RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

THIRTY FOURTH REPORT

ON

Inp1A's PERFORMANCE

In
INTERNATIONAL SPORTS

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1994-95)

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram
Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
Miss Saroj Khaparde
Shri O.P. Kohli
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Md. Salim
9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi
11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen
12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
13, Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
**15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

*

er ही एमी ००

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.)-Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar

21. Prof. PJ. Kurien

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda

35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

38. Shri Rambadan

* Nominated on 30th March, 1994 vice vacancy caused by the appointment of Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel as Minister of

State for Power.
** Nominated vide Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 34717 dated the 7th September, 1994.

(iii)


Gv)

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

*42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal
45. Shri Kanshi Ram

* Nominated vice vacancy caused by the resignation of Shri Brahmanand Mandal w.e,f. 24th August, 1994.


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram
. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
. Miss Saroj Khaparde
. Shri O.P. Kohli
. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
. Shri Md. Salim
9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. 1.0. Sanadi
11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen
12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

9० 53 ०५ ७ + ०७ ७

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran
18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
20. Dr. Vasant Pawar
*21. Vacant
22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole
25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar
*28. Vacant
29. Shri Inder Jit
30. Shri Anna Joshi
31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani
36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia
38. Shri Rambadan
39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
41. Shri Ramchandra Dome
42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

*Vacant vice appointment of Prof. P.J. Kurien and Shri Aslam Sher Khan as Ministers.

(v)


(vi)

43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal
45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary ५

. Shri N. K. Singh, Deputy Director

. Shri Om Datta Sharma, Under Secretary

. Shri P.P.K, Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

WPRwWN—


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee, do hereby present this 34th Report of the Com-
mittee on “India’s Performance in International Sports” as a part of its consideration of the Annual
Report (1994-95) of the Department of Youth Affairs & Sports, Ministry of Human Resource Develop-
ment.

2. The Committee visited the sports complexes and Regional Centres of the Sports Authority of
India (SAI) at Bangalore, Calcutta, Delhi, Gandhinagar and Chandigarh, the Netaji Subhash National
Institute of Sports, Patiala, the Sub-centre at Guwahati, the Lakshmibai National Colleges of Physical
Education (LNCPE) at Gwalior and Thiruvananthapuram, the U.P. Sports College, Lucknow, and many
other sports installations at places like Bombay, Alleppey, Madras, Hyderabad, Shillong and Jaipur to
make an on-the-spot study of the available sports infrastructure, stadia, sports schools, hostels, SPDA
Centres and the on-going sports activities. The Committee also visited the Army Boys Sports Companies
in the Madras Engineering Group, Bangalore, the 58 Gorkha Training Centre and the Assam Regimental
Centre, Shillong, and also some of the schools adopted by SAI.

3. The Committee held wide-ranging discussions with a number of outstanding and distinguished
sportspersons, including Padmashris, Arjuna and Dronacharya awardees, coaches, umpires, managers,
representatives of National/State-level Federations/Associations, officials of the various State Govern-
ments and State Sports Councils/Authorities, etc. at the places visited by it.

4, The Committee heard the views of the representatives of some of the Banks, Public Sector Under-
takings, Central Para-military Forces, the Railway Sports Control Board, the Services Sports Control
Board, the Steel Plants Sports Control Board, the Public Sector Sports Control Board etc. to have an idea
about their contribution to the promotion of sports and to explore as to how they can supplement the
governmental efforts for the promotion of sports in the country. The Committee also met the representa-
tives of some leading private/corporate organisations to elicit their views on the issue.

5. The Committee took the evidence of the Secretary, Department of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions with a view to finding out the policy and position in regard to the recruitment and promo-
tion of sportspersons in different Ministries/Departments of the Government of India.

6. The Committee interacted with the Directors General of Doordarshan and All India Radio to
know the role being played by the media in the promotion and popularisation of sports in the country and
the coverage given to various sports events. The Committee also met sports journalists and commentators
at all the places visited by it so as to elicit their views on the subject.

7. The Committee heard the representatives of sports goods manufacturing/exporting industries to
seek clarifications on the non-availability of quality sports equipment at reasonable cost in the country
and how the situation could be improved.

8. The Committee finally heard the Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs and Sports and Director
General, Sports Authority of India (SAT) and ascertained his views on various problems and the sugges-
tions received by the Committee during its study.

9. Specific Questionnaires were sent separately to various sections of witnesses to elicit their views
on the subject. The discussions were held in the light of replies to the questionnaire.

(vii)

‘4624RS


(viii)

10. A Sub-Committee consisting of Dr. Vasant Pawar, Shri O.P. Kohli, Shri Md. Salim, Dr. M. Aram,
Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy was appointed to finalise the Draft Report.

11. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to all those who appeared before the Committee and
gave their evidences or submitted written memoranda on the subject. The Comimittee also wishes to
express its thanks to the officers of the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports and the Sports Authority
of India for extending their full cooperation and furnishing the material and information required by the
Committee.

12. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at its meeting held on 18th December,
1995.

New Deut, P. UPENDRA

December, 1995 Chairman,
Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development.


CHAPTER — I

SPORTS SCENARIO IN INDIA

(a) INTRODUCTION

1. Sports has gained tremendous popularity all over the globe and this healthy trend is likely to
continue in future also, Sports has become a way of life. It serves a very vital social and cultural function
in the society. There is no gainsaying the fact that sports helps in the all-round development of human
personality. [t provides ample and healthy means for recreation and relaxation of human mind and body.
It also provides opportunities for social interaction thereby fostering peace and understanding among
different people, nations, races, religions, etc. Sports provides healthy and socially acceptable opportuni-
ties for the people and nations to compete against each other, thereby touching heights of excellence in
human endeavour and attainment. The first Prime Minister of India, Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru, in his message
to the Asian Assembly of Youth at the First Asiad, held in New Delhi in 1951, put it this way: “It must be
remembered always that these games and contests should be carried out in an atmosphere of utmost
friendliness, Each one must try his best but cach one, whether winner or loser, must play his part grace-
fully and must enter into the spirit of the games.”

2. Of late there has been a keen competition among the nations to win world recognition in sports.
Sports has acquired great professional skill and there is a race 10 win medals in international sports and
bring glory to the nations. After the start of the modern Olympics in the year 1896 at Athens, more and
ons have started participating in the Olympic tournaments held every four years. A number of
plines have been added. Games are no longer played just for the sake of sportsmanship, rather
they have acquired totally new and professional colour. There have been changes in the rules and tech-
niques of various games, With the advancement of science and technology, new and innovative sports
equipments and related materials have entered the 1100, Countries like America, the erstwhile Soviet
Union, Germany and more recently Japan, China and South Korea have taken sports very seriously and
putina lot of effort and resources to create the necessary infrastructure for their sportspersons to undergo
rigorous and professional training and win medals for their countries. Today, these countrics send their
teams to the international tournaments with a clear motto and directive to win as many medals as they can
so as to boost the nation’s pride and honour,

3. India’s poor performance in international sports events is a cause of serious concern for all of us.
After every international event, be it Asian Games, the Commonwealth Games or the Olympic Games, a
lot of hue and cry is raised in Parliament, in the Press and among the general public. Questions are asked
as to why a vast country like India, with a population of more than 900 million, performs so poorly in
international events, when small countrics (¢.g. South Korea), with hardly a twentieth of India’s popula-
tion, have won more gold medals than the total of this country’s gold, silver and bronze medals put
together.

4. In the Olympic Games, India, which is the second largest country in terms of population and
seventh largest in term of area in the entire world, has been able to win a medal each only in Hockey and
Wrestling so far. Since 1984, it has not won even a single medal in the Olympit

5. India was in the second place in the inaugural Asiad at Delhi in 1951, which was held at the
initiative of the late Prime Minister Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru. Till the Seoul Asian Games in 1986, India had
always been among the first seven nations, in terms of the medals won. But it was relegated to the 11th


2

position in the Eleventh Asiad at Beijing. In the 12th Asian Games, held in Hiroshima in 1994, India’s
performance was again dismal, though it was placed in the 8th position in the medals tally.

6. While examining the reasons for our dismal performance in sports, one cannot avoid comparing
it with that of China, Japan and South Korea. China has made a big leap in the’sports arena and it can be
described as the world’s sports super power today. South Korea too is not far behind. In China, it is a
feeling of national pride, coupled with the coordinated efforts of various agencies involved in sports
promotion and creation of infrastructure from the grassroot level, intensive training and selections based
purely on merit, are the secrets of their success. Children in China are involved in sports right from the
early school age. They are provided enough incentives with a view to motivating them to take up sports as
a career. The sports federations in China are run on professional lines and are generally headed by former
record-holders in various sports disciplines.

7. As compared to this, there has been continuous deterioration in India’s performance over the
years, despite spending considerable money and creating the necessary infrastructure in the country.
However, this is not a chronicle of a lost cause. There have been glorious patches of sunlight in the
generally cloudy landscape of Indian Sports. India has reigned supreme in hockey for decades together.
Besides, we were world champions in Billiards and Snooker and our Cricket team has gladdened our
hearts many a time. In other sports also, there have been occasional flashes in the pan, like K. Malleshwari
and Kunjurani becoming world champions in weightlifting and Jaspal Rana dominating the shooting
ranges. Yet, what we lack is consistency and making winning as our habit. A comprehensive strategy will
have to be evolved, systems created and schemes worked out to enable our sportspersons to continuously
perform well.

8. Attempts have been made earlier to study and analyse the reasons for India’s dismal performance
in international sports. A Committee, headed by Shri Amrik Singh, was appointed by the Government in
the year 1987 to study the report of the Indian Olympic Association on the performance of India at the
Tenth Asiad at Seoul. The Government constituted another Committee, headed by Shir M.M. Rajendran,
in 1991 with terms of reference to review all the schemes. More recently, the department of Youth Affairs
and Sports entrusted the task of assessing, analysing and evaluating the existing schemes of the Sports
Authority of India and to design structural adjustments thereof, to the Tata Consultancy Services. These
Committees, no doubt, have come out with useful and practical suggestions/recommendations but it
appears that these reports have been confined to the cold-storage as there is no perceptible change in the
sports scenario in the country.

9. It is in this backdrop that the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development decided to take up this subject of India’s poor performance in sports at interna-
tional level, for special study and make a detailed report, after having wide ranging discussions with
those connected with sports and also after making on-the-spot studies of the existing sports facilities/
infrastructure at different places in the country. This is for the first time that a Parliamentary Committee
has taken up this subject for special study and report to Parliament.

10. The main problems that were raised before the Committee, during its visits and deliberations,
are: lack of sports culture and consciousness in the country; non-integration of sports with education;
multiplicity of agencies involved in promotion of sports with no coordination and accountability; lack of
proper cooperation between the Centre, States, Federations/Associations and various private and public
sector undertakings; lack of infrastructure in the rural ateas and its concentration in urban areas; under-
utilisation of available infrastructure and poor maintenance and upkeep; lack of good quality and reason-
ably priced sports equipments; absence of adequate incentives to enable the youth to take up sports as a
career, no proper identification of talents; unfair selection procedure and last minute finalisation of teams;
lack of adequate exposure and specialised training and coaching of international standard; non-availabil-
ity of nutritious diet for sportspersons; inadequate participation of women in sports, etc.

11. Some of the suggestions received by the Committee for improving India’s performance in inter-
national sports were: inclusion of sports in educational curriculum; involving public and private sectors


in promotion of sports; broadbasing the sports infrastructure and providing facilities upto the grass-root
level; linking recognition to schools and colleges with having playfields; encouragement for rural sports;
providing suitable jobs and adequate financial assistance and social security to sportspersons so as to
make sports more attractive; streamlining the selection procedure and preparing an annual calendar of
sports; providing medical and sports sciences facilities and introducing sports management courses; need
to have an extensive data bank and of research and development in sports fields; engaging Coaches on
contract basis and providing regular taining and refresher courses for them; making the functioning of
the Federations more democratic, trasparent and on professional lines; reorganising the Sports Authority
of India; use of media, both electronic and print, for popularising sports, etc.

12, The need for bringing Sports from the State List to the Concurrent List of the Constitution and
having a comprehensive Central legislation on sports, defining the role of the Government, both at the
Central and State level, the Sports Authority of India, various national federations/associations, etc. was
also stressed.

13, There is a lack of sports culture in the country. Today, in our educational curricula, all the
emphasis is on academics and sports remains the most neglected area. So much so, parents do not like to
encourage their children to take up sports seriously as it does not offer any career opportunities.

14, A pyramidical approach needs to be built up. First the base has to be enlarged. Major invest-
ments will have to be made in creating and maintaining infrastructure. More playgrounds have to be
provided in rural and tribal areas, and in block and district headquarters, instead of building huge stadia
in big cities. It must be kept in mind that the reach of organised sports is generally limited to urban
centres. The rural population should be encouraged to participate in sports and facilities provided to them
10 acquire skills of modern games and sports. We must ensure that millions of children get an opportunity
to participate in sports because victors will come out of participants only. To begin with, games such as
kho-kho, kabaddi, football, volleyball, basketball, etc, should be encouraged as these do not need much
infrastructure and expenditure. Secondly, the top of the pyramid has to be taken care of. Our best athletes
must be given the best training and, most important, a continuous competitive exposure at international
level. Our players have to be sent out and foreign teams invited here much more frequently than at
present. Not much imagination is required to plan for this, but sports administrators and policy planners
will have to marshal all the ingenuity and innovation at their command to mobilise the money required.
Government resources are tightly stretched. The problem with sports is that it is not a priority area for
government as the country has other problems to attend to first, such as hunger, poverty, illiteracy, etc.

15, Here the corporate world can enter in a big way. In India, the corporate world has very recently
realised the marketing potential offered by sports. Of late, a few events have been sponsored by big
industrial and business houses. The Reliance World Cup was possibly the first major corporate splash.
Sponsorship of chess by Sanghi Industries, hockey by Sahara India, and golf by Sriram Industries are
some more examples of corporate participation in sports promotion. Corporate houses would naturally
concentrate on the major glamorous events. Their objective is quite clearly to get value for their money,
not philanthropy. Therefore, attempts will have to be made to involve more corporate houses in a sus-
tained and long-term manner, whereas Government, both at the State and at the Centre, will have to find
funds to scout talent and nurture it scientifically. The Britannia Amritraj Tennis Academy is a good
example of an ideal corporate involvement.

16. There is something seriously wrong with our sports management. Strategies adopted so far have
not yielded the desired results. We cannot put the blame entirely on the economic conditions ‘in our
country. There is no point in hiding the ground realities and one has to be frank enough to admit our
shortcomings and lapses. The need of the hour is to make concerted efforts by everyone, be it govern-
ment, federations/associations, schools and educational institutions and parents to-attain success in sports.
Such a whole-hearted and integrated appreach only could bring some improvement in the sports scenario
in the country. For a-nation to produce top class sportsmen, it requires“a lot of discipline and hard work
and perhaps we are lacking in these areas.


(b) SPORTS ORGANISATIONS IN INDIA

17. The Department of Youth Affairs and Sports under the Ministry of Human Resource Develop-
ment was set up in 1984. Sports being a State subject, all the State GovernmenU/Union Territories have
either Directorates of Sports or they are having Sports Authorities or Councils and some States have both.

(i) Sports Authority of India

18. The Sports Authority of India was set up in March, 1984 as an autonomous body to coordinate
the functioning of various sports organisations and also to look after the field work of the Department of
Youth Affairs and Sports. The Sports Authority of India has established six regional centres at Bangalore,
Gandhinagar, Calcutta, Chandigarh, Delhi and Imphal. Sports sciences and sports medicine facilities
have been developed at Delhi, Patiala, Bangalore and Calcutta. It has also established two Academic
Wings relating to sports academics: one for training in coaching and R&D in Sports at the Netaji Subhas
National Institute, Patiala, and the other for Physical Education and R&D at L.N.C.P.E., Gwalior and
Thiruvananthapuram. The SAI is managed by a governing body under the chairmanship of the Union
Minister of Human Resource Development.

19. Besides, the SAI implements different schemes for scouting and nurturing talents throughout
the country. The main schemes are: National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC); Special Arca-Games (SAG);
Sports Projects Development Area (SPDA); Sports Hostel Scheme, National Coaching Scheme and Army
Boys Sports Company (ABSC). Besides, SAI also looks after the sports infrastructure created at the time
of the IX Asian Games at Delhi in 1982.

20. The Sports Authority of India, which was intended to be totally autonomous, is funded by the
Government of India on the principle of "meeting the deficit". SAI was given various tasks by the Gov-
ernment of India vide Resolution No. F.1-4/83-SAI, dated the 25th January, 1984.

21. In 1985-86, SAI was given a plan budget of Rs. 1.5 crores and in 1995-96 of Rs. 27.9 crores. The
Committee was informed that Rs. 14.04, Rs. 14.69 and Rs. 15.06 crores were spent as establishment and
administrative charges of SAI during the years 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94 respectively. The Commit-
tee notes that such expenditure constituted slightly more than I/Sth of the total allocation for sports and
games. The Committee finds that this fact corroborates the charge levelled by witnesses that SAI, over
the years, had developed into a huge bureaucratic organisation. The Committec agrees with the sugges-
tion made by certain witnesses that there is an urgent need for reducing the huge expenditure on SAT by
reorganising its structure at various levels and recommends that immediate steps be initiated on the lines
suggested by the Committee in Chapter IT] of the report.

(ii) Indian Olympic Association

22. As per the Olympic Charter, each country is supposed to have a National Olympic Association.
Indian Olympic Association (IOA) is located in the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium at New Delhi. The I.0.A.
is supposed to supervise, as well as coordinate, the functioning of the State olympic associations inter-
alia guiding the national sports federations. Each sports federation ha: affiliated State Sports Associa-
tions. Each state sports association, in turn, is supposed to have district level associations though, at
present, very few such district level sports associations are functioning effectively.

23. As per the Olympic Charter, I.0.A. and its affiliated sports federations are autonomous bodics.
National sports federations are also supposed to work directly under the supervision of the International
Sports Federation of that particular discipline. The Indian Olympic Association has a major role in multi-
disciplinary sports events such as the Asian Games, the S.A.F. Games and the National Games. When
India is to bid for and arrange any multi-disciplinary international event, the JOA comes into the picture.
On the other hand, the respective national sports federations take the permission of international federa-
tions to organise any international tournament/championship in that discipline in India. Federations are
also supposed to continuously scout and nurture fresh talent.


(iii) National Sports Federations/Boards

24. In India, presently, there are 52 national federations concerning various sports and games. They
receive funds from the Government for their activities (see Annexure). At the international level, organ-
ised competitive sports set-up is fully autonomous. Each international federation has its own governing
body and is competent to formulgt te its regulations with regard to the rules of the game, affiliation of
members, ctc. Although, at one time or the other, a particular national group may influence or control the
affairs of an international federation, generally speaking, these federations operate independently of na-
tional governments. The same is also applicable to the International Olympic Committee.

25. Similary, national federations within India are also autonomous and are registered as societies,
They are affiliated directly to the various international federations and the Government has no role to
play. Government can and does, however, influence the functioning of these national federations through
em of props and favours. Similarly, by not according recognition, the Government can discourage,
though it cannot prevent, a rival federation or association operating in the same sporting discipline.

26. National federations are, thus, autonomous organisations which are responsible for the organi-
sation and management of specific sports disciplines in the country. Their responsibility extends to the
management of a particular sports discipline in every sense of the word, They are responsible for organ-
ising competitions, talent scouting, training of athletes, extending equipment support, sponsorship, en-
forcing the rules of the game, and promoting the game in general. In the Indian context, however, as the
national federations are financially weak, except in one or two disciplines like cricket, they depend on
Government assistance in a number of areas.

27. In the long run, however, these federations must become economically independent and only
then can they exercise their full autonomy and authority.
(c) STATE LEVEL ORGANISATIONS

Almost.all State Governments have Directorates of Sports. While some States have set up Sports
Authorities, some others have Sports Councils. Similar to national federations, each State has a State
sports association for each discipline and they do similar job of scouting and nurturing of talents, holding
inter-district tournaments, etc. At present, some of the State associations are active whereas in most of the
States they are still very dormant and need to be revamped. Every State is also supposed to have a State
Olympic Association which is supposed to oversee the working of the State associations and also hold
multi-disciplinary tournaments/championships at the State level.

‘The Committee, during its visits to the North-Eastern States, learnt that the Indian Olympic Associa-
tion (IOA) has not recognised their State Olympic Associations even after repeated requests and remind-
ers. The North-Eastern States are very keen to get this recognition so that they could organise champion-
ships in their States. The Committee feels that the Indian Olympic association should give recognition to
all the State Olympic associations, In turn, State Olympic associations should go up to the district level to
see that inter-block or inter-Panchayat tournaments are organised which would increase the base of sports
in the country and also throw up a lot of fresh talent. State Governments Should provide Financial help to
the State. Associations and Olympic associations for scouting and nurturing of talents and also for creat-
ing sports infrastructure.


CHAPTER-II
PROBLEMS AND ISSUES



CHAPTER -- II

PROBLEMS AND ISSUES

(a) LACK OF SPORTS CULTURE

28. One of the important factors leading to the continuous decline in India’s performance in inter-
national sports arena is the total lack of sports consciousness and culture in the country at every level.
Sports has come to be regarded as a burden at the grassroot level and the common perception is that
sports is at the cost of academics. Our national and state policies do not envisage sports as an integral
part of human resource development. Sports is also not regarded as a crucial input of our educational
process. The result is that teachers, as well ds parents, try to discourage sports. The traditional belief
would perhaps explain and clarify the position better:

Padhoge likhoge banoge nawab,
.-Kheloge kudoge hoge kharab.

(Games and plays ruin your career whereas education makes you a great man.)
This, in fact, summarises the Indian psyche towards sports.

29. The educational institutions, both at the school and college level, can contribute a lot to the
promotion of sports amongst the youth. Unfortunately, our educational institutions give the least priority
to sports, Small children going to schools could be seen walking with bag loads of books and they are
forced to involve themselves in learning through books right from their entry into the schools. There is no
time for them to go to the play-ground, if one such thing exists, Even after the school hours are over,
parents discourage them from playing in the ground. There is a general lack of sports consciousness
amongst the parents, teachers and heads of institutions.

30, Once it is known that opting for sports as a career is:as good or bright as other professions like
engineering, medical, etc., parents would not hesitate to encourage their children to participate in sports
more and more. For this, adequate job opportunities and bright future prospects for sportsmen will have
to be created, There is a need to bring professional awareness in sports to help talented children in their
development, and optimum: performances can be attained by bringing about a change in the parental
attitude,

31. The Committee feels that it should be our objective to see that every child takes part in
sports and games, and that every parent encourages the child to do so. It should also be our endeay-
our to see that as children grow, they do not lose their enthusiasm for sports, nor does the pressure
of studies diminish their interest for participating in sports and games. Every effort should be made
to retain children and students who are active in sports within the educational system. Ideally speaking,
sports and games should form an integral part of our lives at every stage, beginning from the primary
school. Participation in competitive sports at the highest national and international level would then flow
from high levels of participation in schools, colleges, universities and clubs. Our performance in creat-
ing a conducive environment for sports should also ensure that boys and girls with high potential
are encouraged to remain active in sports through a system which offers them social recognition
and encouragement as well as financial benefit. This is very essential if we are to become competi-
tive internationally as a nation.

WIN3/4624RS1


(b) INTEGRATION OF SPORTS WITH EDUCATION

(i) Inclusion in Curriculum

32. “Catch them young and take sports to the grassroots level" are the most often used phrases by
sports experts and sports administrators. One of the basic and pertinent points that came up before the
Committee was the need for integration of sports with education. Unless physical education is made a
part of the educational curriculum, sports in India is not likely to improve. The sports activities, it was
contended, should begin right from the primary school level and each child should be compulsorily
.assessed in sports the way he or she is assessed in other subjects. Such an effort would build an environ-
ment in which talent can be scouted and caught at a very young age. Thus, by the time the child attains an
age of about 10 to 12 years, he or she would have developed basic and fundamental skills which can be
further professionalised by imparting the necessary training in a discipline of the child’s taste and liking.
This would also lead to mass participation in sports by all the children.

33. The Committee emphasises that physical education and sports should be made an essen-
tial and integral part of educational activity in schools and colleges. Participation in games and sports
improves the health of the child and develops his/her motor abilities and responses. Even more impor-
tantly, active participation in games and sports fosters a spirit of sportsmanship, fairness and team out-
look. The Committee was informed that the National Sports policy (1984) emphasised the need for mak-
ing sports and physical education an integral part of the curriculum, as a regular subject in the schools.
This resolve was further strengthened and reiterated in the National Policy of Education (N.P.E.) 1986
which calls for making sports and physical education an integral part of the learning process and provide
for its inclusion in the evaluation of performance. The Policy underlined the need inter-alia for making
physical education a part of the school improvement programme.

34, The Committee emphasises the need for reducing academic burden on the children, par-
ticularly, at the primary stage, so that they could spare enough time for sports. Further, in order to
motivate, encourage, train and guide the students, the role of the physical education teachers is very
important. Therefore, all the schools must have physical education teachers/ coaches. At present it
may not be practicable. Therefore, to begin with, physical education teachers may be provided at
least in the Secondary Schvols and one physical education teacher for a group of Primary Schools.
The Committee feels that unless some financial support is provided to the schools and colleges
specifically for this purpose and for purchase of simple and basic sports equipments and consum-
able sports items, these objectives would not be achieved.

35. There is also a need to develop at least one sports school, preferably residential, in each _
district with minimum playing facilities. The schools should admit children who have aptitude for
sports and who have passed the prescribed physical standards. Such schools should have adequate sports
faculties with good coaches, teachers and other supporting staff from the Sports Departments. After
admission in sports schools, the child should undergo rigorous training in the games of his/her choice and
athletics compulsorily so that he/she could ultimately become a master in his/her discipline. Arrange-
ments will have to be made to provide all facilities/equipments and other necessary infrastructure of the
latest order so that children studying in these schools are trained in the best way. These schools could
ultimately be developed as centres of excellence in sports, at least one in each district, on the same
pattern as is being done by China and some East European countries.

(ii) Sports Schools, Colleges and Universities

36. The countries, which have done well in sports especially the erstwhile Soviet Union, China and
Germany, have a large number of sports schools_in which genetically gifted children are admitted and
provided scientific training to develop their motor qualities and sports skills. The Committee learnt that
the city of Moscow has more than 80 sports schools whereas Beijing has 78 sports schools and Shanghai
more than 60 such schools. In our country, only a few States have established sports schools. Motilal
Nehru Sports School, Rai (Haryana), G.V. Raja Sports School, Thiruvananthapuram, and Andhra Pradesh

13/4624RS1


12

sive participation in various sports disciplines over the years resulted in China’s performance improving
tremendously with every international sports meet.

40. As against this, our schools and colleges have neither the support from the educational heads nor
there are playgrounds and sports equipments for students to play games. The schovis and colleges are
completely starved of funds for organising sports. Even where a little money is carmarked for the promo-
tion of sports, the same is diverted towards other priority areas leaving sports in the lurch. The Commit-
tee found that infrastructure, so far created, was mainly confined to the metro towns/cities, big
industrial townships, defence cantonments, etc. to cater to the needs of people living in the urban
areas whereas 80 per cent of the population, which lives in the villages and small towns, is generally
deprived of this benefit. The tribal and rural areas, with their age-old games, are devoid of any
sports infrastructure worth the name.

41. The Committee was given to understand that ‘sports’ being the State subject, it is the primary
responsibility of the State Governments to build up sports infrastructure at block/district and State levels
The Department of Youth Affairs and Sports implements a scheme of giving grants for creation of sports
infrastructure. Under this scheme, State Governments are eligible to avail Central assistance for creation
of various kinds of sports infrastructure, including construction of stadia at block and district levels
There is no limit to the number of stadia to be created in a particular State at the block, district or State
levels. One of the reasons cited for the lack of sports infrastructure in the country ic the non-
availability of sufficient funds for the promotion of sports. The budget provided for sports in the
Central Government is iess than 0.0001 per cent of the Government’s total budget. Even taking
into consideration States’ provisions for sports, the percentage of allocation does not improve ei-
ther, which shows that sports is not a priority area. We will have to provide and build up the necessary
infrastructure in the form of playgrounds in our schools, colleges and villages so as to create sports
awareness and inculcate a spirit of competition amongst our younger gencration.

42. The Committee feels that Government should plan the development of sports in a phased
manner so that necessary infrastructure is built up over a period of time and scarce resources
earmarked for the purpose are optimally utilised. The Department of Sports and Youth Affairs should
emphasise the need for having sufficient budget allocations from the Planning Commission for this pur-
pose. Further, the Government alone cannot deliver the goods keeping in view the size of the country and
the gravity of the problem. We will have to associate our public and private sector industries and corpo-
rate houses to supplement governmental efforts in this direction.

43. The Committee feels that, as far as possible, there should be provision of a playfield for
opening a school or college in rural, as well as urban areas. Where, however, it is not possible to
have a separate playfield in the urban areas for want of space, a group of schools/colleges could be
allowed to use a common playfield at different timings. This would help utilise the available infra-
structure to the optimum level. There is a need to create and develop sports infrastructure in all the
working places such as factories, industries. offices etc., so as to ensure wider participation and create
sports awareness all over the country. Surplus land available with different Ministries, including the
Railways, the Defence, the Civil Aviation and Tourism, etc. should be allowed to be used as playfields.
All the Municipal Corporations, Cantonment Boards and Development Authorities should also be
directed to ban the use of playfields for any other purposes.

44. The Committee, during its visit to the Southern Centre of SAI, found that the sports hostel at
Secunderabad does not have its own building nor a proper playfield. The Committee, therefore, recom-
mends that necessary steps should be taken immediately in this regard.

(ii) Poor Maintenance

45. The Committee, while visiting the Regional Centres of Sports Authority of India, LNCPEs,
NIS and the important stadia/sports complexes, found it distressing that barring the Bangalore,
Calcutta and Gandhinagar Regional Centres, the condition of most of the sports complexes/stadia
was far from satisfactory. No one appears to be paying any attention towards their proper upkeep and


13 ‘

maintenance. Buildings were in dilapidated condition and some of the stadia looked like abandoned
premises, with no sign of any activity.

46, In the prestigious National Institute of Sports (NIS), Patiala, the Committee noticed that the
beautiful building, Moti Bagh Palace. in which it is housed, looked like a neglected place. The building,
it appeared, had not been white-washed for years. Besides, one could see weeds growing on the lawns and
courts. The covered halls were not properly lit. The Committee hocked to see gunny-bags being
used as window-curtains in the halls. The condition of the kitchen was substandard and totally unhy-
gicnic. The food being prepared and served to the sportspersons in the canteen was substandard, There
was not even a hot water arrangement in the kitchen to wash the used utensils and plates. One very old
rusted geyser was lying. If the players of international standards are subjected to this kind of unhygienic
{reatment as regards their food and dict, it is futile to expect them to win laurels for the country. ‘Ve are
certainly taking a great risk with their health and lives. There is no regular programme of inspection of
these buildings by the Sports Authority of India (SAI). It appeared that no one had visited nor formally
inspected these premises for years together.

47, Similarly, in Delhi, the National Stadium, the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, the ‘Talkatora
Indoor Stadium and the Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium are also not wel! maintained. One could
see seepages and cracks in the buildings, with repairs pending for long. The condition of the canteen
in the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium was cqually horrible. In fact, one would not like to call ita “canteen” as
it lacks even the basic amenity of a wash-basin. If such a sorry state of affairs prevails in the stadia which
are generating regular resources by way of subletting the premises, what can be the situation in those
stadia which are not generating any income, Similarly, in the Guwahati Centre of Sports Authority of
India (SAT), hundreds of drums of bitumin have been purchased and are lying there unused for years
together. Now there seems to be a proposal to change the design of the track resulting in huge losses, The
Committee suspects some irregularities in the construction of this Stadium. The Department of Youth
Affairs and Sports should immediately look into this matter.

48. The Government has informed the Committee that the poor maintenance of stadia/ sports com-
plexes is mainly because of two factors — lack of resources and multiplicity of agencies undertaking the
maintenance responsibility. So far as inadequacy of funds is concerned, Government intends to go to the
Planning Commission with a request for additional funds. As regards the maintenance of stadia/sports
complexes, it ५४: ated that different agencies like DDA, NDMC and CPWD etc. are undertaking the
job of maintenance of different stadia/sports complexes. The Department of Sports has been so far plac-
ing funds at the disposal of these agencies and leaving the entire maintenance work to these agencies
There was neither any interaction with these agencies nor was any monitoring done to oversee the quality
of maintenance. The Committee is not satisfied with the explanation given by the Department in this
regard. The Committee was informed that a decision had been taken by the Gevernment that hereafter the
maintenance responsibility would be taken over by the Department itself. This proposal has already been
cleared by the Finance Committee of S.A.]. The Committee recommends that the Department of
Youth Affairs and Sports should werk out a proper plan and schedule for maintenance of these
buildings/stadia constructed at huge cost. The Department shouid also introduce a system of regu-
lar monitoring and inspection of these buildings by senior offcials so as to ensure their proper
maintenance and upkeep.

49. At the Western Centre, Gandhinagar, the Committee noted that the hockey synthetic field had
outlived its life and needed to be laid afresh. The Sports Psychology and Sports Bio-mechanics Depart-
ments in the Centre are yet to be fully equipped. The Committee recommends that necessary steps should
be taken immediately in this regard.

50. The Committee, during its visit to the Southern Centre, noted that the hockey astro turf in the
centre was not properly maintained simply due to non-availability of a brush and cleaning machine. The
sports hostel in Madras was.also not properly maintained. The playfields attached to the sports hostel
were in a bad condition and needed to be attended to regularly.


14

51. The Committee was informed that repairs to the buildings of the SAI Eastern Centre, Calcutta,
including white: washing, painting, etc., have not been done for the last 5 to 6 years due to paucity of
funds. The Committee feels that such works could well have been undertaken even with the minimum
available funds. Not giving attention to proper maintenance of infrastructure would defeat the very pur-
pose of creating these facilities. The Committee hopes that such lapses would not take place in future.

52. The Committee, during its visit to the Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education,
Gwalior, noted that even though it had been made a deemed university, no Director has been ap-
pointed for the Institute so far. The Committee desires that the Director be appointed to the Insti-
tute expeditiously. The Committee has been informed that the Institute does not have funds to carry out
even minor repair works, white washing, etc. The Committee is of the view that now that it has become a
deemed university, the Institute should also try to raise funds from the corporate sector and through other
resources, including the UGC. The Committee learnt that, earlier, a number of eminent athletes, such as
Labh Singh, U.S. Chauhan, and few others won Asian medals while they were students in this Institution.
However, itis distressing to note that during the last 8 to 10 years, not a single student from this Institute
has been able to show sporting excellence at that level. The Committee recommends that students be
encouraged to participate in various state and national tournaments and more stress should be laid on
sporting activities and improvement of infrastructure.

(iii) Under-utilisation

53. One of the points frequently raised before the Committee is the lack of playgrounds and fields
for our players. Our schools do not have playfields to promote sports amongst children nor do we have
enough money to buy land to create playgrounds in each one of the schools and at block and district
levels. This has to be planned in a phased manner. At the same time, it has been observed that the
Government has erected huge and massive sports infrastructure in the metro cities and towns.
These structures are used only when national or international tournaments take place. For the rest
of the period they are just lying idle or under-utilised. Some of them are rented out for cultural
programmes and other shows. There is a problem of their maintenance as well. Moreover, the public
at large don’t have access to such huge stadia. A lot of money is being wasted for their security and the
very purpose for which they were constructed gets defeated when our boys and girls do not have free

access to these stadia.

54. Of late, States are competing with each other in creating costly sports edifices, instead of concen-
trating on preparing more playfields and sports complexes in small towns and villages. Only two years
ago, Government of Maharashtra had constructed huge stadia at Pune, costing more than Rs. 50 crores,
which is also not being optimally utilised after the National Games were over. At present, the Govern-
ment of Karnataka is busy constructing huge infrastructure and stadia, costing around Rs. 300 crores, in
the city of Bangalore. Similarly, the Government of Tamil Nadu has just completed big sports complex at
Madras at a cost of about Rs. 250 crores for South Asian Federation (SAF) Games. While any addition to
the existing sports infrastructure is to be welcomed, it would be a wasteful expenditure if this is not
utilised properly after the events are over. When the Committee asked the concerned State Government
authorities about their future plans for utilisation of this costly infrastructure, they could not give any
Satisfactory answer. As these stadia have now already been created, the State Governments should
seriously think about making proper utilisation by converting them either as permanent sports hostels or
running sports schools and colleges so that promising sportspersons can be given adequate and scientific
training on a long-term basis and the infrastructure created at huge cost is properly utilised.

55. Further, it has also been observed that State Governments want to organise national or state
level competitions in the State capitals only. Generally, this results in the construction of huge stadia and
concentration thereof at the State headquarters. The Committee feels that instead of organising the
games at the State capitals, many of the games could be heid in other places in the State so that the
sports infrastructure is not concentrated in one particular area. The Committee is of the opinion that
this would bring sports consciousness and awakening amongst our youth and would also give them the


15

much needed opportunity to make use of this infrastructure all over the State. Thus, more and more
people would have free access to these infrastructures within their own State.

56. The Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education, Thiruvananthapuram, is a case where
even though there is sufficient infrastructure, it is not utilised well. The Committee, during its visit to the
college, noted that even though sophisticated equipments and infrastructure have been provided, they are
not put to the optimum use. Activities are yet to commence in some wings and laboratories. The Commit-
tee feels that non-utilisation of infrastructure is not a good sign and necessary steps should be taken, in
coordination with the State Government, for optimum utilisation of the infrastructure.

57. Lately, it has been observed that in many countries, instead of going in for pucca stadia for
organising games at a very high cost, they are now going in for construction of temporary structures
which can be dismantled after the events are over. We should also think on these lines in view of the
resource crunch.

(d) SPORTSMEN AND PROBLEMS
(i) Lack of Discipline and Dedication

58. Lack of discipline, dedication and a strong sense of national pride, both among sportspersons
and coaches, has been cited as one of the major factors contributing to the decline of Indian sports.
Today, international events at times are being taken merely as shopping jaunts for sportspersons and
Managers. There are perhaps more mementos than medallions in the returning baggage of sportspersons
coming home after participating in international meets. Several cases of indisciplined behaviour of
many of our sportspersons are reported, quite often, in the Press. Coaches and Managers are scared
of reporting against them because of various reasons. As a result, even after qualifying in the selec-
tion trials, many of our athletes fail to match their own best performance in competitions like Olympics,
Asian and Commonwealth Games.

59. Many senior players and coaches, during the course of evidence before the Committee, com-
plained that the younger players do not show any respect to their coaches and indulge in acts of indiscipline
in the playground and outside. Even the Selection Committee does not take cognizance of these factors
and includes such persons in the squad which not only becomes a matter of severe criticism but also
brings bad name to the country.

60. The Committee was informed that once the players were selected in the teams for competitions
abroad and their berths were secured, they did not care for the game as much as was required of them to
play in international competitions. One of the coaches, while recalling his experiences of 1986 Asian
Games held at Seoul, remarked: The Chinese team woke up at 5.00 a.m. to do their stretching etc., while
our boys woke up just in time to catch the bus to the arena. If this is the spirit, the Committee wonders,
what kind of laurels they would bring to India. The Committee found that there was a general deteriora-
tion in discipline and dedication among sportspersons, as compared to yesteryears. The Committee is of
the firm view that the country can ill-afford to take lightly the instances of indiscipline and lack of
sportsmanship, particularly from the persons representing the country in international arena. The
authorities, the Committee feels, have to be firm and strict in handling any cases of indiscipline
amongst sportspersons and ensure that such people do not find place in the Indian contingents
going abroad for international tournaments.

(ii) Inadequate Incentives

61. There are no two opinions on the fact that we have not been able, so far, to create a congenial
atmosphere for the promotion of sports culture in the country. The efforts so far made are sporadic.
Coupled with the lack of proper congenial atmosphere for sports, there is a feeling that sports do not offer
adequate career and job opportunities for our youth. Parents, therefore, do not want their children to take
up sports as a career. There is no dearth of talent in the country for sports but the pertinent point is neither
we have been able to create an atmosphere which is congenial for the promotion and development of
sports nor have we been able to provide adequate and proper job opportunities for our young generation


16

so as to attract them towards sperts as is the case with other professions like JAS, Enginecring and
Medical disciplines, लए, The Comniittee feels that if we really want to promote sports in the country
we will have to make available adequate incentives, good job opportunities and recognition of
talents and achievements.

62. At present, there are very few incentives/rewards for our talented and outstanding
sportspersons. The Central Government, the State Governments and the Public Sector Undertak-
ings do not offer good job opportunities for our sportspersons. During its interaction with different
organisations, the Committee found that none of the organisations employing sportspersons has any fixed
quota for recruitment of sportsmen.

63. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is an urgent need for fixing a percentage of jobs
in each and every organisation for sportspersons. This would definitely prove to be a strong incen-
tive to take sports as a career, provided all the organisations like Banks, Railways, Airlines, Public
Sector Undertakings etc. meticulously implement the scheme of employment of sportspersons un-
der this category. At present, there is no mechanism to monitor this aspect by the Government.

64. The Committce has noted that students, who have inclination for sports, are put to disadvantage
in academics as they have to spare more time for sports, than for studies. In the process, they generally do
not fare well and lose in their studies. This is the reason why children and their parents mostly prefer
studies to sports, keeping in view their future carcer. The Committee, therefore, feels that in schools
and colleges students who perform well in sports may be given some percentage of grace marks in
each subject. Similarly, certain percentage of seats for admission in colleges should be reserved for
students who have excelled in sports.

65. Housing is one of the major problems faced by the people in India and sportspersons are no
exception to this. The Committee desires that, as an incentive, sportspersons who have participated
in the state, national and international events should be allotted houses or plots by Housing Boards
and Urban Development Authorities on priority basis and at concessional rates. They may also be
given house building loans by Banks and other financial institutions at low interest. Eminent
sportspersons, who, after retirement, intend to start their own industry/business etc. may be given
licenses for the purpose alongwith bank loans and land, if necessary.

66. Barring a few exceptions, most of the outstanding sportspersons, who have been given employ-
ment by different organisations, are working in low category jobs. Such meagre opportunilics neither
match their outstanding performances in sports nor their positions are able to provide them a good social
recognition and status they deserved. On the other hand, a doctor or an engineer or an TAS officer is
placed much higher in the social strata in terms of his or her status in the society. The Committee, there-
fore, feels that unless we raise the social status and recognition of our outstanding sportspersons to a
respectable level, sports is not going to attract talented youth in the near future. Coupled with the social
status, we will nave to offer them handsome emoluments commensurate with their performance. The
Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for having a comprehensive scheme for providing adequate
incentives and rewards for making sports a lucrative and respectable career.

67. During the course of interaction with the Committee, the Secretary, Department of Personnel
and Training, informed the Committee that the Government of India was not following any definite
policy for recruiting sportspersons in the various Ministrics/ Departments and other Central Government
offices. The Government is, however, reported to haye issued certain guidelines in the year 1980 which
envisaged employing sportspersons upto 5 per cent of the posts in Group 'C’ and 'D’ categories only.
These appointments could be made directly by the Secretary or the Head of the Department without going
to the Staff Selection Commission. The Committee came to know that there 15 no effective monitoring
mechanism to ensure that these guidelines are being implemented or adhered to by different Ministries/
Departments meticulously. The Government has no feedback whatsoever regarding the backlog of vacan-
cies in various Ministries/Departments. The Committee was shocked to learn that till March 1995,
only 25 persons were recruited as sportspersons in the 25 Ministries/Departments of the Govern-



1६९॥

ment of India ( except in Railways and Defence) and that too in the Group ‘@’ category. The Com-
mittee was surprised to hear from the Secretary (Personnel) that his Department had issued a circular on
24 July, 1994 to all the Ministries/ Departments of Government of India for supplying information with
regard to the employment of sportspersons in the Government but the same has not yet been responded,
uance of two reminders! Such aversion to sports speaks of the scenario prevailing in the

despite
country! ‘:

68. As regards the suggestion for having a legislation for providing reservation of jobs to outstand-
ing sportspersons in Government, the Secretary (Personnel) explained that due to 49.5% per cent reserva-
tion already available to certain categories (SC/ST/OBCs) and in view of the Supreme Court’s restriction
on providing further reservations exceeding 50 per cent, the application of a law enforcing 5 per cent
reservation for sportspersons would be rather difficult and not practicable.

* 69. The Committee is very much displeased with the lopsided approach and treatment being given
to sports in the country. The Committee feels that there is a lack of will and determination also in
implementing the existing guidelines in employing sportspersons by the Government. There is no
provision for promotion of outstanding sportspersons or giving them adequate cash awards after
they win medals and bring laureals to the country.

70. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should have (i) a definite
policy for recruiting sportspersons in various Ministries/Departments and Public Sector Under-
takings; (ii) effective monitoring to get regular feedback and to ensure proper implementation of
the provisions of the policy, which is virtually non-existent as.on date; (iii) the Department of
Sports and Youth Affairs should act as a nodal agency for this purpose; (iv) the Government should
also issue clear-cut guidelines to the Union Public Service Commission for recruiting sportspersons
in Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ services also as there are many sportspersons of international standard
having adequate educational qualifications for these categories of posts. The position of employ-
ment, however, was found to be slightly better in the banks and the public sector undertakings, as com-
pared to the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India.

71. Another problem brought before the Committee was that sportspersons employed against sports
quota did not get enough time to continue their sports activities. It was also brought to the notice of the
Committee that some sportspersons, after they got employment, started neglecting sports. The repre-
sentatives of various public sector undertakings, banks and para-military forces, however, informed the
Committee that they did take adequate care to see that sportspersons employed by them were given
enough time to go to the ground for their regular practice every day. The Committee does realise the
sportspersons’ concern about not getting adequate time for practice due to pressure of work in
their jobs. In such a situation, the Committee feels, it is the duty, both of the sportspersons and
their employers, to give topmost priority to sports so long as the person is in full form and is in a
position to win medals. In fact, sportspersons should be left completely free to concentrate on sports a
few months before the meet so that his office work doesn’t come in the way of his success in contests.
Moreover, the nature of work given to the sportspersons should be very light so that it allowsthem a lot
of elbow time to practice on the ground, as well as training the younger sports persons from his/her
organisation.

(iii) Special Awards

72. Besides employment, the other form of encouragement given to sportspersons is cash awards for
individual and team achievements. The Commitiec notes that the cash awards are not adequate to give the
much-needed financial support to sportspersons; and that cash awards for juniors and seniors are highly
disproportionate; and that for some sports these are incredibly higher. Even the cash given for Arjuna
awardees is also very low i.e. Rs. 50,000/- per person. Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Award for “most out-
standing and spectacular performance” also carries a prize of Rs. 1 lakh only. Under the newly-launched
Scheme of Sports Fund for Pension to Meritorious Sportspersons, life pension is given to the Olympic

WIN3/4624RS1


18

Medalists @Rs. 2,000/ per month and Gold Medalists in Asian Games @Rs. 1500/ from the age of 30
years.

73. The Committee is of the view that the amounts of cash awards and pensions being pro-
vided to outstanding sportspersons are not commensurate with the kind of honour and prestige
they bring to the country. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the amount of cash awards
and pension being given to sportspersons by the Government should be increased substantially so as to
make sports more attractive.

74, The Committee also found that apart from the Government, cash awards are being given by
various other agencies/organisations also, sometimes duplicating each other’s work. It was also noticed
that since cash awards are being routed through concerned Federations/ Associations, the amount is not
reaching sportspersons in time. The Committee emphasises the need for pro’ ig these incentives di-
rectly to sportspersons, rather than giving them through differcni agencies with a view to avoiding unnec-
essary delay.

75. There has been a demand that sportspersons, who have won medals at the international level,
and the Arjuna and Dronacharya Awardees should be allowed free/ concessional travel by train and by
air. This would be, the Committee feels, a good motivating factor for the youth. The Committee is of the
opinion that such concessions being provided presently by the Railways and the Airlines are on a limited
scale. Eminent sportspersons are supposed to have greater mobility as their services might be required at
any place in the country. The Committee is happy to learn that Government has recently agreed to pro-
vided free A.C, 2nd class railway tickets to the Olympions and Arjuna awardees. The Committee, there-
fore; recommends that the Ministry of Railways and the Airlines operating in the country, both
private-and the Government, should provide free/ concessional tickets to all the eminent
sportspersons.

76. The Committee also recommends that certain categories of sportspersons should be given
preference in the sanction of soft loans by the Banks, allotment of Petrol and L.P. Gas Agencies
and ofher such incentives/benefits by the Government.

77. The Committee also recommends that one of the outstanding sportspersons may be nomi-
nated to the Rajya Sabha in recognition of his distinguished service to the country.

(iv) Lack of Medical Facilities

78. It has been bitterly complained by sportspersons interviewed by the Committee that. medical
facilities available to sportsmen playing in international tournaments abroad are not adequate. Doctors
accompanying the team neither have the full medical kit nor medicines to take care of any emergent
situation. There are no masseurs or physiotherapist in the medical squad. The committee also learnt that
during international tournaments, sports medicine doctors are not permitted to accompany the teams, As
a result, players are left unattended in case of an injury on the field. A few cases of such nature were
brought to the notice of the Committee. Moreover, there is no medical insurance cover for the teams or
the individual players. The Committee suggests that the government should ensure that no player or
team is sent abroad for participation in international tournaments unless they are accompanied by
a team of qualified sports medicine doctors alongwith the necessary kits and other aids.

During the course of its visits to various places, the Committee was given to understand that some of
the players who got injuries during practice or while playing, were dropped from the teams. This was
particularly because of the non-availability of proper medical aid immediately after the injury, prevent-
ing the sportspersons from participating in the tournaments. The Committee feels that the availability of
Sports medicine doctors and other para-medical staff should be ensured so that our sportspersons get
prompt medical aid. Complaints have also been received that sportsmen who become sick or get injured
on or off the field are left to fend for themselves with no reimbursement of their medical bills.

There is also a need to open ‘fitness centres’, and provide multi-gyms close to playfields to enable
sportspersons to build their strength. A number of fitness centres and multi-gyms have recently come up

N3/4624RS1


19

in big cities, specially in five-star hotels. These hotels, whether Government or private, should provide
facilities free or at concessinal rates to national-level sportspersons to make use of these fitness centres.
(v) Air Passage

79. The Committee was informed that, in some cases, the Government is paying only 90% of
the fare and the remaining 10% is to be borne by the player himself or herself. The logic behind this
part payment is not clear. Moreover, international air passage fares are so costly that it would not be
possible for any of our players to bear even the 10% of the expenditure from their own pockets. The
Government representative informed the Committee that it is very unfortunate if such a thing has hap-
pened with any player. The Government would certainly look into this issue. The Government is, how-
ever, not giving any grants for the boarding and lodging of players. The Federations/Associations are
supposed to bear the boarding and lodging cost of the players. In some cases, it was pointed out to the
Committee, many associations do not make payment of the boarding and lodging expenditure although
there is no dearth of money with them.

80. The Committee feels that this is an important issue on which the Government should issue
proper guidelines to the Federations/Associations and players cannot be left in the lurch, particularly
when they are away from their homeland. The Government should, the Committee reiterates, inves-
tigate as to why part payment of air fare is being made to players attending international meets
and ensure that such a thing is not repeated in future. It was also reported to the Committee that
Government of India generally gives air-fare for parti on in Olympic, Asian Games and Common-
wealth Games whereas federations send teams for participation in various world championships as well
as Asian championships. If it is considered imperative to participate in various Asian and world champi-
onships, for the sake of getting competition exposure, as part of long-term development programme, then
it should be obligatory on the Goverment of India and for the federations to provide air-fare, as well as
board-lodging expenses, to sportspersons, coaches and managers. They should not be left to fend for
themselves whenever they have to go for participating in any tournament outside the country.

(vi) Training for Sportspersons

81. The Committee was given to understand, during its interaction with sportspersons, that another
important reason for the debacle of India’s performance in sports is the lack of proper and timely training
to our sportspersons. The Committee was further informed that in countries like China and Japan, the
teams are trained all through the year. In Germany, sportspersons are scientifically selected between 6 to
8 years of age. First few years they are provided general training, to develop their athleticism and there-
after, they are assessed to find out in which particular discipline they are likely to excel and are then
provided specific training for a period of 8 to 10 years before they start representing their country in
Various. international tournaments. Sportspersons in India are given training barely a couple of months
before the actual commencement of the competition. The Committee is of the opinion that training
forms the core of good performance and champions cannot be produced by training the sportspersons
just for few months before the games. The training system in the country, the Committee feels,
leaves much to be desired. Sports training is a systematic process extending over a long period of time.
For better results, the system of training has to be based and conducted on scientific lines. Therefore,
sports training has to be properly planned and controlled for achieving the best results.

(vii) Supply of Equipment

82. Many sportspersons interviewed by the Committee have bitterly complained that they are not
provided with the kits well in advance. Many of them are not in a position to purchase the kits at their own
cost as they are quite costly. Besides, there is an apprehension of getting sub-standard quality of kit if
purchased by the player on his own which may have adverse effect on the quality of his performance.
Some sportspersons complained of getting different sized shoes in Korea, creating avoidable tensions
and problems in the last minute. The Committee feels that kits should be provided to players and
teams well in advance before they leave for international meets. Non-supply of kits in time hampers
their practice, causes confusion and tension in the players’ minds and also affects their performances in
the game. The Committee, during the course of its visits to SAI hostels, received complaints about non-
supply/late supply of kits to sportspersons undergoing training in these hostels/SPDAs. SAI should en-
sure timely supply of sports-kits to the trainees.


WIN3/4624RS1 20

(viii) Nutritious Diet

83. Availability of nutritious diet and food is one of the basic requirements of any sportsperson to
excel in sports. Efforts should be made to ensure that the diet available to sportsmen and women
has the nutritional value necessary to meet the specific requirements of different games and sports
in which they participate. The sportsmen and women, in the absence of proper and nutritious dict,
cannot show outstanding results irrespective of the amount of training/coaching we may provide to them
At present lack of proper and nutritious diet for our sportspersons is perhaps the onc basic factor for our
sportsmen not having the necessary stamina to win medals in international sports. The parents, by and
large, cannot afford such a costly and rich diet for their children.

84. The Sports Authority of India was earlier paying a meagre amount of Rs. 25 to 30 for diet to their
trainees in various schemes, The Committee was informed that this amount was recently raised to Rs. 35
for N.S,.T.C, and Army Boys Companies and Rs, 40 to sports hostel schemes, which itself is not adequate
keeping in view the prevailing cost of foodstuff. The national campers are provided an amount of Rs, 80
for diet for most of the disciplines and Rs, 90 per day for power disciplines like boxing, wrestling and
Judo, The Committee was informed that SAI has taken the advice of the National Institute of Nutrition,
Hyderabad, to raise the limit of diet allowance for the national campers but the same could not be done
due to paucity of funds. The Committee, during the course of its interaction with the young players in
hostels, playgrounds and at other places, have received numerous complaints about lack of proper dict
for them, The Committee is, therefore, of the firm opinion that the Government should immedi-
ately raise this amount substantially so that players can get a rich and nutritious diet. There should
be a system of raising the amount of diet allowance in tune with the rise in prices from time to time.

85. Ithas also been observed by the Committee that our players, who suffer throughout the year due
to lack of proper and adequate diet, are given extraordinarily rich diet before a major competition. Since
these players are not used to this kind of heavy and rich dict, many of them are not able to even properly
digest this high dose of diet which, instead of proving beneficial to their performances, counter
productive. So we should have a mechanism by which we can provide a rich and nutritious dict to our
sportspersons right from the beginning so that it helps them build their vigour, vitality and physique to
excel in the sports. The Committee, therefore, feels that Government should have a system of evaluating
the nature and quality of diet required to be given to our sportspersons. While quantity of dict is impor-
tant, we cannot afford to compromise with its quality also,

(e) COACHES AND MANAGERS
(i) Coaches

86. The Committee has been told that there are about 15,000 NIS-trained coaches in the country.
Out of them only 1800 have been employed by the SAI and nearly 3000 are working with States and other
organisations such as Railways, Defence Services, para-military forces and in schools and colleges. It is
not known whether the rest of them are working or sitting idle. There is a big demand from State Govern-
ments and other bodies under public and private sectors for SAT-trained coaches. The Committee fails to
understand why this demand is not being met, particularly when SAI has such a large contingent of
trained coaches. Even where the coaches have been provided, the Committee noticed there is no uniform
distribution. At many places, the coaches were found without any work to do. It was also noticed that
there is no effective monitoring or control over their work. They are, in fact, not held accountable for
showing poor results or no results. There does not appear to be any reward system for the one who does
a good job. The Committee, therefore, feels that the placement of coaches should be need-based.
The Government should evolve a system of proper monitoring and evaluation of the performance
of these coaches. The coaches who work hard and show good results should be suitably rewarded.
Simultaneously, those who do not take interest in sports or fail to give any tangible results need to
be dealt with sternly: Unless the Government monitors their performance closely, the Committee is of
the view, it will not be possible to introduce an effective system of rewards and reprimands for the
coaches.

87. The Government representative informed that SAI also lends coaches to the State Governments
for being deployed at the State and district levels. The disciplines are supposed to be identified by the



21

State Governments. The Directors of Sports of the concerned State Governments deploy these coaches
depending upon the requirements in a particular discipline. These coaches are working under the control
of the Regional Directors, SAI, who are supposed to monitor and evaluate their performances. There is a
system of monitoring the performance of these coaches for which a chart is maintained. The Government
Representative informed that the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports of the Ministry of Human
Resource Development had recently taken a decision according to which if a particular coach is deployed
ina place where the work-load is not sufficient or he doesn’t take interest in the game, then the Regional
Director can transfer him to a place where his services could be more optimally and gainfully utilised. In
many cases, it has been observed that these coaches, immediately on their transfer to such places, start
asking for their transfers to their home towns. They bring political pressure on the authorities. A lot of
time and efforts are, thus, wasted in sorting out problems of placement of these coaches. As against this,
there are many coaches who are really doing a good job. Many school principals are reported to have
informed the Government about the good efforts put in by SAI coaches in showing excellent results. The
Committee, however, feels that once a good rapport is established between the coach and the stu-
dents, it will not be advisable to disturb such coaches in the overall interest of the students and the
sports,

88. The Committee was informed that with a view to dealing with the problem of deployment and
taking optimal results from the coaches, the Government was thinking to take coaches on contract in
future though the idea did not find favour with the existing coaches. In case their services are found to be
fruitful, the contract could be renewed after its expiry. It was also contended that it would, to some extent,
solve the problem of placement and other issues related to the coaches. When asked if the SAI would be
able to find really deserving and outstanding coaches for shorter durations on contract basis, it was
argued that India is a large country having many outstanding sportspersons who have represented
the country in the international games. They have now retired from active sports but they can
work as good coaches, The Committee feels that services of such sportspersons would be both
beneficial and economical and it would also give them the much needed financial help and recogni-
tion of their talent. The Committee desires that this system could be initially tried on an experi-
mental basis which could be subsequently extended or discontinued depending upon its perform-
ance, :

89, The Committee was told that the posting of the SAT coaches in various States served little purpose
as their achievements and performance were in no way better than those employed by the States. It was
alleged that the SAI coaches were not at all accountable to the State Governments, The Committee re-
ceived a suggestion that the job of coaching should be left entirely to the States and savings thus accrued
on account of the salaries etc. of the SAI coaches should be given to the States as grants for the develop-
ment of infrastructure/purchase of sports equipments, etc. The Committee also feels that in the existing
set-up it is very difficult to monitor the activities of the SAI coaches and fix responsibility for their
performance as there is hardly any monitoring of these coaches even by the SAI. Many of the coaches are
dissatisfied due to the postings in distant places and the inadequate facilities provided to them in regard to
housing and other matters. They are always on the look out for their transfer to the station of their choice.
This adversely reflects on the performance of the players. Therefore, the Committee suggests that
either the entire control of the SAI coaches should be given to the State Governments who have
comparatively better mechanism for their close monitoring or they may be completely withdrawn
so that their half-hearted presence does not hamper the progress of the players. The State Govern-
ments should be given full authority for all the service matters of SAI coaches, including their
posting and transfer.

90. One of the problems raised by the coaches deployed in the schools was that they did not
have accommodation either in the school premises or anywhere near the school. Since these coaches
are required to be present in the ground alongwith players, both early in the morning and evening, they
are not, quite often, able to reach the ground in time. The Committee feels that it is a genuine problem
which needs to be looked into sympathetically and Government should try to give residential accommo-
dation to these coaches, either in the school premises or just near to their working place so that they could
reach the ground early in the morning. This would certainly benefit the students and also solve the genu-
ine grievances of the coaches.



91. The Committee is happy to note that SAI is designing some short and long duration refresher
courses for the in-service coaches. At present, the coach enters into service with a particular qualification
and retires with the same. The Committee emphasises the need for continuous skill development and
orientation in view of the rapid changes in the techniques of various games. The Committee desires
that the SAI should identify certain specialised training institutes in various sports disciplines,
both within the country and abroad, so that coaches could be deputed for refresher training courses
from time to time to upgrade their skills. The Committee recommends that foreign coaches should
be employed to train Indian coaches and our junior teams. The Committee came to know that, at
present, there was no policy with regard to training of the coaches and that only a handful of
coaches were repeatedly being sent for foreign exposure. The Committee expresses its unhappiness
over such a state of affairs and recommends that a uniform policy be evolved for training the
coaches without any discrimination.

92. One of the issues raised by many sportspersons was that of frequent changes of coaches. The
Committee was told that this not only distracted concentration of the players but also hampered their
practice and wholehearted attention to the game. It was argued that the new coach starts from the begin-
ning and has his own techniques and methods of coaching. Since such a practice creates confusion in the
minds of the players, it should, therefore, be avoided as far as possible. It has also been complained that
while most of the coaching/grooming is done by our own coaches, the foreign coaches are generally
called at the last minute, sometimes only a few weeks before the actual event. In such an event, if the
players/teamis do well, the credit goes to the foreign coach and not to the Indian coach who has donc the,
entire ground work. The Committee also shares the concern of Indian coaches and believes that if the
efforts and labour put in initially by the national coaches go unnoticed, it gives rise to a sense of frustra-
tion amongst them. The Committee strongly recommeds that the practice of making frequent changes
of coaches be avoided and whenever any team or player performs well, the credit should also be
given to the coaches who are basically responsible for their training.

93. Some of the leading sportspersons mentioned that they needed a personal coach who would act
as a friend, philosopher and guide to them, specially during the last few years before participation in
major international tournaments, such as, Asian Games and Olympic Games. This practice is followed in
most of the countries to enable outstanding sportspersons to prepare themselves under the watchful cycs
of a coach in whom they have total confidence and can also confide in them. The Committee feels that
Government should make arrangements to provide personal coaches to those sportspersons who
1996 adequate potential and hope of winning medals at international level. These personal coaches
should also accompany the sportspersons whenever they go abroad to participate in international
tournaments.

4, During its deliberations, the Committee was informed by the Kerala State Sports Council that
there were coaches of various disciplines in service who joined the Council after serving in various
Government Departments/Undertakings. Therefore, the average age of entry of these coaches in service
is between 25—35 years. The superannuation age for retirement from service is 55 years. As against this,
the coaches of Sports Authority of India, the Committee was informed, retire from service at the age of 60.
years. Also, the superannuation age of coaches in the universities is 60, and in many other States it is 58
years. The Committee found that there is no uniformity in the service conditions of coaches, including
their pay structure, retirement age, etc. As a result of this anomaly, coaches, especially in some States, are
put in a disadvantageous position. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is a need for uniform na-
tional policy for coaches by different agencies, like Sports Councils of the States, SAI, Universities,
various Sports Control Boards, etc. The Committee also feels that there is a need for a central agency to
supervise and direct coaching programmes uniformly all over the country. The service conditions, includ-
ing the qualifications, pay structure and retirement age and other service benefits, should also be uniform
in all respects throughout the country.

(ii) Managers

Managing a team in any international tournament is a very qualified job and can be done only by

those persons who have full knowledge of the game, as well as management abilities. It is, therefore,



23

imperative that sports federations and Government should give serious consideration to selecting compe-
tent ex-sportspersons and give them training in ‘Sports Management’ and appoint them as Managers of
teams representing India in various international competititons. These managers should be asked to live,
at 1९881 for a few months, with the teams they are leading. It is essential that the manager should not only
know the rules and regulations of the game, but he must also intimately know the sportspersons, their
strength and weaknesses, and should be able to knit them as a happy and harmonious team. Managers
should also undertake all administrative duties such as getting the visas, obtaining clearances from Gov-
ernment departments and making proper arrangements for players, etc. Most of the federations have not
accepted the Managers offered by SAI and preferred to send their own men. When asked, the federation/
association representatives said that their office-bearers took turns to go as managers of teams, as it
would offer them an opportunity to witness the games.

(f) UPGRADING THE STANDARD OF REFEREES, JUDGES & TECHNICAL OFFICIALS

95. Alongwith the improved standard required of our coaches, the Committee feels, a comprehen-
sive plan to upgrade the skills and qualifications of technical officials, referees and judges in iden-
tified disciplines also needs to be taken up as quickly as possible. Such a step would ensure that
competitions are arranged in accordance with the prevailing international rules and regulations, which
itself would help familiarise our athletes and sportspersons with the nature of competition at the interna-
tional. level. Such a move would also provide increased job opportunities to qualified personnel to per-
form duties in international events. This is necessary because this area has so far been completely ne-
glgcted and there have been instances in the past when our athletes and sportspersons have been put a at
disadvantageous situation due to their unfamiliarity with the prevailing rules and regulations. The Com-
mittee, therefore, feels that a detailed plan of action on this issue be prepared and implemented, in consul-
tation with the various Federations/Associations.

(g) ROLE OF FEDERATIONS/ASSOCIATIONS

96. During the course of its visits and deliberations the Committee received a common complaint
against the functioning of different federations/associations in the country. These federations are al-
leged to be the weakest link in the chain and their functioning has been described-as perfunctory.
The selection of teams and players by them is also stated to be lopsided, based on favouritism,
nepotism and arbitrariness. There is no democratic functioning in all in most of them. It is also
stated that huge amounts of money are spent on the election of office-bearers. Many federations/
associations are being headed by people who have nothing to do with sports. The working of the
Federations has been criticised everywhere as they are neither amendable to any rules or regulations nor
are they accountable for acts of omission and commission. These federations/associations receive grants
from the Government. Although they are dependent on the Government for grants, giving clearances to
the teams, and a hundred other things, they do not want supervision and control on their functioning of
any kind either by SAI or by the Government. They do not accept the Managers offered by the Sports
Authority of India. Even the SAI representative are not effective in the selection committees. Selections
are rigged and the Government/SAI representatives are merely asked to sign the proceedings afterwards.
As a result, the role of the Government or the SAI in the selection of teams has become completely
negligible. Even selections by the federations/associations for international events are finalised in the last
minute creating utter confusion in the minds of the sportspersons as to whether they would be included in
the final team or not.

97. The Government is believed to have now prepared a new set of guidelines to regulate the func-
tioning of these federations/associations with a view to making them transparent. The Government repre-
sentative informed the Committee during his oral evidence that the Human Resource Development Min-
ister had convened a meeting of all the federations and appealed to them that it would be a good gesture
if, after a couple of terms, the presidents of the federations step down voluntarily but this suggestion was
stoutly opposed by most of the federations on the plea that unless they were continued, the voice of India
would not be heard in the international fora.

98. Federations must hold their elections regularly and democratically. Instances have come to
the notice of the Committee where some of the office bearers are holding their posts for decades together.
In other cases, office bearers of sports federations have been playing musical chairs by rotating the posts


24

among themselves. The first and the most important task before each national federation is, there-
fore, to mobilise its energies and efforts for obtaining sponsorship and financial support from
various sources. This can be best achieved effectively by popularising the game to the public and using
the income from the sale of seats, advertisement rights, TV rights, etc. to finance its activitics, and to
invest in long-term projects for the development of that particular sporting discipline. They need to learn
marketing of their discipline professionally and also motivate their state associations to do the same.

99. The other major area where national federations have to assume a greater degree of responsibil-
ity is in organising competitions on a regular and sustained basis, especially at district and statc levels, so
that our athletes and sportspersons are given the maximum possible competitive exposure within India.
Indeed, the Committee has observed that sports federations in India do not organise enough local compe-
titions for our players to test their skills. Hence, when the same players are tested at international leve’
they are frequently found wanting. It is therefore, essential that the national federations organise
competitions, tournaments and championships on a regular basis throughout the sporting season.
This can be achieved by monitoring, guiding and motivating their state/districts units. While some
degree of government assistance is possible for these competitions, particularly in priority sports, na-
tional federations must realise that this is no solution to their problem and would not help the game to
grow if they remain dependent on the government. They must, therefore, organise their finances through
an efficient and effective system of sponsorship, etc. which will, no doubt, be attracted if they promote
the game through frequent competitions. Wasteful expenditure on ceremonials like opening and closing
functions and frequent visits by officials abroad should be cut down.

100, The national federations are also responsible for enforcing the rules of the game and for
ensuring that officials who conduct games, tournaments and competitions are fully competent and
fit for the purpose. The national federations should ensure that the international rules approved by
the international federation to which they are affiliated, are followed in recognised national cham-
pionships. This simple requirement is frequently forgotten by the national federations and this too leads
to major problems when sportspersons proceed abroad for competition.

101. While every endeavour should be made to ensure that sportspersons and athletes at a younger
age are retained in the school and university system, through which they can be effectively covered by the
various promotional schemes of the Government of India and the state governments, there would never-
theless be a large number of highly competent athletes and sportspersons who are outside the school and
university system for whom the national federations must play a major role. Full responsibility for the
identification of these sportspersons and for their training, nurturing and preparation for competitive
exposure must be assumed by the national federations. They would also be responsible for providing
opportunities for competitions at local tournaments and state and national championships for these
sportspersons. To help ensure that India’s interests are protected at the international level, it is essential
for national federations to be adequately represented on the governing bodies of the various international
federations and also of the International Olympic Committee (IOC). This would mean government sup-
port for federation candidates contesting elections to the executive bodies of international federations. In
identified disciplines this support should be provided to the extent required to ensure adequate represen-
tation. In return, the federations are expected to ensure that the rules of the game are not altered to India’s
disadvantage. Moreover, Indian representation at the official and technical level in international compe-
titions should also be ensured.

102. While it would take some time for federations to become financially independent, and to
organise their work and responsibilities along structured and well regulated lines, assistance from
the Government of India for various purposes may have to continue. Government, at present, is
giving assistance only for organising national and international events but not for sustained development
of sports. This assistance may be in the form of direct financial support or assistance for infrastructure,
equipment, etc. However, government may impose certain conditions with regard to such matters
as democratic functioning, appointment of selection committees, dope testing, age verification pro-
cedure etc., as are considered necessary to protect our sportspersons from exploitation, and also to
ensure against adverse publicity in India and abroad.


25

103. An important area of resource mobilisation in which the Government can help the federa-
tions greatly is by way of transferring the remaining sum of the advertising revenues of Doordarshan
earned from showing sports programmes to the concerned federations after deducting its costs.
This is the principal source of funding of the federations abroad. More than 70 to 80 per cent of the
resources of a federation in a foreign country come from this source alone. For those disciplines which do
not have a high viewership for which advertising revenues may, in fact, be less than transmission costs, a
separate solution is to be found to their problems. It is suggested that brief capsules showing highlights
from these championships can be included along with highlights of other high profile sports events and
combine into a single programme. This would perhaps provide adequate revenue from advertising for
these federations as well.

(h) LACK OF COORDINATION & ACCOUNTABILITY

104, The Committee finds that another factor responsible for the poor show in sports is the lack of
coordination among various agencies like the Union Government, the Sports Authority of India, Federa-
tions, State Governments and the I.0.A. The Committee also feels that I.0.A. is not in a position to
maintain any effective control and effect any coordination with national sports federations / asso-
ciations. The I.0.A. should reiterate to each federation the importance of making long term devel-
opment planning and also ensuring its implementation. The Committee also recommends that each
federation should make its long-term development planning scientifically and ensure its effective imple-
mentation.

105. Besides the lack of coordination between various agencies engaged in promotion of sports,
the Committee noted that there is no accountability and responsibility for poor performance in
sports in international events. In fact, these bodies blame each other for the poor performance. Al-
though SAI is the apex body controlling sports in the country, it washes its hands off for the dismal
performance of our teams at the international play-fields and so do the national federations. The Com-
mittee emphasises the need for clearly demarcating the duties and responsibilities of each one of
the agencies so that accountablity could be fixed for their lapses.

(i) LAST MINUTE SELECTION OF TEAMS

106. There has been a series of complaints about the late selection of teams. There is tension in the
minds of sportspersons till the last minute as they are not very sure about their final inclusion in the team.
This results in utter confusion and players are not able to concentrate on their sporting activities. Rather
they are busy running around the embassies for getting visas and clearances. It is often seen that teams
are selected virtually almost on the last day and at times had reported after the events had already
started. The Committee was shocked to learn that in the year 1994 the Indian women weightlifting team
arrived at Melbourne a day after the tournament was over because of a delay in getting the visa for the
World Championship; as a result Kunjurani had to participate in a weight category higher than her own
body weight due to which she missed the medal. Ironically, the then gold medal winner in the World
Championship lifted just 152.5 Ibs, while Kunjurani was consistently doing 160 Ibs at that time. The
Committee feels that this state of affairs is highly deplorable and has to be stopped forthwith if we
really intend to achieve medals in the international sports arena.

107. The Committee feels that there is a need for a long-term planning and selection of teams
has to be made much in advance so that players are aware of their selection and they could concen-
trate more on sports rather than running around till the last moment for various clearances. The
Committee also desires that once the teams are selected, they should be given intensive training and
sent sufficiently in advance to the place where the event takes place, for proper exposure and
acclimatisation to the foreign environment. National sports federations should appoint managers in
time who should be responsible for ensuring timely release of foreign exchange and obtaining visas.

WIN3/4624RS1


26

(j) CALENDAR OF EVENTS

108. There are a number of agencies like the School Games Federation of India (SGFI), the State
Governments, the Indian Olympic Association, Sports Federations, Public and Private Sector Organisa-
tions etc. which individually organise various tournaments from time to time. None of these organisa-
tions, the Committee notes, has a calendar of sports events or plan for organising tournaments. Many of
the witnesses, dun ig the course of their evidence before the Committee, complained about the non-
availability of an annual Calendar of Sports Events with any of these organisations. The need of the hour
is to have a proper and systematic planning by these organisations.

109. The Committee, therefore, suggests that each one of these organisations should have an
annual calendar of events giving the details of events, their venues and the dates for the entire year.
The Committee also suggests that there should be only one National Calendar of Events of various
disciplines which should be finalised after consulting different agencies involved in its promotion,
This calendar of events should be sent to the Sports Authority of India (SAI) by the concerned
sports federations. The Committee is constrained to say that the Sports Authority of India (SAI), which
is an apex body for promoting and propagating sports in the country, has not so far thought of preparing
such a calendar of events ever since its inception in the year 1984.

(k) NON-AVAILABILITY OF QUALITY SPORTS GOODS

110. During its deliberations, the Committee was particularly told by sportspersons that in India,
sports goods, in many cases, were not of international standard and that wherever they were, such goods
were highly expensive. As a result, some equipments had to be imported at high cost involving a drain on
our foreign exchange reserves.

111, The Committee met the representatives of the sports goods manufacturers and exporters and
enquired from them about the problems they are facing in producing good quality and reasonably priced
sports goods in our country. They contended that it was not true to say that India was not producing
international quality sports goods. They informed the Committee that they were facing problems in im-
porting certain raw-materials for manufacturing sports goods in the country. They informed the Commit-
tee that the sprots-goods industry was a major supplier to all the big brands in the world like Adidas,
Ambro, Slack, Mitto, etc. The Committee was informed that football for the Rugby Championship was
entirely produced in India. India is also producing international quality tennis balls. That the industry is
able to produce quality goods is evident from the fact that the equipments of one Meerut-based company
have been approved for the Atlanta Olympics. The sports industry has requested for exemption from
import duty on raw-materials needed by it, so that import of finished equipments for various sports like
archery, golf, tennis and badminton rackets, etc. would be considerably reduced. The Committee also
emphasises the need for continuous research and development on sports goods for improving the quality
of our products. =

112. The Committee is happy to know that the sports goods industry has come a long way in
producing good quality equipments which are in great demand and that some of these have been
approved even for Olympic games. The Committee, however, feels that such quality production is
confined to a few games like tennis and cricket which are very costly. India still does not produce
good quality and reasonably priced sports items of common use. The Committee is of the opinion
that making sports equipment easily available, upto the grassroot level, at economical cost, is abso-
lutely necessary which would contribute not only to broad-basing the participation but also creat-
ing a mass sports movement in the country.

113. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs should have
a meeting with the representatives of sports goods industry to identify their problems which should
be sorted out in consultation with the Ministry of Commerce, Finance and Industry.

114, The Committee also feels that small and cottage industries involved in production of sports
goods should be encouraged so that they can sell their products to local buyers at reasonable prices.

WIN3/4624RS2


27

(I) ROLE OF MEDIA

115. During its visits to various places, the Committee received a number of complaints from
the palyers and the organisers of various sports events that sports, except a few like cricket, tennis,
and golf, are not given adequate coverage by the Government-owned electronic media, particu-
larly Doordarshan. It may indeed be true that the development of sports has been lopsided, with some
games getting more prominence than the others. Such a step-motherly treatment to other games is com-
ing in the way of promotion and uniform development of all the games. To the contrary, such an attitude
by the media is proving counter-productive to the promotion of games, other than cricket, tennis etc.

116. When asked, the Director-General, Doordarshan, admitted the fact that some sports had been
getting undue coverage but this situation was in the process of change now. Doordarshan, at present, is
trying to cover all the important sports events held in the State capitals because earth stations are fixed
there. He, however, expressed his inability to do so in the areas and places where necessary equipment
and uplinking facilities are not available. Doordarshan does not have enought outdoor broadcasting vans
and earth stations for uplinking. Presently, the Doordarshan has only a few mobile earth stations which
can be transported to far off places which takes a lot of time and poses many problems. It is, therefore, not
possible to provide coverage on a very large scale. As a matter of policy and in view of the practical
difficulties confronted, Doordarshan has not covered minor sports events. It is, however, recording the
events and televising them.

117. As regards the need to have a separate channel for sports, the Director-General, Doordarshan,
informed that in 1993, such a channel was started which had to be discontinued after nearly one year due
to lack of enough sports software to keep it going. Secondly, everyone preferred 0101 10 sports channel
because of its larger outreach. The Director-General, Doordarshan, informed the Committee that he did
not find it worthwhile and cost effective to have a separate channel for sports. A request from the Minis-
try of Sports has again been received for opening a separate sports channel on Doordarshan, different
aspects of which are under consideration. Besides, Doordarshan is also in correspondence for the forma-
tion of an Asian TV Sports Channel to cater to the increasing demand for sports coverage at international
level in collaboration with TV New Zealand, Radio & Television Malaysia, etc.

118. Asked about coverage of rural and indigenous sports on Doordarshan, the Committee was in-
formed that Doordarshan was ready to cover every rural or tribal sport if it was organised in such a way
as it would be technically feasible to telecast. Similarly, the Director-General, AIR also told the Commit-
tee that the AIR had neither the adequate manpower nor the equipments to cover more programmes than
what it was doing today. It, however, has more widely distributed AIR stations throughout the country, as
compared to Doordarshan, and is providing enough coverage for various sports at the regional level and
the stations are, in fact, working beyond their capacity.

119. The Committee is of the opinion that media, particularly Doordarshan, is a potent and
powerful instrument for popularising sports. The Committee, keeping the condition of sports in
the country in view, feels that endeavour should be made to cover live, as far as possible, or through
highlights, all the national championships at senior and junior levels. The Committee feels that
there is a need to increase the equipments and other facilities available with Doordarshan and AIR
so that they do not feel handicapped in covering important and major sports events. The Commit-
tee also cmphasises the need for improving the quality of live coverage and commentaries.
Doordarshan and AIR may also play an effective role in projecting the techniques and style of
eminent sportspersons by showing them in slow motion on the national hook-up. There is also a
need for calling eminent sportspersons in programmes on fitness, yoga, sports and games.

120. The Committee is concerned to learn that some of the federations/boards are giving the
telecasting/broadcasting rights to foreign media companies, which is depriving Doordarshan of an
opportunity to earn revenues for its expansion and improvement. The Committee notes that
Doordarshan is not able to'cover all important events and open separate sports channel primarily due to
lack of resources, though it is willing to do that. The Committee notes the suggestion of Director


28

General, Doordarshan, to have a legislation declaring some sports as of national importance so
that national media would be bound to cover the important events connected with them, as is being
done in Britain. This legislation should also impose some restriction on federations giving TV/broad-
casting rights to foreign companies. In return, Doordarshan should pay part of the revenue earned to the
federations. This aspect may be covered in the proposed legislation on sports. Thus, the Committee feels,
Doordarshan and AIR can largely and very meaningfully contribute for the promotion and development
of sports as also fo. developing sports culture and awareness in the country.

(m) SPORTS LITERATURE IN INDIAN LANGUAGES

121. Most of the sports literature specially on sports sciences as well as on methodology of skill
training is either available in English or in foreign languages like German and Russian as a result,
sportspersons and administrators find it difficult to keep pace with the latest developments in the world of
sports. The Committee therefore emphasises the need for get these translated into various Indian lan-
guages and also to encourage Indian authors and sports scientists to write on various aspects of sports.

(n) IMPROVEMENT OF SPORTS SCIENCE

122. In India, the scientific back-up to the development of sports is in such a rudimentary stage that
it is virtually non-existent. It is mainly confined to taking blood samples. Sports psychology and sports
sciences, as well as sports medicine, are indispensable for the promotion of sports. A good psychologist
working with a medical expert can, in fact, influence, to a large extent, the outcome of the game, as well
as the performance of sportspersons. The Committee is aware that in the context of stiff competition
today, the games are won or lost just by a fraction of seconds. There is a very narrow gap between the
winner and loser. Role of psychologists and sports medical experts can do wonders in such a situation.
The Committee noticed that neither the sports psychology nor the sports medicine was being given
any priority in India. The Committee feels that all the organisations working towards promotion of
sports must give due attention and priority to both these disciplines. The Committee recommends
that the services of good sports physiologists, psychologists and sports medical experts be made
available to our players in the ground.

123. The Committee was also informed that there was a mental block between the sports scientists
and the coaches. The scientists operated from air-conditioned rooms expecting the players and the coaches
to come to them for necessary consultations. The Committee feels that it is not a happy situation and
desires that all of them—be it a doctor or phsychologist or a coach—should be present in the field for the
common benefit of the players and the team. The scientists should also keep themselves abreast with the
latest technologies/ information available in this area. There is a need for a more coordinated effort on
the part of coaches, sports scientists and sports medicine doctors to help sportspersons enhance
their performance. Though SAI has made a beginning in this direction, yet a lot more needs to be
done.

(०) SPORTS AT GRASS-ROOT LEVEL—ROLE OF PANCHAYATS; RURAL AND TRIBAL
SPORTS

124. Most of our efforts to develop sports, the Committee noticed, have so far been confined to
urban areas only, and the rural areas have, in the process, been neglected. We have not been able to utilise,
effectively whatever little and rudimentary infrastructure we have in the rural areas. Nor have we been
able to ensure mass participation by rural youth in sports. In view of the fact that there exists enough
potential of sportspersons in rural areas, the Committee desires that a concerted approach be
adopted for popularising and propagating sports in the rural areas. In view of the decentralisation
of resources to panchayats, Government should ensure that there is a sports complex in each
panchayat. Panchayats should also hold sports competitions and championships periodically. There
is also need for scouting talent at an early age and select them on scientific basis because it is all the
more easier to train the young ones. Panchayat bodies should take up this responsibility.


29

125. Talented children, the Committee feels, niay be selected from the grassroot level i.e. from
different primary schools for training for a period of four years. From amongst them 100 most talented
boys and girls may be short-listed from each district for further training for a period of about two years at
the district centres and at various SAI training centres. From these trainees, 100 most talented candidates
may be selected from each state for highly advanced state level training for a further period of 4 years, in
the area of their specialization. While training and coaching these candidates in the most popular disci-
plines, emphasis should be given on developing various human faculties, such as motor ability, endur-
ance, agility, etc. Working groups may be constituted at each training centre for research and analysis,
evaluation, sports-medicine, sports psychology, administration, etc. Compurterised data processing units
may also be established for processing and analysing the data collected at the training centres. Thus,
planned training programme should be drawn up keeping in mind the interests and capacity of the partici-
pants. The boys and girls undergoing such rigorous training should be exposed to various competitions at
the state level and services of the best coaches may be provided to them so as to achieve excellence in
their respective disciplines.

126. The Committee finds it disappointing that most of the state governments have not made
any concrete plans to streamline the procedure for selection of sportspersons, their coaching and
participation in the national events so far. Improper selection of sportspersons, coupled with lack
of modern and rigorous training, result in disastrous performance at the international level. The
Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for streamlining the entire system of selection of
sportspersons and their training so as to achieve the best results. State governments should be
asked to make long-term development programmes and also match them with adequate budget.

(p) WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION

127. From. Ms. Kamaljit Sandhu, the first woman gold medalist in the 400 metres race in the first
Asian Games held in New Delhi in the year 1951, to Geeta Zutshi, Angel Mary, P.T. Usha, Shiny Wilson,
now K. Malleshwari and N. Kunjurani: women’s participation in sports in India has come a long way. In
fact, out of five golds won by India in the Seoul Asian Games in 1986, P.T. Usha alone accounted for
three individual titles in the 200, 400 and 800 metre hurdles, besides gaining another gold in the 1600
metres relay. Very recently, K. Malleshwari and N. Kunjurani have proved their ability clinching the gold
in the women’s weightlifting championship. This proves that the Indian women have potential even to
take up power disciplines, leave alone the indoor and other games of national and international level.

128. There is still, however, a vast scope for women’s participation in sports. There is no dearth of
talent or potential amongst our women, both in the urban and rural areas. The only thing that is lacking is
mass awareness and participation, also lack of infrastructural facilities, particularly in the rural areas.
Since our rural society is still dominated by the menfolk there is a general tendency to discourage women
from coming foward for various professional and career opportunities, including sports. There is a need
to give very liberal incentives, in the form of awards, job opportunities and other benefits, to women
opting for sports as a career. The Committee finds that so far neither the Department of Youth
Affairs and Sports nor the federations have taken any particular interest for the development of
sports among Indian women and whatever distinction the women have achieved so far for the
country is largely due to their individual efforts.

129. The Committee was given to understand that the Sports Authority of India has been imple-
menting a scheme of National Sports Festival for Women in which regular tournaments are organised
annually from block level onwards. These tournaments, exclusively for women, are launched to draw out
more and more women into sports activities at all levels. The schemes may serve the cause of the women
sportspersons partially, but there is not much enthusiastic participation, perhaps for want of adequate
publicity and incentives. Unless the scheme is given wider publicity through radio, Doordarshan and
print media, it cannot really achieve the objectives of broad-basing the sports and encouraging mass
participation by women. The Committee feels there is a need to give good incentives in the form of
cash awards and medals so as to attract mass participation by women. Many parents would like to


30

send their daughters to play games but they are hesistant to do so because of security and safety
reasons. The Committee noticed that out of 18 sports hostels of SAI, there is only one sports hostel
for women and there is no exclusive SPDA hostel for girls. Therefore, the Committee feels, there is
a need for proper planning to develop sports amongst women, by opening more sports hostels for
them and adopting more sports oriented girls' schools.
(q) SPORTS FOR THE HANDICAPPED

130. At present there is a separate para-Olympics for the handicap, 34 sportsmen, which is held once
in every four years. Recently India has been participating in this para-Olympics and the performance of
our handicapped sportspersons has been reasonably good though there are very few persons to train them.
These handicapped persons need specialised equipment and facilities. The Government of India should
provide sufficient funds in training the teachers and also enough grants for holding separate annual sports
meets for handicapped persons in different categories.

(r) SPORTS IN THE NORTH-EASTERN REGION

131. The Committee, during its visit to the North-Eastern region, noticed that children in that area
genetically are very much gifted for sports such as football, archery and long distance running and for
contact sports like boxing, judo and other martial arts. Of late, there have been a number of instances
where, when facilities are provided, boys and girls from this region have shown exceilence upto interna-
tional level. For example, Kunjurani from Manipur, Bhai Chung Bhutia from Sikkim, and Jorong Thamba
from Mizoram have excelled in weightlifting, football and boxing respectively.

132. The Committee found that very limited sports infrastructure has been provided to the
whole of the North-Eastern region. The region also lacks adequate sports tournaments and cham-
pionships. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government and SAI, as well as national
sports federations, should concentrate in this sports fertile area, not only for scouting and nurtur-
ing of the potential sportspersons for providing adequate and suitable infrastructure in this re-
gion but also for holding more and more competitions. Holding of North -Eastern Sports Festival by
SAI, the Committee feels, is a step in the right direction, but its impact is not felt as the Festival is held
only in limited disciplines and about a thousand persons are permitted to participate in the event. The
Committee feels that federations should organise a number of regional, zonal and national level sports
championships and tournaments in the North-Eastern region.

(s) DEVELOPMENT OF CLUB CULTURE

134. The countries which are doing well in games and sports have very strong club culture. In
Europe sports clubs are there even for toddlers and parents encourage their infants to play for fun and
recreation. It is followed by developing and promoting youth clubs for different sports and games culmi-
nating into sports clubs which are then financed and managed by different industrial houses. The football
clubs in Europe illustrate this point.

135. In India, there is a club culture but it is restricted only to football, cricket and wrestling.
Club culture can be developed by organising inter-club competitions and by providing patronage
at different levels by government agencies as well as business establishments. The Committee feels
that the club culture needs to be encouraged right from the Panchayat level. The National Sports
Club of India, NSCI, was set up by free India’s national Government headed by late Pt. Jawaharlal
Nehru with the great vision and ideal of promoting healthy sports activities in the country. The
NSCI was expected to have Club houses and facilities not only at Delhi but also at Bombay, Cal-
cutta and Madras to provide accommodation and sports facilities to the players. Regrettably, the
NSCLis no Jonger what it was originally conceived to be with the blessings by Nehru and under the
leadership of late Smt. Rajkumari Amrit Kaur. In fact, complaints have been received that the
Club has degenerated into yet another Club for social activity. The Committee feels that the Deptt.
of Youth Affairs & Sports, Ministry of HRD, should probe into the working of the NSCI with a
view to restoring the original vision and ideals as truly National Sports Club of India. Similarly,


31

other elite Sports Clubs in Calcutta and in other metropolitan cities were alleged to have become
very exclusive Clubs for the rich and the famous. The Committee desires that the Clubs should
provide their facilities and infrastructure to be used by the sportspersons on concessional rates.

(i) PRIORITISATION OF SPORTS AND ENCOURAGEMENT TO INDIGENOUS GAMES
AND MARTIAL ARTS

136. At present, there are about 32 to 34 disciplines in sports on which the country is spending
a lot of money. The Committee feels that due to paucity of funds we should not spend our scarce
resources on each one of the games. Now we are not really able to concentrate and develop all the
disciplines upto the international standards. Many developing countries have identified only a few games
and are whole-heartedly concentrating their energies on the selected games only. The Committee, there-
fore, is of the opinion that it would be appropriate, in the present situation, to concentrate on a few
selected games and try to bag medals in these games in the international arena. A country like
G.D.R. did a lot of research on this and it specifically concentrated on individual sports like swimming,
athletics, gymnastics, rowing, weightlifting, etc. Similarly, South Korea, with a strong tradition of dedi-
cation and discipline, started nurturing the available talents in the disciplines where they stood chance
rather than wasting their money, time and energy on every sport.

137, The Committee found that the Government had not formulated any proper policy/ guidelines in
this regard. However, all the disciplines have been divided into three categories, namely Category-A,
Category-B and Category-C. Category-A consists of 10 disciplines (athletics, hockey, archery, boxing,
water-sports, judo, wrestling, weight-lifting, tennis and volleyball) in which we have good potential for
showing excellent performance in the international arena. In Category-B are included those disciplines
where we do not have so much prospects of achieving international standards and winning medals, e.g.
football. No doubt, it is a popular and widely played game in India but as regards the medal prospects in
this game, we do not stand anywhere near the international standards. Thirdly, there are certain games
which include many indigenous games which have been classified in Category-C. The Committee was
informed that the Government intends to give priority to Category-A games by putting some extra money
on them, The Committee also feels that this paper classification of disciplines is not going to help much
unless things are taken seriously and we concentrate on only those games which are identified as priority
disciplines.

138. Simultaneously, the Committee feels that we should also concentrate on traditional In-
dian sports like kho-kho, archery and kabaddi in which India could always do better than other
countries just as countries like Thailand, Japan, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore and Sri Lanke
are concentrating on kabaddi.

139. The Committee, emphasises the need for issuing very clear-cut policy guidelines in this regard
to all the state governments to adopt a uniform approach for the propagation of the disciplines, so identi-
fied, in order to achieve results matching international standards. In addition to this, the Committee
also feels that we should not send our teams to international sports events in the disciplines where
we do not have any chance of bagging medals. It would perhaps be better not to participate than
participating and losing in all the games. Our players, however, should be given enough exposure
at the national level and, if need be, we may invite foreign teams to India to participate in compe-
titions.

(u) BUDGETARY CONSTRAINTS

140. The Committee notes that the total allocation for sports and games has not registered
any noticeable increase over the years. For example, the amount allocated for this purpose in the year
1991-92 (Rs. 69.11 crores), came down substantialiy (Rs. 57.01 crores) in the year 1992-93. The alloca-
tion made in the year 1993-94, no doubt, marked a slight increase over the previous year, still it was lower
than the amount provided in the previous year. This allocation, however, was increased to Rs. 71.33
crores in the year 1993-94, basically for preparation of teams for Asian Games. It has come down again


32

to Rs. 68.76 crores in the year 1995-96. More or less the same trend prevailed in the case of Revised
Estimate also for these years. Similarly, the Committee finds no substantial increase in the case of plan
allocation also during these years. It had remained more or less the same in the years 1994-95 and 1995-
96. The Committee notes that the कक of plan allocation to the total allocation for games and sports
had ranged between 72 to 80 per cent during these years. The share of non-plan allocation, after remain-
ing stagnant upto 1993-94, slightly increased in 1994-95, which has come down again in the year 1995-
96.
Plan Outlay
(Rupees in crores)

Budget Estimates Revised Estimates
Year Plan Non-Plan __ Total Plan Non-Plan 1041
1991-92 53.46 15.65 69.11 — _ =
1992-93 41.36 15.65 57.01 43.36 15.85 59.21
1993-94 46.91 15.65 62.56 60.66 16.25 76.91
1994-95 55.00 16.33 71.33 55.11 16.33. 71.44
1995-96 55.20 13.26 68.76 _ ता _

141. On being asked, the Committee was informed by the Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs
and Sports that the share of the funds allocated to games and sports in the year 1995-96 constituted
a mere 0.0001 % of the total budget of the Government of India.

142. The Committee, during its visit to various SAI centres/Institutes, Stadia and other infrastruc-
ture created in different States and also during its discussions with various persons connected with sports,
found that there was a general complaint regarding the inadequacy of funds for not only promoting sports
but also for maintenance of stadia, buildings, etc. The shortage of funds, in fact, appeared to be one of the
major constraints, both at the Centre and in the States, in developing and promoting sports activities.

143. The Committee, no doubt, is aware of the general resource crunch in the counrty, Yet, it is of
the considered opinion that nothing significant can be done for sports and games with such a meagre
allocation. The Committee feels that there are many other sources of collecting/generating revenue for
the purpose, but not much has been done in this regard so far. The Committee was informed that SAI was
generating some resources of their own by way of renting out their stadia/buildings etc. The Committee,
in this regard, reiterates its recommendation made in para 15.5 of the Seventeenth Report on Demands for
Grants (1995-96) of the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports. The Committee recommended as fol-
lows:

“The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department for raising its revenue by renting out its
stadia and buildings. It, nevertheless, feels that such practice should not affect the sports activities ad-
versely. The department may frame certain rules and regulations in this regard which should be observed
strictly. A Marketing Cell may also be created in the SAI which will be responsible for not only the
commercial exploitation of stadia but also of exploring other avenues for raising more revenue.”

144, The Committee feels that the basic responsibility for providing bulk of resources for this
purpose falls on the government only. The Committee, in view of great need for improving our
performance in sports, recommends that the government should make all-out efforts to enhance
the funds for sports and games in order to overcome various problems being faced in this regard.
The Committee recommends that the government should provide to begin with at least 0.5 per cent
of the total annual budget of Govt. of India.

145, The Committee also recommends that the Planning Commission and Ministry of Fi-
nance should take a more realistic view of the financial needs of the Department of Youth Affairs
and Sports and provide them more resources.

146. The Committee was informed that Rs. 14.04, Rs. 14.69 and Rs. 15.06 crores were spent as
establishment and administrative charges of SAI during the years 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94 respec-


33

tively. The Committee notes that such expenditure constituted slightly more than 1/Sth of the total
allocation for sports and games. The Committee finds that this fact corroborates the charges lev-
elled by witnesses that SAI, over the years, had developed into a huge bureaucratic organisation.
The Committee agrees with the suggestion made by certain witnesses that there is an urgent need
for reducing the huge expenditure on SAI by reorganising its structure at various levels and recom-
mends immediate steps be initiated on the lines suggested by the Committee elsewhere in this

Report.
(v) ALLOCATION BY MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT AND LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLIES

147. The Committee feels that lack of funds and budgetary constraints are coming in the way
of development and promotion of sports. Due to paucity of funds, our schools and colleges are not able
to provide even the basic equipments and intrastructure required for playing a game. Non-availability of
basic sports equipments and infrastructure for our young boys and girls is also one of the major demotivating
factors in the sports acquiring a mass movement in our country. The country’s economic condition being
what it is, it may not be possible to pool enough resources for the development of sports as there are other
priority areas like water, rural development, education, health etc.

148. Members of Parliament are given Rs. 1 crore every year under the MP’s Local Area
Development Scheme by the Central Government. MLAs are also given special discretionary funds
by the respective State Governments. A suggestion had come to the Committee that the MPs and
MLAs may be requested to earmark one to five per cent of this money every year for purchasing
sports equipments in the schools/colleges in their respective constituencies.

(w) INVOLVEMENT OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS

149. The governmental efforts so far made to promote sports have not yielded the desired results.
The Committee found that although various agencies were involved in the promotion of sports, all of
them depended solely on State funding. Even the major federations/associations do not have any re-
sources of their own. The Committee feels that the Government alone cannot deliver the goods.
Public and private sectors’ involvement is necessary in supplementing the governmental efforts.
The Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for a joint and coordinated approach by all the .
agencies, including public and private sectors, in pooling their resources to promote sports in the
country. This is particularly necessary in the context of financial constraints, both at the Central
and State levels.

150. The Committee interacted with representative of Tata Iron and Steel Co. (TISCO), Peerless,
Indian Tobacco Co. (ITC), Sanghi Group, Hindujas, Escorts, Steel Authority of India, Coal India Ltd.,
UCO Bank, Indian Overseas Bank, State Bank of India, Punjab & Sind Bank, Air India & Indian Airlines,
BHEL, Indian Oil Corporation, ONGC, etc. During the course of the discussions the Committee was
informed that they are giving jobs to talented sportspersons, who participate in various sports meets
organised by national federations and Public Sector Sports Control Board. They also complained that
major industrial houses are not permitted to field their teams in the national games nor are they permitted
to participate in major national level championships.

151. The Committee recommends that each major industrial house, both public and private
sector, should be asked to adopt one sports discipline and they should take the total responsibility
of scouting talent and nurturing the same, including their participation in various national and
international events. On reciprocal basis, the concerned industrial house should have its nominee
in the concerned national federation / association.

152. The Committee was also informed that the private and public sectors were already employing
sportspersons and had also set up Academies for sports. For example, Air India had started Hockey
Academy, Steel Authority of India~-Handball and Hockey Academies, Coal India Limited- Archery, Petro-
leum Sports Contro} Board-Table Tennis Academy, Sanghi-Chess Academy and MRF Pace Founda-
tion—Cricket. The Government gives 100% tax exemption to the private and public sector organisations

WIN3/4624RS2


34

on the rhoney they spend on various sports projects under Section 35 AC of the Income-tax Act. Repre-
sentatives of industrial houses appealed for tax exemption on revenue expenditure also for scouting
talent and training the teams.

153. Such incentives are necessary for the continued support of industrial houses in sports. As
regards the sponsoring of sports events by industrial houses, the Committee noticed that it is restricted to
only certain disciplines such as cricket, tennis, golf, chess, etc. Besides, their sponsorship is related to
their marketing strategy. As a result, other disciplines are not able to get the requisite attention from them.
It would be better if a group of or individual industrial houses/private organisations adopt specific disci-
plines and particular sportspersons for their all-round development and growth.

154. The Committee is of the view that there is a need to create necessary conditions for these
sectors to invest in sports development liberally. The Income-tax Act has, therefore, to be suitably
amended so as to give substantial tax exemption to the organisations investing in sports. Special
Customs Duty exemption for certain categories of imported equipments is also required to be made.
Liberalised access to foreign exchange for import of sports equipment is also called for.

155, The Committee also noted that there is a lot of duplication of efforts as various sports
control boards like Services, Railways, P&T, Banks and Para-military Police Forces, Steel Plants,
Coalfields etc. are contributing in their own way for promotion of sports without any coordination
with each other. Much worse is the lack of cooperation and communication between these bodies on the
one hand and the Sports Authority of India (SAI) and the federations on the other. Players employed by
them are participating in championships in the name of the concerned State, etc. The Committee is not
happy with this chaotic situation and lack of coordination among various bodies which is resulting
in loss of scarce resources and time. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
of Youth Affairs and Sports should take immediate steps with a view to developing an effective
machinery for regular dialogue and coordination with the CII, FICCI and BPE and other bodies so
that no effort is duplicated and wastage of time and money could be avoided.

(x) PREPARATION FOR OLYMPICS, 1996

156. The Committee was quite disappointed to learn that till now, we have not been able to
identify the sportspersons who would represent India in the 1996 Olympics at Atlanta even though
only seyen months are left now. Countries who do well in Olympics normally select their players suffi-
ciently in advance and prepare them to participate in the games. The Committee has been informed that a
few shooters, judokas and archers have qualified for participation in the Olympics’ 96, whereas our
hockey team would be competing in Berlin in January 1996 to earn a berth for participation in the forth-
coming Olympics. The Committee strongly recommends that we should start selecting our players/
teams without further delay not only for Olympics 1996 and Asian Games 1998 but also for Olym-
pics 2000 and train them scientifically with a veiw to winning gold medals for the country.

(y) NEED FOR A COMPREHENSIVE SPORTS LEGISLATION

157. The Committee is of the opinion that at present there is a plethora of agencies working in
different directions towards promotion of sports, without any coordination/ liaison amongst themselves.
Such an individualistic approach towards sports has not so far yielded any tangible results. Instead, the
Committee feels, it has resulted in utter confusion and wastage of resources. The Committee found that in
the absence of a law defining the roles of various agencies, there is a lot of duplication of efforts. The
Committee also notes that while ‘Sports’ figures in the ‘State List’ of the Constitution, ‘Education’
figured in the “Concurrent List’. Both being two facets of the same coin, the Committee feels that
unless sports is also brought under the ‘Concurrent List’ of the Constitution, and a comprehensive
legislation is enacted by the Central Government, sports activities in the country cannot be uni-
formly regulated and developed in an effective and coordinated manner. The Committee was in-
formed that a legislation for including ‘Sports’ in the Concurrent List was introduced in the Parliament,
which was later withdrawn. The Committee was informed that nearly 16 States had now agreed to the

WIN3/4624RS2


35

proposal and the Government was now thinking of bringing this legislation again before the Parliament in
the near future. The Committee recommends that this legislation should be brought before Parliament
without any further delay. The Committee also recommends that the Government should have a
Central legislation specifying the roles and responsibilities of the SAI, federations/associations and
of the State bodies so that a uniform and common approach could be adopted towards promotion
of sports by different agencies. This law should also provide for an effective regulatory mechanism
in the sports arena without impairing the autonomy of various agencies. Such legislations are al-
ready in existence in countries like USA, Germany, Thailand, Sri Lanka and China.


.CHAPTER-DI
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA

पृ


CHAPTER—III

SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA

(a) SQUARE PEGS IN ROUND HOLES

158. One of the general complaints received by the Committee was that the sports administrators,
particularly most of the officials of the Sports Authority of India (SAI), had no sports background. It was
cited as one of the reasons for lack of direction in the sports arena.

159. At the time of its visit to the National Institute of Sports (NIS), Patiala, the Committee found
that this prestigious Institute is headed by a person who is basically a medical doctor by profession,
though he had served the Institute for long. Even at the Sports Authority of India (SAT) Headquarters in
Delhi, the Committee came to know that most of the officials, from the rank of Assistant Directors and
above, did not have sports background. For example, one Director had the sports experience at the col-
lege level and the other at the district level and one had played at school level. The Director-General is an
IAS officer, who is also Secretary to the Government of India.

160. The argument advanced by the SAI is that a good sportsperson does not necessarily possess
administrative skills also. It was also argued that there are well known sports administrators who had
never had any sports background. The Committee does not quite agree with this argument. It sounds good
in theory but not in actual practice. For example, the Committee visited the Bangalore Regional Centre
and was happy to see this Centre being very well managed because it is being headed by an ex-Olympian.
The Committee feels that the Regional Centre at Bangalore is an example of a sportsperson proving
himself to be an able administrator as well. The Committee, therefore, feels that in future, all the key
positions (starting from Group A and group B) should be filled up only by outstanding sportspersons
so that sports could be promoted in a professional way. It should not be difficult for them to learn
the basic tenets of administration by undergoing training in one of the renowned Institutes of
Management. It would also not be difficult to arrange crash courses/training programmes of the
duration of six to nine months to such sportspersons in a recognised administrative training insti-
tute in the country like the Indian Institute of Public Administration. SAI should arrange sports
management courses at the earliest for its own officers and officers of the State Governments and
officials of the federations.

161. The Committee feels that in view of the problems discussed in the foregoing paragraphs,
the Government can consider asking one or two universities to start under-graduate and post-
graduate sports management courses.

(b) RESTRUCTURING THE SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI)

162. During the course of its visits and interactions with sportspersons, coaches, journalists, State
officials, etc., the Committee observed that there was a lot of dissatisfaction about the structure and
functioning of the Sports Authority of India (SAI). It was complained that SAI had become a huge and
unwieldy organisation, with completely bureaucratic characteristics. There are a number of Directors,
Deputy Directors and other paraphernalia which was not originally contemplated. There are a number of
square pegs in the round holes. It is a sort of inverted pyramid. All the powers are centralised at the
headquarters. The Regional Centres some of which like the Bangalore one—doing excellent work— are
deprived of financial powers due to lack of autonomy. Even for small matters, they have to get clearance
from the headquarters of SAI at Delhi, including sanctioning of small expénditure. The Committee

39


40

found that such a bureaucratic functioning of the SAI is proving to be a major obstacle in the free
and smooth functioning of the Regional Centres. The Committee feels that the Regional Centres should
be delegated adequate financial and administrative powers so as to cater to their day-to-day requirements
for the efficient and smooth functioning of these Centres. The atmosphere in SAI needs to be made a
sports-friendly rather than the existing monolithic bureaucratic organisation. The Committee feels that
unless these Centres are strengthened, we cannot expect better results from them. Work and ac-
counts of the Centres should be periodically audited and monitored by the competent authority. The SAI
in Delhi could be just a coordinating authority and should concentrate on policy, planning and
monitoring. There should be a Sub-Regional Centre of SAI in each State, with a Director in charge
of it.

163. At present, there are six Regional Centres at Chandigarh, Delhi, Bangalore, Calcutta,
Imphal and Gandhinagar. The Central region, which is at present located in Delhi, should be
shifted to Lucknow and the North-Eastern region, comprising eight States including Sikkim, should
have two centres, one located at Imphal and the other at Guwahati/Shillong. The Committee de-
sires that each one of the Regional Centres should be headed by a Regional Director with almost
full powers. Two Executive Directors in Delhi could look after the administrative and coordinating
works of the organisation as well as matters relating to the teams, The Secretary, Department of
Youth Affairs and Sports, should not be the Director-General of SAI. Instead, a full-time Chair-
man-cum-MD, with good sports background or interest in sports, be appointed by the Goyern-
ment. We could plan for developing one SAI Centre in each State, either at its capital city or at some
other suitable place. The SAI Governing body shall consist of the Chairman-cum-MD, nine Execu-
tive Directors, Financial Adviser and four Members elected by the General Council from amongst
themselves. The General Council of SAI, headed by the Minister of Human Resource Develop-
ment, shall consist of the Minister of Sports, the Chairman-cum-MD, SAI, the two Executive Di-
rectors, and seven Regional Directors, F.A., Sports, Joint Secretary, Sports, Directors of SAI Sub-
Regional Centres, representatives of the State Sports Authorities, five Arjuna Awardees/Olympi-
ans, three coaches, Secretary-General, IOA, five representatives cf natural sports federations, rep-
resentatives of sports control boards of various government and public sector organisations and
five sports experts such as sports journalists, commentators, etc. and three Members of Parliament.

164, The Committee was informed that the Government was already thinking of moving in this
direction. The Regional Centres are proposed to be developed as “‘Centres of Excellence” having all the
facilities required for training the national teams. SAI has also decided that the whole country would be
divided into 78 zones or regions for purposes of sports organisation. In each of these places, there will be
a SAI training centre, the idea being that there should be a centre at the intermediate level. The idea of
having one centre in each State is perhaps a beginning to this. In some states, there may be two or three
such centres out of which one would be eventually developed as a SAI Sub-Regional Centre in the State.
If we are able to delegate responsibility at the regional and sub-centre level, a lot of day-to-day problems
could be solved. In Delhi, a minimum number of people should be kept to give broad policy directioris
and for policy planning and to coordinate and oversee the implementation of the schemes, rather than
getting involved in each and every day-to-day matter.

(c) SCHEMES OF SAI—AN APPRAISAL

165. To generate sports consciousness in the country and to redeem and fulfil India’s vision of
achieving excellence in international sports events, Sports Authority of India is running the following

schemes:
(i) National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC);
(ii) Sports Project Development Area (SPDA);
(iii) Special Area Games (SAG);
(iv) Sports Hostel Scheme (SHS);


PROPOSED RE-ORGANISATION OF SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA [SAI]

a 17055 2०309 पी Coe ee ca ral Se
GOVERNING BODY OF SAI (1 Members) GENERAL COUNCIL OF SAI (85 and not more than 100)

*CHAIRMAN-CUM-MANAGING DIRECTOR 1. Minister of H.R.D. —Chairman

2. Minister of State (Sports)—Vice-Chairman

iT Pelt eT ES ee
Two E.Ds at FA. SAL Seven E.Ds Incharge of 3. Secretary (Sports) Member

Corporate Office Regional Centres,

4. Chairman-cum-Managing Director, SAI—Convener

Five Three State Govts’ 1.5. (Sports) FA. Sports ANLE.Ds. Twenty-five** —_Secy.-Genl.
nominated nominated representatives Dio Youth of SAI Directors of LOA.
Arjuna Dronacharya (Chairmen of State Affairs SAI Sub-Centres

Awardees) Coaches Sports Authorities!

Olympians Sports Councils)

* Director-General, SAI to be re-designated as Chairman-cum-Managing Director of SAI in order to give full autonomy to Sports Authority of India.
**Directors of SAI Sub-Centres may be called to the Governing body meetings, whenever necessary, as special invitee.

Five
Representatives
of National Sports
Federations out of
identified
disciplines

Representatives of
Railway Sports
Control Board, Public
Sector Sports Control
Board, Services Sports
Control Board, Banks
SportsControl Board”
and other Sports
Control Boards

(Five in rotation)

Five Sports
Experts (such
as Sports
journalists,
commentators,
ete.)

Iv


42

(v) Army Boys Sports Company (ABSC); and
(vi) National Coaching Scheme (NCS).
(i) National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC)

166. Started in 1985, the prime objective of the scheme is to identify the potential and prospective
sports persons from amongst school children in the age group of 9-12 years and to nuture them by provid-
ing scientific training and other facilities, so that they could excel in sports. Selection of children is made
for 10 Olympic disciplines through a battery of tests and also by holding assessment camps to gauge their
potential by scientific screening, with the help of a battery of tests, organised annually at various levels.
400-450 students are selected under this scheme annually.

167. The children, thus selected, are admitted in one of the adopted schools. Their boarding, lodging
and tuition fees are met by the Sports Authority of India (SAI). A school so adopted by SAI gets one time
assistance of Rs. 5 lakhs (Rs. 7.5 lakhs for schools in hilly areas) to further create and develop their sports
infrastructure. Besides, Rs. 50,000/per annum is also provided for maintenance of sports facilities, pur-
chase of periodicals, magazines, consumable/non-consumable sports equipments, etc. SAI posts four to
five coaches in every adopted school. The schools, in turn, reserve 10% of its seats for the children
selected under this Scheme.

168. The Committee notes that the scheme aims at scouting talented children from the rural areas;
synthesising sports with education and also to provide an ideal and conducive atmosphere for budding
sportspersons. Also, the children selected under the scheme are potential multiplier/ motivator for the
other non-NSTC students in a particular school who inspires in them interest in sports, acting as an agent
for broad-basing and popularising sports. The talent contests, held annually at block and district levels,
also help create consciousness amongst the masses at the grassroot level.

169. The Committee feels that, in principle, this scheme appears to be very sound, reaching
upto the village or panchayat level. It is, however, constrained to observe that, in actual practice, it
has achieved very limited results. After ten years of its implementation, the scheme has thrown up
a few outstanding sportspersons, yet it has not been able to fully tap the potential and prospective
children throughout the nook and corner of the country, because, at present, they are running the
scheme only in 44 schools in the whole country. Selection of players is done scientifically but in a very
low profile manner, which goes unnoticed by a vast majority of the people. SAI and State Governments
do not seem to be paying attention to give adequate publicity to it. As a result, the selection process is
vitiated due to lack of requisite number of participants, compromising its merit.

170. The Committee, therefore, feels that a wide publicity campaign should be launched through
mass media/local newspapers and also through locally elected bodies, well before the selection
process starts, so that the event could create enough awareness among the populace and attract
more and more participants from the rural areas.

171. The Committee also expresses its concern over the implementation aspect of the scheme,
which is fraught with various flaws and loopholes. The Committee had, in its Sixth Report (on De-
mands for Grants 1994-95 of the Deptt. of Youth Affairs and Sports, para 43) highlighted the point of
verifiability of the number of schools adopted by SAI which has gone unresponded in the Action Taken
Report sent by the Department. In the Annual Report, 1994-95, the details of only 47 schools, as against
58 adopted schools and 10 Kendriya Vidyalayas mentioned in the Performance Budget 1994-95, are
available. The Committee is, thus, given to understand that the rest of the schools, on the basis of a review
done by its Governing Body, were held in abeyance and asked to improve their infrastructure. The Sports
Authority of India should periodically monitor the functioning of each school and also insist on
improving the sports infrastructure and boarding/lodging facilities.

172. The Committee finds that no serious thought has been given to the number of schools to
be adopted which is borne out by the fact that the number of schools adopted is not commensurate
with the number of children selected. For example, figures given in the Performance Budget 1994-95


43

of the Deptt. of Youth Affairs and Sports indicate that for 68 adopted schools there are arovnd 1300
studenis. Thus, on an,average, enly 19 children are admitted in each of the adopted schools which in-
volved substantial expenditure in the form of one time infrastructure grant of Rs. 5 lakhs to each school
and an annual recurring maintenance grant of Rs. 50,000/excluding pay and allowances of coaches posted
in those schools.

173. The Committee also noticed that some of the adopted schools did not have the infrastruc-
ture prescribed for adopting the schools under NSTC Scheme.

174. The Committee notes that sufficient number of trainees, particularly in team games, were not
admitted which precluded the constitution of even a full team. As a result, purposeful training could not
be imparted to the children. Some of the adopted schools did not even have the required number of
coaches, thus hampering the training of children. Of late, the governing body of SAI has permitted day
boarding concept, which is a step in the right direction.

175.-For this scheme to be successful, the profile of the schools adopted is very crucial. It should not
be overly academic-oriented; it should have a sound sports culture and base and it should not be elitist
since students of such schools would pay scant attention and devotion towards sports and generally
concentrate on their professional careers.

176. The Committee found that some of the schools adopted by SAI under this scheme were elitist
in nature charging high boarding, lodging, tuition fees. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends
that Government should take this factor into consideration before adopting the schools and henceforth
preference should be given under NSTC Scheme to Kendriya Vidyalayas, Navodaya Vidyalayas,
Sainik Schools and Government boys / girls schools.

177. The Coinimittee was'also informed that owing to the prescribed sports training schedules, SAI
trainees Were notable to follow thé academic time-tables of the adopted schools and as such some of
them failed or just managed to pass: This indicates a failure of the system and inability of the administra-
tors to ensure synthesis of sports and education.

178. The Committee feels that uprooting hundreds of budding youngsters to places far away from
their homes and planting them amongst residents of hostels with widely different environment, medium
of instruction, attitude'té academics and culture did more harm than good. The youngsters felt alienated
and, thus, could neither concentrate on academics nor on sports.

179. The Committee also noted that children admitted in some of the schools were being trained
under a long-term development programme without having prepared specific programmes on scientific
lines. The monitoring of the scheme needs to be improved and those schools not adhering to the rules may
be derecognised. Children admitted under the scheme in few disciplines did not have sufficient competi-
tion. Training and competition, the Committee feels, have to go side by side or else it would not be
possible to assess the potential and progress of the trainees. The Committee recommends that more and
more competitions should be organised to provide children enough exposure. The federations / associa-
tions may also be involved for this purpose.

180. The Committee also noted that some of the students (approximately 10%) continue to drop out
of the scheme after a couple of years for various reasons causing substantial loss to SAI. The Government
should take adequate steps to contain the drop-out rate.

181. In view of the problems discussed above, the Committee is, therefore, of the considered
opinion that SAI should continuously monitor the programme of the adopted schools and should
increase the number of children in schools by extensively introducing the day boarding concept.
(ii) Sports Project Development Area (SPDA)

182. This scheme, started in 1987-88, aims at providing an integrated in-house coaching and train-
ing facilities to children in the age group of 9—14 years in any five Olympic disciplines, and one indig-
enous game at a location not very far from their native place. It evisages setting up of one SPDA Centre
with free board, lodging and coaching facilities covering an average of 80-100 development blocks


44

from five to six districts in a State. Selection procedure for children is the same as in the NSTC Scheme.
The total intake capacity of a centre is 80. The Committee noted that out of 78 SPDA Centres pro-
posed to be set up, only 33 centres have started functioning so far. The Committee expresses its
displeasure over such a tardy progress of the scheme.

183. The project cost of a SPDA Centre is fixed at Rs. one crore which is shared on 50:50 basis by
the Centre and the states. The states contribute their share in kind i.e. providing land for infrastructure
development, hostel etc. The Department of Youth Affairs and Sports provides matching grant to im-
prove the facilities. The recurring expenses on board, lodging, training etc. are met by SAI. The Commit-
tee finds that this scheme is a combination of the two schemes of SAI viz. NSTC and Sports Hostel
Scheme (SHS). The Committee notes, however, that unlike NSTC, the SPDA does not cause uprooting of
children from their native places nor does it lead to cultural and linguistic banishment. Moveover, the
selected children are under constant surveillance and care of their coaches who could provide suitable
training to them.

184, The Committee was informed that the biggest problem in implementing this scheme was the
lack of cooperation and interest shown by the state governments. The Committee was also informed that
some states were not contributing their share of money. The Representatives of some of the state govern-
ments, however, gave another version of the story. They submitted that the States did not get the matching
grants from the Department of Sports when they had already invested their share in building up the
infrastructure. As a result, the facilities transferred by the state governments are not developed beyond
the level they were at the time of handing over to the SAI.

185. The Committee takes a serious view of this state of affairs and holds both the Department of
Sports, Government of India, and the state governments responsible for it. The Committee was sur-
prised to note the slow progress of the scheme and found that the target of setting up of 78 centres
by the end of the शाप Five Year Plan cannot be achieved when only 33 centres have been set up
so far. The Committee, therefore, strongly urges upon the Central, as well as the state Govern-
ments to work in close tandem with each other in the larger interest of sports. The Central Govern-
ment, while extending full cooperation and support to the states, should persuade them to reciprocate in
a similar vein.

186. Since the state governments have a significant say in the implementation of the scheme, it is
vulnerable to several extraneous pressures resulting in prevalence of non- technical, petty and parochial
considerations over the technical and logical ones like selection of site, children etc, This phenomenon
has resulted in setting up of some SPDA Centres at such places where sports infrastructure already exists
and other sports schemes are operating. In this way, the very purpose of SPDA Scheme i.e. to set up
centres at such places where no other SAI Scheme exists, is defeated.

187. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government must take a serious note of this
phenomenon and aviod duplication of infrastructural facilities at the same places. All-out efforts should
be made to ward off and avoid such unhealthy pressures.

188. As regards the suggestion of the Tata Consulting Services to phase out the SPDA Scheme,
the Committee is of the view that it is not based on a sound proposition. The Committee suggests that
all-out efforts be made to streamline and strengthen the scheme by rectifying the ills afflicting it. Decen-
tralisation is the need of the day and states’ participation in improving our performance in national and
international games is also necessary. Hence, to wind up the schemes simply on the pretext of States'
failures is not sound. The SPDA Centres should be converted into SAI sub-regional centres, in
course of time, with additional inputs.

(iii) Special Area Games (SAG)
189. Introduced in 1985, the scheme aims at identification of survey and areas, regions and com-

munities having a natural interest and advantage for a particular sport. It also involves organising compe-
titions and camps to scientifically assess the potential and capabilities and to select promising boys and


45

girls for intensive training in SAG Centres. Informal, educational and vocational training facilities are
also made available at these centres.

190. At present, there are 8 SAG centres all over the country in which some 328 persons are being
trained in such disciplines as athletics, archery, boxing, cycling, canoeing and kayaking, football, fenc-
ing, gymnastics, hockey, judo, rowing, shooting, volleyball, weightlifting and wrestling.

191. Although the Committee expresses its overall satisfaction with the functioning and per-
formance of the scheme as far as archery, hockey and water sports are concerned, it is constrained
to observe that the achievements in other schemes, particularly gymnastics and athletics, had not
been upto the mark. The Committee was highly impressed with the infrastructure for water sports in the
Alleppey SAG Centre in Kerala. The District Collector, Alleppey, informed the Committee that a pro-
posal for the construction of a hostel at a cost of Rs. 86 lakhs had already been sent to SAI for further
development of water sports in Alleppey as it has vast potential for development. The Committee recom-
mends that the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports should immediately process and finalise the
proposal.

192. The Commitee suggests that the Government should take all possible remedial measures to
improve the performance in the disciplines not faring well and try to strengthen and streamline the scheme.
The Committee notes that although Madhya Pradesh and Bihar have sizeable tribal population, only one
SAG Centre exists in Bihar and none in Madhya Pradesh. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that based on the population / concentration of tribal and other communities, Government should
try to expand this scheme in the rural and tribal areas.

(iv) National Coaching Scheme (NCS)

193. This scheme is a major source for meeting the -equirements of coaches in our country. Under
the scheme, SAI provides coaches to States / UTs based on their requirements. Coaches are also made
available to universities, various agencies like sports federations and associations, SAI regional centres,
LNCPEs, and in-house training centres, and to district coaching centres and state coaching centres.

194. The Committee, in the course of its deliberations with the representatives of state govern-
ments and federations / associations, was informed that this scheme was not working well as tlie states
were not getting coaches for the disciplines they required. Complaint was also made to the Committee
that coaches lacked commitment and dedication and since they were directly under the control of the SAI,
states were not able to ensure their accountability. Most of the states also suggested that the coaches
should be placed at the disposal of state governments for the purpose of efficient and smooth functioning
of the scheme. SAI, however, was of the view that if it was done, it would create more problems than it
intended to solve. Coaches, on the other hand, informed the Committee that the places where they were
posted did neither have adequate infrastructure nor sufficient number of trainees. Thus they are unable to
perform their assigned duties efficiently and effectively. The Committee found that because of various
problems the services of coaches remain unutilised/under-utilised, which needs to be taken care of by the
government.

195. The Committee was surprised to note that the role and responsibilities of the coaches were not
defined. They don’t have anything specific to aim at and nc clear output requirement. Hence, the effec-
tiveness/performance of the scheme is severely affected.

196. The coaches at Regional/State Coaching Centre (RCC/SCC) assist the State Sports Councils,
Departments/Associations in holding state coaching camps for training state-level teams for inter-state/
national championships, holding weekly/monthly competitions in rural sports, organising short-term re-
fresher course, etc. But the Committee is surprised to note that SAI did not get any feedback from the
coaches/RCCs regarding the number of coaching camps held, number of participants, duration of camps
held in various disciplines etc. The Committee, therefore, feels that this was all because of lack of effi-
cient and effective monitoring mechanism in this regard. The Committee recommends that Govern-
ment should take all necessary measures to streamline and revamp the scheme.


46

(v) Sports Hostel Scheme (SHS)

197. The Sports Hostel Scheme, introduced in 1986-87, envisages establishment of one sports
hostel in each State/UT for training and nurturing of meritorious state and national level players in the
age group of 16-21 years in order to enable them achieve excellence at international levels. Talented and
deserving sportspersons from other SAI Schemes such as NSTC, SPDA, Army Boys Sports Company,
etc. are also eligible for seeking admission in these hostels. Providing training facilities with free board,
lodging, diet, sports equipments, administrative staff and coaches, etc. are the responsibility of SAI and
the state is to make available hostel buildings and playfields, including their maintenance. Although the
scheme is jointly shared by the states and SAI, the overall administration of the hostels lie with the latter.
Each hostel has a total sanctioned strength of 80 (50 boys and 30 girls) inmates. Eighteen hostels have so
far been established in which about 876 sportspersons are being imparted training in disciplines like
archery, athletics, badminton, basketball, boxing, cycling, football, gymnastics, hockey, handball, judo,
swimming, table tennis, volleyball and wrestling.

198. The Committee, during its visit to different sports hostels, came across a number of problems
and drawbacks afflicting the scheme. Although this scheme is different from the other ones in the sense
that whereas other schemes aimed at broad-basing by scouting talented children, the focus of this scheme
is on achieving excellence at the internationa! ievei. But the hostels visited by the Committee were not
found to be wholly geared to achieve this specific objective. While the main aim of the players appears to
be seeking a berth in the national teams, the zeal to win the international events is not visible. The quality
of equipment and coaching required to produce international players was not found to be satisfactory.
Also the exposure to both, players as well as coaches, in terms of the latest information/development
taking place worldwide is quite inadequate. Location of some of the hostels was found to be based on
extraneous considerations. Each of the hostels was to be located near a regional coaching centre so that
the facilities of sports infrastructure, equipments and services of coaches etc., could be extended to the
hostelers. But the location of some of the hostels was found to be as far away as 35 to 200 kilometres. Due
to lack of cooperation and support from the state governments, the hostel sports facilities were not upto
the mark.

199. Another major drawback of the scheme is that due to inadequate incentives, this scheme has
failed to retain many potential players. The Committee also came to know that the management and
supervision of studies of the hostel inmates is divested in the Assistant Director/Hostel Managers, major-
ity of whom do not have a sound sports background or academic experience. This results in a constant
tussle and conflict with the coaches who are otherwise senior and more experienced then them. This is
quite detrimental to the smooth progress of the scheme.

200. During the course of interaction with the boys and girls staying in the hostels, the Committee
observed that there is a definite strain on the students residing in these hostels because they are supposed
to be in the ground for practice for two to three hours in the morning before going to their schools.
Schools are generally far away from the hostels. After the school, they are again required to play in the
evening. The entire schedule is not conducive to their development and healthy growth. At times, they are
either skipping the classes or the ground practice. The Committee feels that the students cannot do justice
both to the sports and their education.

201. In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommends that Government should get the
scheme reviewed to set right shortcomings and streamline the functioning of the scheme at the
earliest. The concept of sports hostel should be reoriented and focussed towards achievement of
excellence at the international level. The Committee is also of the view that it is imperative to
prioritise disciplines and select only those in which India has the possibility of achieving results in
the international arena.

(vi) Army Boys Sports Companies Scheme (ABSCS)

202. An extension of NSTC, this scheme is jointly implementing by the SAI and the Army. This

scheme envisages scouting talented boys upto 14 years from rural, semi-urban and tribal areas and train-


47

ing them in various sports disciplines by putting them into regimental centres affiliated to CBSE. Recur-
ring expenditure for the trainees on board, lodging, tuition fees, books and coaching is borne by SAI
which also extends a one-time grant to the Army for creation and development of sports infrastructure,
purchase of essential sports equipment to the tune of Rs. 3 lakhs. An annual maintenance grant of Rs.
50,000/- is also provided. The Committee came to know that one of the greatest merits of the scheme is
that the future of the selected boys is secure. On attaining the age of seventeen and on completion of 10th
standard the boys have the option to be enrolled directly as “Sepoy” in the army. These boys who do
well at junior national level are directly recruited as havaldars. No other scheme offers such a job oppor-
tunity to the prospective outstanding sportsmen.

203. The Committee was informed that 17 Boys Sports Companies for 2000 boys were to be raised
in a phased manner during the VIII Five Year Plan period at selected regimental centres. So far 17 boys
sports companies have already become operational with a total strength of 833 sportspersons. The Com-
mittee visited some Army units in which the Army Boys Sports Company Scheme of the SAT had been
provided. It found that the scheme was functioning very efficiently because the overall atmosphere
of discipline in these Regimental Centres was quite conducive for the development of sporting
skills amongst the children. The Committee is of the opinion that the amount of Rs. 35 being given
for diet per head under this scheme is quite inadequate and feels that it needs to be increased
substantially. The Committee is happy to learn that there is a proposal to increase this amount to
Rs. 60/-. The Committee recommends that sufficient funds should be provided for this purpose at the
carliest.

204. During the course of their interaction with the Committee, representatives of the Serv-
ices Sports Control Board expressed a desire to haye one school in each Regiment. 8.4 .1. may have
to enlarge the scheme, accordingly, as it is likely to pay better dividends.

205. The Director Generals of the para-military forces also wanted schools on the lines of Army
Boys Sports Company at their different centres. They argued that besides lack of funds, they had no other
facility/infrastructure and environment like the Army for development of sports. The Committee em-
phasises the need for expanding the scheme further. It, therefore, recommends that apart from
extending the Scheme to other Regiments of the Army, the scheme should be given to the Central
para-military forces also.

206. The Committee, however, expresses its dissatisfaction over the total number of boys selected
for training at these schools, which falls for short of its target Le. only 833 as against the target of 2000,
when all the 17 centres have been made operational. The number of boys undergoing training varies from
94 al one centre to mere 16 at the other. The Committee feels that each centre should have more or
less equal number of boys, particularly when the grant given to every centre is fixed. The Commit-
tee also notes with serious concern that none of the centres is having the full strength of trainees. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should make concerted efforts to remove
these drawbacks forthwith. This scheme also needs to be further expanded in view of its encourag-
ing results.


CHAPTER IV

SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

1. The Committee feels that it should be our objective to see that every child takes part in
sports and games, and that every parent encourages the child to do so. It should also be our endeay-
our to see that as children grow, they do not lose their enthusiasm for sports, nor do the pressure of
studies towards a bright career diminish their interest for participating in sports and games. (para
31)

2. Our performance in creating a conducive environment for sports should also ensure that
boys and‘girls with high potential are encouraged to remain active in sports through a system
which offers them due social recognition and encouragement, as well as financial benefit. This is
very essential, if we are to become competitive internationally as a nation. (para 31)

3. The Committee emphasises that physical education and sports should be made an essential
and integral part of educational activity in schools and colleges. There is need for reducing aca-
demic burden on the children, particularly at the primary stage, so that they could spare enough
time for sports. (paras 33 & 34)

4. Ideally all the schools and colleges must have physical education teachers/coaches. Until it
is possible, physical education teachers may be provided in each secondary school and one in a
group of primary schools. The Committee feels that unless some financial support is provided to
the schools and colleges specifically for this purpose and for purchase of simple and basic sports
equipments and consumable sports items, this objective would not be achieved. (para 34)

5. There is also a need to develop at least one sports school, preferably residential, in each
district with the requisite playing facilities and equipments. These schools could ultimately be de-
veloped as Centres of Excellence in sports, on the same pattern as is being done by China and East
European countries. (para 35)

6. The University Grants Commission should identify a few colleges, preferably physical
education colleges, which, in addition to giving theoretical knowledge, should encourage their stu-
dents to participate in performance sports. The Government should also seriously think of estab-
lishing a sports university to which all the colleges of physical education could be affiliated. (para
36).

7. The Committee strongly recommends that the functioning of the Association of Indian
Universities should be revamped to increase sports activities in the universities and improving
thereby their contribution to sports. The Inter-university Sports Board, which existed before the
Independence, should be revived, so as to supervise sports activities in our universities and their
affiliated colleges. (para 37)

8. Coupled with the absence of sports consciousness and culture in the country, there is al-
most total lack of sports infrastructure at the grassroot level all over the country. The Committee
found that the infrastructure, so far created, is mainly confined to the metro cities, big industrial
townships, defence cantonments, etc. and caters to the needs of people living in the urban areas,
whereas 80 per cent of the population, which lives in the villages and small towns, is generally

51


52

deprived of this benefit. The tribal and rural areas, with their age-old games, are devoid of any
sports infrastructure worth the name. (paras 39 & 40)

9. One of the reasons cited for the lack of sports infrastructure in the country is the non-
availability of sufficient funds for the promotion of sports. The amount provided for sports in the
Central Government is less than 0.0001 per cent of the Government’s total budget. Even taking
into consideration the States’ provisions for sports, the percentage of allocation does not improve
either, which shows that sports is not a priority area. (para 41)

10. The Committee feels that Government should plan the development of sports in a phased
manner so that necessary infrastructure is built up over a period of time and scarce resources
earmarked for the purpose are optimally utilised. (para 42)

11. The Committee feels that, as far as possible, there should be a condition regarding provi-
sion of a playfield while granting permission for opening a school or college in rural, as well as
urban areas. Where, however, it is not possible to have a separate playfield in the urban areas for
want of space, a group of schools/colleges could be allowed to use a common playfield at different
timings. Surplus land available with different Ministries, including Railways, Defence, Civil Avia-
tion and Tourism, etc. should be allowed to be used as playfields. All the Municipal Corporations,
Cantonment Boards and Development Authorities should also be directed to ban the use of playfields
for any other purposes. (para 43)

12. The Committee, while visiting the Regional Centres of Sports Authority of India, LNCPEs,
NIS and the important stadia/sports complexes, found it distressing that barring the Bangalore,
Calcutta and Gandhinagar Regional Centres, the condition of most of the sports complexes/stadia
was far from satisfactory. (para 45)

13. The Committee recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports should
work out a proper plan and schedule for maintenance of these buildings/stadia constructed at a
huge cost. The Department should also introduce a system of regular monitoring and inspection of
these buildings by senior officials so as to ensure their proper maintenance and upkeep. (para 48)

14. The Committee, during its visit to Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education,
Gwalior, noted that even though it has been made a deemed university, no Director has been ap-
pointed for the Institute so far. The Committee desires that the Director be appointed to the Insti-
tute expeditiously. (para 52)

15. The Government has erected huge and massive sports infrastructure in the metro cities
and big towns. These structures are used only when national or international tournaments take
place. For the rest of the period, they are just lying idle or under-utilised. Some of them are rented
out for cultural programmes and other shows. There is a problem of their maintenance as well. A
plan should be drawn up for utilisation of the infrastructure. (para 53)

16. The Committee feels that instead of organising the games at the State capitals, many of
the games could be held in other places in the State so that the sports infrastructure is not concen-
trated in one particular area. (para 55)

17. Several cases of indisciplined behavior of many of our sportspersons are reported, quite
often, in the press. Coaches and Managers are scared of reporting against them because of various
reasons. The Committee is of the firm view that the country can ill- afford to take lightly the
instances of indiscipline and lack of sportsmanship, particularly from persons representing the
country in international arena. The authorities, the Committee feels, have to be firm and strict in
handling the instances of indiscipline amongst sportspersons and ensure that such people do not
find place in the Indian contingents going abroad for international tournaments. (paras 58 & 60)


53

18. The Committee feels that if we really want to promote sports in the country we will have
to make available adequate incentives, good job opportunities and recognitidn of talent and achieve-
ments. At present, there are very few incentives/rewards for our‘talented and outstanding
sportspersons. The Central Government, the State Governments and the public sector undertak-
ings do not offer good job opportunities for our sportspersons. (paras 61 & 62)

19. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for fixing a percentage of jobs in each
and every organisation for sportspersons. This would definitely prove to be a strong incentive to
take sports as a career, provided all the organisations like Banks, Railways, Airlines, public sector
undertakings, etc. meticulously implement the scheme of employment of sportspersons under this
category. At present, there is no mechanism to monitor this aspect by the Government, (para 63)

20. The Committee feels that in schools and colieges students, who perform well in sports,
may be given some percentage of grace marks in each subject. Similarly, certain percentage of
seats for admission in colleges should be reserved for students who have excelled in sports. (para
64)

21. The Committee desires that, as an incentive, sportspersons who have participated in the
state, national and international events should be allotted houses or plots by Housing Boards and
Urban Development Authorities on priority basis and at concessional rates. They may also be given
house building loans by Banks and other financial institutions at low interest. Eminent sportspersons,
who, after retirement, intend to start their own industry/business etc. may be given licenses for the
purpose, alongwith bank loans and land, if necessary. (para 65)

22. The Committee was shocked to learn that till March 1995, only 25 persons were recruited
as sportspersons in the 25 Ministries/Departments of the government of India (except in Railways
and Defence) and that too in the Group ‘C’ category. (para 67)

23. The Committee feels that there is a lack of will and determination also in implementing
the existing guidelines in employing sportspersons by the government. There is no provision for
promotion of outstanding sportspersons or giving them adequate cash awards after they win medals
and bring laurels to the country. (para 69)

24. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the government should have (i) a definite
policy for recruiting sportspersons in various ministries/departments and public sector undertakings;
(ii) effective monitoring to get regular feedback and to ensure proper implementation of the
provisions of the policy, which is virtually non-existent as on date; (iii) the Department of Sports
and Youth Affairs should act as a nodal agency for this purpose; (iv) the government should also
issue clear-cut guidelines to the Union Public Service Commission for recruiting sportspersons in
Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ services als as there are many sportspersons of international standard having
adequate educational qualifications for these categories of posts. (para 70)

25. The Committee does realise the sportspersons’ concern about not getting adequate time
for practice due to pressure of work in their jobs. In such a situation, the Committee feels, it is the
duty, both of the sportspersons and their employers, to give topmost priority to sports so long as the
person is in full form and is in a position to win medals. (para 71)

26. The Committee notes that the existing cash awards system is not adequate to give the
much-needed financial support to sportspersons; and that cash awards for juniors and seniors are
highly disproportionate; and that for some sports these are incredibly higher. (para 72)

27. The amount of cash awards and pension being given to sportspersons by the government
should be increased substantially so as to make sports more attractive and lucrative. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Railways and the airlines operating in the country, both private


54

and the government, should provide free/concessional tickets to eminent sportspersons. (paras 73
& 75)

28. The Committee also recommends that certain categories of sportspersons should be given
preference in the allotment of soft loans by the banks, petrol and LP gas agencies and other such
incentives/benefits by the government. (para 76)

29 ‘he Committee recommends that one of the outstanding sportspersons may be nominated
to the Rajya Sabha in recognition of his/her distinguished service to the country. (para 77)

30. The Committee suggests that the government should ensure that no player or team is sent
abroad for participation in international tournaments unless they are accompanied by qualified
sports medicine doctors alongwith the necessary kits and other aids. (para 78)

31. The Committee was informed that, in some cases, the government is paying only 90% of
the fare and the remaining 10% is to be borne by the player himself or herself. The government
should investigate as to why part payment of air fare is being made to players attending international
meets and ensure that such a thing is not repeated in future. (paras 79 & 80)

32. The Committee is of the opinion that training forms the core of good performance and
champions cannot be produced by training the sportspersons just for a few months before the
games. The training system in the country, the Committee feels, leaves much to be desired. Sports
training has to be properly planned and controlled for achieving the best results. (para 81)

33. The Committee feels that kits should be provided to players and teams well in advance
before they leave for international meets. (para 82)

34. Efforts should be made to ensure that the diet available to sportsmen and women has the
nutritional value necessary to meet the specific requirements of different games and sports in which
they participate. The Committee is of the firm opinion that the government should immediately
raise the amount of diet allowance substantially so that players can get a rich and nutritious diet.

(paras 83 & 84)

35. The Goverment should evolve a system of proper monitoring and evaluation of the
performance of SAI coaches deployed at various places. Coaches who work hard and show good
results should be suitably rewarded. Simultaneously, those who do not take interest in sports or fail
to give any tangible results need to be dealt with sternly. (para 86)

36. The Committee feels that once a good rapport is established between the coach and the
students, it would not be advisable to disturb such coaches in the overall interest of the students

and the sports. (para 87)

37. Outstanding sportspersons who have represented the couniry in the international games
and have now retired from active sports, can work as good coaches. The Committee feels that
services of such sportspersons would be both beneficial and economic] and it would also give them
the much needed financial help and recognition of their talent. The Committee desires that this
system could be initially tried on an experimental basis which could be subsequently extended or
discontinued depending upon the results. (para 88)

38. The Committee suggests that either the entire control of the SAI coaches should be given
to the state governments who have comparatively better mechnism for their close monitoring or
they may be completely withdrawn. The state governments should be given full authority for all
the service matters of SAI coaches, including their postings and transfers. (para 89)


57

56. The Committee is of the opinion that media, particularly Doordarshan, is a potent and
powerful instrument for popularising sports. The Committee, keeping the condition of sports in
the country in view, feels that endeavour should be made to cover live, as far as possible, or through
highlights, all the national championships at senior and junior levels. The Committee feels that
there is a need to increase the equipments and other facilities available with Doordarshan and AIR
so that they do not feel handicapped in covering important and major sports events. The Commit-
tee also emphasises the need for improving the quality of live coverage and commentaries.
Doordarshan and AIR may also play an effective role in projecting the techniques and style of
eminent sportspersons by showing them in slow motion on the national hook-up. There is also a
need for calling eminent sportspersons in programmes on fitness, yoga, sports and games. (para
119).

57. The Committee is concerned to learn that some of the federations/boards are giving the
telecasting/broadcasting rights to foreign media companies, which is depriving Doordarshan of an
opportunity to earn revenues for its expansion and improvement. The Committee notes the sugges-
tion of Director General, Doordarshan, to have a legislation declaring some sports as of national
importance so that national media would be bound to cover the important events connected with
them, as is being done in Britain. (para 120).

58. The Committee noticed that neither the sports psychology nor the sports medicine was
being given any priority in India. The Committee feels that all the organisations working towards
promotion of sports must give due attention and priority to both these disciplines. The Committee
recommends that the services of good sports physiologists, psychologists and sports medical ex-
perts be made available to our players on the ground. There is a need for a more coordinated effort
on the part of coaches, sports scientists and sports medicine doctors to help sports persons enhance
their performance. Though SAI has made a beginning in this direction, yet a lot more needs to be
done. (paras 122 & 123).

59. In view of the decentralisation of resources to panchayats, government should ensure that
there is a sports complex in each panchayat. Panchayats should also hold sports competitions and
championships periodically. There is also need for scouting talent at an early age and select them
on scientific basis because it is all the more easier to train the young ones. Panchayat bodies should
take up this responsibility. (para 124).

60. The Committee finds it disappointing that most of the state governments have not made
any concrete plans to streamline the procedure for selection of sportspersons, their coaching and
participation in the national events so far. Improper selection of sportspersons, coupled with lack
of modern and rigorous training, results in disastrous performance at the international level. The
Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for streamlining thé entire system of selection of
sportspersons and their training so as to achieve the best results. State governments should be
asked to evolve long-term development programmes and also match them with adequate budget.
(para 126).

61. The Committee finds that so far neither the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports nor
the federations have takes any particular interest in the development of sports among Indian women
and whatever distinction women have achieved so far is largely due to their individual efforts.
(para 128).

62. The Committee feels there is a need to give good incentives in the form of cash awards and
medals so as to attract mass participation by women. Many parents would like to send their daugh-
ters to play games but they are hesistant to do so because of security and safety reasons. The Com-
mittee noticed that out of 18 sports hostels of SAI, there is only one sports hostel for women and
there is no exclusive SPDA hostel for girls. Therefore, the Committee feels, there is a need for


58

proper planning to develop sports amongst women, by opening more sports hostels and adopting
more sports-oriented girls schools. (para 129).

63. In India, there is a club culture but it is restricted only to football, cricket and wrestling.
Club culture can be developed by organising inter-club competitions and by providing patronage
at different levels by government agencies as well as business establishments. The Committee feels
that the club culture needs to be encouraged right from the panchayat level. The Committee feels
that the government should probe into the workings of the National Sports Club of India. The
Committee also desires that the other sports clubs existing in various parts of the country should
tarow open their facilities/infrastructure to sportspersons on concessional basis (para 135).

64. At present, there are about 32 to 34 disciplines in sports on which the country is spending
a lot of money. The Committee feels that due to paucity of funds we should not spread our scarce
resources thinly on each one of the games and it would be desirable to concentrate on a few selected
games and try to bag medals in these games at the international arena. (para 136).

65. The Committee emphasises the need for concentrating on traditional rural and tribal
sports like kho-kho, archery and kabaddi in which India could always do better than other coun-

tries. (para 138)

66. The Committee also feels that we should not send our teams to international sports events
in the disciplines where we do not have any chance of bagging medals. It would perhaps be better
not to participate than participating and losing in all the games, which would have a demoralising
effect. Before participating in international events, our players should be given enough exposure at
the national level and, if need be, we may invite foreign teams to India to participate in competi-
tions. (para 139)

67. The Committee feels that lack of funds and budgetary constraints are coming in the way
of development and promotion of sports. The amount earmarked’ by Government of India for
sports in 1995-96 is only Rs. 68.86 crores, which works out to 0.0001 % of the total budget of the
Government. The Committe recommends that, to begin with, atleast 0.5 per cent of the total budget
should be earmarked for sports promotion. (para 144)

68. Members of Parliament are given Rs. 1 crore every year under the MPs’ Local Area
Development Scheme by the Central Government. MLAs are also given special discretionary funds
by the respective state governments. A suggestion has come to the Committee that the MPs and
MLAs may be requested to earmark at least one to five per cent of this money every year for
purchasing sports equipments in the schools/colleges in their respective constituencies. (para 148)

69. The Committee feels that the Government alone cannot deliver the goods. Public and
private sectors’ involvement is necessary in supplementing the governmental efforts. The Commit-
tee, therefore, emphasises the need for a joint and coordinated approach by all the agencies, includ-
ing public and private sectors, in pooling their resources to promote sports in the country. This is
particularly necessary in the context of financial constraints, both at the central and state levels.
(para 149) :

70. The Committee recommends that each major industrial house, both in public and private
sectors, should be asked to adopt one sports discipline and they should take the total responsibility
of scouting talent and nurturing the same, including their participation in various national and
international events. On reciprocal basis, the concerned industrial house should have its nominee
in the particular national federation/association. (para 151)

71. Representatives of industrial houses appealed for tax exemption under revenue expendi-
ture also for scouting talent and training the teams. Such incentives are necessary for the continued


59

support of industrial houses in sports. The Income-tax Act should, therefore, be suitably amended
so as to give substantial tax exemption to organisations investing in sports. Special Customs Duty
exemption for certain categories of imported sports equipments is required to be made. Liberal-
ised access to foreign exchange for import of sports equipment is also called for. (paras 152 & 154)

72. There is a lot of duplication of efforts as various sports control boards, such as Services,
Railways, P&T, Banks and Para-military police forces, Steel plants, Coal-fields etc., are contribut-
ing in their own way for promotion of sports without any coordination with each other. Much
worse is the lack of cooperation and communication between these bodies on the one hand and the
Sports Authority of India (SAT) and the federations on the other. The Committee is not happy with
this chaotic situation and lack of coordination among various bodies is resulting in loss of scarce
resources and time. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs
and Sports should take immediate steps to develop an effective machinery for regular dialogue and
coordination with various organisations so that no effort is duplicated and wastage of time and
money could be avoided. (para 155)

73. The Committee found that very limited sports infrastructure has been provided in the
whole of the North-Eastern region. The region is also denied major sports tournaments and cham-
pionships. The Committee, therefore, recommends that governments and SAI, as well as national
sports federations, should concentrate in this sports fertile area, not only for scouting and nurtur-
ing of potential sports persons and providing adequate and suitable infrastructure in this region
but also for holding more and more competitions. (para 132)

74. The Committee is quite disappointed to learn that we have not been able to, till now,
identify the sports persons who would represent India in the 1996 Olympics at Atlanta even though
only seven months are left now. The Committee strongly recommends that we should start select-
ing our players/teams without further delay not only for Olympics 1996 and Asian Games 1998 but
also for Olympics 2000 and prepare them scientifically with a view to winning medals for the
country (para 156)

75. The Committee feels that unless Sports is also brought under the “Concurrent List’ of the
Constitution, sports activities in the country cannot be uniformly regulated in an effective and
coordinated manner. (para 157)

76. The Committee also recommends that the government should bring forward a Central
legislation, specifying the roles and responsibilities of the SAI, federations/ associations and of the
state bodies so that a uniform and common approach could be adopted towards promotion of
sports by different agencies. This law should also provide for an effective regulatory mechanism in
the sports arena without impairing the autonomy of various agencies. Such legislations are already
in existence in countries like USA, Germany, Thailand, Sri Lanka and China. (para 157)

77. The Committee has come to the conclusion that the bureaucratic functioning of the SAI is
proving to be a major obstacle in the free and smooth operation of the regional centres. The
Committee feels that unless these Centres are strengthened, we cannot expect better results from
them. The SAI office in Delhi could be just a coordinating authority and should concentrate on
policy, planning and monitoring. There should be a Sub-regional centre of SAI in each State, with
a Director in charge of it. (Para 162)

78. At present, there are six Regional Centres at Chandigarh, Delhi, Bangalore, Calcutta,
Imphal and Gandhinagar. The Central Region, which is at present located in Delhi, should be
shifted to Luchmow, as originally contemplated. The North-Eastern region, comprising eight states
including Sikkim, should have two centres, one located at Imphal and the other at GuwahatilShillong.
The Committee desires that each one of the Regional Centres should be headed by a Regional


60

Director, with almost full powers. Two Executive Directors in Delhi could look after the
administrative and coordinating works of the organisation, as well as matters relating to teams.
The Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, should not be the Director-General of
SAL. Instead, a full-time Chairman-cum-MD, with good sports background or interest in sports,
should be appointed by the government. (para-163)

79. The SAI governing body shall consist of fifteen members, including the Chairman-cum-
MD, two Exective Directors, seven Regional Directors, one Financial Advisor and four non-official
Members elected by the General Council. The General Council of SAI, headed by the Minister of
Human Resource Development, shall consist of the Minister of Sports, the Secretary, Deptt. of
Youth Affairs & Sports, the Chairman-cum-MD of SAI, the Financial Advisor, the Executive
Directors, Regional Directors and Directors of SAI sub-centres, representatives of the State Sports
AuthoritiesISports Council, Joint Secretary in the Ministry of HRD, five Arjuna Awardees/
Olympians, three coaches, Secretary General, IOA, five representatives of national sports
federations, two representatives of public sector sports control boards, five sports experts such as
sports journalists and commentators and three Members of Parliament. The number shall not

exceed 100. (para 163)

80. The Committee feels that the National Sports Talent Contest Scheme appears to be very
sound, reaching upto the village or panchayat level. However, in actual practice, it has achieved
very limited results. After ten years of its implementation, the scheme has thrown up very few
outstanding sports-persons. The scheme is now operated only in 44 schools in the country, SAI and
State Governments do not seem to be paying attention to give adequate publicity to it.

The Committee, therefore, feels that a wide publicity campaign should be launched through
mass inedia/local newspapers and also through locally elected bodies, well before the selection
process starts. The Committee also expresses its concern over the implementation aspect of the
scheme, which is fraught with various flaws and loopholes. The Sports Authority of India should
periodically monitor the functioning of each school and also insist on improving the sports
infrastructure and boarding/lodging facilities. The Committee finds that no serious thought has
been given to the number of schools to be adopted which is borne out by the fact that the number of
schools adopted is not commensurate with the number of children selected. Henceforth, preference
should be given under NSTC Scheme to Kendriya Vidyalayas, Navodaya Vidyalayas, Sainik Schools
and government boys/girls schools. (paras 169, 170, 171, 172 & 176)

81. Out of 78 SPDA Centres proposed to be set up, only 33 centres have started functioning so
far. The Committee expresses its displeasure over such a tardy progress of the scheme and strongly
urges upon the central as well as the state governments to work in close tandem with each other in
the larger interest of development of sports. As regards the suggestion of the Tata Consultaricy
Services to phase out the SPDA scheme, the Committee is of the view that it is not based on a sound
proposition. To wind up the scheme simply on the pretext of States’ failure is not sound. The SPDA
centres should be converted into SAI Sub-regional Centres in course of time, with additional inputs.
(paras 182 & 190)

82. Although the Committee expresses its overall satisfaction with the functioning and
performance of the Special Area Games Scheme as far as archery, hockey and watersports are
concerned, it is constrained to observe that the achievements in other disciplines, particularly
gymnastics and athletics, have not been upto the mark. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that based on the population/concentration of tribal and other communities, government should
try to expand this scheme in the rural and tribal areas and take all necessary measures to streamline
and revamp the scheme. (paras 191 & 192)


61

83. The Committee recommends that government should review the National Coaching Scheme
to set right shortcomings and streamline the functioning of the scheme at the earliest. The concept
of sports hostel should be reoriented and focussed towards achievement of excellence at the
international level. (para 196)

84. The Committee is also of the view that it is imperative to prioritise disciplines for sports
hostel scheme and select only those games in which India has the potentiality of achieving results in

the international arena. (para 201)

85, The Committee found that the Army Boys Sports Company Scheme is functioning very
efficiently because the overall atmosphere of discipline in the Regimental Centres is quite conducive
for the development of sporting skills amongst children. The Committee is of the opinion that the
amount of Rs. 35 being given for diet per head under this scheme is quite inadequate and should be
increased substantially. During the course of their interaction with the Committee, representatives
of the Services Sports Control Board expressed a desire to have one school in each Regiment. SAI
may have to enlarge the scheme, accordingly, as it is likely to pay better dividends. The Committee
recommends that apart from extending the scheme to other regiments of the army, the scheme
should be extended to the central para-military forces also who are keen to run schools on the same
lines as by army regiments. (paras 203, 204 & 205)