PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON

HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT *

THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
ON
THE MAHATMA GANDHI ANTARRASHTRIYA HINDI VISHWAVIDYALAYA
BILL, 1995

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 15.12.1995)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13.12.1995)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 1995/Agrahayana, 1917 (Saka)

_reremeeeyrene one


CyOEN BANE:

COMPOSITION OFTHE  COMOAPITED ss २०5० > 32 207 न 5 snc tested mateo pean (i)-(ii)

PREFACE

Report.

Press RELEASE

MIND TES २ २०५० guses kek said esnsthvs saado¥es जन beaters Lau inaanageasanelacne eas ५०४ कक 7-14


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

4. Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Shri 0. P. Kohli

6. Shri M. P. Abdussamad Samadani ~

7. Shri ५, Hanumantha Rao

8. Shri Md.. Salim

9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

10. Prof. I. G. Sanadi

ll. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
“14, Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana, Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
17, Dr. ५. Rajeshwaran
18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
20. Dr. Vasant Pawar
21. Vacant

i 22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
24. Shri Z. M. Kahandole
25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K. T. Vandayar
28. Vacant
29. Shri Inder Jit
30. Shri Anna Joshi
31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
32. Shri Chinmaya Nand. Swami
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K. D. Jeswani
36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. 0. L. Kanaujia

‘ 38. Shri Rambadan
39, Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

' 40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

(i)


(ii)

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

43. Shri Venkateswatlu Ummareddy

44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram a

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

Shri Om Datta Sharma, Under Secretary

Shri N. K. Singh, Deputy Director

Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

A 2७ So Sh ३० १००



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, present this Thirty-
third Report of the Committee on the Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi
Vishwavidyalaya Bill, 1995.

2. The Mahatma Gandhi, Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Bill, 1995 which was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 24th August, 1995, seeks to establish and incorporate
a teaching University for the promotion and development of Hindi language and literature,
through teaching and research, with a view to enabling Hindi to achieve greater functional
efficiency and recognition as a major international language and to provide for matters
connected therewith, or incidental thereto.

3. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill to the Committee for examination
and report. %

4. A Press COmmunique inviting suggestions/views from individuals, organisations and
institutions interested in the subject matter of the Bill was issued on the 4th September,
1995. Several memoranda containing views/opinions in response thereto were received by
the Committee.

5. The Committee considered the Bill in four sittings and heard the oral evidence of
some of the members of the Expert Committee which recommended to set up a Hindi
University.

6. The Committee, in its meeting held on December 11, 1995, considered the draft
report on the Bill and adopted the same for presentation/aying in both the Houses of
Parliament.

New Deni; P. UPENDRA
December 11, 1995 Chairman,
aS PAN Ue ay Rae TTS. Committee on Human
20 Agrahayana, 1917 (Saka) Resource Development.

(iii)


REPORT

Hindi, apart from being the official language of the Union, is also a link language within
the country. Besides, Hindi occupies a special place in countries like Mauritius, Fiji,
Surinam, Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago, etc., where a large number of people of Indian
origin have settled. They have tremendous interest in learning and use of this language.
Hindi, in fact, enables them to maintain their link with India.

2. According to the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development, although Hindi is being taught and studied in many Indian Universities and in
nearly 150 universities abroad, the need to have a centralised institution or a centre for the
study of Hindi language, which could meet the requirements of the Hindi-loving people in
India and abroad, was being felt for a long time. The idea of having an international Hindi
University originated from a Resolution passed by the First Vishwa Hindi Sammelan, held at
Nagpur in 1975. This was reiterated by the Second and Third Vishwa Hindi Sammelans held
in the years 1976 and 1983 respectively,

3. The National policy on Education, 1986 had emphasised, inter-alia, development of
Hindi as the link language, as provided in Article 351 of the Constitution. One of the several
Task Forces set up for preparing the Programme of Action to implement the National
Education Policy recommended establishment of an International Hindi University.
Accordingly, the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development,
constituted a five-member Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Shiv Mangal Singh
‘Suman’ to examine, in detail, the nature, structure, jurisdiction, venue, estimates of
financial resources, etc., of the proposed University. This Committee, after examining the
matter, submitted its report in April, 1993. The Bill, under examination, has been drafted in
the light of the recommendations of this Committee

4, It may be mentioned that the outline of a University called ‘Vishwa Hindi
Vidyapeeth’ was submitted at the instance of the then Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi,
to the Ministry of Education, in the year 1983, which was forwarded to the University
Grants Commission (UGC) for consideration. The UGC had then opined that the idea of
setting up a University exclusively for Hindi was not educationally sound, as it was likely to’
isolate learners of Hindi from those of the other disciplines, making thereby cross-
fertilization of ideas and information impossible. The objectives, according to the UGC,
could be met either by strengthening/developing the existing infrastructure on the desired
lines or by setting up a separate institute, but certainly not by setting up a separate
University. The UGC, however, re-examined its stand in 1992 and expressed the view that
due to the unique status of Hindi in the country, as well as its growing importance in the
international sphere, ‘‘Setting up of an international Hindi University is very essential and its
nature and structure should be different from that of other conventional universities.”

5. The objectives of the proposed Hindi University, as outlined in the Bill, are: the
development of Hindi as an international language; active pursuit of comparative study and
research in Hindi and other Indian languages; developing international information and
resource centre for this purpose; conducting courses in translation and interpretation in
addition to courses concerning development of Hindi; encouraging and conducting research
in linguistics with the perspective of Hindi and in areas relating to development of Hindi and

1


2

Indian languages; conducting courses by distance mode for teaching Hindi to non-Hindi
speaking people in India and to interested persons abroad; and to reach out to Hindi
scholars and groups interested in Hindi abroad and to associate them in teaching/research
in the University.

6. In order to achieve the objectives mentioned above, the Bill proposes to have four
schools, i.e. (a) the School of Languages; (b) the School of Literature; (c) the School of
Culture; and (d) the School of Translation and Interpretation.. The University, it has
been stated, will not have Departments of other Indian languages. but programmes in
comparative literature and language would, however, provide inputs regarding various
Indian languages. The School of Language would conduct courses and research in
subjects like lexicography, grammar, dialects, scripts, linguistics, etc., in relation to Hindi
language. It would focus on the comparative study of Hindi and other Indian languages
as also of linguistics from the perspective of Hindi. The school of culture would be
mainly research-oriented. Various aspects of Indian culture would form subject of
research in this school. The underlying idea behind having such a school is that any
comprehensive understanding of a language or its literature is not possible without
studying its cultural moorings. The School of Translation and Interpretation would be
expected to give the much needed thrust to these two activities.

7. Members of the Expert Committee, set up under Dr. Shiv Mangal Singh ‘Suman’,
who appeared before the Committee, argued that the proposed University would be
different from the other existing Universities in its objectives and structural features.
They strongly pleaded about the need for having an international University as soon as
possible despite the fact that they were not in complete agreement with certain provisions
of the Bill. which, according to them, were not in accordance with the recommendations
made by them in the report submitted to the Government.

8. As regards the need and justification for the University, the Department of
Education informed that currently there was no centre/Institute of international status
which could link all activities concerning Hindi studies and research to other Indian and
international languages and which could raise the standard of this language adequately, in
the context of modern knowledge and social roles that a language has to perform. This
work is so comprehensive and specialised, that only an apex body like an International
Hindi University would be able to accomplish it. This University, argued the Department,
would bring India culturally closer to the countries having large numbers of Hindi-
speaking people and would generate a lot of goodwill for India internationally.

9. In response to a query as to how far the proposed University would be different
from the Institutes/Departments of Hindi in the existing Universities, the Department of
Education submitted that the proposed University was intended to have many unique
features. Firstly, it would focus on comparative studies of Hindi and Indian Languages as
also of linguistics from:the perspective of Hindi. Secondly, the University would seek to
strengthen the cultural bond between India and many other countries where there is a
sizeable number of people of Indian origin and who are desirous of preserving their
moorings and traditions. A feature in the same direction is that the University is being
enabled to have teachers also from such origins. Thirdly, the University would be future-
oriented in the sense that it would give great importance to the emerging disciplines of

a


2.

translation and interpretation and would have a full-fledged Computer Unit. Ultimately,
however, the level of excellence, the Department felt, would be determined by the work
of the faculty it acquires.

10. When the Committee sought to know if the objectives of the University could not

“be achieved by strengthening/developing the departments of Hindi in the existing

Universities, the Department of Education stated that the existing Universities were
providing mostly traditional courses in Hindi medium and no institution was currently
having a cohesive academic programme relating to the disciplines to be covered by the
four schools proposed in the Hindi University. The main idea behind having this
University, according to the Department of Education, is “to establish a central
institution for development and propagation of Hindi at the national and international
level. The conventional Universities, in fact, do not have this as overriding objective.”

The Committee noted that there are Hindi Chairs established by the Indian Council
for Cultural Relations (ICCR) in various foreign Universities with a view to propagating
and promoting Hindi abroad. The Committee was also informed that courses in Hindi
were being offered in as many as 183 Universities/institutions all over the world. The
Committee sought clarification from the Department of Education as to how the
proposed University would co-ordinate with those institutions and whether it would not
lead to duplication of activities. It was submitted that Hindi, being the link language,
required to be developed into a very dynamic language through active interaction with
other languages. It was further clarified that although Hindi was being taught in various
universities in India and abroad, nothing dynamic had taken place and much more
needed to be done. As regards functional duplication with the ICCR, the Committee was
informed that the university would, in “fact, supplement the activities of the ICCR in this
regard,

12. When asked whether the objectives of the proposed University could not be met by
strengthening the Kendriya Hindi Sansthan, Agra, the Director of the Sansthan stated
that the objectives sought to be achieved by the proposed University were, more or less,
the same which the Sansthan was trying to achieve. The representative of: the
Department of Education, however, felt that there was no significant functional
overlapping between the Kendriya Hindi Sansthan and the proposed University. The
Department assured that the suitable remedial measures would be initiated in case any
such overlapping comes up after the University was established.

13. The Committee expressed its feeling that the proposal might give rise to similar
demands from other language-groups in the country to set up separate Universities for
them. When the Committee asked if such demands come up, would the Centre provide
financial and other assistance for this, the Department replied that ‘Education’ being in
the concurrent List, every State had the power to create a language University of its
own. As regards: financial and other assistance from the Central Government, the
representative of the Department of Education, said:

‘it would be desirable for the Central Government to help and dssist the
development of all the languages which are listed in the Constitution. This has to be
done by us. But when it is a question of availability of resources, probably, one has.
necessarily, to prioritise. Under the prioritisation scheme, obviously, Hindi as a link
language, would get a higher priority. That is not to be little the other languages
They have also an equal claim, I think, with the availability of adequate resources,


4

Perhaps, in an idealistic situation, the Central Government should assist. But it is
always possible that in the immediate scenario, this may not happen.”

14. The Committee pointed out that there was’ no provision for teaching Gandhian
thought and philosophy in a University which is being set up in the name of Mahatma
Gandhi and at a place closely associated with him. The representative, Department of
Education, assured the Committee that the new university would not go in for something
that is only styled as Gandhian philosophy or Gandhian concept but it would certainly go
in for what Gandhiji stood for,

15. The attention of the Department of Education was drawn towards the fact that the
University was intended to work as a centralised institution “Which would coordinate,
develop or direct programmes in the existing Universities.”” On an enquiry as to whether
having a University to coordinate, develop and direct other Universities would not impinge
upon the autonomy of the Universities, the Department stated that it would not be done
by any statutory control but by making the proposed University a ‘Centre of Excellence’
for others to emulate and utilise. He explained it by giving examples of the Indian
Instijutes of Management and the Indian Institutes of Technology which have worked
tremendously for Quality upgradation not by exercising any control but by raising the level
of excellence to such an extent that other institutions were motivated to follow them,

16. The question of funding also came up for discussion and Members expressed their
apprehension as to whether the provision made for the University would be adequate for
setting up the University and running it. The Department itself agreed that the amount
projected in the Bill was an underestimate and that the Government was committed to
provide adequate funds to the UGC specifically for this purpose. The Committee welcomes
this assurance,

17. There was a broad consensus amongst the members of the Committee on the need
for propagation and development of Hindi as the official language of the Union and as a
link language within the country. It was agreed that in spite of there being sufficient
expertise in the country for higher research and for creation and dissemination of
knowledge in Hindi, both from a linguistic and literary point of view, the development of
Hindi had lagged behind. The need for interacting with trends of study, research and
language learning in other countries, where large sections of Hindi-speaking people lived,
was also unanimously admitted. It was agreed that there must be no delay in taking all
measures necessary for the purpose. Members were also unanimous in asserting that the
125th Birth anniversary of Gandhiji should be commemorated in a befitting manner by
establishing an international university in his name.

18. However, whilé most of the members were in agreement with the proposal of setting
up an international Hindi University, a few members expressed their doubts and argued
that the‘objectives of the proposed university could be achieved by strengthening the Hindi
Departments in the existing Universities or even by upgrading some selected, Departments
as Centres of Excellence. It was their view that centralisation of these resources is likely to
be detrimental to the efforts that scholars and teachers of Hindi, spread out all over the
country, are now making. Further they felt: that the Department’s description of: the
proposed University as an apex body did not tally with its assertion that it would not
impinge upon the autonomy of the existing Departments. They also felt that the Kendriya


A

5

Hindi Sansthan, Agra, could be up-graded and expanded if necessary, to achieve the
projected objectives. The idea of setting up a new Institute, rather than a University, was
also mooted.

19. Some membérs and experts were also not convinced that comparative studies
between Hindi and other Indian Languages could be carried out efficiently within the
proposed parameters of the University which would not have Departments for the study of
other languages. They felt that there would be better opportunities for such comparative
studies in a situation where such departments, with their own community of scholars and
experts, existed side by side with Hindi Departments.

20. Reacting to the possibility of achieving the desired objectives by alternatives such as
(i) strengthening/expanding Hindi Departments in certain selected Universities; (ii) setting
up an Institute, not necessarily a full-fledged University; or (iii) by strengthening the
Kendriya Hindi Sansthan, Agra, which was already trying to achieve the objectives projected
by the proposed Hindi University, the representative of the Department of Education
summed up the Government’s stand in the following words:—

“I would concede, right at the beginning, that there are two or three different
routes to what we are seeking to achieve and the Government considers this route
of setting up of the International Hindi University to be a very significant step.
This route, perhaps, has greater chance of success.”

21. It was further stated that by proposing such a University, the Department of,
Education, in fact, was responding to a long-standing popular demand of the Hindi-loving
people from India and abroad.

22. Keeping in mind the status of Hindi as the official and link language in the country
and in view of the commitment already made by the Government and the long-cherished
desire of the Hindi-loving people in India and abroad, the Committee approves the Bill and
recommends that it be passed.

23. The Committee, however, is of the view that the Union Government has a
responsibility to develop other Indian languages also. The Committee is aware that some
States have already started separate Universities for the promotion of language, literature
and culture of the respective regions. The Telugu University in Andhra Pradesh, the Hampi
Kannada University in Karnataka and the Tamil University in Tamil Nadu come in this
category. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government should
extend all possible help/assistance to such existing or new Universities so as to remove any
sense of discrimination and promote national integration.

24. The Committee trusts that the observations and recomendations made in the
preceding paragraphs would be implemented in letter and spirit.


PRESS RELEASE

The Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Bill, 1995, was introduced
in the Rajya Sabha on the 24th August, 1995. This Bill has been referred to the
‘arliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, headed by Shri P.
Upendra, M.P., for examination and report.

2. The Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Bill, 1995, proposes to
establish a teaching University at Wardha for the promotion and development of Hindi
language and literature, through teaching and research with a view to enabling Hindi to
achieve greater functional efficiency and recognition as a major international language.

3. The Bill seeks to meet the aspiration of a large number of Hindi loving people of
Indian origin residing abroad and having interest in learning and teaching Hindi and would
help those people to maintain link with their parent culture. Even though Hindi is taught
and studied in most of the Indian Universities and in nearly 150 Universities abroad, there is
no certralised institution or a centre of studies which coordiantes/develops or directs
programmes to meet such expectations.

4. Since the proposed Bill is of utmost public importance, the Committee invites views/
suggestions of the individuals/organisations/institutions, etc. on the subject matter. The
views/suggestions may be sent to Shri N. K. Singh, Deputy Director, Rajya Sabha
Secretariat, Room No. 534, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 110 001, latest by 22nd
September, 1995.

5. Copy of the Bill can be obtained on requisition.


i
i
1
|

setae ८

MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

XV
“FIFTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Monday, the 11th September, 1995 in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra —Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

३, Shri 0. P. Kohli

4. Prof. I. G. Sanadi

5. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

6. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
7. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

8. Shri Inder Jit

9. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11, Dr. G. L. Kanaujia

12. Shri Anna Joshi

13. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
14. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
15. Shri Suraj Mandal

WITNESSES

1. Shri S. V. Giri, Secretary (Education)

2. Shri Y. N. Chaturvedi, Additional Secretary

3. Prof. (Ms.) Armaity S. Desai, Chairman, U.G.C.
4. Shri Inderjit Khanna, Secretary, U.G.C.

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri O. D. Sharma, Under Secretary

4. Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the views of the above witnesses on the provisions of the
Maulana Azad National Urdu University Bill, 1995 and the Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya
Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Bill, 1995.

*Minutes of I to XIV meetings of the Committee relate to matters not included in the Report.

५


8

2.1 A yerbkatim record of the evidence was kept.

3 * * *
4 * : * *
5. * . .
6. * * *
7 * . *
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m.

***Relates to some other matter.

i


XVII
“SEVENTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. and again at 2.30 p.m. on Monday the 9th October,
1995 in Committee Room ‘D’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri P. Upendhra —— Chairman
. Shri 0. P. Kohli

Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. I. G. Samadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

LOK SABHA

8. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran
9, Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
10.°Dr. Vasant Pawar
. Shri Bapu Hari: Chaure
12. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
13. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi.
14. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
15. Dr. G. L. Kanaujia
16, Shri Anna Joshi
ve 17. Prof, Malini Bhattacharya
18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
19. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
20. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh, M.P., Special Invitee

WITNESSES

“Z. Dr. Ram Lal Parikh, Vice-Chancellor, Gujarat Vidya Peeth

. Prof. Shiv Kumar Mishra, Sardar Patel Vishwa Vidyalaya

. Prof. Ram Singh Tomar, Shantiniketan

Prof. S, P. Dikshit, Hindi Department, Lucknow University

Prof. Ramchandra Dev, Hindi Department, Cochin University -

Dr. Nagendra

. Shri Mahavir Saran Jain, Director, Central Hindi Institute Agra

. Prof. Rakesh Khurana, Pro. V. C., IGNOU, New Delhi

. Shri Mahmoodur Rehman, V.C., Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh
. Prof. Yash Pal, Former Chairman, U.G.C.

. Shri Syed Hamid, Former Vice-Chancellor, Aligarh Muslim University

NAWEWN #+

a
=

tek

हे
4
*

89०9० :३ ७ ७ + ४० [७

ee

*Minutes of XVI meeting of the Committee relates to matter not included in the Report.

9


10

12. Shri A. J. Kidwai, Former Vice-Chancellor, Aligarh Muslim University
13. Shri Aziz Qureshi, ex-M.P.

14, Shri P. R. Dasgupta, ees) Department of Education, Ministry

15. Shri Nayed Masood, Director of Human.Resource Development

16, Prof. (Ms.) Armaity S. Desai, Chairperson

17. Prof. N.C. Mathur, Vice-Chairman एम Grants Commission
18. Shri Indeyjit Khanna, Secretary

SECRETARIAT

1, Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

2. Shri N. K. Singh, Deputy Director

3. Shri'O. D. Sharma, Under Secretary

4. Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer.

2. The Committee heard oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses on the
Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Bill, 1995 and the Maulana Azad
National Urdu University Bill, 1995.

3 * * * *

4. The Committee appointed a drafting Committee on the Mahatma Gandhi
Antarashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Bill, 1995 and the Maulana Azad National Urdu
University Bill, 1995 with Dr. M. Aram as Convenor and Shri O.P. Kohli, Prof. 1. G.
Sanadi, Prof. (Mrs.) Savithiri Lakshmanan and Prof. Malini Bhattacharya as its members.

4.1. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m.

***Relates to some other matter.

ar


~t

a

XX
“TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. and again at 3.00p.m. on Tuesday, the 14th

November, 1995 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.

PRESENT

1, Shri P, Upendra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2, Dr. M. Aram

3. Smt, Renuka Chowdhury

4, Shri O. P. Kohli

5. Shri ५. Hanumantha Rao

6. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
7. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

8, Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

10. Prof. (Smt.) Savithiri Lakshmanan
11. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

12. Dr. Vasant Pawar

13. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
14, Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

15. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
16..Shri Dau. Dayal Joshi

17. Shri Mahadeepak Singh

18. Shri Anna Joshi

19. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

* * *
WITNESSES

SECRETARIAT

Shri N. K. Singh, Deputy Director

*Minutes of XVIII and XIX meetings of the Committee relates to matters not included in the Report.

ll


12

2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on the Maulana Azad National Urdu
University Bill, 1995 and the Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Bill,
1995 prepared by the Drafting Committee.
* *

* *

* *

An Rw

. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m.

*** Relates to some other matter.


xxii
“TWENTY-THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 11th December, 1995 in Committee

Room No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Dr. M. Aram
. Shri 0. P. Kohli

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
. Shri Md. Salim
. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
. Prof. 1. 0. Sanadi
8. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
10. Shri Inder Jit
ye 11. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

NYA Wt ७७-३७

12, Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
13. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
14. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
15. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
३. Shri. N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri 0. D. Sharma, Under Secretary *
‘XN 5. Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

*Minutes of XXI and XXII meetings of the Committee relates to matters not included in the Report.

13


14

2. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Thirty-third Report on the
Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Bill, 1995. After some
modifications, the Committee adopted the Report and decided to present in both the Houses
of Parliament.

3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman and in his absence, Shri Md. Salim
and Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Inder Jit
and in his absence Dr. G.L. Kanaujia, to lay it on the Table of Lok Sabha.

4, The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 p.m.