PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

NINETEENTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1995-96 (DEMAND NO. 39) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
2 HEALTH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25.04.1995)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25.04.1995)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 1995/Chaitra, 1917 (Saka)


REPORT

1. The Department of Health aims at securing to the citizens a healthy life by
promoting various policies and programmes, covering preventive, promotive and: curative
health care. The Central sector health programmes can be broadly classified as (i) Centrally
Sponsored Schemes and (ii) Purely Central Schemes.

1.1 The Department of Health incurs expenditure, either directly or through various
institutions and establishments run by it, and also by way of grants given to autonomous and
voluntary organisations. Grants to States and Union Territory administrations are mainly for
Centrally Sponsored Health Schemes being implemented through State Governments and
Union territory administrations. These include national programmes for prevention, coutrol
and eradication of diseases, particularly the communicable ones.

1.2 Centrally Sponsored Health Schemes, financed 100% by the Central Government,
are the National Schemes for Prevention of Visual Impairment and Blindness, including
Trachoma, National Leprosy Eradication Programme, National Guinea/worm Eradication
programme and National AIDS Control Programme, etc.

1.3 Schemes on which the expenditure is shared between the Central Governmest and
the State Governments on 50 : 50 basis are the National Malaria Eradication Programme
(Rural and Urban), Sexually Transmitted Diseases Control Programme, National
T.B. Control Programme and Kala Azar Control Programme.

1.4 Besides running some hospitals and dispensaries, the Department finances, wholly
or substantially, some autonomous Institutions engaged in patient care and/or medical
research, such as AIIMS, ICMR, JIPMER, Pondicherry, AIIPMER, Bombay, PGIMER,
Chandigarh, Central Councils for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, Unani, Joga and
Naturopathy and Homeopathy, etc.

1.5 It has set up National Institutes separately for various systems of Indian Medicine
and Homeopathy. Two Public Sector Undertakings (i) Indian Medicine Pharmaceutical
Corporation Ltd.; and (ii) Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (India) Ltd., have also
been set up by the Department. Voluntary Organisations and Institutions, substantially
assisted by the Department, are the Indian Red Cross Society, New Delhi, Tuberculosis
Centres, New Delhi, Lala Ramsarup Tuberculosis Hospital, Mehrauli, etc.

1.6 The Secretariat of the Department of Health, mainly engaged in policy formulation,
is advised on the broad policy matters by the Central Councial of Health, set up under
Article 263 of the Constitution. The Health Ministers of Stastes are its members. Technical
expertise on medical and public health matters is provided by the Directorate General of
Health Services, an attached office of the Ministry. The Directorate General of Health
Services is also responsible for implementation of programmes through its subordinate
offices, including Hospitals, Medical Stores Depots, Drugs Controiler, Training and
Research Institutions, etc.

2. The Committee notes that the total outlay of the Department for the year 1995-96 is
Rs. 1048.16 crores of which Rs. 644.57 crores is under plan and Rs. 403.59 under non-plan.

The Committee was informed that the allocation for the Department of health constituted
0.06% of the total budget of the Government of India for 1995-96.


2.1 When asked about the reasor for providing less in the non-plan this year, it was
explained by the Department that the non-Plan budget for 1994-95, which was increased to
Rs. 408.09 crores in the RE, included provision of Rs. 24.00 crores to accommodate the grant
from Germany for Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Cancer Research, New Delhi. This, being
national and cae-time grant, was not a part of the regular budget. In other words, the actual
non-Plan budget of the Department was Rs. 384.89 crores which has been enhanced to
Rs. 403.59 crores in 1995-96 i.e. an increase of 4.86% over the previous year’s budget
provision.

2.2 Similarly, regarding allocation, on the revenue side, the Secretary, Department of
Health, explained that it also included Rs. 75 crores of German aid which was to be received
in terms of equipment in the year 1995-96. So, for the purpose of comparison, he argued,
Rs. 75 crores had to be deducted from the RE of the last year.

2.3 The Committee is deeply concerned over such a meagre allocation (i.e. 0.06% of the
total budget) for Health, which forms an important ingredient of human development. The
WHO has recommended that the public health care expenditure should be at least 5% of the
GDP, if equity and universal coverage has to be realised. Public expenditure in health sector
in India, both by the Centre and the States, however, has been a litte over 1.5% of the GDP.
The Committee hopes that the Government would make efforts to achieve the target of
spending 5% of the GDP on Health sector by the year 2000 AD.

2.4 The Committee feels that the allocation for the Department of health, though shows
an increase this year over the previous year, does not appear to be adequate in view of India’s
commitment to attain ‘Health for All’ by 2000 A.D. With the present rate of increase, the
Committee apprehends, that ‘Health of All’ would remain a distant goal. The Committee,
therefore, feels that if at all the Government is serious about this, it should try to find out
ways and means for providing a suitable share to the Health sector from the GDP every year.

2.5 The Committee observed that, generally, non-plan expenditure has been going up
leaps and bounds resulting, sometimes, in diversion of plan funds to the non-plan expenditure,
which is not a healthy practice. When asked about this, the Department stated that there had
been a rising trend in the prices of medicines and other consumables, which being non-plan
expenditure, had an edge on demands for higher allocation. In view of this factor, the Ministry
of finance was requested to make necessary additional allocations at the R.E. stage. the
Department, however, had not made any diversion of funds from plan to non-plan to meet the
increased expenditure under non-plan. The Committee is happy to note that no such diversion
of funds was resorted to by the Department.

Medical Education and Training

3. The Committee wanted to know if the total outlay provided for Medical Education,
Training and Research in the year 1995-96, was less than what was provided last year. It was
explained to the Committee that it was not, if compared to the BE of the last year. While an
outlay of Rs. 258.26 crores was provided in BE 1994-95, Rs. 277.77 crores has been provided
for this purpose in BE 1995-96. As regards increasing the allocation to Rs. 322.84 crores at RE
level, the Committee was informed that this allocation also included the component of
German aid which was one-time grant.

3.1 The Committee notes that the allocation for Medical Education Research and Training
included outlays mainly for premier institutions like AIIMS, PGIMER, Chandigarh, MCI and
ICMR, etc, which are the back-bone of medical research and training in our country. In view of
the shortage of trained medical and para-medical specialis! manpower in the country and the
urgent need for strengthening the base of medical research, the allocation for this purpose, the
Committee feels, is not adequate and it should, therciore, be suitably increased.


3.2 In the context of growing number of private medical Colleges, the Committee
recommends creation of proper monitoring machinery to supervise their function. It also
emphasises the need for strengthening the MCI.

Cancer Research

4. There is reduction in allocation for Cancer research from
Rs. 19.80 lakhs in the BE, 1994-95 to Rs. 16.88 crores in BE 1995-96. When questioned; the
Secretary, Department of Health, stated that the allocation had to be reduced as the
Department was not giving now any recurring grants but was only giving a lump-sum of
Rs. 50 lakhs per year to various hospitals and regional cancer centres for establishing Cobalt
units and opening of Oncology wings in various medical colleges.

4.1 The Commitiee is not satisfied with the answer given by the Secretary regarding the
cut in the allocation for Cancer research. Cancer treatment, in fact, requires highly
sophisticated and costly equipment which is not available even in reputed Government
Hospitals. In view of the cancer treatment becoming expensive, there is an imperative need
to provide adequate facilities for this. The Committee, therefore, recommends an increase in
allocation for this purpose from the next year and regional cancer centres given more funds.

Nursing Schools

5. In reply to the Committee’s recommendation (para 73) last year to open more
nursing schools in the country, the Department had informed that 10 such schcools were
proposed to be set up during 1994-95 and 1995-96 for which Rs. 150 lakhs was provided last
year. When asked about the position regarding money spent so far, the Department
informed that out of Rs. 150 lakh provided for this purpose in 1994-95, a sum of Rs. 83.70
lakhs had been released to the following institutions/State Governments to open six new
nursing schools during the year 1994-95:—

Name of the State/Instiiution No. of Nursing schools Amount Sanctioned
Mizoram one Rs. 13.95 lakhs
Kerala one Rs. 13.95 lakhs
Karnataka one Rs. 13.95 lakhs
West Bengal two Rs. 27.90 lakhs
Muolvaphei one Rs. 13.95 lakhs

Rural Health and Research Society, Manipur

5.1 When asked as to why there was a shortfall, both in achieving the target of opening
10 schools and also in utilising the fund, the Secretary informed that only six complete
proposals were received in 1994-95. It appears to the Committee that the Department did
not make serious efforts for achieving the target in this regard. The Committee feels that the
matter should have been taken up with the States/institutions to get sufficient number of
Proposals for opening these schools. In view of severe shortage of nursing staff throughout
the country, the Committee recommends that the Department should see to it that the
remaining schools are set up in 1995-96.

Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H)
6. The outlay of Rs. 42.38 crores. provided in the BF 1994-95 for the ISM&H, was
reduced to Rs. 39.09 crores in the RE. The Department thus was not able to utilize the

entire amount provided for this purpose last year. This year also, the amount provided for
other systems of medicines is less than what was provided in the B.E. of the last year. The


Committee expresses its displeasure on the reduction of allocation both in RE 1994-95 and
BE 1995-96.

6.1 The Secretary, Department of Health, stated that adequate emphasis was being
given to the nromotion of research and treatment in the Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy. A separate Department had already been created for achieving the goals set
in this regard. Budget provisions for the work under these systems had also shown an
increase in 1994-95 in comparison to the previous year. The Department expected that funds
made available in 1994-95 would be fully utilised. In the remaining years of the 8th Five
Year Plan also the newly-created Department would need more funds for developing the
ISM&H.

6.2 The Committee welcomes the decision. of the Government, albeit late, to set up a
separate Department of ISM&H and feels that it would go a long way in providing the
required impeius to the promotion of research and treatment .on scientific lines in the
traditional systems of medicine. The Committee feels that the Government should provide
the necessary infrastructure, including office and manpower, and see to it that the newly-
created Department starts functioning immediately. The Committee recommends that
adequate allocation should be made for this Department.

63 In vespouse to the Committee’s suggestion in para 57 of its Report, given last year,
to get the Excise Duty on Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Medicines removed, the Department
stated that it had requested the Ministry of Finance on 16.1.1995 regarding removal of 10%
Excise Duty on patent proprietory Ayurvedic Medicines in the current Budget and that there
has not been any response from the Finance Ministry so far, to which the Committee takes
serious exception.

6.4 The Committee feels that the matter needs urgent attention as it would be an
important step in popularising the Indian Systems of Medicine. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the new Department of ISM&H should take up this matter with the
Ministry of Finance for an early decision.

National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur

7, The National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur, the Committec was informed, was being
given increased fund from the year 1991-92. While in 1993-94, Rs. 309.50 lakhs had been
provided to the Institute, a sum of Rs. 370 lakhs (Rs. 200 lakhs in plan and 170 lakhs in
nen-plan) was provided in the BE 1994-95. The Committee notes that allocation for the
Institute has been reduced to Rs. 324.00 lakhs in 1995-96.

7.1 The Committee is not at all satisfied with the progress of expenditure in the
Institute. It has noted that the amount provided in the BE 1994-95 had to be brought down
at the RE stage for reasons not known to the Committee. The Committee is perturbed over
the fact that the Institute was not able to utilise the funds last year and the allocation has
been reduced in 1995-96.

7.2 National Insutute of Ayurveda, it is said, is facing problems on several counts.
There is no Director at present; many posts in different categories are lying vacant, and no
research activity is being carried out. Lot of construction activities are going on and a major
portion of money provided is being spent on building construction. The Institute thus
appears to be in complete shambles.

7.3 The Committee, therefore, suggests that a senior officer of the Department be
deputed immediately to take stock of the situation and review the progress of the Institute
end prepare a report so that steps may be initiated to clear the augean stables at the earliest.
The Committee also recommends that a suitable enhancement be made in the allocation for
this Institute at the RE stage.


7.4 The Committee is happy to learn, that on the initiative of the Department, the pay-
scales of teachers have recently been upgraded and hopes that the posts lying vacant in
various categories, including that of the Director, would be filled up soon.

National Institute of Siddha

8. The Committee has been informed that a proposal for setting up of the National
Institute of Siddha has been received from the State Government of Tamil Nadu. The
Committee is not aware whether the Department has initiated any action and recommends
that the proposal of Tamil Nadu Government be examined expeditiously and funds provided
for this should be utilised in the financial year 1995-96.
Mental Health

9. The institutions/hospitals working in the field of Mental Health are in a pathetic
condition. These are not being given adequate financial and other support. Even the meagre
amount given for mental health was not being utilised properly. The Committee notes that
the allocation for this purpose has remained more or less stagnant for the last two years.

9.1 The Committee, in its 9th Report submitted in 1994-95, had expressed its concern
over the poor state of affairs in the field of mental health care and had recommended (para
35) to ensure a minimum standard of treatment to the mental patients.

9.2 During the course of evidence, the Secretary, Department of Health, informed the
Committee that the National Mental Health Programme, initiated during the 7th Five Year
Plan, aimed at making available mental health care services, by identifying some medical
colleges for imparting training in basic knowledge in this field, to the primary health care
physicians and para-medical personnel. Besides, adequate attention is also being given to
premier institutions like the CIP, Ranchi, National Institute of Mental Health & Nurro
Sciences, Bangalore and the Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied Sciences, Sahadara,
Delhi. The NIMHNS, Bangalore, has been provided Rs. 10 lakhs for conducting training
programmes for physicians engaged in mental health care.

9.3 The Committee was also informed that some mental hospitals were visited by the
Secretary, Department of Health, and the DGHS, on the directions of the Supreme Court,
and after visiting these hospitals, a scheme has been submitted which envisages, among other
Measures, some autonomy to these hospitals. Other recommendations are under implemen-
tation.

9.4 The Committee expresses its concern over the unsatisfactory conditions prevailing in
the institutes/hospitals meant for mental health care and research. The training programme
evolved by the Centre has also not picked up. The response from the State Governments is
neither forthcoming nor adequate. 5

9.5 The Committee feels that the need for improving the services and facilities for
treatment and training and extending them upto the district and primary health care level
can hardly be ignored. There is an imperative need for having a comprehensive plan for
tackling the mental health problems in this country. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that a programme be evolved with broad thrust on improving the status of mental health
care services in our country, by involving mental hospitals, departments of psychiatry in
medical colleges, training of medical and para-medical staff and creating awareness among
the people.

Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi

10. The outlay provided for the CIP, Ranchi, has been much less than what was
demanded during 1994-95 and also in 1995-96. Against a demand of Rs. 2.94 crores under


plan this year, only 1.50 crores has been provided. It is also less than Rs. 1.60 crores
provided in the RE last year.

10.1 As regards the gap between the amount projected and the amount provided, the
Department contended that the demand, particularly under the non-plan, was on the higher
side and was not supported by the trend of expenditure during the previous years.

10.2 The Committee is not convinced by the argument advanced by the Department for
giving much less than what Was asked for by the Institute. It feels that the Department
should have ensured that the funds provided to the institute were utilized properly. The
Committee is aware of the poor conditions obtaining in the Institute and, in fact, last year
also, in its Ninth Report, it had drawn the attention of the Department to this issue and had
recommended that a review of the functioning of the Institute be conducted soon.

10.3 When asked about the action taken in this regard, the Committee was informed
that in pursuance of its recommendation, a work study of the Institute had been proposed
and the Ministry of Finance had been requested to nominate a core member from the Staff
Inspection Unit in the Study Group. As soon as the core member was nominated, the
Committee was assured, the work study would be carried out.

10.4 The Committee recommends that the Department should review the financial
requirements of the Institute at the appropriate stage and enhance the outlay based on its
actual needs. It also likes the Department to ensure that the Institute does utilise the fund
fully and properly. The Committee also recommends that the formalities regarding
constituting the proposed study group should be completed early and the work be started.
The study group should be asked, the Committee suggests, to make concrete and positive
suggestions for bringing about radical improvements in the functioning of the Institute.
Yoga

10.5 The Committee is of the view that the Department has not made desired efforts to
provide facilities for Yoga therapy/training for treatment of various diseases and mainte-
nance of health in our country. There is a greater need to provide yogic treatment in
diseases like Diabetes, Asthama, Arthritis, hypertension, etc., in the present context. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the new Department of ISM&H should take
concerted steps in this regard. Popularisation of Yoga Therapy, Committee feels, needs
immediate attention.

Hospitals & Dispensaries

11. The Committee notes that the total allocation of Rs. 79.93 crores in 1995-96 for
Hospitals and Dispensaries in allopathy though Higher in comparison to the amount of Rs.
75.59 crores provided in the BE 1994-95, is less than Rs. 92.14 crores provided in the RE of
the same year. When asked, the Secretary Department of Health, explained to the
Committee that this decrease was more apparent than real because the RE of 1994-95 also
included an element of aid given by Germany to purchase equipments, which was a one time
grant. In actual practice, therefore, there is no decrease in outlay in 1995-96.

11.1 The Committee is fully aware of the appalling conditions prevailing in the Central
Government Hospitals. Facilities and services being provided are both inadequate and sub-
standard. Modern and sophisticated equipments are either not there or are not working.
Problems like lack of staff and basic amenities to the patients are known to everyone. About
the dispensaries, the less said the better.

11.2 The Committee is of the opinion that mismanagement of both men and materials is
the major cause for all the ills bedevilling our hospitals and dispensaries. With this level of


allocation to the hospitals and dispensaries, the Committee feels, it would not be possible to
maintain even the existing services, what to think of expanding of improving them. It,
therefore, recommends that a realistic assessment of the requirement of all the hospitals and
dispensaries be madc and a suitable amount be provided at the RE level.

11.3 There is much to be desired in the functioning of the prestigeous medical
institutions under Central Government control, like AIIMS, Safdarjung Hospital, Lady
Hardinge Hospital and PGIMER frequent strikes and work stoppages, both by doctors,
para-medical staff and others are the order of the day. Indifferent management and
indiscipline aggravate the problem. This is highly deplarable. But, the committee is not
going deep at this stage, into the functioning of the Central Government Hospitals and
dispensaries as well as the Central Government Health Scheme, as a special study of the
same has been undertaken by the Committee and the report thereon is under preparation.

Vallabbhai Patel Chest Institute

12. It is a premier institution devoted to applied and basic research and referral clinic
for chest diseases. The Committee notices a decline in the fund earmarked for this Institute,
as compared to that in the RE of 1994-95,

12.1 The Committee was informed that the functioning of the Institute was reviewed on
two occasions in 1994 and it was decided to enhance the non-plan budget by Rs. 60.00 lakhs
for the year 1994-95 and also to provide a sum of Rs. 27.00 lakhs under plan for revival of
its activities and also for modernising its labs, etc.

12.2 In view of the rising level of air pollution and resultant high incidence of
respiratory and related diseases, the Committee feels that even the increased amount
provided for the institute will not be sufficient to carry out its obligations.

12.3 Several complaints regarding lack of drugs, misuse of funds, maladministration, etc.
in the Institute were brought to the notice of the Department by the Committee. The
Secretary, Department of Health, assured the Committee that he would look into them but
he denied any misuse of funds having come to his notice during the reviews done by him last
year. He said: “The fact is that there is no money to pay electricity bill, to pay telephone
bills... to pay salaries because the non-plan funds were not increased and the plan funds
were totally zero. This Institute is virtually starved of funds.....This Institute certainly needs
more money.”

12.4 In view of the above admission by the Secretary, the Committee is distressed to
conclude that a premier Institute, which had done a lot of outstanding scientific work in the
areas of chest diseases like TB and Asthma and which had large number of international
publications to its credit, is being allowed to languish in this manner.

12.5 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should
prepare, after a careful study, a comprehensive plan to develop and modernise the Institute’s
laboratories with a view to reviving the research activities and restoring its previous glory.
The Department should assess the financial requirements for impiementing that plan and
make suitable provision in the Institute’s Budget at the appropriate stage.

Drug Control

13. The Secretary, Department of Health, stated that there was only a marginal increase
in assistance for strengthening drug testing facilities and labs in the States. The new Drug
Policy, announced recently, emphasises the need for strengthening the drug control
organisations in the country. The Committee was informed that the Department had been
allowed to levy one percent cess on drugs with a view to raise extra revenue. The


Department of Health has estimated that nearly Rs. 30 crores would be collected by levying
this cess and expressed the hope that, with this amount, the drug control organisation would
be put on sound footing in three to four years.

13.1 The Committee welcomes the proposal of levying and collecting cess on drugs and
recommends that necessary legal and other formalities should be completed at the earliest,
with a view to paving the way for setting up a Central Drug Authority in the year 1995-96.
Public Health

14. The following are the details of the allocations:

Plan Non-Plan Total
BE 94-95 390.79 26.49 417.28
RE 94-95 436.76 30.02 466.78
BE 95-96 445.48 32.09 477.5

14.1 Regarding the alloca.ion for Public Health, the Committe was informed that the
RE 1994-95 included a German commodity grant amounting to Rs. 24.00 crores and a
provision of Rs. 20.00 crores for Plague Control which were one time allocations. After
excluding these amounts from the RE 1994-95, the Committee notes, an enhancement of
Rs. 60.29 crores in the BE 1995-96 has been effected.

14.2 Reacting to a query regarding lack of public health education in our country, the
Secretary drew the attention of the Committee to the increased allocation for the Central
Health Education Bureau in 1995-96. Most of the programmes of public health, he informed
were implemented by the States and their financial position was also well-known. He further
informed the Committee that a programme for improving sanitation, hygiene, etc. had been
proposed and that an action group had been set up for this purpose which included, besides
him, Secretaries of the Departments of Urban Development and Rural Development and
Chief Secretaries of the States. This programme would be finalised by the NDC and would
have a separate allocation.

14.3 The Committee is happy to learn that the Department is acting on a proposal to
promote health and hygiene awareness among the people for which consultations are already
underway. The Committee feels that the need for having such a plan in this country is
overdue. In the wake of recent outbreak of killer diseases like Plague and malaria, this
country can ill-afford to delay it any more.

14.4 The Committee, therefore, suggests that this plan should be prepared and brought
into action immediately so that the country is not caught unawares, as it was last year.

National Health Program
National Malaria Eradication Programme

15. This programme is a centrally sponsored scheme on 50:50 sharing basis with the
States. The Committee notes with roncern that the malaria situation in the country had not


improved even after the adoption of Modified Plan of Operation (MPO) strategy from 1977.
The Committee observed from the following statistics supplied by the Department

Year Malaria cases (Million) Deaths
1976 6.47 59
1984 2.18 247
1987 1.66 188
1989 2.05 268
1990 2.02 353
1991 कं 421
1992 213 422
1993 2.20 345
1994 2.20 1069

that except in the years 1991 and 1992, the total number of cases of malaria had gone up
over the previous years. Similarly, deaths due to malaria had also increased consistently,
except in the years 1984 and 1992.

15.1 The Committee does not agree with the Department’s contention that containing
malaria cases to around 2 million per year, from 1984 onwards, was in itself an indication of
the success of the programme. The aim of the programme, the Committee points out, is not
merely containment but its eradication. Even the containment theory does not hold good, as
the incidence of malaria has increased all these years. The Committee is not satisfied with
the explanation given for the outbreak of malaria in Rajasthan last year, which led to an
unsurge in deaths due to malaria in 1994.

15.2 Insecticidal spray is the main component of the strategy adopted under NMEP, but
not many States were achieving the target fixed in this regard. Reasons attributed for this
are: refusal to spray by the community; delay in release of funds by the States leading to
delay in procurement of insecticides; lack of funds to meet operational works; and large
number of vacancies of malaria staff.

15.3 The Secretary, Department of Health, during his evidence before the Committee,
stated that the main constraint in implementing NMEP successfully was lack of adequate
response and cooperation from the States. While the Centre was giving a lot of support,
technical and logistic, including insecticides, drugs, equipment, etc., to the States, actual
implementation rested with the States only.

15.4 The Committee is of the opinion that the outlay for NMEP, though increased in
1995-96, is not adequate only Rs. 119 crores on the plan side has been given against a
demand of Rs. 182 crores for this purpose. Even the Secretary, Department of Health, also
accepted that the amount provided was not sufficient and the programme, in fact, needed
more.

15.5 The Committee, therefore, recommends that more funds should be provided for
this programme. It also emphasises the need for activating the administrative machinery
from the top to bottom and recommends that all out efforts be made for tackling the menace
of malaria on‘the level it was done during the 60s.

15.6 When enquired about the progress regarding the project for 100% assistance from

World bank for control of malaria in the tribal areas of seven States, Andhra Pradesh,
Gujrat, M.P., Bihar, Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Orissa, the Committee was informed that


necessary information as required by World Bank are being collected for finalising the
proposal. The Committee finds that this proposal is pending for a long time. The
Committee, therefore, suggests that the Department should collect the required information
and get the proposal finalised without any further delay.

15.7 The Committee advises the Department to take the help of elected Panchayats and
local volunteers, and involve teachers, particularly in tribal and remote areas, for making
NMEP a success. All the PHC, the Committee recommends, be provided trained manpower
for preparing slides, microscopes, enough drugs and insecticides. If malaria can almost be
eradicated during the 60s. when the country did not have enough infrastructure, it can be
done with much ease today.

National Leprosy Eradication Programme

16. This programme is a 100% Centrally Sponsored Scheme and is implemented with an
aim to achieve elimination of leprosy by the year 2000 AD; thereby reducing the leprosy
caseload in the community to 1/0000 population.

16.1 Rs. 80 crores has been earmarked for this programme in 1995-96 (BE), as against
Rs, 94 crores provided in the RE of 1994-95. The Committee was informed that the
programme was provided Rs. 14 crores in 1985-86 and since :then allocations to the
programme had increased gradually to Rs. 35 crores in 1993-94. The government secured
IDA assistance of Rs. 302 crores for six years for expansion of the programme in 1994.
Accordingly, the programme budget was steeply hiked to Rs. 94 crores in 1994-95. With this
fund, adequate infrastructural support, drugs, vehicles and other logistics have been
provided to all the districts throughout the country during 1994-95. Thus, the programme
would not require any expansion or increased expenditure on logistics during 1995-96, hence,
the decrease in its outlay. Rs 80 crores provided this year is only for consolidation and
sustaining the on-going anti-leprosy activities.

16.2 The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the performance of the natioanal
Leprosy Eradication Programme and is happy to learn that the registered leprosy caseload
had come down from 11.6 lakh cases at the end of March, 1994 to less than 8 lakh cases
now. The Committee also notes that with the application of Multi-drug Therapy (MDT),
which makes the patient non-infective very soon, has reduced the duration of the whole
treatment. There is more voluntary reporting now and the cases are being reported at early
stages.

16.3 The Committee emphasises the need for maintaining the pace of success in this
regard and advises the Department to guard against the feeling of contentment as was
noticed in the case of NMEP. The Committee recommends that adequate emphasis: be
provided to the rehabilitative aspect also in which voluntary organisations should be involved
in a big way.

National Aids Control Programme

17. AIDS control is a very difficult job because it is an incurable disease and spreads
like a forest- fire. When asked what the Department was doing in this regard, the
Committee was apprised that two schemes one for the Prevention and Control of AIDS and
the other for Prevention of Infection and strengthening of Blood Banking system were being
implemented. by the Department. The Secretary, Department of Health, informed the
Committee that a programme for modernisation of blood banks had been taken up with the
assistance of Rs. 56 crores received from the World Bank.

17.1 The Committee is happy that blood bank services are being improved. The

Committee emphasises the urgent need of improving blood transfusion services and making
them foolproof so that no HIV-infected blood was given to anyone as more and more such


11

cases are being reported now-a-days. Disposable needles, it has ‘been observed, are not being
used in all the hospitals/dispensaries. The Committee recommends that the use of such
disposable Syringes should be enncouraged and adequate emphasis be given on surveillance
and clinical management. Increased stress should be given for voluntary blood donation.

Plague Control

18. Outbreak of plague last year, after remaining dormant for several decades, had taken
everyone by surprise. When asked as to what contingency and long term plan the Department
had for preventing recurrance of this dreaded disease, the Department stated that a technical
Advisory Committee to determine factors for the outbreak of Plague and to avoid its
recurrence in future had been constituted in 1994, which is expected to submit its final report
by April 1995.

18.1 As a follow-up action, government has initiated activities like surveillance, training
of workers and upgradation of laboratories. Surat Medical College, Surat, B.J. Medical
College, Pune, Grant Medical College, Bombay, S.R.T.R. Medical College, Beed, and
Bangalore Medical College, Bangalore, have been provided financial assistance for develop-
ment of laboratory ficilities. In addition, National Institute of Communicable Diseases, Delhi,
has also been strengthened by providing financial assistance for the development of their
laboratory facilities.

18.2 The Committee notes that the Medical Colleges selected for the development of lab
facilities fall in the endemic area in which Plague cases were reported first. Possibility of it
occurring in other parts of the country cannot be ruled out. The Committee, therefore,
suggests that such assitance be provided to all regional laboratories in different parts of the
country so that cases could be detected promptly and remedial and preventive measures taken
without wastage of time.

National T.B. Control Programme

19. Under the programme, a fully equipped and staffed District T.B. Centre is being set
up in each district of the country. The Committee was informed that such T.B. Centres have
been set up in 85% districts of the country so far. A proposal is under consideration of
expansion of District - B programme to the remaining districts in a phased manner by 2000
AD. Infrastructure under TB programme, as on December 1992 and December 1994, are as
under:—

District TB No. of TB No. of TB

Centres Clinics Beds
December, 92 386 331 47321
December, 94 390 327 47409

19.1 When enquired about the slow pace of progress in regard to setting up of DTCs, TB
Clinics, etc., the Department explained that for the last three years emphasis was on
consolidating infrastructural facilities and capabilities created already for the implementation
of the programme.

19.2 In response to a query regarding allocation for this programme, the Secretary,
Department of Health, stated that the allocation for TB control had been increased in 1995-96
and a littler more money was made available last year also. He claimed that “something
fantastic” could be done in TB control if more funds were made available to the Department.


19.3 The Committee found the progress in regard to increasing the DTCs, TB clinics
etc. very slow. It also notes that though the programme is being implemented since 1962.
So far only 85% districts-of the country could be covered and the rest are expected to be
covered by 2000 AD. Mortality rate due to T.B., which has come down from 80 per lakh
of population in 1968 to 50 per lakh of population, now,-is also not very satisfactory.

19.4 Despite all these efforts and achievements, the Committee observes, with deep
concern, that the incidence of T.B. does not appear to have come down drastically; it
remains, more or less, constant. T.B. is not more a killer disease and it can be cured
completely if a proper regimen of medicines and life style are adhered to.

19.5 The Committee recommends that the matter of setting up DTCs in the remaining
districts should be taken up with the respective State Governments and more and more
T.B. clinics should be provided in the rural areas. The Committee also suggests that for
the detection of T.B., the Department should rely more on microscopy method that on
radiology because quite often diagnoses, based on the latter technique, were found to be
wrong, particularly in the case of pulmonary T.B.

19.6 The Committee also recommends increase in the allocation for the National T.B.
control Programme through preventive measures from early childhood.

De-addiction Centres

20. The Committee noticed that the outlay for De-addiction Centres have been
reduced by Rs. 50 lakhs in the BE of 1995-96, than what was provided the last year. The
Department explained that this reduction had to be effected because the Department got
much less than what it had projected.

20.1 When asked about the recommendations of the Committee made last year to
open more De-addiction centres, the Committee was informed that this programme was
reviewed by the Expenditure Finance Committee in October, 1994 which endorsed the
Ministry’s view to continue the assistance under the Central sector to State Governments
for establishment/strengthening of Drug De-addiction Centres in Medical Colleges/district
level hospitals and that extra measures be taken to stengthen the infrastructure in NE
States. During 1994-95, 8 new centres were proposed to be set up two of which will be in
NE region.

20.2 The Committee feels that neither the number of De-addiction centres nor the
infrastructure provided to them in adequate. It also feels that the outlay for this purpose
should not have been reduced.

20.3 The Committee reiterates its recommendation to open more sub-centres in
various parts of the country. The efforts shoule be to provide one such centre in every
district having the facilities for detoxification and psychological counselling. The Committee
feels that the number of beds for this purpose is also inadequate and it should be
increased. The Committee, therefore, recommends suitable increase in the outlay for the
Drug De-addiction centres at the RE level.

National Iodine Deficiency Programme

21. The National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme is a purely Central
Scheme which envisages availability of iodised salt in place of common salt for human
consumption to all segments of the population. The target fixed for achieving universal
iodisation of salt, the Committee was informed, could not be met within the stipulated
period which was 31st December, 1992. The reasons given for this was that some States/


UTs had not yet issued/enforced the notifications banning the sale of non-iodised salt. The
Committee was assured that as soon as all the States/UTs enforce the’ ban, the production of
iodised salt would be stepped up according to the demand and the scheme of iodisation
would be simultaneously extended to cover all the regions of the country.

21.1 The Committee finds the implementation of the universalisation of iodised salt
tardy. The Committee is not aware as to why some of the States were not taking intrest in
the programme. It recommends that the Department should intervene in a more positive and
effective manner for persuading the States to implement the scheme in the current year. A
sustained publicity campaign should be conducted to create awareness among the peaple.


MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

XXXII
“THIRTY SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 4th April, 1995 in Committee Room
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Md. Salim

3. Prof. I. G. Sanadi

4. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

5. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

7. Dr. Vasant Pawer

8. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

9. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
10. Shri Rambadan

11. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

12. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

13. Shri Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
14, Shri Anna Joshi

15. Shri Ramchandra Dome

16. Shri Suraj. Mandal

WITNESSES

1. Shri M. S. Dayal, Secretary (Health)
. Dr. A. K. Mukherjee, DGHS

. Shri I, Choudhary, Addl. Secretary
Mrs. A. P. Ahluwalia, JS & FA

. Mrs. Shailja Chandra, JS

Mrs. Sunila Basant, JS

. Shri K. Chandramouli, JS

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

५७ 9 ७ # (० [७

*Minutes of Ist to 31st meeting relates to matters not included in this Report.

1A


3. Shri N. K. Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary and other officials of the
Deptt. of Health in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants 1995-96.
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on
50 April, 1995.


॥॥ ६
“SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 18th April, 1995, in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament Houses, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Maulana Habibur Rahaman Nomani
. Shri Md. Salim

. Prof. I.G. Sanadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

9. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
LOK SABHA

10. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

11. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavada
12. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

13. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

14, Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

15. Shri Anna Joshi

16. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

17. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

2. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Nineteenth Report of the Department of
Health (Demand No. 39) on Demands for Grants 1995-96 and adopted the same with some
modification.

3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 p.m. to meet again on 19th April, 1995 at
10.00 a.m.

9० जय 9७ ७ AR ७ ७

*Minutes of 15 Meeting relates to matters not included in this Report.