PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SIXTEENTH REPORT
ON
ASSAM UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1994

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 March, 1995)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22 March, 1995)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 1995/Phalguna, 1917 (Saka)


CONTENTS

1, ComposITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...

3. APPENDICES...


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

1. Shri P. Upendra——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

Shri O.P. Kohli

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

. Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. I.G. Sanadi

11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14, Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar

21. Prof. P.J. Kurien

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

24, Shri Z.M. Kahandole

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda

35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

38. Shri Rambadan

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

० 9० :3 9६ (७ # (० ७


REPORT

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present its
sixteenth report on its behalf, present the Report of the Committee on the Assam University
(Amendment) Bill, 1994.

2. The Bill, which was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 20th December, 1994,
seeks to amend the Assam University Act, 1989. In pursuance of the rules relating to
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha,
referred* the Bill to the Committee for examination and report.

3. A Press Communique, inviting memoranda containing opinions and suggestions from
individuals, organisations and institutions interested in the subject matter of the Bill, was
issued on 9th January, 1995 (Appendix-I).

4. The Committee considered the Bill in three sittings (Appendix-II) and heard the oral
evidence of the Secretaries of the Ministries of Human Resource Development (Department
of Education) and Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Department of Legal Affairs), the
Secretary, University Grants Commission the Commissioner and Secretary, Department of
Education, State Government of Assam, and the Registrar, Assam University, Silchar.

5. In its meeting, held on the 16th February, 1995, the Committee considered the Draft
Report and adopted it for presentation/aying in both the Houses.

6. The Department of Education, in the background note on the subject submitted to
the Committee, explained the need to introduce the Assam University (Amendment) Bill,
1994, (Appendix-III)

7. Elaborating on the circumstances which led to the introduction of the Bill, the
Secretary, Department of Education, State Government of Assam, informed the Committee
that objections had been raised by various sections of the people regarding the affiliating
status of the Assam University, Silchar. A feeling had grown that the jurisdication of the
Assam University at Silchar overlapped the jurisdiction of the Guwahati and the Dibrugarh
Universities.

8. As a result of this, the issue was taken up by the Human Resource Development
Minister with the Chief Minister of Assam. The Chief Minister, after having discussions with
the academicians, the Vice-Chancellors of the concerned universities, as well as the
representatives of the Teacher’s association, etc. wrote back to the Minister of Human
Resource Development about the need to restrict the jurisdiction of the Assam University by
amending Section 6 of the Assam University Act, 1989.

9. The Minister of Human Resource Development, thereafter, convened a meeting of
Union Ministers and Members of Parliament from Assam, the Chief Minister of Assam,
representatives of Assam Gana Parishad and Vice-Chancellors of both the Central
University in Assam to discuss the affiliating status of the Assam University. There was
unanimous agreement that the Assam Government’s proposal to restrict the jurisdiction of
the new university be accepted. Hence, the Assam University (Amendment) Bill, 1994 was
introduced.

10. The Department, in its note, has stated that the Bill seeks to amend Section 6 of the

* Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part वा, Para No. 34883 dated 2Ist December, 1994.


parent Act, with a view to ensure an equitable distribution of territorial jurisdiction of
different universities in the State; and to see that the older universities of the State, set up
by the State Government, also remained viable.

11. Section 6(i) of the Assam University Act, 1989, which provides that the jurisdiction
of the Assam University shall extend to the whole of the State of Assam, was, therefore,
sought to be amended in order to restrict the jurisdiction of the University to only five
districts: Cachar, Karimganj, North Cachar Hills, Karbi Anglong and Hailakandi. It will be
deemed to have been effective from the 15th January, 1994, i.e. the day on which the Assam
University Act came into effect.

12. The amendment seeks to add one more district Hailakandi to the names of districts
already mentioned in Section 6(2) of the parent Act. This district, the Committee was
informed, had been carved out of the district of Cachar after the enactment of Assam
University Act 1989.

13. The amendment also seeks to omit altogether sub-section 3 of the Section 6 which
empowered the University to grant affiliation to any other college existing in any part of the
State of Assam provided the University concerned in whose jurisdiction the college was
located, had no objection.

14. During the evidence, Members expressed apprehension about the admission policy
of the University. In the absence of a definite stipulation in this regard, some Members felt
that students from other parts of the State or the country might not be admitted in the
University. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, informed the Committee that no
such expressed stipulation had been provided in the case of other Central Universities as
well. The Secretary, UGC, clarified to the Committee that even in the absence of such a
provision, complaints regarding discrimination in admission on the basis of region had never
come up. In practice, however, the University shall be open to the students from all parts of
the country.

14.1 The Committee, however, feels that in order to remove the doubts about the
admission policy of the University, government should bring forward an amendment into
clause 7 of the Act so as to make it clear that admission is open to all students, irrespective
of race or class or place of domicile, on the pattern of the amendment suggested by this
Committee to Clause 7 of the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar University Bill, 1994.

15. The Committee also sought to know the reason as to why the Assam University Bill,
which was passed in 1989, was notified only in January, 1994. The Secretary, Department of
Education, informed the Committee that the delay was mainly due to lack of infrastructure
and inadequate funds. It was also delayed, he said, due to demand for seting up another
university at Tejpur. Both the Universities were set up more or less at the same time.

16. To a query regarding lack of adequate facilities, including roads, buildings, etc. in
the University, the Registrar, Assam University, apprised the Committee of the works
completed and the projects undertaken in this regard. The main reason for the slow pace of
works, according to him, was the non-availability of requisite funds. The Committee,
however, was informed that efforts were on to provide sufficient funds to the University.
Department of Education, in fact, had proposed to release three crore rupees for this
University from its savings in the Revised Estimates for 1994-95. The Committee desires that
this should be ensured so that the university might starts functioning soon.


17. The Committee approves the Assam University (Amendment) Bill, 1994, alongwith
the recommendation made in para 14.1.

New Deu; P. UPENDRA,
21st March, 1995 Chairman,
a Committee on Human
30 Phalguna, 1917 (Saka) Resource Development.


APPENDIX—I
PRESS RELEASE

PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
The Assam University (Amendment) Bill, 1994

The Assam University (Amendment) Bill, 1994 introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
20th December, 1994 has been referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development headed by Shri P. Upendra, M.P., for
examination and report.

2. The Assam University Act, 1989, was enacted to establish and incorporate an
affiliating university at Silchar. The present Bill seeks to amend the Act with a view to
restrict the jurisdiction of the said University which, as originally provided, extended to the
whole of State of Assam.

3. Certain apprehensions were raised in Assam regarding state wide jurisdiction of the
said university and suggestions made by various sections of public including the Members of
Parliament to restrict the jurisdiction of the Assam University to Cachar, Karimganj, North
Cachar Hills. Karbi Anglong and Hailakandi districts of the State of Assam for a fair
distribution of territorial jurisdiction amongst the universities of Assam and to ensure that
the viability of other universities set up by the State government prior to establishment of
the Assam University is not impaired. The Bill proposes to achieve this objective by
restricting the territorial jurisdiction of the University only to the five above mentioned
districts.

4. In this connection, it has been decided to invite Memoranda containing the views of
individuals, institutions etc., interested in the subject matter of the Bill. Accordingly, all the
interested persons, institutions etc., are requested to send their views by 23rd January, 1995
to Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House Annexe
(Room no. 239), New Delhi-1100011.

5. Copies of the Bill can be obtained on requisition from the Committee Section(HRD)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, (Room No. 228), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-110001.

New Delhi;
January 9, 1995.


APPENDIX—II

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 3rd January, 1995 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kohli

4. Shri Md. Salim

5. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

7. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan

8. Dr. Vasant Pawar

9. Prof. P.J. Kurien

10. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

11. Shri Inder Jit

12. Shri Rambadan

13. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

15, Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya

16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

17. Shri Anna Joshi

18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

19. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

20. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman wished a very happy and prosperous New Year to all.

3. The Chairman then informed the Committee that the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha, had referred the Assam University (Amendment) Bill, 1994, to the Committee on
Human Resource Development for examination and report. The Committee decided to issue
a press communique inviting memoranda on the Bill.


“Relates to other matters.


4. eee Pers eee
Sy eee ee tee
6. The Committee then authorised its Chairman to finalise the date on which the report
is to be presented/laid on both the Houses of Parliament and other details relating thereto.

7. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on
Wednesday the 4th January, 1995.

***Relates to other matters.


XXVI
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. and again at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 31st January,
1995 in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
Dr. M. Aram
. Miss Saroj Khaparde
Shri O.P. Kohli
Shri Md. Salim
Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. I.G. Sanadi
. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen
. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
12. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran
13. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
14. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
15. Shri Aslam Sher Khan
16. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
17. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
19. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
20. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
21. Shri Suraj Mandal

8.०9:१9 ७ # ७० ०

a

WITNESSES
1 Ped ae Peed
2. केक कक के कक
3; ee कक के कंकक
4. eae ee wee
5. ae see +e

6, Shri S.V. Giri,
Secretary, Department of Education,
Ministry-of Human Resource Development

*** Relates of other matters


7. Dr. P.C. Rao,
Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice
and Company Affairs.
(Department of Legal Affairs)

8. Shri Inderjit Khanna,
Secretary, University Grants Commission.

9. Shri P.C. Sharman,
Commissioner and Secretary,
Department of Education,
Government of Assam.

10. Shri P.S. Bhattacharjee,
Registrar,
Assam University, Silchar.

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

3. The Committee also heard the oral evidence of the witnesses at nos. 6—10 mentioned
above in connection with the consideration of the Assam University (Amendment) Bill,
1994.

3.1 The Committee after some discussion adopted the Bill and decided to consider the
report on this at its next meeting.

4. A Verbatim record of the evidence was kept.

6. The Committee then discussed about its future programme and decided to meet again
on 16th and 17th February, 1995.

The Committee adjourned at 5.30 p.m.

*** Relates to other matters


XXIX
TWENTY-NINTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 21st March, 1995 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

MEMBERS

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kohli

4. Shri Md. Salim

5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
6. Prof. 1.0, Sanadi

7. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

8. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

9. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
10. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

11. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

12. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
13. Dr. Vasant Pawar

14. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

15. Shri Suraj Mandal

SECRETARIAT

1, Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee adopted the draft Sixteenth Report on the Assam University
(Amendment) Bill, 1994 and decided to present it to both Houses of Parliament on 23rd
March, 1995.

3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman or in his absence Dr. M. Aram and
Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Braja Kishore
Tripathy and Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan to lay it onthe Table of Lok Sabha on the
same day.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.45 a.m. to meet again on 29th March, 1995.
9


APPENDIX—IlI
COMPREHENSIVE BACKGROUND NOTE

AMENDMENT TO THE SECTION 6 OF ASSAM UNIVERSITY ACT, 1989,
REGARDING JURISDICTION OF THE ASSAM UNIVERSITY, SILCHAR

Assam University Act, 1989 was enacted on May 5, 1989 and notified on January 1:
1994.

2. Some opinions have been expressed in press in Assam regarding affiliating status
Assam University, Silchar. The representations were also made to the Prime Minister statii
that there is a strong public opinion in Assam that the jursidiction of the Central 1
at Silchar usurps the jurisdiction of the Gauhati and the Diburgarh Universities. It wa:
requested the concerned section of the Act involving the jurisdiction should be amended.

3. HRM took this issue with Chief Minister of Assam. Chief Minister of Assam in his
letter dated March 8, 1994 to HRM has mentioned after discussion with the academiccians
and Vice-Chancellors of Gauhati and Dibrugarh Universities, as well as the representatives
of the Gauhati University Teacher’s Association, a view has emerged that Section 6(2) of the
Assam University Act, 1989 should remain, while section 6(1) of the Act should be amended
to confine the jurisdiction of the Assam University at Silchar to the five districts namely,
Cachar, Karimganj, Hailakandi, North Cachar Hills and Karbi Anglong and section 6(3) of
the Assam University Act should be deleted.

4. HRM has covened a meeting of Union Ministers from Assam, Members of
Parliament from Assam, Chief Minister of Assam, representatives of Assam Gana Parishad
and Vice-Chancellors of both the Central Universities in Assam to discuss the affiliating
status of Assam University. There was unanimous agreement that the Assam Government’s
proposal may be accepted. The purpose of the proposed amendment is to ensure (i) an
equitable distribution of territorial jurisdiction to different universities in the State and (ii)
that the older universities of the State set up by the State Government also remain viable.

5. On the advice of the Law Ministry in Sub-section (2) of the Section 6 of the Assam |
University Act, Hailakandi district is to be added to the names of the districts already
mentioned. It is proposed to make the amendment effective from 15-1-1995 i.e. the date of
commencement of Assam University Act. This proposal is made because the new district of
Hailakandi has been carved out of the earlier district of Cachar after the legislation of
Assam University, Act 1989. This sub-section validates the inclusion of Hailakandi in the
scope of the amendment.

6. Department of Education has proposed Rs. 3.00 Crores each for Assam University,
Silchar and Tezpur University, Tezpur and Rs. 1.00 crores for Nagaland University from its
savings in Revised Estimates for 1994-95. ,