PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1996-97 (DEMAND NO. 48) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4.9.1996)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6.9.1996)

Bata

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 1996/Bhadra, 1918 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
PREFACE
3. Report
I. Introduction
Il. Games and Sports
(a) Grants to National Sports Federations
(b) Grants to Sports Authority of India
(c) Scheme of Grants for creation of Sports Infrastructure
(d) Rural Sports Programme
(e) Dismal Performance in Atlanta Olympics
Ill. Youth Programmes
(a) Nehru Yuvak Kendra Sangathan
(b) Assistance to Voluntary Organisations working for the field of
Youth
(c) National Integration Programme
(d) Youth Hostels
(e) Programme of Training of Youth
(f) Assistance to Youth Clubs
(g) Special Scheme for Promotion of Youth Activities among the
Youth of Backward Tribes.
(h) Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development
(i) National Service Scheme
(j) National Discipline Scheme
4. ANNEXURE
5. MINnuTES

PaGes
(i)-Gii)
(iii)
1-9

10-20
21-25


toyed Bak eons
OEY. ५ ४४0



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra $. Deo
3. Dr. B.B. Dutta

4. Dr. M. Aram

5. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

6. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
7. Shri Raj Nath Singh

8. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

9. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
10. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

11, Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

12. Shri R. Margabandu

13. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

14. Dr. Mohan Babu

15. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

16. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
17. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

18. Shri Sartaj Singh

19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Shri Jai Prakash

21. Shri. Rajendrasinh Rana

22. Shrimati Divya Singh

23. Shri Mahant Abedyanath
24, Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

25. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

26. Dr. C. Silvera

27. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
28. Shri Dutta Meghe

29. Shri 1.G. Sanadi

30. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
31. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao
32. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
33. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

34. Shri Pawan Diwan

35. Shri Krishna

36. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
37. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
38. Shri Samik Lahiri

39. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

40. Shri Mukhtar Anees

41. Dr. M. Jagannath

@


(ii)

42. Dr. Bali Ram

43. Shri Ranen Barman

44. Shri Surender Singh

45. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Forty-eighth Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 48) of the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports,
Ministry of Human Resource Development for the year 1996-97.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, Ministry of Human Resource Development
and also heard the Secretary and other Officials of that Department on the said Demands
for Grants in its meeting held on 17th August, 1996.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 29th August,
1996.

S.B. CHAVAN

New De.ut; Chairman,
August 29, 1996 Department-related Parliamentary
——S ae Standing Committee on
Bhadra 7, 1918 (Saka) Human Resource Development.

(ii)


(89700: 9३7 पप्रण) wT 1

0)



REPORT

I. INTRODUCTION

1. The main objective of the Department is to ensure qualitative and quantitative
improvements in Youth Programme and also on broad basing and bringing about awareness
of sports and physical fitness amongst school children and youth. The programmes
undertaken by the Department are mainly Sports and Games and Youth Programme.

1.1. The Department finances various youth welfare programmes ranging from
personality development to vocational training. Most of these programmes are implemented
by reputed institutions, non-governmental organisations as well as State Governments
whereby financial assistance is provided by the Department as per the stipulated norms. The
major schemes for youth development are: National Service Scheme, Nehru Yuva Kendra
Sangathan, National Integration Programmes, National Discipline Scheme, Youth Hostels
and National Service Volunteers Scheme, etc.

1.2. The Department also finances a number of programmes which aim at promotion of
sports, including creation of sports infrastructure in all parts of the country, grants for laying
of synthetic surfaces, spotting and nurturing of talents through the schemes of Sports
Authority of India, grants to National Sports Federations, National championships,
organising of tournaments for rural youth, women and in the North Eastern region etc.

1.3. The total outlay, both Plan and Non-Plan taken together provided to the
Department for the year 1995-96 was Rs. 132. 74 crores in BE which was reduced marginally
to Rs. 132.52 in RE. The allocation made for the year 1996-97 is Rs. 136.24 crores. (Plan
Rs. 95 crores and Non-plan Rs. 41.24 crores)

Il. GAMES AND SPORTS yy

2. The budgeted plan outlay for 1994-95 in respect of Sports and Physical Education was
a meagre Rs. 55 crores as against the budgeted outlay of Rs. 55.50 crores during 1995-96
which means that there was no step up in the budget provision during the year 1995-96 over
the previous year in spite of the fact that India was to participate in Olympics this year.
Even during 1996-97, the budgeted plan outlay for sports has been kept at the same level
i.e. Rs. 55.50 crores. Pleading for more funds, the Secretary informed the Committee that
one of the reasons behind the continued low level of performance by the India’s
sportspersons at international events such as Olympics is the highly inadequate *.vestment
for Sports and Physical Education.

2.1. The Secretary also stated that the Department proposed an outlay of Rs. 109.85
crores for 1996-97 for sports after a detailed and realistic assessment of the requirement of
funds in this sector. Even though the Planning Commission recognised the need for such a
step up in the budget provision and also found the justification for the same, in view of the
overall constraint of resources, a figure of Rs. 71.16 crores was agreed to by the Planning
Commission. However, the total allocation for 1996-97 including Plan and Non-Plan is Plan
Rs. 55.50 crores, Non-Plan Rs. 17.26 crores. The Committee is constrained to note that even
though the Planning Commission recognised that this budget provision was the bare

1


minimum required for the Sports and anything below that level would léad to serious
implications, still this has not been reflected in the allocation.

2.2. The Secretary informed that the two major schemes in which considerable step up
is needed are—{i) Grants to National Sports Federations; and (2) Grants to Sports
Authority of India.

(a) Grants to National Sports Federations

3. The allocation for Sports Federations has increased only marginally this year i.e. Rs.
7.90 crores in RE for 1995-96 to Rs. 8.73 crores for 1996-97. Commenting on the allocations,
the Department stated the outlay of Rs. 8.73 crores for 1996-97 is not sufficient to improve
our standards as preparations are already on for the Asian Games, 1998 and Commonwealth
Games. A sum of Rs. 15 crores for 1996-97 has been assessed to be the requirement on plan
side for this purpose. However, the final allocation made is Rs. 8 crores only. The
Department intends to meet the shortfall by seeking additional allocation of funds. The
Committee feels that keeping in view the forthcoming Asian Games and Commonwealth
Games and also for preparation of our teams, Planning Commission should consider
allocating more funds to'the Department for various federations. The Department stated
that to ensure full and proper utilisation of funds earmarked for national sports federations,
a close monitoring of the scheme was undertaken during 1995-96. As a result full utilisation
of funds was achieved. As against the BE of Rs. 7.05 crores in the Plan and Rs. 75 lakhs in
Non-Plan, the utilisation was Rs. 7.24 crores in Plan and Rs.71 lakhs in Non-Plan. The
major expenditure under the scheme was incurred on holding of coaching camps,
participation of teams in international competitions, purchase of sports equipment and
release of grants to federations for organising national championships etc.

3.1. The Department also stated that fresh guidelines for the federations are expected to
be finalised soon. To ensure strict adherence by the federations one of the clauses of the
proposed guidelines stipulates withdrawal of Government. Recognition, in case, the
guidelines are not followed in toto by the National Sports Federations. The Committee feels
that the guidelines should be finalised at the earliest.

(b) Grants to Sports Authority of India

4. Similarily, under the scheme of “Grants to Sports Authority of India”, the Secretary
stated that a requirement of Rs. 55 crores for the year 1996-97 was worked out after taking
into account the backlog of expenditure, the existing committed expenditure and a normal
growth pattern. However, at the stage of Annual Plan discussions with the Planning
Commission, a plan outlay of Rs. 34.50 crores was agreed to on the basis of a zero growth in
various schemes etc. Against this, the actyal allocation given is Rs. 29.50 crores which
would, infact, lead to a negative growth, such as, closure/reduction in coverage of various
schemes, a set back to the proposal of special repairs of stadia, further delay in completion
of on-going projects etc., the Secretary added. Turning towards the Non-Plan side, the
Secretary stated that even though revenue generation of SAI increased from Rs. 1.83 crores
in 1991-92 to Rs. 6.18 crores'in 1995-96, the budgetary support was cut from Rs. 14.29
crores (1992-93) to Rs. 11.63 crores (1995-96). During the current year, this has been further
cut to only Rs. 6 crores which is not adequate even to meet the committed requirement for
payment of salaries etc. to the employees of SAI. He added that the minimum committed
requirement on the Non-Plan side has been worked out to Rs. 11.63 crores. This excludes
the MCD’s outstanding dues on account of service charges amounting to Rs. 26.02 crores
payable by SAI to the MCD. The backlog of expenditure on the Plan side is Rs. 6.60 crores
and on the Non-Plan side Rs. 8.53 crores, which, if added to the outstanding dues to MCD,


3

totals upto a figure of Rs. 41.15 crores which SAI has to be provided for, over and above
the current year’s committed expenditure. Sports Authority of India is the premier Sports
Organisation in the country and the Committee desires that it should not starve for funds.
Similarly the backlog to be paid to MCD may be taken care of at RE stage.

4.1. The Secretary also submitted that if the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports is
to work on the basis of a normal growth pattern, the projected requirement of Rs. 109.85
crores for Sports and Physical Education must be provided. If it is not possible to provide
Rs. 109.85 crores, the outlay of Rs. 71.16 crores as agreed to by the Planning Commission
during the Annual Plan discussions is the bare minimum which is required for the
Department to sustain a zero growth pattern.

4.2. The Committee feels that if the country has to improve the performance in sports
particularly at the International level and to sustain the on-going programmes there is a need
for a higher allocation to it. The Committee also notes that the Planning Commission,
having recognised the need for more funds to the Department, should provide the same
atleast in the Ninth Plan. A new thrust and approach should be given to Sports. The
Committee is deeply anguished to note that even though the country was to participate in
Atlanta Olympics this year, no step-up was made in the allocation both last year and this
year. Planning Commission is not taking a realistic view of the necessity of higher allocation
for sports. The Committee also puts the blame on the Sports Federations and SAI for not
making a rational expenditure of funds provided. The dismal performance put up by the
Indian contingent is totally un-justifiable and not in commensurate with the size of the
country. Instead of spending money on all the sports, two or three items could have been
selected for participation in Olympics and the entire concentration could have been put on
this. The Department should consider this approach in future.

(c) Scheme of Grants for creation of Sports Infrastructure

5. This year an allocation of Rs. 8 crores has been made, which is the same made last
year. The Committee notes that out of the total allocation of Rs. 8 crores roughly 6.70
crores has already been utilised out of Rs. 6.85 crores meant for State Governments, U.T.
Administrations etc. 43 Sports Projects have been given grant for this purpose. Out of Rs.
1.15 crores earmarked for rural schools approximately an amount of Rs. 55 lakhs has been
utilised till 31st December, 1995 which covers 65 rural schools.

5.1. The Department pleaded that the Government of India should give assistance for
facilities like State level Training Centres and for sports infrastructure in the districts and
block level which may be considered at RE stage.

5.2. About the proposal to evolve standard low cost design for creating sports
infrastructure, the Department stated that the School of Planning and Architecture (SPA)
has been approached to prepare a Handbook of Sports and Recreation facilities covering the
aspects of standard low cost designs also for sports infrastructure. The designs are yet to be
evolved as the proposed context of ‘the handbook is at discussion stage with school of
Planning and Architecture. The Committee feels that creating sports infrastructuic at a low
cost is the need of the hour. The Committee, therefore, desires that a decision on it may, be
taken at the earliest and steps may be taken to implement the same immediately.

(d) Rural Sports Programme

6. The objective of the scheme is to provide opportunities to rural sports talent to get
noticed at a very early age for further training and development. Funds are provided for
holding tournaments at the District, State and National levels. The allocation for the


4

programme has been reduced from Rs. 1 crore in the last year to Rs. 50 lakhs this year. On
this, Department stated that the outlay for programme has been fixed keeping in view the
expenditure figures in the last many years.

6.1. The Department also stated that during the working group discussions for the IX
plan, there was a feeling among the experts that the Rural Sports Programme should be left
to the States. The State Governments are able to make a better assessment of the needs and
requirements of the people in the rural areas as well as organise District and State level
tournameats in rural areas. The Committee does not agree with this contention. Rural areas
are the most neglected parts as far as sports is concerned and necessary attention is required
to be given. Steps should be taken to ensure full utilisation of funds.

6.2. The Department stated that all State/UT Governments have been advised to
organise a massive awareness campaign with a view to promote mass participation in
physical education and sports and their attention was drawn towards the Rural Sports
Programme and the Department is awaiting replies from the State Governments. The
Committee desires that it should be pursued vigorously.

(e) Dismal Performance in Atlanta Olympics

7. The Department attributed the following reasons for India’s dismal performance not
only in Atlanta Olympics but in all Olympics:—

(i) Lack of long term commitment for the development of sports in India at the
National and State levels and allocation of indequate monetary and organisational
resources.

(ii) Absence of professional and systematic approach towards the development of sports
in the country.

(iii) Lack of a planned and hierarchichal competition programme at National/
International level.

(iv) Non availability of infrastructural facilities right upto the grass root level including
training areas, standard sports equipment.

(v) Lack of integration of Physical Education and Sports with educational curriculum in
educational institutions.

(vi) Inadequate mechanism for talent scouting and their training for achieving excellence
at international level.

7.1. The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons given by the Department for the
poor and very dismal performance by our teams in the recently held Olympic Games at
Atlanta. The Committee fails to understand whether there was any planning and preparation
for this international events by the Department. The Committee also fails to understand as
to why such a large contingent of officials and sports persons were went to Atlanta when the
Department did not have expectations from them. The Department should have sent only
those players and teams which were fully prepared to bag medals for the country. There is
definitely something seriously wrong with our planning for promotion and development of
sports. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the issues and the problems responsible
for the poor state of affairs should be looked into in greater detail and remedial measures
taken immediately. The Committee has already dealt with this subject at length and had
recommended various measures in its Thirty-fourth Report on India’s performance ir
International Sports. The Committee would impress upon the Department to ensure promp
action on the recommendations made by the Committee in this regard, so as to avoic


4

repetition of the Atlanta performance in the next Asian and Olympic Games scheduled to be
held in 1998 and 2000, respectively.

7.2. The Committee is yet to consider the Action Taken Report on the 34th Report.
The Committee, therefore, does not like to discuss the issues relating to sports, at length, at
this stage. (Summary of recommendations of 34th Report is enclosed.)

गा, YOUTH PROGRAMMES

8. The total allocation made for Youth Programmes Division for the current year is Rs.
60.75 crores (Plan Rs. 39.25 crores and Non-Plan Rs. 21.50 crores) as against Rs. 61.25
crores (Plan Rs. 39.25 crores and Non-Plan Rs. 22.00 crores) made in BE last year. The
Se-retary informed the Committee that the overall annual plan allocation for youth is wholly
inadequate. He also stated that for the last three years, the annual plan allocation for the
schemes for youth have remained more or less static and even the normal inflationary impact
on the schemes has not been adjusted in the allocations. The Committee, recognising the
importance of the role of youth, recommends that the required amount may be allocated at
RE stage.

(a) Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan

9. The Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan was set up as an autonomous organisation in
1986-87. Nehru Yuva Kendras aim at providing the rural and non-student youth with an
opportunity to take part in the process of national development and develop their
personality and skills. The number of kendras functioning at present is around 500. For
1996-97 a budget provision of Rs. 10.20 crores on Plan side and Rs. 7.11 crores on Non-Plan
side. This has been kept at the same level as that of the last year.

9.1. The Committee had recommended in its Seventeenth Report for higher allocation
to Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan. Out of Rs. 39.25 crores allocated for youth programmes,
Rs. 10.20 crores are for NYKS, exactly at last year’s level. The Department stated that the
funds available for rest of the schemes are so meagre that it has not been possible to provide
any additionality to NYKS during tlie current financial year. The Department also stated
that any additionality to NYKS is possible only if additional funds over and above the
existing Plan outlay are provided to the Department. The Committee recommends that the
allocation may be increased at RE stage.

(b) Assistance to Voluntary Organisations working in the field of youth

10. The scheme provides a frame-work for voluntary organisations to involve youth for
development activities specially in rural areas. The main focus under: this scheme is on
vocational training, in order to provide self-employment for youth. During the year 1995-96,
the Department assisted 73 voluntary agencies/educational institutions for 7754 beneficiaries,
while the target was to assist around 20,000.

10.1. This year a provision of Rs. 72 lakhs has been made and the Department propose
to assist around 10,000 youth. The Committee fails to understand that while the target was
to assist around 20,000, it_could assist only 7754 beneficiaries. The Committee is of the view
that instead of keeping ambitious target, the Department should set an ideal and attainable
target and the allocation should be fully utilised.


(c) National Integration Programme

11. The main objective of the programme is to promote National Integration
through visit of youth to different parts of the country to work in a group of short
periods in other parts of the country.

11.1. A sum of Rs. 3 crores has been provided this year as compared to Rs.
3.26 crores provided last year. The Department stated that the on-going activities
would be affected by this reduction.

11.2. The Committee feels that due to the rise of regionalism, linguistic
chauvinism and other divisive tendencies all over the country there is an urgent need
for conducting more National Integration Camps and Inter-State Youth Exchange
Programme to create a feeling of oneness among the people. The allocation, therefore,
is required to be increased at RE stage as per the requirement.

(d) Youth Hostels

12. Youth Hostels are built to promote youth travel. The scheme was allocated
Rs. 2.11 crores for 1995-96 and it has been reduced to Rs. 1.75 crores this year.

12.1. To a question, as to what steps were taken by the Department to create
awareness about Youth Hostels and also for constructing new hostels at places of
religious and cultural importance, the Department stated that due to financial
constraints, construction of Youth Hostels is possible only in some selected places. The
Committee desires that the allocation may be increased at RE stage as per
requirement.

12.2. The Committee also reiterates its recommendation made earlier in its 17th
Report that the Department should take steps to provide hostels in places of cultural
and historical importance, so that our youth can get a glimpse of our religious and
cultural diversities and glory of the past.

(e) Programme of training of youth

13. The scheme aims at improving the productive potential of youth through
training courses based on local needs and talents for promoting the self and better
employment. The allocation for the scheme is Rs. 1 crore this year, which is the
same as provided last year.

13.1. The Department stated that the entire amount was fully utilised last year
and there was no shortfall both in achieving physical as well as financial targets. The
Committee was given to understand that training was imparted to 2215 youth as
against the target of 5,000. The Committee fails to understand as to how the
Department could train the rest of youth as targeted, when it could train only 2215
during the’ first 9 months.

13.2. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the target set, both physical
and financial, should be proportionately distributed in each quarter and the
Department should try to achieve it.

(0 Assistance to youth clubs

14. The scheme was started with a view to give a new thrust to the youth
movement in the country. The target was to assist 1160 youth clubs and the
Department could assist only 534 youth clubs upto 15th December, 1995 and released


7

an amount of Rs. 26.70 lakhs. In the rest of the period, the Department claims, it assisted
around 442 youth clubs and released around Rs. 22.10 lakhs.

14.1. The Committee hopes that the target set this year i.e. 1000 youtti clubs would be
achieved. a

(g) Special scheme for promotion of youth activities among the youth of Backward Tribes

15. A special scheme for promotion of youth activities among.the youth of Batkward
Tribes was initiated in 1991 in order to promote youth activities amongst the tribal youth
based on their needs and potential.

15.1. An allocation of Rs. 90 lakhs was provided during the last year and a target of
assisting 8,000 youth was kept. The Committee notes that upto December, 1995 only 5539
tribal youth were benefited and Rs. 46.97 lakhs were released. The Committee also notes
that an allocation of Rs. 1 crore has been provided this year and the Department proposes
to give benefit to 5000 tribal youth.

15.2. Like every other scheme of the Department, the Committee feels that this scheme
also suffers from under-utilisation of funds and has failed to achieve the targets set.

15.3. The Committee feels that the Department should initiate effective steps to utilise
the allocated sum fully and also to achieve the target set.

(h) Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development

16. The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development has been set up at
Sriperambadur (Tamil Nadu), as an autonomous body registered under the Societies
Registration Act. It is responsible for training, documentation, research and evaluation and
extension for all youth related activities in the country.

16.1. The Department stated that the construction of the Phase-I of the campus has
been started and the cost of construction of Phase-I would be to the tune of Rs. 11 crores
and even the amount of Rs. 2.07 crores allocated in the current year is fully inadequate.

16.2. The Committee notes that funds to a large extent have been diverted to this
Institute for its early completion. The Committee feels that the Department should impress
upon the Planning Commission to provide a separate allocation to this Institute in view of its
national importance.

(i) National Service Scheme

17. National Service Scheme is a scheme being implemented through the Universities,
Colleges, +2 level schools and institutions of higher learning in all the States/Union
Territories with the objective of developing the personality of students through community
service.

17.1. The expenditure of NSS is shared between the Central and the State Government
in the ratio 7:5 except in the case of Jammu and Kashmir and Union Territories without
legislatures, where the entire expenditure is met by the Central Government.

17.2. The Committee was given to understand that the States do not release funds to
colleges and schools in time. The Secretary agreeing with the view of the Committee, stated
that releasing the money directly to the educational institutions may resolve the problem of
late release, but at present the Department did not have the necessary staff strength to deal
with such a huge number of institutions which are under the control of the State Education
Departments and their involvement in the activities is very important. The Central


Government does not have adequate résources to make it a fully Central, Scheme. It is,
therefore, imperative on the Department to depend on the State Governments both for
resources as well for proper management of the scheme, the Secretary added.

17.3. The Department also stated that the general experience is that almost all the State
Governments are quite enthusiastic about the NSS and much of the success of NSS is due to
their enthusiasm. Many of them are having their own financial constraints. A meeting is
being convened and it would be used for achieving better coordination in matters of release
of grants and to streamline the operation of the schemes, the Department added.

17.4. The Department further stated that the participation of students in the NSS is
entirely voluntary and no amount is paid to the volunteers in any form. Similarly the
participation of the teachers is also voluntary. Wider coverage rather than a selective
approach is the criteria adopted.

17.5. The Committee is, however, of the considered opinion that the Department
should select some colleges and distribute the amount and after sometimes, if they are not
giving good results, then it may be reconsidered.

17.6. On the question of recognising NSS as a third dimension of academic activity, the
Department stated that till date 11 Universities have already integrated NSS programme into
their curricula, 28 Universities are willing to integrete and 8 Universities have declined. The
Committee feels that the Department should request the UGC to further pursue the matter
with the remaining Universities in this regard.

17.7. On the issue of enhancement of NSS programme fund, per annum per volunteer,
from Rs. 120 to Rs. 160 for regular activities and Rs. 200 to Rs. 300 for special camping
programmes, the Department stated that it is under consideration for quite some time. The
Department also stated that Planning Commission has already agreed to the proposed
enhancement in principle. The additional funds required for enhancement of programme
funds are estimated to be about Rs. 6.3 crores. While making the projection for Annual
Plan, 1996-97, this additionality was taken into consideration and an amount of Rs. 17.36
crores was projected. However, the annual Plan outlay for 1996-97 Has been restricted to the
last year’s level of Rs. 95 crores. The outlays for NSS has been similarly pegged at Rs. 12.60
crores i.e. same as during 1995-96.

17.8. The Department. further informed the Committee that 10 State Governments
namely Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram,
Orissa, Punjab and Rajasthan have agreed for revised rates and have provided additional
funds in their budget for 1996-97 and these States are requesting the Department repeatedly
to release the NSS grant for the year 1996-97 at enhanced rates. The Department added that
it is not possible to provide any additional funds out of the existing resources as already
explained earlier.

17.9. The Committee feels that the rates should be revised at the earliest and the
Planning Commission should provide the necessary funds for it at RE stage.

(@) National Discipline Scheme (NDS)

18. This year a provision of Rs. 9 crores has been made for the scheme. Asked to
explain about the scheme, the Secretary stated that the scheme is not in existence and only
instructors are there who are now-a-days employees of State Governments, previously they
used to be employees of Central Government.

18.1..While explaining the reasons for allocation to the scheme when it is not in


9

existence, the Secretary informed the Committee that it was a commitment made to the
Parliament in 1972 that the Government of India would meet the future deficit required to
be paid to the employees.

18.2. On the question of monitoring the work and the work they are doing, the
Secretary stated that the Department does not have any mechanism.to monitor as far as the
work is concerned, they are working as physical education teachers.

18.3. The Secretary further stated that the money is given to State Governments on the
basis of actual expenditure incurred by them and about 15-20 States are claiming. He also
informed that the total accumulated liability so far for the scheme is Rs. 102 crores while
only Rs. 9 crores has been provided towards Central Government Share this year.

18.4. The Department stated that in view of the recommendations made by the
Committee last year, the former Union Minister for Human Resource Development had
agreed to make a statement on the floor of the Parliament, stating, inter alia, that
“Government desires to discontinue the scheme and no further payment to the State
Governments may be made towards pay and allowances to the ex-instructors in the States’.
However, it could not be done and the matter has now again been taken up for review, the
Department added. The Committee desires that it should be done as early as possible.


ANNEXURE
SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF 34TH REPORT

1. The Committee feels that it should be our objective to see that every child takes part
in sports and games, and that every parent encourages the child to do so. It should also be
our endeavour to see that as children grow, they do not lose their enthusiasm for sports, nor
do the pressure of studies towards a bright career diminish their interest for participating in
sports and games. (para 31)

2. Our performance in creating a conducive environment for sports should also ensure
that boys and girls with high potential are encouraged to remain active in sports through a
system which offers them due scial recognition and encouragement, as well as financial
benefit. This is very essential, if we are to become competitive internationally as a nation.
(para 31)

3. The Committee emphasises that physical education and sports should be made an
essential and integral part of educational activity in schools and colleges. There is need for
reducing academic burden on the children, particularly at the primary stage, so that they
could spare enough time for sports. (paras 33 & 34)

4. Ideally all the schools and colleges must have physical education teachers/coaches.
Until it is possible, physical education teachers may be provided in each secondary school
and one in a group of primary schools. The Committee feels that unless some financial
support is provided to the schools and colleges specifically for this purpose and for purchase
of simple and basic sports equipments and consumable sports items, this objective would not
be achieved. (para 34)

5. There is also a need to develop at least one sports school, preferably residential, in
each district with the requisite playing facilities and equipments. These schools could
ultimately be developed as Centres of excellence in sports, on the same pattern as is being
done by China and East European countries. (para 35)

6. The University Grants Commission should identify a few colleges, preferably physical
education colleges, which, in addition to giving theoretical knowledge, should encourage
their students to participate in performance sports. The Government should also seriously
think of establishing a sports university to which all the colleges of physical education could
be affiliated. (para 36)

7. The Committee strongly recommends that the functioning of the association of Indian
Universities should be revamped to increase sports activities in the universities and
improving thereby their contribution to sports. The Inter-University Sports Board, which
existed before the Independence, should be revived, so as to supervise sports activities in
our universities and their affiliated colleges. (para 37)

8. Coupled with the absence of sports consciousness and culture in the country, there is
almost total lack of sports infrastructure at the grassroot level all over the country. The
Committee found that the infrastructure, so far created, is mainly confined to the metro
cities, big industrial townships, defence cantonments, etc. and caters to the needs of people
living in the urban areas, whereas 80 per cent of the population, which lives in the villages

10


18

and small towns, is generally deprived of this benefit. The tribal and rural areas, with their
age-old games, are devoid of any sports infrastructure worth the name. (paras 39 & 40)

9. One of the reasons cited for the lack of sports infrastructure in the country is the
non-availability of sufficient funds for the promotion of sports. The amount provided for
sports in the Central Government is less than 0.0001 per cent of the Government’s total
budget. Even taking into consideration the States’ provisions for sports, the percentage of
allocation does not improve either, which shows that sports is not a priority area. (para 41)

10. The Committee feels that Government should plan the development of sports in a
phased manner so that necessary infrastructure is built up over a period of time and scarce
resources earmarked for the purpose are optimally utilised. (para 42)

11. The Committee feels that, as far as possible, there should be a condition regarding
provision of a playfield while granting permission for opening a school or college in rural, as
well as urban areas. Where, however, it is not possible to have a separate playfield in the
urban areas for want of space, a group of schools/colleges could be allowed to use a
cominon playfield at different timings. Surplus land available with different Ministries,
including Railways, Defence, Civil Aviation and Tourism, etc. should be allowed to be used
as playfields. All the Municipal Corporations, Cantonment Boards and Development
Authorities should also be directed to ban the use of playfields for any other purposes.
(para 43)

12. The Committee, while visiting the Regional Centres of Sports Authority of India,
LNCPEs, NIS and the important stadia/sports complexes, found it distressing that barring
the Bangalore, Calcutta and Gandhinagar Regional Centres, the condition of most of the
sports complexes/stadia was far from satisfactory. (para 45)

13. The Committee recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports
should work out a proper plan and schedule for maintenance of these buildings/stadia
constructed at a huge cost. The Department should also introduce a system of regular
monitoring and inspection of these buildings by senior officials so as to ensure their proper
maintenance and upkeep. (para 48)

14. The Committee, during its visit to Lakshmibai National College of Physical
Education, Gwalior, noted that even though it has been made a deemed university, no
Director has been appointed for the Institute so far. The Committee desires that the
Director be appointed to the Institute expeditiously. (para 52)

15. The Government has erected huge and massive sports infrastructure in the metro
cities and big towns. These structures are used only when national or international
tournaments take place. For the rest of the period, they are just lying idle or under-utilised.
Some of them are rented out for cultural programmes and other shows. There is a problem
of their maintenance as well. A plan should be drawn up for utilisation of the infrastructure.
(para 53)

16. The Committee feels that instead of organising the games at the State capitals, many
of the games could be held in other places in the State so that the sports infrastructure is not
concentrated in one particular area. (para 55)

17. Several cases of indisciplined behaviour of many of our sportspersons are reported,
quite often, in the press. Coaches and Managers are scared of reporting against them
because of various reasons. The Committee is of the firm view that the country can ill-afford
to take lightly the instances of indiscipline and lack of sportsmanship, particularly from


12

persons representing the country in international arena. The authorities, the Committee feels,
have to be firm and strict in handling the instances of indiscipline amongst sportspersons and
ensure that such people do not find place in the Indian contingents going abroad for
international tournaments. (paras 58 & 60)

18. The Committee feels that if we really want to promote sports in the country we will
have to make available adequate incentives, good job opportunities and recognition of talent
and achievements. At present, there are very few incentives/rewards for our talented and
outstanding sportspersons. The Central Government, the State Governments and the public
sector undertakings do not offer good job opportunities for our sportspersons. (paras 61 & 62)

19. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for fixing a percentage of jobs in
each and every organisation for sportspersons. This would definitely prove to be a strong
incentive to take sports as a career, provided all the orgnisations like Banks, Railways,
Airlines, public sector undertakings, etc. meticulously implement the scheme of employment
of sportspersons under this category. At present, there is no mechanism to monitor this aspect
by the Government. (para 63)

20. The Committee feels that in schools and colleges students, who perform well in
sports, may be given some percentage of grace marks in each subject. Similarly, certain
percentage of seats for admission in colleges should be reserved for students who have
excelled in sports. (para 64)

21. The Committee desires that, as an incentive, sportspersons who have participated in
the state, national and international events should be allotted houses or plots by Housing
Boards and Urban Development Authorities on priority basis and at concessional rates. They
may also be given house building loans by Banks and other financial institutions at low
interest. Eminent sportspersons, who, after retirement, intend to start their own industry/
business etc. may be given licenses for the purpose, alongwith bank loans and land, if
necessary. (para 65)

22. The Committee was shocked to learn that till March 1995, only 25 persons were
recruited as sportspersons in the 25 Ministries/Departments of the Government of India
(except in Railways and Defence) and that too in the Group ‘C’ category. (para 67)

23. The Committee feels that there is a lack of will and determination also in
implementing the existing guidelines in employing sportspersons by the government. There is
no provision for promotion of outstanding sportspersons or giving them adequate cash awards
after they win medals and bring laurels to the country. (para 69)

24. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the government should have (i) a
definite policy for recruiting sportspersons in various Ministries/Departments and public
sector undertakings; (ii) effective monitoring to get regular feedback and to ensure proper
implementation of the provisions of the policy, which is virtually non-existent as on date; (iii)
the Department of Sports and Youth Affairs should act as a nodal agency for this purpose;
(iv) the government should also issue clear-cut guidelines to the Union Public Service
Commission for recruiting sportspersons in Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ services also as there are many
sportspersons of international standard having adequate educational qualifications for these
categories of posts. (para 70)

25. The Committee does realise the sportspersons’ concern about not getting adequate
time for practice due to pressure of work in their jobs. In such a situation, the Committee
feels, it is the duty, both of the sportspersons and their employers, to give top most priority to
sports so long as the person is in full form and is in a position to win medals. (para 71)


13

26. The Committee notes that the existing cash awards system is not adequate to give
the much-needed financial support to sportspersons; and that cash awards for juniors and
seniors are highly disproportionate; and that for some sports these are incredibly higher.
(para 72)

27. The amount of cash awards and pension being given to sportspersons by. the
government should be increased substantially so as to make sports more attractive and
lucrative. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Railways and the airlines
operating in the country, both private and the government, should provide free/concessional
tickets to eminent sportspersons. (paras 73 & 75)

28. The Committee also recommends that certain categories of sportspersons should be
given preference in the allotment of soft loans by the banks, petrol and LP gas agencies and
other such incentives/benefits by the government. (para. 76)

29. The Committee recommends that one of the outstanding sportspersons may be
nominated to the Rajya Sabha in recognition of his/her distinguished service to the country.
(para 77)

30. The Committee suggests that the government should ensure that no player or team
is sent abroad for participation in international tournaments unless they are accompanied by
qualified sports medicine doctors alongwith the necessary kits and other aids. (para 78)

31. The Committee was informed that, in some cases, the government is paying only
90% of the fare and the remaining 10% is to be borne by the player himself or herself. The
government should investigate as to why part payment of air fare is being made to players
attending international meets and ensure that such a thing is not repeated in future. (paras
79 & 80)

32. The Committee is of the opinion that training forms the core of good performance
and champions cannot be produced by training the sportspersons just for a few months
before the games. The training system in the country, the Committee feels, leaves much to
be desired. Sports training has to be properly planned and controlled for achieving the best
results. (para 81)

33. The Committee feels that kits should be provided to players and teams well in
advance before they leave for international meets. (para 82)

34. Efforts should be made to ensure that the diet available to sportsmen and women
has the nutritional value necessary to meet the specific requirements of different games and
sports in which they participate. The Committee is of the firm opinion that the government
should immediately raise the amount of diet allowance substantially so that players can get a
rich and nutritious diet. (paras 83 & 84)

35. The Government should evolve a system of proper monitoring and evaluation of the
performance of SAI coaches deployed at various places. Coaches who work hard and show
good results should be suitably rewarded. Simultaneously, those who do not take interest in
sports or fail to give any tangible results need to be dealt with sternly. (para 86)

36. The Committee feels that once a good rapport is established between the coach and
the students, it would not be advisable to disturb such coaches in the overall interest of the
students and the sports. (para 87)

37. Outstanding sportspersons who have represented the country in the international
games and have now retired from active sports, can work as good coaches. The Committee


14

feels that services of such sportspersons would be both beneficial and economical aud it
would also give them the much needed financial help and recognition of their talent. The
Committee desires that this system could be initially tried on an experimental basis which
could be subsequently extended or discontinued depending upon the results. (para 88)

38. The Committee suggests that either the entire control of the SAI coaches should be
given to the state governments who have comparatively better mechanism for their close
monitoring or they may be completely withdrawn. The state governments should be given
full authority for all the service matters of SAI coaches, including their postings and
transfers. (para 89)

39. One of the problems raised by the coaches deployed in the schools was that they did
not have accommodation either in the school premises or anywhere near the school. The
Committee feels that it is a genuine problem which needs to be looked into sympathetically
and government should try to give residential accommodation to these coaches either in the
school premises itself, or just near to their working place so that they could reach the ground
early in the morning. (para 90)

40. The Committee emphasises the need for continuous skill development and
orientation of coaches in view of the rapid changes in the techniques of various games. The
Committee desires that the SAI should identify certain specialised training institutes in
various sports disciplines, both within the country and abroad, so that our coaches could be
deputed for refresher training courses from time to time to upgrade their skills. The
Committee came to know that, at present, there was no policy with regard to training of the
coaches and that only a handful of coaches were repeatedly being sent for foreign exposure.
The Committee expresses its unhappiness over such a state of affairs and recommends that a
uniform policy be evolved for training the coaches without any discrimination. (para 91)

41. The Committee strongly recommends that the practice of making frequent changes
of coaches be avoided and whenever any team or player performs well, the credit should
also be given to the coaches who are basically responsible for their training. (para 92)

42. The Committee feels that government should make arrangements to provide
personal coaches to those sportspersons who have adequate potential and hope of winning
medals at international level. These personal coaches should also accompany the
sportspersons whenever they go abroad to participate in international tournaments. (para 93)

43. A comprehensive plan to upgrade the skills and qualifications of technical officials,
referees and judges in the identified disciplines needs to be taken up as quickly as possible.
(para 95)

44. The various Federations/Associations in the country are alleged to be the weakest
link in the chain of sports management and their functioning has been described as
perfunctory. The selection of teams and players by them is also stated to be lopsided, based
on favouritism, nepotism and arbitrariness. There is no democratic functioning,at all in most
of them. It is also stated that huge amounts of money are spent on the election of office-
bearers. Many Federations/Associations are being headed by people who have nothing to do
with sports. (para 96)

45. Federations must hold their elections regularly and democratically. The first and the
most important task before each national federation is to mobilise its energies and efforts for
obtaining sponsorship and finanical support from various sources. (para 98)

46. It is essential that the national federations organise competitions, tournaments and


championships on a regular basis throughout the sporting season. This can be achieved by
monitoring, guiding and motivating their state/district units. (para 99)

47. The national federations are also responsible for enforcing the rules of the game and
for ensuring the officials who conduct: games, tournaments and competitions are fully
competent and fit for the purpose. The national federations should ensure that the rules
approved by the international federations to. which they are affiliated, are followed in
recognised national championships. (para 100)

48. While it will take some time for federations to become financially independent, and
to organise their work and responsibilities along structures and well regulated lines,
assistance from the Government of India for various purposes may have to continue.
However, government may impose certain conditions with regard to such matters as
democratic functioning, appointment of selection committees, dope testing, age verification
procedure, etc., as are considered necessary to protect our sportspersons from exploitation,
and also to ensure against adverse publicity in India and abroad. (para 102)

49. An important areas of resource mobilisation in which the government can help the
federations greatly is by way of transferring the remaining sum of the advertising revenues
earned by Doordarshan from showing sports programmes to the concerned federations after
deducting its costs. (para 103)

50. The Committee also feels that I.0.A. is not in a position to maintain any effective
control and effect any co-ordination with national sports. federations/associations. The
1.0.A. should reiterate to each federation the importance of making long-term development
planning and also ensuring its implementation. (para 104)

51. There is no coordination or cooperation between various agencies engaged in
promotion of sports. There is no accountability and responsibility for poor performance in
sports in international events. The Committee emphasises the need for clearly demarcating
the duties and responsibilities of each one of the agencies so that accountability could be
fixed for their lapses. (para 105)

52. It is often seen that teams are selected virtually almost on the last day and at times
had reported after the events had already started. The Committee feels that this state of
affairs is highly deplorable and has to be stopped forthwith if we really intend to achieve
medals in the international sports arena. The Committee feels that there is a need for a
long-term planning and selection of teams has to be made much in advance so that players
are aware of their selection and they could concentrate more on sports rather than running
around till the last moment for various clearances. The Committee also desires that once the
teams are selected they should be sent to places of training and also sufficiently in advance
to the venue of the event for proper exposure and acclimatisation to the foreign
environment. (paras 106 & 107)

53. The Committee suggests that each one of the sports organisations should have an
annual calendar of events giving the details of events, their venues and the dates for the
entire year. The Committee also suggests that there should be only one National Calendar of
Events of various disciplines which should be finalised after consulting different agencies
involved in its promotion. This calendar of events should be sent to the Sports Authority of
India (SAI) by the concerned sports federations for consolidation and publication. (para 109)

54. The Committee is happy to know that the sports goods industry had come a long
way in producing good quality equipments which are in great demand and that some of these
have been approved even for Olympic games. The Committee, however, feels that such


16

quality production is confined to a few games like tennis and cricket which are very costly.
India still does not produce good quality and reasonably priced sports items of common use.
The Committee is of the opinion that making sports equipment easily available, upto the
grassroot level at economical cost, is absolutely necessary which would contribute not only to
broad-basing the participation but also creating a mass sports movement in the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports should
have a meeting with the representatives of sports goods industry to identify their problems,
which should be sorted out in consultation with the Ministries of Commerce, Finance and
Industry. The Committee also feels that small and cottage industries involved in production
of sports goods should be encouraged so that they can sell their products to local buyers at
reasonable prices. (paras 112, 113 & 114)

55. During its visits to various places, the Committee received a number of complaints
from players and organisers of various sports events that sports, except a few like cricket,
tennis and golf, are not given adequate coverage by the government-owned electronic media,
particularly Doordarshan. (para 115)

56. The Committee is of the opinion that media, particularly Doordarshan, is a potent
and powerful instrument for popularising sports. The Committee, keeping the condition of
sports in the country in view, feels that endeavour should be made to cover live, as far as
possible, or through highlights, all the national championships at senior and junior levels.
The Committee feels that there is a need to increase the equipments and other facilities
available with Doordarshan and AIR so that they do not feel handicapped in covering
important and major sports events. The Committee also emphasises the need for improving
the quality of live coverage and commentaries. Doordarshan and AIR may also play an
effective role in projecting the techniques and style of eminent sportspersons by showing
them in slow motion on the national hook-up. There is also a need for calling eminent
sportspersons in programmes on fitness, yoga, sports and games. (para 119)

57. The Committee is concerned to learn that some of the federations/boards are giving
the telecasting/broadcasting rights to foreign media companies, which is depriving
Doordarshan of an opportunity to earn revenues for its expansion and improvement. The

- Committee notes the suggestion of Director General, Doordarshan, to have a legislation
* declaring some sports as of national importance so that national media would be bound to
cover the important events connected with them, as is being done in Britain. (para 120)

58. The Committee notice that neither the sports psychology nor the sports medicine
was being given any priority in India. The Committee feels that all the organisations working
towards promotion of sports must give due attention and priority to both these disciplines.
The Committee recommends that the services of good sports physiologists, psychologists and
sports medical experts be made available to our players on the ground. There is a need for a
more coordinated effort on the part of coaches, sports scientists and sports medicine doctors
to help sportspersons enhance their performance. Though SAI has made a beginning in this
direction, yet a lot more needs to be done. (paras 122 & 123)

59. In view of the decentralisation. of resources to panchayats, government should
ensure that there is a sports complex in each panchayat. Panchayats should also hold sports
competitions and championships periodically. There is also need for scouting talent at an
early age and select them on scientific basis because it is all the more easier to train the
young ones. Panchayat bodies should take up this responsibility. (para 124)

60. The Committee finds it disappointing that most of the state governments have not
made any concrete plans to streamline the procedure for selection of sportspersons, their


17

coaching and participation in the national events so far. Improper selection of sportspersons,
coupled with lack of modern and rigorous training, results in disastrous performance at the
international level. The Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for streamlining the
entire system of selection of sportspersons and their training so as to achieve the best results.
State governments should be asked to evolve long-term development programmes and also
match them with adequate budget. (para 126)

61. The Committee finds that so far neither the Department of Youth Affairs and
Sports nor the federations have taken any particular interest in the development of sports
among Indian women and whatever distinction women have achieved so far is largely due to
their individual efforts. (para 128)

62. The Committee feels there is a need to give good incentives in the form of cash
awards and medals so as to attract mass participation by women. Many parents would like to
send their daughters to play games but they are hesistant to do so because of security and
safety reasons. The Committee noticed that out of 18 sports hostels of SAI, there is only one
sports-hostel for women and there is no exclusive SPDA hostel for girls. Therefore, the
Committee feels, there is a need for proper planning to develop sport amongst women, by
opening more sports hostels and adopting more sports-oriented girls schools. (para 129)

63. In India, there is a club culture but it’ is restricted only to football, cricket and
wrestling. Club culture can be developed by organising inter-club competitions and by
providing patronage at different levels by government agencies as well as business
establishments. The Committee feels that the club culture needs to be encouraged right from
the panchayat level. The Committee feels that the government should probe into the
workings of the National Sports Club of India. The Committee also desires that the other
sports clubs existing in various parts of the country should throw open their facilities/
infrastructure to sportspersons on concessional basis. (para 135)

64. At present there are about 32 to 34 disciplines in sports on which the country is
spending a lot of money. The Committee feels that due to paucity of funds we should not
spread our scarce resources thinly on each one of the games and it would be desirable to
concentrate on a few selected games and try to bag medals in these games at the
international arena. (para 136) हि

65. The Committee emphasises the need for concentrating on traditional, rural and
tribal sports like kho-kho, archery and kabaddi in which India could always do better than
other countries. (para 138)

66. The Committee also feels that we should not send our teams to international sports
events in the disciplines where we do not have any chance of bagging medals. It would
perhaps be better not to participate than participating and losing in all the games, which
would have a demoralising effect. Before participating in international events, our players
should be given enough exposure at the national level, and if need be, we may invite foreign
teams to India to participate in competitions. (para 139)

67. The Committee feels that lack of funds and budgetary constraints are coming in the
way of development and promotion of sports. The amount earmarked by Government of
India for sports in 1995-96 is only Rs. 68.86 crores, which works out to 0.0001% of the total
budget of the Government. The Committee recommends that, to begin with, atleast 0.5 per
cent of the total budget should be earmarked for sports promotion. (para 144)

68. Members of Parliament are given Rs. 1 crore every year under the MPs’ Local Area
Development Scheme by the Central Government. MLAs are also given special


18

discretionary funds by the respective state governments. A suggestion has come to the
Committee that the MPs and MLAs may be requested to earmark at least one to five per
cent of this money every year for purchasing sports equipments in the schools/colleges in
their respective constituencies. (para 148)

69. The Committee feels that the Government alone cannot deliver the goods. Public
and private sectors’ involvement is necessary in supplementing the governmental efforts. The
Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for a joint and coordinated approach by all the
agencies, including public and private sectors, in pooling their resources to promote sports in
the country. This is particularly necessary in the context of financial constraints, both at the
Central and State levels. (para 149)

70. The Committee recommends that each major industrial house, both in public and
private sectors, should be asked to adopt one sports discipline and they should take the total
responsibility of scouting talent and nurturing the same, including their participation in
various national and international events. On reciprocal basis, the concerned industrial house
should have its nominee in the particular national federation/association. (para 151)

71. Representatives of industrial houses appealed for tax exemption under revenue
expenditure also for scouting talent and training the teams. Such incentives are necessary for
the continued support of industrial houses in sports. The Income-tax Act should, therefore,
be suitably amended so as to give substantial tax exemption to organisations investing in
sports. Special Customs Duty exemption for certain categories of imported sports
equipments is required to be made. Liberalised access to foreign exchange for import of
sports equipment is also called for. (paras 152 & 154)

72. There is a lot of duplication of efforts as various sports control boards, such as
Services, Railways, P & T, Banks and Para-military police forces, Steel plants, Coal-fields
etc., are contibuting in their own way for promotion of sports without any coordination
with each other. Much worse is the lack of cooperation and communication between these
bodies on the one hand and the Sports Authority of India (SAI) and the federations on the
other. The Committee is not happy with this chaotic situation and lack of coordination
among various bodies is resulting in loss of scarce resources and time. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports should take
immediate steps to develop an effective machinery for regular dialogue and coordination
with various organisations so that no effort is duplicated and wastage of time and money
could be avoided. (para 155)

73. The Committee found that very limited sports infrastructure has been provided in
the whole of the North-Eastern region. The region is also denied major sports tournaments
and championships. The Committee, therefore, recommends that governments and SAI, as
well as national sports federations, should concentrate in this sports fertile area, not only for
scouting and nurturing of potential sportspersons and providing adequate and suitable
infrastructure in this region but also for holding more and more competitions. (para 132)

74. The Committee is quite disappointed to learn that we have not been able to, till
now, identify the sportspersons who would represent India in the 1996 Olympics at Atlanta
even though only seven months are left now. The Committee strongly recommends that we
should start selecting our players/teams without further delay not only for Olympics 1996
and Asian Games 1998 but also for Olympics 2000 and prepare them scientifically with a
view to winning medals for the country. (para 156)

75. The Committee feels that unless Sports is also brought under the “Concurrent List”


19

of the Constitution, sports activities in the country cannot be uniformly regulated in an
effective and coordinated manner. (para 157)

76. The Committee also recommends thatthe government should bring forward a
Central legislation, specifying the roles and responsibilities of the SAI, federations/
associations and of the state bodies so that a uniform and common approach could ७९
adopted towards promotion of sports by different agencies. This law should also provide for
an effective regulatory mechanism in the sports arena without impairing the autonomy of
various agencies. Such legislations are already in existence in countries like USA, Germany,
Thailand, Sri Lanka and China. (para 157)

77. The Committee has come to the conclusion that the bureaucratic functioning of the
SAI is proving to be a major obstacle in the free and smooth operation of the regional
centres. The Committee feels that unless these Centres are strengthened, we cannot expect
better results from them. The SAI office in Delhi could be just a coordinating authority and
should concentrate on policy, planning and monitoring. There should be a Sub-regional
centre of SAI in each State, with a Director in charge of it. (para 162)

78. At present there are six Regional Centres at Chandigarh, Delhi, Bangalore,
Calcutta, Imphal and Gandhinagar. The Central Region, which is at present located in
Delhi, should be shifted to Lucknow, as originally contemplated. The North-Eastern region,
comprising eight States including Sikkim, should have two centres, one located at Imphal
and the other at Guwahati/Shillong. The Committee desires that each one of the Regional
Centres should be headed by a Regional Director, with almost full powers. Two Executive
Directors in Delhi could look after the administrative and coordinating works of the
organisation, as well as matters relating to teams. The Secretary, Department of Youth
Affairs and Sports, should not be the Director-General of SAI. Instead, a full-time
Chairman-cum-MD, with good sports background or interest in sports, should be appointed
by the government. (para 163)

79. The SAI governing body shall consist of fifteen members, including the Chairman-
cum-MD, two Executive Directors, seven Regional Directors, on, Financial Advisor and
four non-official Members elected by the General Council. The General Council of SAI,
headed by the Minister of Human Resource Development, shall consist of the Minister of
Sports, the Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, the Chairman-cum-MD of
SAI, the Financial Advisor, the Executive Directors, Regional Directors and Directors of
SAI sub-centres, representatives of the State Sports Authorities / Sports Council, Joint
Secretary in the Ministry of HRD, five Arjuna Awardees / Olympians, three coaches,
Secretary-General, IOA, five representatives of national sports federations, two
representatives of public sector sports control boards, five sports experts such as sports
journalists and commentators and three Members of Parliament. The number shall not
exceed 100. (para 163)

80. The Committee feels that the National Sports Talent Contest Scheme appears to be
very sound, reaching upto the village or panchayat level. However, in actual practice, it has
achieved very limited results. After ten years of its implementation, the scheme has thrown
up very few outstanding sportspersons. The scheme is now operated only in 44 scheols in the
country. SAI and State Governments do not seem to be paying attention to give adequate
publicity to it.

The Committee, therefore, feels that a wide publicity campaign should be launched
through mass media / local newspapers and also through locally elected bodies, well before
the selection process starts. ‘The Committee also expresses its concern over the
implementation aspect of the scheme, which is fraught with various flaws and loopholes. The
Sports Authority of India should periodically monitor the functioning of each school and also

/


insist on improving the sports infrastructure and boarding / lodging facilities. The
Committee finds that no serious thoughtehas been given to the number of schools to be
adopted which is borne out by the fact that the number of schools adopted is not
commensurate with the number of children selected. Henceforth, preference should be given
under NSTC Scheme to Kendriya Vidyalayas, Navodaya Vidyalayas, Sainik Schools and
government boys / girls schools. (paras 169, 170, 171, 172 & 176)

81. Out of 78 SPDA Centres proposed to be set up, only 33 centres have started
functioning so far. The Committee expresses its displeasure over such a tardy progress of the
scheme and strongly urges upon the central as well as the state governments to work in close
tandem with each other in the larger interest of development of sports. As regards the
suggestion of the Tata Consultancy Services to phase out the SPDA scheme, the Committee
is of the view that it is not based on a sound proposition. To wind up the scheme simply on
the pretext of States’ failure is not sound. The SPDA centres should be converted into SAI
Sub-regional Centres in course of time, with additional inputs. (paras 182 & 190)

82. Although the Committee expresses its overall satisfaction with the functioning and
performance of the Special Area Games Scheme as far as archery, hockey and watersports
are concerned, it is constrained to observe that the achievements in other disciplines,
particularly gymnastics and athletics, have not been upto the mark. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that based on the population / concentration of tribal and other
communities, government should try to expand this scheme in the rural and tribal areas and
take all necessary measures to streamline and revamp the scheme. (paras 191 & 192)

83. The Committee recommends that government should review the National Coaching
Scheme to set right shortcomings and streamline the functioning of the scheme at the
earliest. The concept of sports hostel should be reoriented and focussed towards
achievement of excellence at the international level. (para 196)

84. The Committee is also of the view that it is imperative to prioritise disciplines for
sports hostel scheme and select only those games in which India has the potentiality of
achieving results in the international arena. (para 201)

85. The Committee found that the Army Boys Sports Company Scheme is functioning
very efficiently because the overall atmosphere of discipline in the Regimental Centres is
quite conducive for the development of sporting skills amongst children. The Committee is
of the opinion that the amount of Rs. 35 being given for diet per head under this scheme is
quite inadequate and should be increased substantially. During the course of their
interaction with the Committee, representatives of the Services Sports Control Board
expressed a desire to have one school in each Regiment. SAI may have to enlarge the
scheme, accordingly as it is likely to pay better dividends. The Committee recommends that
apart from extending the scheme to other regiments of the army, the scheme should be
extended to the central para-military forces also who are keen to run schools on the same
lines as by army regiments. (paras 203, 204 & 205)


MINUTES



bite
“THIRD MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. and again at 3.00 p.m. on Saturday, the 17th August,
1996 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri $.B. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. B.B. Dutta

Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Shri Raj Nath Singh

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

LOK SABHA

10. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
11, Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

12. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
13. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

14. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

15. Shri Ishwarbhai K.Chavda
16. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
17. Shri Krishna

18. Shri Samik Lahiri

19. Dr. M. Jagannath

20. Dr. Bali Ram

21. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

WITNESSES

1, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Women and Child
Development

. Dr. (Shrimati) Sarala Gopalan, Secretary

. Shrimati B. Sen, Joint Secretary

. Shri Vivek Mehrotra, Financial Adviser

. Shrimati Chandra Iyenger, Joint Secretary
Shri D.P. Sethi, Director (NIPCCD)

. Shrimati Nisha Achuthan, Member-Secretary
. Shrimati Smita Nagaraj, ED (CSWB)

Shri T.M. Vijay Bhaskar, Deputy Secretary
. Shri T.K. Das, CCA

Per AWAD

WCONAARYWNE

*Minutes of Ist and IInd meetings relates to matters not included in this report.

23


24

10. Shri S.K. Bhargava, Deputy Secretary
11. Shri A.M. Tiwari, Deputy Secretary
12. Shri M.P.S. Sethi, Joint Director
13. Shrimati Reena Ray, Deputy Secretary
14, Shrimati Shashi Prabha Gupta, Tech. Adviser
15. Shri Gopal Krishna, Deputy Secretary
16. Shri C.A. Bhaskaran, Deputy Secretary
II. Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Youth
Affairs and Sports
. Shri Bhaskar Barua, Secretary
. Shri Satya Moorty, Financial Adviser
. Shri S.Y. Quaraishi, Joint Secretary
. Shrimati Asha Swarup, Joint Secretary
. Shri M.N. Buch, DG, Sports Authority of India
. Shri Julius Sen, DG, Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above witnesses in connection with the
examination of Demands for Grants of the Departments of Women and Child Development
and Youth Affairs and Sports for the year 1996-97.
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.35 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 A.m. the 19th

August, 1996.

ANwne


VI
*SIXTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 29th August, 1996 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri S.B. Chavan — Charman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. B.B. Dutta

3. Dr. M. Aram

4. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

5. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
6. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

7. Shri R. Margabandu

LOK SABHA

8. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
9. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
10. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

11. Shri Mahant Abedyanath
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

13. Shri Ishwarbhiai K. Chavda
14. Shri Dutta Meghe

15. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
16. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
17. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
18. Dr. M. Jagannath

SECRETARIAT
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on the Demands for Grants for 1996-97
of the Departments of Education (Demand No. 47), Women and Child Development
(Demand No. 50) and Youth Affairs and Sports (Demand No. 48). The Committee, after
some discussions, adopted the same with some modifications.

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram and
Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Sumitra
Mahajan and in her absence Shri Ram Chandra Dome to lay the reports in Lok Sabha. The
Committee decided that the reports may be laid / presented on 3rd September, 1996 or on a
subsequent day subject to availability of Hindi Version.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

“Minutes of IVth and Vth meetings relates to matters not included in this report.

25