PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN 
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
TENTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1994-95 (DEMAND NO. 49) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE 
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22.4.94) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22.4.94) 
RAJ)' A SABRA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL 1994/CHAITRA 1916 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
PAG ES 
I. COMPOSITION OF TiiE COMMilTEE 
II. INTRODUCTION (iii)-(iv) 
III. AN OVERVIEW (v) 
IV. REPORT 1-3 
v. MINUTES 3-10 
13-16 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN 
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
1. Shri P. Upendra-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
4. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
5. Shri O.P. Kohli 
6. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel 
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
8. Sliri Md. Salim 
9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
10. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen 
12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
15. 
LOK SABHA 
16. Dr. Vtswanatham Kanithi 
17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran 
18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
20. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
21. Prof. P .J. Kurien 
22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak 
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole 
25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe 
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
27. Shri K.T. Vendayar 
28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
29. Shri Inder Jit 
30. Shri Anna Joshi 
31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami 
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gow_,da 
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani 
36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
38. Shri Rambadan 
39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
41. Shri Ramchandra Dome 
(1994-95) 

(iv) 
42. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai 
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 
44. Shri Suraj Mandai 
45. Shri Kanshi Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present this Tenth Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand 
No. 49) of the Department of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource Development for the year 
1994-95. 
2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the 
Deptt. of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource Development and also heard the Secretary and other 
officials of that Deptt. on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 7th April, 1994. 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report in its sitting held on 13th April, 1994 and 
adopted the same on 18th April, 1994. 
NEW DELHI; 
April 18, 1994 
28 Chaitra, 1916 (Saka) 
P. UPENDRA 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committ ee on Human 
Resource Development. 

AN OVERVIEW 
There are two main components of the Department i.e. Cultur~ and Arts . . A . separate 
department, called the Department of Arts, was constituted in August, 1985 with the aim 9f setting 
up the Indir a Gandhi National Centre for Arts (IGNCA)-a major centre for Arts, Humanities and 
Cultural heritage . The vast treasure of our culture is being preserved, promoted and propagated 
jointly by the Central and State Governments and Union Territ ory Administrations through out the 
country. The Archaeological survey of India is the largest and most important part of the Department 
of Culture engaged in conservation and excavation of old historical sites and about 25 per cent of the 
total budget provisions of the Department of Culture goes to this institution. Awareness generation 
and dissemination of information about our glorious past is done through exhibition of antiquities and 
artefacts preserved in museum s spread thr oug hout the country. Different Academies, National School 
of Drama, Centre for Cultural Resources and Training , Zonal Cultural Centres: Libraries , Memorials 
like Gandhi Smriti and Darshan Samiti, Kalakshetra, Madras etc., functioning under the Depart ment 
of Culture, cater to the artistic and literary needs of the people. The Anthmpological Survey of India , 
a subordinate office of the Departm ent, has been carrying out researches on cultural aspects of Indian 
population. 
2. The total outlay on culture during the Eighth Five Year Plan (as initially approved for the 
Departmen t of Culture) amounts to Rs . 727 crores (including both Central as well as State sectors). 
The Central sector share is Rs. 385.00 crores, supplemented by an additional allocation of Rs. 75.00 
crores, making it a total of Rs. 460.00 crores. 
Eighth Plan outlay for Art and Culture 
Table I 
(Rs. in crores) 
Sl. No. Major Head Centre States U.Ts Total 
1. Art & Culture 385.00 324.76 17.92 727.68 
*75.00 75.00 
Total 460.00 324.76 17.92 802.68 
• Additional outlay conveyed by Planning Commission. 
3. For 1994-95 a total budget provision of Rs. 179.69 crores has been made for the Department 
of Cultur e, with an increase of Rs. 23.93 crores over the last year's total outlay (Budget estimates) 
but if the Revised Estimates are taken into considen:ition then there is a cut of Rs. 4.82 crores (as 
shown in the table below):-
Table II 
Art and Culture (Rs. in crores) 
PLAN NON-PLAN TOTAL 
Year B.E. R.E. B.E. R.E. B.E . R.E . 
1991-92 65.54 50.28* 62.80 61.24* 128.34 111.52* 
1992-93 64.00 57.63* 62.59 66.56* 126.59 124.59* 
1993-94 85.70 107.50 70.06 77.01 155.76 184.51 
1994-95 102.60 77.09 179.69 
.__. *Actuals 

4. Out of the total outlay of Government of India for the year 1994-95, which is Rs. 157419.90 
crores, the percentage of allocation for the Department of Culture works out to be a negligible 0.1 
percent. This meagre budget provision is highly unsatisfactory in the face of acute shortage of funds 
for various · projects undertaken by the Department to preserve and propagate our cultural traditions. 
Therefore, Committee strongly urges upon the Government to pay due attention and grant" adequate 
allocations to the Department of Culture. 
5. Article 51 A Part IV A of the Constitution of India provides that it shall be the duty of every 
citizen to preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture. Therefore, Public cooperation and 
participation to realise this goal is must. But some concrete and concerted efforts apart from the 
ongoing schemes of the Government have also become inevitable. The Committee recommends that a 
National Cultural Fund be set up for the preservation and protection of ancient monuments. If needed, 
money from this fund may also be appropriated to other schemes starved of funds. 
6. While, on one side, there is scarcity of resources for culture, on the other side, a cursory 
glance at the appropriation of the approved plan outlay during 1992-93 (See Table II - on pre-p ,age) 
reveals considerable under-utilisation of the already meagre plan provisions made for the Department. 
Swtement showing instances of such cases Scheme-wise:-
Organisation/Scheme 
1 
1. Secretariat + Strengthening 
of Statistical Machinery 
2. Zonal ·cultural Centres 
3. Financial Assistance for 
Preservation & Dev. of Cultural 
Heritage of Himalayas 
4. Setting up of Multipurpose 
Cultural Complexes in States 
including those for children 
5. Setting up of National Cultural 
Complex in New Delhi 
6. National Archives of India 
(including the schemes of Pr~servation 
of manuscripts etc.) 
7. Thanjavur Maharaja 
Serfoji's Saraswati Mahal 
Library, Thanjavur 
8. Central Reference 
Library, Calcutta 
9. Central Sectt. Library, 
New Delhi 
10. National Museum Institute 
of History of Art, conservation 
& Museology, New Delhi. 
B.E. 
(Plan) 
( i 
17.00 
8.00 
250.00 
10.00 
50.00 
20.00 
300.00 
25.00 
15.00 
25.00 
40.00 
(in lakhs of rupees) 
1992-9:; 
Actual 
(Plan) 
3 
14.94 
74.07 
8.48 
20.00 
136.35 
11.25 
6.52 
7.59 
22.39 

1 
11. Promotion and Strengthening 
of Regional and Local Museums 
12. Indira Gandhi Rashtriya 
Manav Sanghralaya, Bhopal 
2 3 
10.00 
170.00 125.00 
The Committee takes strong exception to the failure of the Department and recommends that 
henceforth budget allocations given to the Department should be fully utilised and appropriated. The 
Committee also notes that the distribution of available funds is also not need-based. While on the one 
hand, funds are being blocked by allocating them to such scheme where appropriation is less and are 
~ing surrendered on the other, some schemes where appropriation is cent percent and more grant is 
required, suffer from lack of resources. Therefore, the Committee recommends that instead of 
surrendering the untllised funds the Deptt. should reallocate them for the needy schemes in time. 
7. The Secretary, Deptt. of Culture, during the course of his oral evideqce tendered before the 
Committee stated that this year the major thrust of the Deptt. are on the Scheme of setting up of 
rural libraries assistance to private museums, documentation and promotion of folk and tribal arts, 
attracting private sector in the field of arts and culture by according them tax exemptions etc., 
encouraging people's initiative and participation in the process of cultural development and organising 
festivals of India abroad. 
8. In order to give fillip to the culture and to restore and refurbish its dying facets, Govt. has 
drafted an Approach Paper on National Policy on Culture. Views/comments received from Members 
of Parliament, eminent person in the field of literature, arts and culture, critics and administrators, 
etc. on the Policy Paper have been discussed in the meetings of the Consultative Committee of the 
Department. Presently, by the Draft Approach Paper on National Policy on Culture is under 
consideration of this Standing Committee and it proposes to submit its report to the Parliament soon. 
REPORT 
9. The Committee, taking note of the revolutionary changes taking place in communications and 
mass media and threat to the Indian culture from outside, emphasises that culture should be seen in 
right perspective and stresses the need of countering cultural invasion from outside. The Secretary, 
during the course of his oral evidence before the Committee, while taking note of the concern of the 
Committee stated that efforts are being made to have parleys with the Secretaries of Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and Department of Tourism in order to ensure better coordination 
between them in this regard. The Commmittee urges upon the Government to make all-out efforts to 
contain cultural invasion and to restore our cultural ethos, ideals and values. 
10. The Committee expresses its concern over the neglect of the rural areas due to the 
centralisation of programmes in the urban areas by the Department of Culture. More and more 
programmes of the department are concentrated in the major cities and the rural areas are being 
neglected in the process . It was admitted by the department that in our cultural programmes priority 
is being given to the urban areas due to reason that major cultural institutions arc located in the cities 
and there are better transport and other facilities available in cities for the foreign delegates and 
dignatries visiting these centres. The situation c~n improve only when more and more such facilities 
are provided in the rural areas to facilitate the establishment of cultural centres in villages or semi­
urban areas. 
The Committee was also informed that there is a provision with the Department to extend 
building grant of Rs. 10 lakhs to any organisation for setting up of auditorium at any place including 
the rural areas, if it has a piece of land and is ready to spend matching amount. During the year 1993-
94, fifty nine such institutions/organisations were given building grants to the tunc of Rs. 1.38 crores. 
But the logic of the Department does not appear to be sound enough in the sense that if the semi­
urban, under-developed and rural areas are neglected and rejected on this pretext, how the cultural 
needs of the vast majority of people living in these areas would be met. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the programmes and resources of the Department be considerably decentralised and 

taken to the backward, rural and und erdeve loped urban areas where ancient cultural heritage still 
holds appeal and requires to be galvanised by the centre. 
Archaeological Survey of Indi a (ASI) 
11. Archaeological Survey· of India, set up way back in 1861, is engaged in several activities, 
prominent among which arc conservation and preservation of ancient monuments, exploration and 
excavation of ancient sites, study of inscriptions, research and training in different areas of 
archaeology. etc. Povisions made for this head during the last two years arc given in the table. 
Scheine 
Archaeological Survey of India 
1993-94 
B. E. 
Plan Non-Plan 
12.80 29.99 
R.E. 
Plan Non-Plan 
12.00 31.48 
(Rs. in crores) 
1994-95 
B. E. 
Plan Non-Plan 
13.00 32.48 
12. There has been an increase of Rs. 1.90 crorcs this year, as against the revised estimates of the 
last year, which, in view of price esclation, is negligible. Therefore, the Committee feels that allocation 
for ASI should be adeq uately increase d because a large number of monument s are in dilapidated 
conditions and need urg ent repairs and a great number of monument s and sites remain unidentified 
and unprotected. Out of arou nd 8,000 monuments, about 3,500 are cent rally protecte d. The Committee 
expresses its concern over the fact that even the centrally prot ected monuments do not have proper 
maintenance and foolpr oof protectioq. Cases of larcen y of artefacts, idols etc. have been occuring from 
time to time. During the course of evidence the Committee came to know that the number of staff 
engaged in preservations and maintenance of monuments is so small that the ratio works out to 11h 
staff per monument. Therefore, the Committee recommen ds that staff st rength of the ASI engage d for 
protection and preservation of monuments be adequa tely increased and all other necessary measures be 
taken to check the increasing menace of pilferage. Some amount from the proposed National Cultural 
Fund may also be utilised for the purpo se. 
The Committee is also of the view that, as envisaged in the Eigh th Plan documen t related to the 
Department of Cultur e, volunta ry organ isations should be attracted and encouraged to take up the task 
of preservation and protection of monu.ments. 
13. Even after one hundred and twenty five years of its existence, ASI has not been able to cover 
all parts of the country as far as excavation and exploration of ancient historical sites are concerned. 
Nor it has been able to decipher all the inscriptions. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the 
network of ASI sho uld ha ve been extensively expanded and enlarged. It should also be well equipped. 
The scheme of village to village survev should also be undertaken and expanded. 
Anthropological Survey of India 
14. Researches in anthropology and allied disciplines and study of customs and traditions are 
some of the major functions undertaken by the Anthropological Survey of India. In the Eighth Five 
Year Plan document it was proposed to salvage and document those specimens of the tribal and folk 
art which face the threat of extinction. It was also proposed to study inherent socio-religious 
disabilities of the tribals, nature of transformation and mobilisation of their special skills in arts, dance 
and music and mastery over musical instruments. But, no follow-up action on these lines is found in 
the Annual Plans of the Department. Therefore, the Committee urges upon the Government to pursue 
vigorously those objectives. Reasons for decrease in the plan allocation of Rs. 140.00 lakhs from Rs. 
150.00 lakhs (Plan Expenditure Revised) of the year 1993;94 arc not tenable . Hence the Committee 
recommends that the provision shou ld be incr eased. Study and research in the field of conservation of 
environment, welfare of women and children, nutritional status of Indian population, etc. have also 
been added to its activ~ties, recently. 

15. In keeping with its aims and objectives, the Anthropological Survey of India took up a 
national project called 'People of Indi a' to analyse Indian population on the basis of bio-cultural 
variables and socio-cultural determinents like marriage, kinship, region, language etc. Out of the 
proposed 43 volumes of the prestigious National Project 'People of India'- three under national and 
two under State ser ies have so far been published. The remaining work should be expedited. 
Museums 
16. Museums play a vital role in the preservation of documents and objects of cultural antiquity. 
In this field, at present, there are ten premier institutions under Govt. of India, including the 
National Reserach Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural property located at Lucknow. Out of the 
ten institutions, three each are located at New Delhi and Calcutta and one each at Lucknow, 
Allahabad, Hyderabad and Bombay, all situated in major cities. To provide representation to cultural 
aspects of other states of Indian Union, a new scheme for Promotion and Strengthening of Regional 
and Local Museums has been mooted and is envisaged to be operationlised during the Eighth Five 
Year Plan period. Govt. is also providing assistance for opening private museums. Govt. proposes to 
intensify this scheme through a Committee which will look after them. But for this well conceived 
scheme a meagre amount of Rs. 10 lakhs has been provided for the year 1994-95. There has been no 
change in the allocations for the last three years. In such a situation the Committee wonders how the 
scheme contemplated for the Eighth Plan could be implemented within the time-frame with this 
insignificant budget allocation. As the Eighth Five Year Plan is left with only two financial years, the 
Committee strongly recommends enhancement of financial allocation to speed up the implementation of 
the scheme. 
National Council of Science Museums (NCSM), Calcutta 
17. It is an autonomous organisation engaged primarily in the task of popularising science and 
technology among the students in particular and the mas~es in general through a variety of interactive 
and innovative programmes and activities like science exhibitions, school centres, portable 
planetarium and national science seminars etc. and setting up of a Science City in Calcutta, is the 
highlight of the activities of the National Council of Science Museums. In the Eighth Plan document it 
was proposed to create 1000 science centres to reach the common man, five new regional centres, 20 
district science centres and 203 school science centres in the under privileged rural schools, 20 new 
mobile science exhibition buses, a science train, etc. The total out lay for the 8th Plan period of Rs. 
4500.00 lakhs for these ambitious proposals is too littfe. Slight increase in the allocation for this year, 
as against the last year's Budget Estimates, of around Rs. 161 lakhs and of Rs. 111 lakhs in Revised 
Estimates may not be said to be adequate in view of the rising prices. The implementation of the 
scheme has made very little progress and should be speeded up. Therefore, the Committee recommends 
that additional grant be given for this scheme to increase scientific temper among the people. 
National Museum, New Delhi 
18. During 1994-95, the National Museum, New Delhi, proposes to organise exhibitions of 
Persian manuscripts in Teheran, an exhibition of Indian Art at Singapore and of miniature paintings 
at Tashkent. Apart from this, it is also proposed to introduce such new programmes as developing 
software for physically handicapped persons, lending consultancy services to the State and other 
museums, introduction of disc system for documentation of its huge collection, microfilming of 
manuscripts and computerisation of its library, etc. 
19. The provisions made for this year, as against last year, remain more or less the same. Plan 
provision has fallen from Rs. 200.00 lakhs to Rs. 190.00 lakhs and Non-Plan provisions has increased 
by only Rs. 7 lakhs in comparison to the Revised Estimates of the last year. Thus, there has been a 
decrease of Rs. 3 lakhs this year. The Committee is surprised to know as to how with this small 
allocation. It would be possible to achieve the targets set for this year. The Committee therefore, 
recomm ends that the allocation for National Museum be increased appropriately. 
Indian Museum, Calcutta 
20. The total provisions made this year for Indian Museum, Calcutta, arc less by 1.45 lakhs as 
agianst the Revised Estimates (both Plan and Non-Plan) of the last year. In this situation, apart from 

carrying out on-going functions the proposal to construct a new building for display of valuable 
artefacts may find itself in rough weather. It was also envisaged in the Eighth Plan document to set 
up new galler ies on textiles, folk arts, gems and jewelleries. Therefore, the Committee recommends 
that sufficient grant should be provided to the Museum so that these schemes are completed. 
Institutes and Organisations of Tibetan and Buddhist studies 
21. There are. four autonomous institutes, namely, the Central Institute of Higher Tibetan 
Studies, VaranasC the Central Institute of Buddhist Studies, Leh; the Sikkim Research Institute of 
Tibetology and the Library of Tibetan Works & Archives, Dharamsala, which are engaged in 
preservation and propagations of Tibetan culture and tradition, restoration of ancient Indian literature 
preserved in Tibetan language, imparting higher education in Buddhist philosophy and literature, etc. 
The Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, Varanasi, enjoys the status of a 'Deemed 
University'. The Committee while expressing its satisfaction over the encouragement given to these 
institutes feels that they should be allowed to pursue their academic interest without any extraneous 
influences. 
22. The Committee feels that due attention is not being paid in these institutes to promotion and 
development of Pali, one of ancient language of India and, therefore, recommends suitable steps in this 
regard. 
Libraries 
23. The Committee feels that the reading habi!s of the general masses are on the wane, partly 
owing to revolutionary changes in electronic media, partly due to the shift in social values titled more 
to materialism, and partly because of high prices of books. In this situation, libraries have to be 
opened on a large scale with even distribution in urban and rural areas. 
24. There arc six major libraries under the Department of Culture. The total budgetary provision 
(lOth Plan and Non -Plan) for the year 1994-95 under this .head is Rs. 13.36 crores a total increase of 
Rs. 2.38 crores in comparison to the Revised Estimates (Both Plan & Non Plan) of the last year. In 
view of the rising prices of books and other allied items, maintenance cost of buildings etc. this 
increase of Rs. 2.38 crores in not enough. 
25. The tendency of centralisation is perceptible in the scheme of libraries also. The Committee 
feels that suitable scheme be devised to spread the network of libraries to District Headquarters and 
small towns. There is also a need to Interlink the major libraries with computer network. It will 
facilitate the research scholars and other persons desiring any information sitting in one library to 
gather additional information from all the connected libraries. 
26. The Delhi Public Library, established in 1951 with the assistance of UNESCO to provide free 
library service to the citizens of Delhi , has also now developed into a Metropolitan Public Library. A 
major portion of its activities is located in the affluent localities of Delhi and the rural and 
underdeveloped areas are being neglected . Therefore, -the Committee, recommends that Govt. should 
take adequate steps to spread it~ network of libraries and reading rooms in the slum and 
underdeveloped ar~as of the National Capital. More and more mobile library vans should also be made 
available. In view of all these, the Committee recommends that the budget allocation for Delhi Public 
Library be enhanced appropriately. 
Raja Ram Mohan Roy Library Foundation, Calcutta 
27. Established in 1972, it is an autonomous organisation fully funded by the Deptt: of Culture. 
The · main aim of the library is to support and promote library services in the country. 
28. Increase in its budget provision this year is welcome. However, some Irregularities in the 
fuQctioning of the lib_rary have come to the notice of the Committee. Guidelines on book purchasing are 
not being adhered to and books are allegedly being purchased at higher r~tes than the market rates. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that these matters be looked Into. 

Rural Library Scheme 
29. The Committee is happy to note that the Department of Culture has decided to focus its 
attention on the rural populace by deciding to set up rural libraries in villages. A teacher from the 
local school is proposed to be made in-charge of the library which will, in the incipient,have around 
300 books. The Committee "is of the view that these libraries should also ~ave such books which may be 
used by neo-literates in the post-literacy stage. It is, undoubtedly a well conceived scheme and generous 
funds should be provided for it. The Committee recommends that this scheme be made a pilot project 
so that about five and half lakh villages could be covered within a stipulated time-frame. The 
Committee also recommends that separate allocation be made for individual states. In consultation with 
the Ministry of Rural Development, the assistance of Panchayats may be sought to ensure speedy and 
effective implementation of this scheme. The Committee also recommends that the modalities for the 
implementation of this scheme be worked out as early as possible so that the scheme implemented in 
right earnest. 
Akademies and National School of Drama 
I. Sahitya Akademi 
30. The Sahitya Akademi was inaugurated in 1954 and registered as an autonomous society in 
1956 with the objective of working actively for development of literature and to foster and coordinate 
literary activities in all the Indian languages and to promote through them the cultural unity of the· 
country. To achieve these objectives, the Akademi is running programmes such as granting literary 
awards, translation and publication of books in different languages, etc. The Akademi also provides 
assistance to State Akademies. 
31. The Committee is not happy with the budgetary allocation made for the Akademi this year, 
which is only Rs. 57 lakhs more than the Revised Estimates of the last year :-
B.E. 1993-94 
Plan 
150.00 
Non-Plan 
82.00 
R.E. 1993-94 
Plan 
150.00 
Non-Plan 
82.00 
(Rs. in Lakhs) 
B.E. 1994-95 
Plan 
200.00 
Non-Plan 
89.00 
32. The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that a premier literary institution like the 
Sahitya Akademi is made ·to curtail its activities due to lack of funds. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends strongly that more resources be made available to the Sahitya Akademi and the arrear 
payments, if any, should also be released forthwith. The Akademi should bestow more attention on the 
development of regional languages, in addition to Hindi. 
II. Sangeet Natak Akademi 
33. The Sangeet Natak Akademi, which come into being in 1953, is a national institution engaged 
in promotion and preservation of performing arts, extending financial assistance to cultural institution 
for training and production, undertaking inter-state cultural exchange programmes etc. Although 
there is an increase of around Rs. 27 lakhs this year, as compared to the last year's Revised Estimates 
(both Plan and Non-Plan) this is negligible in view of the price escalation. The Committee is of the 
view that the outlay for the Akademi may be appropriately increased. 
III. Lalit Kala Akademi 
34. The Lalit Kala Akademi an apex institution in the field of art was established in 1954 for the 
promotion and development of paintings, graphics, sculpture, ceramics, etc. in the country. The major 
activities of the Akademi are to organise exhibitions (in and outside the country), artists' camps, 
bringing out art publications, and implementing cultural exchange programmes. 
35. The allocation for the Akademi this year has come down from Rs. 2.85 crores (Revised 
estimates) of the year 1993-94 to Rs. 2.40 crores. The Committee urges upon the Govt. to increase the 
allocation appropriately. 

National School of Drama 
36. The National School of Drama, established in 1959, is a premier institution devoted to 
imparting training in the field of theatre and to propagate dramatics in the country. Increase in this 
year's budgetary provisions for the institution from Rs. 266.65 lakhs to Rs. 285.00 lakhs is welcome. 
The National School of Drama proposes to set up regional centres, which is a welcome step, and the 
Committee desires that these regional centres should enjoy due autonomy in their functioning and not 
made mere branches of the National School of Drama, New Delhi. 
Promotion of Art & Culture 
37. A number of organisations and institutions are active in promoting and disseminating 
different types of art and cultural activities in various regions and zones of the country. A brief sketch 
of their activities, objectives vis-a-vis provisions thereof is given below:-
/. Centre for Cultural Resources & Training 
38. The Centre for Cultural Resources and Training, set up in 1979 with its headquarter in New 
Delhi, is doing a commendable job in the propagation of culture, especially among college and school 
students. One of the major activities of the Centre is to train inservice school teachers in the area of 
linkage between education and culture and to provide a cultural component in the curricula. The 
Centre also prepares audio-visuals and printed materials to be used in schools for cultural education. 
The centre also took over the scheme 'Cultural Talent Search Scholarship' from the Deptt. of Culture 
in 1982 under which 300 children in the age group of 10-14 years are awarded scholarships each year 
in various fields. 
39. The Centre has been entrusted with the task of interlinking culture with education, mass 
media and the scheme of the Deptt., bearing an identical nomenclature, has since been merged with 
the centre's scheme. 
40. The Committee is of the view that it is not practically feasible to cover whole country by the 
one and only Centre in New Delhi and hence feels the need to decentralise the activities of the Centre 
by opening sub-centres in various zones and regions. 
41. The provisions made for the Centre are not in consonance with the multifarious activities of the 
Centre. A comparative analysis of the allocation suggests that there has been a meagre increase of 
Rs. 20 lakhs in Plan and 0.65 lakhs in Non-Plan expenditure, as against the revised estimates of the last 
year. Since this is the only institution which is taking culture down to the general masses, students and 
teachers, the Committee recommends that more .resources should be allocated to the Centre, 
particularly keeping in view the Committee's recommendation for opening sub-Centres at various 
places. 
Zonal Cultural Centres 
42. At present, there are seven Zonal Cultural Centres which cover the entire country. The main 
functions of the Zonal Cultural Centres are to provide facilities for the creative development in the 
entire spectrum of culture, particularly in that of folk and tribal art. These centres are also 
implementing National Cultural Exchange Programmes, Republic Day folk dance festival and setting 
up Shilpgrams etc. For the year 1994-95 a sum of Rs. 200 lakhs has been earmarked for zonal cultural 
centres. During the year 1992-93 there was an under-utilisation of the approved outlay to the tune of 
about Rs. 175 lakhs, mainly because of the delay in allotment of land by Sta~ Government for setting 
up of Shilpgrams. The Committee, however, feels that such delays should be avoided so that funds are 
utilised in time. The Committee recommends that speedy progress be made in setting up Shilpgrams at 
the remaining six zonal cultural centres, particularly the one being set up at Thanjavur. The 
Committee also feels that centrewise allocation should also be reflected in the documents of the 
Department. 
43. Documentation and propagation of folk art constitute one of the main functions of Zonal 
Cultural Centres and as stated by the Secretary, Department of Culture, it is also one of the major 
thrust areas during this year. But the work being done in this regard cannot be said to be satisfactory. 
There is no indication as to how much money each Zonal Cultur al Centre spends on the propagation of 
the Jjving folk art forms at the grassroot level in villages where they are actually performed. Therefore, 

~he Committee is of the view that due emphasis of the Zonal .Cultural Centres should be on folk arts 
and necessary financial assistance should also be provided for the same. 
44. The Committee is constrained to note that the hopes generated at the time of establishment of 
Zonal Cultural Centres have not been fulfilled and realised. Because these centres are not pursuing the 
programmes and schemes fop which they were set up, therefore, the Committee recommends that the 
time has come for a high-powered Review Committee to be constituted to look into the working of the 
Zonal Cultural Centres. 
Dissemination of Tribal Folk Art & Culture 
45. Under this scheme, financial support is given to voluntary cultural organisations, institutions 
and individuals-both tribal and non-tribal for undertaking small duration projects of around one year 
for preservation and development of tribal folk art and culture, conduct of tribal cultural activities, 
including their festivals and festivities. This year, there has been an increase of Rs. 10 lakhs for this 
scheme. But the Committee is not happy with the working of the voluntary organisations/institutions 
in this field because it is found that the assistance does not percolate down to the folk artistes, 
although the Secretary, Department of Culture, has submitted before the Committee that Gqvern­
ment is taking necessary steps to ensure that the artistes get the desired benefit. The Committee 
recommends the pro_gressive establishment of a network of organisations to ensure that folk artistes in 
villages are enabled to derive full advantage of the scheme meant for them. Assistance should also be 
given for opening performance centres or auditoria at the village and block level so that artistes could 
perform and interact with each other to improve their particular art forms. 
Multipurpo se cultural complexes at States & National Cultural Complex in Delhi 
46. Under this scheme, financial assistance is proposed to be extended to autonomous bodies for 
settmg up art complexes in the States to improve the quality of life among youth and students and to 
sensitize them to what is aesthetically and morally good in our society and also to expose them to the 
finest forms of creative expressions. 
47. The Committee is not happy with the progress made in the scheme and expresses its serious 
concern over the fact that almost two financial years have elapsed and the projects have not been 
finalised yet. The Committee is also not happy with the idea of creating more and more cultural 
infrastructure in big cities and towns at the cost of rural areas. However, the Committee is satisfied to 
note that multi-purpose complexes, are being set up in smaller towns, rural and backward areas and 
recommends that other schemes being formulated by the Deptt. should also be located in sucn art!aS. 
The Committee also recommends that the National Cultural Complex (Parisar), proposed to be set up 
in Delhi, be established in the trans-Yamuna or outer Delhi areas. 
48. The Committee is also of the view that instead of concentrating only on huge cultural 
complexes, Govt. should set up smaller units where the deprived, under privileged and unprivileged 
may have access to all forms of culture as well as to practice and promote their arts. The Committee 
also holds that the Department may construct multi-purpose stadia in smaller towns and cities which 
could be utilised for sports during the day and for cultural purposes in the evening and night. 
Asia'tic Society, Calcutta 
49. The Asiatic Society, Calcutta, is an institution of national importance involved mainly in 
oriental studies and research, research in humanities and science, publication of periodicals, books 
and other literature. At present, there are around 12 senior fellows and 30 junior research scholars 
attached to the Society. 
50. The Committee is surprised to note that a drastic cut has been resorted to in this year's budget 
allocation for the society. The plan provision has been reduced from Rs. 341.00 lakhs (Revised 
Estimates) during the year 1993-94 to Rs. 200.00 lakhs for the year 1994-95. The provision is 
understood to have been reduced in view of the opening of the Asiatic Society, Bombay. The Committee 
desires that the activities of the Asiatic Society, Calcutta should not suffer pending opening of Asiatic 
Society, Bombay. 

51. No financial assistance has been provided to the Asiatic Society, Bombay, during the Eighth 
Five Year plan. The reason behind this is stated to be that the Planning Commission has earmarked a 
provision of Rs. 200.00 lakhs to be given to the Society as corpus fund. But this fund also has not 
reached the Society so far as it is pending approval from the Ministry of Finance. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that government shotJd expedite the matter and release the amount without 
any further delay. 
Assistance to Cultural Organisations 
52. For promotion and dissemination of Cultur¢ the Department extends financial assistance to 
voluntary organisations under various schemes such as Scheme for Building grants to voluntary 
organisations, Scheme for financial Assistance to Dance, Drama and Theatre Ensembles, Financial 
Assistance for Research Support to voluntary organisations· engaged in Cultural Activities, Grants to 
Institutions I Individuals engaged in literary Activities. 
There' has been only marginal increase in allocations for these schemes and the Committee 
recommends that they should be enhanced adequately. 
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Centre for Asian Studies 
53. This centre, proposed to be set up in the wake of the centenary celebrations of Maulana Abul 
Kalam Azad, is still not complete. The Committee is surprised to note that this ·year budget provision 
for the Centre has been reduced by Rs. 5 lakhs, for the reasons not acceptable to the Committee. The 
Committee recommends that tLere should be no further delay in the setting up of this Centre. 
Indira Gandhi National Centn: for Arts 
54. The Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts was established in 1985 as an autonomous 
Trust. The Government had contributed to its Corpus Fund Rs. 46.75 crores between 1987-88 and 
1993-94. The balance of Rs. 3.25 crores of the Committed amount has been provided in this year's 
Budget. For the building fund, the Government has so far allocated Rs. 32.35 crores and in this year 
Rs. 16.75 crores have been provided. The Committee regrets to note that even after eight years or 
establishment of the Centre, its main projects including the building are yet to be completed, though 
requisite allocations are being made by the Government. The Committee has been told that work on 
the construction of the building has started in the real sense only in March, 1994. The other activities 
of the Centre like microfilming of unpublished manuscripts and creation and updating of data base are, 
however, in progress. The Committee feels that ~teps should be taken to utilise the funds fully and 
speedily so as to achieve the desired objectives. 
Memorials and Centenaries 
55. The Department of Culture proposes to commemorate this year the 125th birth anniversary of 
Mahatma Gandhi through Gandhi Smriti and Darshan Samiti. But the allocation earmarked for the 
purpose is most inadequate. Also, in 'this year, the country will observe the 75th Anniversary of the 
Jallianwala Bagh Massacre but no budgetary provision has been made for this purpose. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the budget provision for celebration of the 12Sth birth anniversary of 
Mahatma Gandhi be increased and adequate funds be allocated for the observance of the 7S.th 
Anniversary of Jallianwala Bagh Massacre. 

MINUTES 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN 
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
xxxvm 
•THIRTY EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 7th April, 1994 in Committee Room No. 
63, First Floor, Parliame nt House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P. Upendra-- Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shrimati Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel 
3. Shri Md. Salim 
4. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
5. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
6. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
7. Dr. M. Aram 
8. Shri O.P. Kohli 
LOK SABRA 
9. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
10. Shri Ishwarb hai Khodabhai Chavda 
11. Shri K. Thulasiah · Vandayar 
12. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
13. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
14. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami 
15. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
16. Dr. K.D. Jeswani 
17. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
18. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
19. Shri Braja Kishor e Tripathy 
20. Shrimati Malini Bhattacharya 
21. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
22. Shri Brahmanand MandaJ 
Representatives of the Department of Cultufe (Ministry of Human Resource Development) 
1. br. S.K. Mahapatra , Secretary 
2. Mrs. Komal Anand, Joint Secretary 
3. Mrs. A. Mullick , D.G., A.S.I. 
4. Shri G. Vcnkataramani, Director 
5. Shri R.S . Rangarajan, Dy. Secretary 
6. Shri D. Sen Gupta, Dy. Secretary 
7. Shri N. Sikder, Dy. Educational Advisor 
8. Shri D.S. Nehra, Deputy Secretary 
9. Mrs. A. Sen, Dy. Secretary 
10. Shri A.C. Grover, Dy . Director , A.S.I. 
11. Shri V.K. Bajaj, Dy. Director 
12. Shri P.P. Rao, A.O. 
*Minutes of I to XXXVII meetings relate to matters not included in this Repon. 

SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2.. The Committee heard the Secretary and other officials of the Department of Culture, Ministry 
of Human Resource Development, on the Demands for Grants 1994-95 of that Department. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 P.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 8th 
April, 1994. 

XLII 
•FORTY SECOND MEE'l'ING 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 13th April, 1994 in Committee Room No. 
53, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P. Vpendra--Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
3. Shri O .P. Kohli 
4. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel 
5. Shri Md. Salim 
6. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
7. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
LOK SABHA 
8. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
9. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
11. ·Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
12. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
13. Shri Anna Joshi 
14. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
15. Prof. r,1alini Bhattacharya 
16. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ram Krishan , Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered the Draft Tenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
1994-95 of the Department of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource Development. The Discussion 
was not concluded. 
(The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 P.M. for lunch to meet again at 3.00 P.M.) 
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shrimati Urmilaben Chimanbhai 
Patel, Shri Md. Salim, Dr. M. Aram, Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury, Shri Pravat Kumar Samantray 
and Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri to present the Reports on behalf of the Committee in Rajya Sabha and 
Dr. Vas ant Pawar, Prof. Malini Bhattacharya, Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda, Dr. G .L. 
Kanaujia , Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan and Shri Dau Dayal Joshi to lay the copies of the 
Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
4. The Com~ittee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
•Minutes of XXXIX to XXXXI meetings related to matters not included in this Reports 

XLIII 
FORTY THIRD MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development 
met at 3.00 A.M. on Monday, the 18th April, 1994 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament House , 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P. Upendra--Chairrnan 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury 
4. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
5. Shri Md. Salim 
6. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
7. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen 
8. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
9. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
11. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
12. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
13. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
14. Shri Anna Joshi 
15. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee further considered the Draft Tenth Report on Demands for Grants 1994-95 of 
he Department of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource Development and adopted the same with 
:orne modifications. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 P.M. 

ERHATA T 0 THE TEl~H REPOH'r \ON DEMTM:DS FCR GRANT.:> 1 994-95 OF 
THE DEPAt.TMiS~T OF CULTUtE, MHlJTRY OF' HU~~N RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT) 
OF THS DEPARTM.El.fr RSLATED PARLlAMEl\TABY STANDING COMMmEE ON 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMElfl'. 
On page 4 
On ;page 5 
On page 6 
-do-
-do-
On page 7 
On page 10 
--------
para 11, line 11, ~ 1 12.80' ~ '12.00'. 
para 19, line 3, !.!r£. 'by only' ~ 'only by'. 
para 22, line 2, f..g£ 'language'~ 'languages•. 
para 23, line 2, !£!'titled'~ 'tilted'. 
para 24, line 2, f2! 'loth' ~ 'both'. 
para 29, line 11, insert the word 'is' between 
schene al'li implemented. 
fJSra 52, line 5, after 'literary Activities• 
ill 'etc.• 