Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
REPORT NO.
297
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th January, )5 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on )5 2018th January,
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendation ontained in
ty Report on the
c the Two Hundred
Eigh Eighth Demands for Grants
2017-18 of the Department of Higher Education
(Ministry of Human Resource Development)
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SEVENTH REPORT
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

34
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SEVENTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred
Eighty Eighth Report on the Demands for Grants
2017-18 of the Department of Higher Education
(Ministry of Human Resource Development)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 5th January, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 5th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-26
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government ......................................................................................... 2-4
Chapter -II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply ................................ 5-17
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ..................... 18-25
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which reply of the
Government is still awaited ............................................................................. 26
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 27-28
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 29-32

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2017)
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya    —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
5. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
6. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
8. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
9. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
10. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
12. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
13. Shri Nihal Chand
14. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali (Patil)
15. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste.
16. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
17. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
18. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
19. Shri Ramachandran Mullappally
20. Shrimati Neelam Sonker
21. Shri Hari Om Pandey
22. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
23. Shri N.K Premachandran
24. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
25. Shri M.I. Shanavas
26. Dr. Nepal Singh
27. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
28. Shri Satyapal Singh
29. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
30. Shri P.R. Sundaram
31. Shrimati P.K Sreemathi Teacher
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri K P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred Ninety Seven Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by Government on
the observation/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eighty Eighth Report on the Demands for
Grants 2017-18 of the Department of Higher Education (Ministry of Human Resource Development).
2. Two Hundred Eighty Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 
2017 and simultaneously laid
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st  March, 2017. Replies of the Government to the Observation/
Recommendations/contained in the Report were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the
4th January, 2018.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 4th January,
2018.
DR. SA TYANARAY AN JATIYA
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
4 January,  2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Pausa 15,  1939 (Saka) Committee on Human Resource Development
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations contained
in its Two Hundred Eighty Eighth Report on the Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Department Of
Higher Education (Ministry Of Human Resource Development).The 288th Report was presented to both the
Houses of Parliament on 21st March, 2017. The Department of Higher Education (Ministry Of Human
Resource Development) has vide their communications dated 21st November, 2017 furnished their Action
Taken notes to the Committee.
2. The Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations/observations
contained in the 288th Report have been categorized as follows:
(i) Chapter-I: Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government
Paras - 9.3, 14.5, 15.4 & 15.6
Total – 4
(ii) Chapter-II: Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s reply Paras -  2.7, 3.4, 3.5, 4.5, 4.8, 5.4, 5.6, 7.3, 8.4, 12.13, 13.5 &
15.3
Total – 12
(iii) Chapter-III: Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee Paras - 4.6, 4.7, 6.5, 10.3, 11.11, 11.12, 11.13, 11.14
& 11.15
Total – 9
(iv) Chapter-IV: Observations /Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government is
still awaited. Paras – Nil
Total - Nil

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY GOVERNMENT
GLOBAL INITIATIVE OF ACADEMIC NETWORKS (GIAN)
Observations / Recommendations
9.3 The Committee observes that this scheme by the Department to bring world class teachers to teach
courses in Government educational institutions is commendable. The Committee, however, would like to
recommend that the Department should provide adequate facilities and research facilities in the premier
educational and  scientific institutions so that these institutions not just attract global faculty but also
international students.
Action Taken
Global Initiative of Academic Networks (GIAN) in Higher Education was launched on 30th November,
2015. The programme seeks to invite distinguished academicians, entrepreneurs, scientists, experts from
premier institutions from across the world, to teach in the higher educational institutions in India. The
Scheme envisages garnering the best international experience into our systems of education, enabling
interaction of students and faculty with the best academic and industry experts from all over the world.
Collaboration is going on with different countries to attract the best international talent. All courses are video
recorded and some of them are also live webcasted depending on the available infrastructure and consent of
the foreign faculty. This enables others to view the content later through the local and national GIAN portal
and the National Digital Library. No. of Courses approved till date is 1299. Courses already organized till
21st September, 2017 is 705. So far an amount of ` 80 crore has been released during the last two years and
current year.
2. All the IITs have been permitted to hire NRIs and OCIs as faculty on permanent basis and the foreigners
(other than NRIs and OCIs) on contract for a period not exceeding five years, with necessary clearances
from the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of External Affairs. This has been done to bring in
international exposure to these premier institutions. The exercise is mutually beneficial as the foreign faculty
brings a diverse but relevant research background, which adds to the vibrancy of the Institute in terms of
collaboration with in-house faculty in areas of research, supervision of Ph.D students, seminar presentations,
teaching in advanced courses and mentoring. Government offers attractive pay and allowances to all faculty
members in IITs and also provides necessary support for carrying out research. To attract quality faculty,
IITs take steps such as: year-round open advertisements, invitation through search-cum-selection procedures
to alumni/scientists/faculty, and advertisements in international journals.
3. Foreign students have been allowed to appear in JEE(Advanced) 2017 examination, which was also
conducted at six centres abroad, namely Addis Ababa (Ethiopia), Colombo (Sri Lanka), Dhaka (Bangladesh),
Dubai (UAE), Kathmandu (Nepal) and Singapore. The seats allotted to them are supernumerary with of cap of
10% of total number of seats in each course, without reducing the availability of seats for the Indian students.
UNNAT BHARAT ABHIYAN AND UCCHATAR AVISHKAR ABHIYAN
Observations / Recommendations
14.5 The Committee takes note of the two schemes being implemented by the Department. The Committee

3
would like to point out that till date 40 institutes have adopted gram panchayats/villages under this scheme
in their vicinity. The Committee recommends that adequate resources should be made available to the institutes
to help solve the problems and improve living conditions and livelihoods in these villages. The Committee
observes that these schemes should have inclusive academic system by providing knowledge and practices
for different professions and upgrade the capabilities  responding to the development needs of rural India.
Action Taken
Under Unnat Abhiyan, the Ministry of HRD provides funds for the institutions to carry out field
studies of chosen villages assist with their inputs into Gram Panchayat Development Plans and provide
knowledge or linkage with any technological requirement while formulating solutions to the pressing problems
face by villagers. The actual funds for implementation of the solutions are envisaged to come from the
concerned District Administration through convergence of existing resources. Over time the attempt is to
orient the syllabi of higher educational institutions so as to make them more relevant to the development
needs of rural India.
PROJECT VISHWAJEET
Observations / Recommendations
15.4 The Committee takes note of the financial outlay for the scheme for improvement of ranking of the
seven IITs. The Committee recommends that apart from providing funds the Department  should  also  take
steps  like improving the  infrastructure, increase research in  new  fields , recruit  international  faculty and
enroll  more international student in these institutions. These steps would not only  help in  making  our
premier institutes compete  with  other  world  class institutes but  also  improve  their  world rankings.
Action Taken
The modalities of the Project Vishwajeet have not yet been finalized and still under consideration in the
Ministry. However, recommendations made in the report have been noted.
Observations / Recommendations
15.6 In view of its observations in the foregoing paras the Committee further adds that quality assurance
in higher education has to become top of policy agenda and education has to prepare graduates with new
skills, broad knowledge base and a range of competencies to enter a more complex and interdependent
world. Quality is a multi-dimensional concept and several mechanisms for quality assurance and management
at individual and institutional level are needed. The Committee further points out that system of accountability
and accreditation with a robust regulatory mechanism are essential to process of sustaining and improving
quality and developing performance indicators and benchmarks for assessing outcomes in higher education.
The Committee accordingly, urges upon the Department of Higher Education to take all measures so as to
ensure the quality in higher education matching with the global standards.
Action Taken
Based on the changed higher education scenario, feedback received from the stakeholders and the
considered practise of National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) to revisit its methodology
periodically, it was desirable to fine tune and revise the grading pattern. It was observed that instrument of
NAAC does need more objectivity to capture finer distinctions between various grade levels and therefore it

4
was agreed that to reflect the institution performance level with more distinctively, a 7 point scale with
appropriate distribution of CGPA can be a better choice.
NAAC would provide for roping in a third party (professional agencies and reputed research/academic
institutions like IITs, IIMs etc.) which could verify the authenticity of data captured in the proposed system
of accreditation and offer qualitative inputs through inspection.
Priority would be accorded to data capture and to minimal physical inspections. The proposed
accreditation system needs to shift from the present system where the Peer Review Team (PRT) gives the
CGPA. The CGPA should be calculated by software based on quantitative inputs captured online and qualitative
inputs given by PRTs.

CHAPTER-II
OBSERV ATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Observations / Recommendations
2.7 The Committee appreciates that the amount in the Budget has been increased by 15.56%. The Committee
observes that the funding for technical and management institutions in the budget has seen an increase of
57.76% and 41.1% respectively. The Committee would like point out that the funding for Central Universities
has seen an increase of just 2.31%. The Committee observes that this increase for Central Universities is just
meagre as compared to their infrastructure, faculty and number of students. The Committee recommends
that Central Universities have a larger number of students enrolled in them as compared to the technical and
management institutes; therefore the Department should increase the funding for the Central Universities
appropriately.
Action Taken
Requirement of funds in respect of Central Universities was properly projected. Allocation of funds to
various Departments comes under the purview of Ministry of Finance/ Parliament. However, funds are
allocated on the overall availability of resources and the competitive demand under various schemes.
GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO
Observations / Recommendations
3.4 The Committee takes note of the work done by the Department in the increase of Gross Enrolment
Ratio. The Committee emphasizes the need for promotion of skill improvement as it has always been neglected.
The Committee recommends that the Department should make efforts not only to increase the content and
length of the skill development courses, but also strengthen the industrial linkage.
Action Taken
UGC has launched guidelines for establishing University-Industry Inter-Linkage Centres in Universities.
The objectives of the scheme are given below:
(a) Identify the expertise available in the university which can be of use for the industries in the
locality/region by way of consultancy services, evaluation of R & D activities of the industries,
etc.;
(b) Take the help of the expertise of the industries to improve/redesign the curriculum periodically
in tune with the requirements of the industries;
(c) Help create skilled manpower for industry requirements at various levels;
(d) Conduct Management Development Programmes (MDPs), Entrepreneurship Development
Programmes (EDPs), etc.;
(e) Initiate schemes for student/teacher training, joint research;
5

6
(f) Undertake R & D in the areas related to skill education and development, entrepreneurship,
employability, labour market trends, etc. at the postgraduate and research levels;
(g) Maintain ‘Labour Market Information’ for the region in coordination with government agencies
and industry associations;
(h) Help set up Science & Technology Entrepreneurs’ Parks (STEPs), Technology Business
Incubators (TBIs), etc.;
(i) Work for coordination between the University and industry/industries in the neighbourhood to
make the Centre a Centre of Excellence for skill development in specified areas;
Conduct all other activities as are incidental or conducive to the functioning of the Centre
Comments of the Committee
The Committee takes note of the Government’s initiative.  However, it may be apprised of
impact of the scheme.
Observations / Recommendations
3.5 The Committee observes that Gross Enrolment Ratio of SC/ST students at 19.9 and 14.2 respectively,
is below the national average of 24.5. This needs to be improved by taking all the necessary steps by the
Department. The Committee desires that the Department should ensure the benefit of scholarships and
reservation being provided to SC/ST/OBC and minority students reach them  and therby result into
enhanced GER in these categories. The Committee, however, would like to reiterate that the Department
should not only take steps to bridge the gap between the general category students and the SC/ST/OBC
and minorities students but also take initiatives so that students from these sections do not leave their
education in between.
Action Taken
The following steps have been taken with a view to ensure implementation of welfare measures for
SC/ST/OBC and minorities students:
The UGC is continuously monitoring the progress of implementation of Reservation Policy for SCs,
STs and OBCs and minorities in admission to courses at all levels in Universities/Institutions.
The UGC has been contributing towards social equity and social economic mobility of the under
privileged sections of the society through special coaching schemes in universities and Colleges. In the initial
period of XII Plan, Grant was released to colleges through Regional Offices of the UGC. After 2014-15, the
Coaching Schemes for universities and colleges were shifted to an Independent section of UGC i.e. SC/ST/
OBC Section.
The UGC had introduced Remedial Coaching for the benefit of SCs, STs, OBCs (non-creamy layer)
and Minority students with a view to improve and strengthen their knowledge, academic skills and linguistic
proficiency in various subjects.
The Commission also introduced Coaching for NET/SET examination with the objective to prepare
SC/ST/OBC & Minority students for such examination.
In order to gain useful employment in Group A, B and C positions in Central and State Government

7
services or equivalent positions in the private sector, the UGC has introduced a coaching scheme for facilitating
entry into these services.
During XIIth Plan period, 137 State Universities are assisted under Coaching Scheme for SC/ST/OBC
(non-creamy layer)/Minorities.  Further, UGC constitutes Expert Committees to study the impact of Coaching
Schemes related to SC,ST and OBC (non-creamy layer) and Minorities from time to time.
Establishment of Equal Opportunity Cells in CUs: The Equal Opportunity Cell run specific scheme
of coaching for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, OBC (non-creamy layer), Minorities in order to enhance
their employability and success.
Remedial coaching for SC/ST/OBC (Non-creamy layer) & Minority  students: Remedial Coaching
is organized at Undergraduate and / or Postgraduate level with objectives to:
(a) improve the academic skills and linguistic proficiency of the students in various subjects.
(b) raise their level of comprehension of basic subjects to provide a stronger foundations for further
academic work.
(c) strengthen their knowledge, skills and attitudes in such subjects, where quantitative and qualitative
techniques and laboratory activities are involved, so that necessary guidance and training provided
under the programme may  enable the students to come up to the level necessary for pursuing
higher studies efficiently and to reduce their failure and dropout rate.
(d) provide career guidance and psychological counselling for capacity building to those who are in
need of such counselling.
Coaching for NET/SET for SC/ST/OBC (Non-creamy layer) & Minority  students-
The main objective of the scheme is to prepare Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes OBC (non-
creamy layer) and Minority communities candidates for appearing in National Eligibility Test (NET) or State
Eligibility Test (SET) so that sufficient number of candidates becomes available for selection as teachers in
the university system.
Residential Coaching Academy (RCA) for Minorities and SC/ST/ Women in Universities
The main objective behind establishment of Residential Coaching Academy is to run schemes like
‘Coaching for students at UG/PG level’, ‘Coaching for students to prepare for NET’, ‘Coaching for students
for entry in services covered under Central and State Governments’. The aim of these schemes is to prepare
students for NET and all India & State Services examinations and UG/PG level examinations.
Centres in Universities for study of Social Exclusion and Inclusive Policy
Social exclusion not only generates tension, violence and disruption, but also perpetuates inequality
and deprivation in society. In India, certain communities such as Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
religious minorities experience systemic exclusion in the matter of getting advantages of development.
Social exclusion is a complex and multidimensional concept having social, cultural, political and economic
ramifications. The consequences of macroeconomic factors such as poverty, unemployment and involuntary
migration exclude the victims from economic, cultural, and political activities. The primary space where
‘exclusion’ can be studied, understood, and first transcended, are our universities, which can and must act

8
as a beacon for society. The UGC therefore supports research on the issue of social exclusion, which has
theoretical as well as policy importance. The centre approved by UGC in universities undertake following
activities.
Functions
z Teaching Courses at the M.A and M.Phil levels, leading eventuality to full-fledged M.A and even
M.Phil programmes in Social Exclusion Studies.
z Undertaking M.Phil and Ph. D. supervision.
z Undertaking empirical studies with theoretical perspective and build time series data bank for
comparative studies and policy/programmes evaluation.
z Carrying out detailed rigorous analyses based on the socio-economic data generated by
government agencies.
z Organizing conferences, seminars and symposia on the theme of Social Exclusion.
z Publishing regularly the research findings of the faculty and students.
z Organizing public lectures on the subject by eminent scholars.
z Reaching out to scholars, especially young scholars, in other universities and colleges through
an active programme of inviting Visiting Faculty.
z Establishing links with Civil Society Organizations engaged in combating Social Exclusion.
Conducting short-term Orientation courses for political leaders, Parliamentarians, government officials,
trade unionists and media personalities.
RASHTRIYA UCHCHATAR SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (RUSA)
Observations / Recommendations
4.5 The Committee is astonished to note that only 46% of the total Central share has been released and
24.7 % of the released fund has been utilized so far. When enquired the Department could not furnish the
desired details of fund earmarked for RUSA and also failed to give explanation why so less fund has been
released and further why only 11% of  the total central share was utilized. The Committee therefore, calls for
the details as well as the reasons for the above under utilization. Further the Committee would like to know
how the State share of 
` 200 crore was utilized. The Committee may be apprised accordingly by the
Department in its Action Taken Replies.
Action Taken
As on 30th September, 2017, ` 2319.53 crores has been approved as infrastructure grants to Universities,
out of which the Central share is ` 1413.015 crore.  The Central share released till mentioned date is
` 812.95 crores out of which utilization for an amount of ` 279.454 crores has been received.
In the initial period after the launch of RUSA, the structures and channels required for proper
implementation of the scheme were in the developing stage.  Hence, it seemed prudent to release a smaller
fraction of the central share as 1st installment to the states list it lead to parking of funds due to lack of

9
structure.   The states required some time to set up their state Project Directorates, Technical Support
Groups, identifying vendors etc.  Thus the initial pace of fund release and utilization was slow.  However,
the pace has picked up. In 2015-16 and 2016-17 more than 90% of Budget allotted to the Ministry for RUSA
were released as Central share.  An additional amount of ` 1300 crores was sought as supplementary grants
in Financial Year 2016-17 for RUSA, however, it was not granted. The MHRD makes judicious use of the
budget allotted for RUSA.
Observations / Recommendations
4.8 Further, the Committee recommends that the higher amount of financial support  may specially be
provided to the institutions which are in rural regions, remote areas and hilly terrain. The Committee, also
recommends that Department should focus on the up- gradation of autonomous colleges which have the
potential for excellence. The Department should in collaboration with State Governments develop Cluster
college/Universities and introduce integrated UG/PG programmes for improving the skills of the student.
Action Taken
Among the components of the scheme, RUSA provides support for upgradation of autonomous colleges
into Universities and also for clustering of colleges into Universities. Till date 8 autonomous colleges have
been approved for upgradation into  Universities and approval for 8 Universities have been given by clustering
of colleges.
The scheme gives importance to unserved and under-served areas since one of the pillars of the
scheme is increasing access of higher education.  With this view, RUSA aims to cater educationally Backward
Districts and has also covered various LWE districts too.
IIT s, IIMs AND NITs
Observations / Recommendations
5.4 The Committee is happy to note that new IITs and IIMs have been opened in the last few years to
cater to the increasing demand for quality higher technical educational institutions. The Committee, however,
would like to point out that while creating new IITs and IIMs, the Department should also ensure provision
of adequate funds for the development of infrastructure in these higher educational institutions.
Observations / Recommendations
5.6 The Committee desires that the Department should ensure that these institutions are   set up expeditiously.
A time line needs to be drawn and all efforts need to be made in co- ordination with all stakeholders including
the State Government to facilitate the setting up these institutions. The Committee also desire that since all
these institutions will be our premier institutions of national importance and so all required resources, financial
or otherwise should be adequately given.
Action Taken (5.4 & 5.6)
Pursuant to Budget Announcements 2014-15 & 2015-16, 6 new IITs one each at Jammu (J&K),
Tirupati (A.P), Palakkad (Kerela), Bhilai (Chhattisgarh), Goa (Goa), and Dharwad (Karnataka) have been
established. Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 2-12-2015 had inter-alia approved the provision of funds
of ` 1412 cr. @ ` 235.30 cr. per IIT, for running of the 6 new IITs in their temporary campuses. Subsequently,
the Expenditure Finance Committee in its meeting held on 17-7-2017 under the chairmanship of

10
Secretary(Expenditure) appraised the proposal for establishment of permanent campus of 6 new IITs with
a total cost of ` 7002.42 crore under Phase-A for a period of 3 years beginning from 2017-18 to 2019-20.
Accordingly Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 24.10.2017 has approved the proposal.
During the year 2015-16, six new IIMs have been established at Amritsar (Punjab), Bodh Gaya (Bihar),
Nagpur (Maharashtra), Sambalpur (Odisha), Sirmaur (Himachal Pradesh) and Vishakhapatnam (Andhra
Pradesh). The academic sessions of these IIMs has commenced from academic year 2015-16 from their
temporary campuses. Another IIM has been established at Jammu which started its academic session from
academic year 2016-17 from its temporary campus. The release of funds for these IIMs during 2015-16,
2016-17 and 2017-18 is as under:
Sl.No. IIMs 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 T otal
(provisional)
1 Visakhapatnam 1300.00 1796.92 1200.00 4296.92
2 Nagpur 1400.00 500.00 1400.00 3300.00
3 Amritsar 1285.00 962.00 900.00 3147.00
4 Bodh Gaya 1000.00 750.00 900.00 2650.00
5 Sambalpur 1000.00 988.00 900.00 2888.00
6 Sirmaur 1000.00 1364.00 700.00 3064.00
7 J & K 0.00 2216.50 900.00 3116.50
The department ensures that adequate funds are provided to these institutes for the development of
infrastructure.
SW AYAM & NMEICT
Observations / Recommendations
7.3 The Committee recognizes the use of information and communication technology (ICT) to improve the
quality of teaching and learning. The Committee recommends that  new technologies such as online teaching,
virtual class rooms etc. must be used for enhanced learning experience for the students. The faculty must be
encouraged to leverage ICT for better learning outcomes and also deployed for assessment of student’s
performance. The information and communication technology needs to be used as a tool across all institution
and necessary infrastructure must be made available to institutions.
Action Taken
Keeping in view the recommendations of the committee, the MHRD, under NMEICT programme has
recently made the following progress in the use of ICT in Education.
Preamble:  Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development is
administering the National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology
(NMEICT) Scheme to leverage the potential of ICT, in providing high quality personalized and interactive
knowledge modules over the internet/ intranet for all the learners in Higher Education Institutions in
anytime any where mode.

11
The Mission has two major components viz. (a) content generation and (b) Dissemination that includes
providing connectivity along with provision for access devices for institutions and learners. It plans to focus
on appropriate pedagogy for e-learning, providing facility of performing experiments through virtual
laboratories, on-line testing and certification, on-line availability of teachers to guide and mentor learners,
Direct to Home (DTH) platforms, training and empowerment of teachers to effectively use the new method
of teaching learning etc.
Study Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds (SW AYAM):
The MHRD has developed ‘SW AYAM’, integrated platform for online courses delivery through ICT.
It is intended to develop world class content, covering subjects from senior schooling to Post Graduation
and skill sector courses to ensure that the every student in our country has access to the best quality higher
education & to host it on  https://swayam.gov.in . About 2000 courses and 80,000 hours of learning material
are expected to be developed within three years, on SWAYAM, to support 3 Crore users with a 10 lakh
concurrent connections, in few years.
The MHRD has got MOOCs Platform developed and the Beta Version has already been launched. As
present about 345 On-line courses are listed on SWAYAM and hundreds of Online Courses have already
been launched where-in thousands of students have participated. This way it is expected to support 3 Crore
users with a 10 lakh concurrent connections, in few years. UGC and AICTE have issued ‘Credit Framework
for online learning courses through SWAYAM, Regulation 2016’; allowing up to 20% Online courses taken
through SWAYAM, to be counted for credit.
Integrated e-content Portal:
MHRD has assigned to INFLIBNET, which has developed a web-based portal called “e-Acharya:
Integrated e-Content Portal” ( http://eacharya.inflibnet.ac.in ) a reposting content of all e-content projects,
developed / funded under the National Mission of Education through ICT. So far about 19,656 e-text, 29824
e-tutorial, 5449 self assessment, 9217 web resources have been uploaded on the platform that includes
36432 courses for under graduates and 12813 courses for post graduation videos, 5862 e-text, 2,225
quizzes and 4,509 learn more component of e-content have been uploaded on this portal.
Campus Connectivity:
Establishment of 1 GBPS Connectivity to universities and 20 numbers of 512 Kbps (broadband)
connectivity to colleges has been provisioned under NMEICT. A total of 438 Universities have so far been
connected, through 1 GB; also 22026 Colleges have been connected with 10 Mbps bandwidth. LAN with
400 nodes has been established at 50 Universities. For Campus Connect, each of the university & College
are being paid 90% Central share for NER States and the rest of the States & UTS paid 75% and the
remaining is to paid by respective States & UTs.
National Digital Library (NDL):
Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) is establishing the National Digital Library (NDL)
and IIT Kharagpur has been entrusted to host, coordinate. The objective of the project is to integrate all the
existing digitized and digital contents across educational and cultural institutions/bodies to provide a single-
window access to different groups of users ranging across the entire population.
The NDL portal has gone live. There are 64,23,000 resources available through the portal. More than

12
3 lakhs users are registered on the portal. 14 workshops and trainings have been conducted for the contributing
institutes. A Mobile App has also been developed.
E-Kalpa / D’Source:
MHRD/ NMEICT has initiated a project named “e-Kalpa” creating Digital-Learning Environment for
Design, in India, with the following project objectives:
1. Digital online content for learning Design with e-Learning programmes on Design
2. Digital Design Resource Database including the craft sector
3. Social networking for Higher Learning with collaborative Learning Space for Design
4. Design inputs for products of National Mission in Education through ICT
E-kalpa is a design-learning environment, URL link  www.dsource.in , available as downloadable
mobile app also. The text can be read in a number of international & Indian languages. The e-Content is
provided in six sections that consist of 95 courses, 465 resources, 206 case studies, 16 showcases, 455
galleries and 298 videos.
‘e-Shodh Sindhu’ of INFLIBNET Centre:
The main objective of the e-Shodh Sindhu: Consortia for Higher Education E-Resources is to provide
access to qualitative electronic resources including full-text, bibliographic and factual databases to academic
institutions at a lower rates of subscription. The e-Shodh Sindhu, serves more than 220 universities and
4,400 colleges, Centrally-funded Technical Institutions including IITs, IISc, NITs, IIMs, IISERs, IIITs,
etc., and has by 31st December 2016 subscribed to more than 31,35,000 e-books, 15,000 e-journals, 40
Resources, 16 Databases. The number of publications (e-recourses) under e-Shodh Sindhu, has crossed
11,254. The e-Shodh Sindhu further supports to more than 4000 Colleges, 230 Universities, 87 Centrally
Funded Institutions and 72 Technical Institutions.
Virtual Labs:
The MHRD has launched the programme of “Virtual Labs” wherein web enabled experiments have be
designed for remote operation and viewing so as to enthuse the curiosity and innovation into students.
Virtual Lab does not require any additional infrastructural setup for conducting experiments at user premises.
One computer terminal with broadband Internet connectivity is all that is needed to perform the experiments
remotely. Over 125 virtual labs in 9 Engineering & Science disciplines, comprising about 1500 experiments
are operational and currently being accessed by more than 6 lakh students.
Launch of 32 Educational DTH Channels:
The SW AY AM Prabha (SP) is running 32 Educational DTH channels and for this activity the ‘Department
of Space’ has allotted 2 transponders in GSAT 15 satellite. The uplinking facility for SP has been set up at
BISAG Gandhinagar and the transmission of the channels is currently on. A portal, swayamprabha.gov.in, is
also operational. This portal contains schedule of all the channels.
The Videos that get generated from Online Courses on SWAYAM platform shall also be used for
transmission in SW AYAM Prabha (SP) DTH channels. Channel coordinator of SP shall decide the scheduling

13
of the videos on SWAYAM Prabha. Attempt shall be made to synchronise DTH channel transmission with
the dates of offering Online Courses of the SWAYAM.
Since every SP channel would initially have 4 hours of fresh contents every day, besides videos
content of SWAY AM, video programmes from other sources including live transmissions is also planned in SP.
IMPACTING RESEARCH INNOV ATION AND TECHNOLOGY (IMPRINT)
Observations / Recommendations
8.4 The Committee appreciates the Department for taking the initiative for enhancing  the quality of
research and innovation in the country. However, the Committee would like to recommend that the Department
should follow some parameters like outcome based research funding; liberal research grants for both social
sciences and basic sciences; setting up incubation centers with enough seed money to do innovative research,
collaborate with R&D in industry, setting up of research parks, inter-disciplinary research, establish centers
in frontier areas of research and viable Public Private Partnership in research; and innovation.
Action Taken
Two schemes namely Impacting Research Innovation and Technology (IMPRINT) and Uchhatar
Avishkar Yojana (UAY) have been launched for improving the quality of research in the country.  Brief note
on these Schemes is as under:
(a) IMPRINT:- IMPRINT focuses on research in higher educational institutions, with an allocation
` 487.00 crore for a period of three years beginning 2016-17. The cost of the project is met to
the extent of 50% by the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) and the remaining
50% by the participating Ministries/Departments. IIT-Kanpur is the Mentor Institute of the
Scheme. Out of 258 projects approved, 135 projects have been accepted for funding by
participating Ministry/Deptt. etc.  A provision of ` 85.00 crore has been made for the Scheme
during current financial year. During the year 2016-17, an amount of ` 50.00 crore has been
released to the NC of IMPRINT for implementation of the projects.
(b) UAY:- UAY promotes industry sponsored, outcome-oriented research projects with an outlay of
` 475.00 crore for a period of two years beginning 2016-17. The project cost is met to the
extent of 50% by the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) and 25% each by the
Industry and the participating Ministries/Departments. IIT-Madras is the Mentor Institute of the
Scheme. Out of 180 projects; 89 projects have been accepted for funding. During the year
2016-17, an amount of ` 75.00 crore has been released to the NC of UAY for implementation of
the projects.
Apart from the two Schemes mentioned at pre-page, the old Scheme titled, ‘National Initiative for
Technology Transfer including Setting up of Research Parks and Establishment of Council for Industry and
Higher Education Collaboration’ with an outlay of Rs.1000 Crore has been rechristened as ‘Startup India
Initiative in Higher Educational Institutions’ with focus on setting up of 13 Research Parks and 60 Startup
Centres in the higher educational institutions.  Two Research Parks at IIT Kharagpur and IIT Bombay are
presently under construction and funds amounting to ` 72.00 crore and ` 7.70 crore respectively have been
released to the two Institutes as on date. Under the Startup Initiatives, funds amounting to ` 37.50 lakh
have been released towards setting up of Startup Cen tres and Technology Business Incubators as on date.

14
A Revised EFC Note is being prepared based on comments received from the concerned Ministries /
Departments.
PRAGATI SCHOLARSHIP
Observations / Recommendations
12.13 The Committee gathers from above that from the scholarships run by AICTE/UGC etc., more than one
lakh research students / scholars are benefitted. The  Committee  observes that the Department has to ensure
that all the schemes of scholarships are implemented in its true spirit and it should reach to the beneficiaries
strictly according to the rules, guidelines and other eligibility criteria provided there for. At the same time,
it is also obligatory on the part of the Government to review these schemes time to time considering  its
relevance and also that the beneficiary students / research scholars get the financial assistance or other
support adequately. The Committee apprehends that there can be institutions where students give up their
research without completing it. The Department  has also informed that the students enrolled for M.Tech. in
the IITs desert their course mid- way for getting opportunity elsewhere. The Department should take all
measures to avoid such a situation.
Action Taken
The University Grants Commission (UGC) implements various fellowship schemes on behalf of Ministry
of Human Resource Development, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Ministry of Minority Affairs
and Ministry of Tribal Affairs. UGC has intimated that it has brought all fellowship schemes under Direct
Benefit Transfer (DBT) mode with a view to ensure effective administration and smooth disbursement of
fellowships to the students. Under the DBT disbursement process, the fellowship awardees are required to
upload continuation certificates, HRA certificates on quarterly basis in designated bank branches. Payments
are made into the Student Beneficiary Accounts through Public Financial Management System (PFMS).
As informed by the UGC, it has taken following initiatives in administration and disbursement of
fellowships:
1. A dedicated web portal ( https://scholarship.canarabank.in/AdminLogin.aspx ) has been created
for migration of legacy cases on DBT platform.
2. A fellowship tracking portal has been developed  https://scholarship.canarabank.in/scholar/
Login.aspx  where the students can check the status of payment, date of upload of documents
etc.
3. A dedicated email-id  ugcfellowships.ugc@gmail.com  is created to facilitate the redressal of
student grievances especially relating to disbursal of fellowship/ scholarships.
4. A dedicated telephone number has been provided to attend to calls from students relating to
grievances/complaints/ problems on disbursal of grants under various fellowship/ scholarship
schemes.
In addition to inputs given in above point, a new Scheme called ‘Prime Minister Research Fellow
(PMRD) and promotion of Research and Innovation’  to attract good quality students for research and
measures for promoting of research has been formulated and under stakeholder consultation.  The Scheme
has (2) components:

15
(A) Prime Minister’s Research Fellowship (PMRD): The fellowship programme has been formulated
to improve the quality of the research, and to encourage bright students completing their B.Tech
in IITs/NITs/IIITs or graduation in IISc and IISERs to register for direct Ph.D programme in
IITs & IISc.  Under the Scheme, the fellowship will be offered at the rate of ` 70,000/- per
month for the year of first 2 year, ` 75,000/- p.m. for 3rd year and ` 80,000/- p.m. for 4th
& 5th year. A maximum of 1000 students of each of the (3) batches joining in 2017-18,
2018-19 and 2019-20 would be awarded this fellowship. The proposal has been appraised by
EFC and Cabinet approval is being sought.
(B) M.tech Teaching Assistantship (PMTA): Under this scheme, it is proposed to offer 2,000 Teaching
Assistantships per year in the M.Tech. programme in the IITs/IISc at the rate of ` 25,000/- per
month for a peiod of 2 years. The proposal has been appraised by EFC and approval of the
Competent Authority is being sought.
MHRD vide letter dated 18.2.2015 revised the rates of Ph.D. Scholarship and M.Tech Scholarship in
AICTE funded and Centrally Funded Technical Institutions.  IITs are paying these scholarships to their
students.
AICTE
All the Scholarships of All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) are monitored by checking
the student attendance and transferred through Direct Beneficiary Transfer (DBT) mode. Hence there is
very little scope of misuse Moreover, if the students terminate their studies in-between, they are expected to
return the scholarship received.
HIGHER EDUCATION FUNDING AGENCY (HEFA)
Observations / Recommendations
13.5 The Committee takes note of the proposed scheme which is expected to take off by the end of May.
The Committee feels, since the scheme was announced last year, the Department and other agencies should
have taken adequate efforts, so as to avoid delay in launching of this scheme. The Committee now emphasize
upon the Department of Higher Education to ensure that no further delay takes place and the scheme takes
off as proposed now. The Committee realises that the scheme is meant for the Centrally Funded Universities
and other premier institutions. The Department may consider the demand raised by the State universities and
private universities / institutions for coverage under this scheme.
Action Taken
The Cabinet has consi dered and approved the proposal of establishment of HEFA in its meeting
dated 12th September, 2016. In order to give a big push for building up robust higher educational institutions,
the Cabinet has approved creation of the Higher Education Financing Agency (HEFA) with Government
equity of ` 1000 Cr. The creation of HEFA will enable major investments for creation of high quality
infrastructure in premier educational institutions. The HEFA would be formed as SPV within a PSU Bank/
Government-owned NBFC (Promoter). It would leverage the equity to raise up to ` 20,000 Cr for
funding projects for infrastructure and development of world class Labs in IIT/IIMs/NITs and some
other infrastr ucture.
The HEFA would finance the academic and research infrastructure projects through a 10-years loan.

16
The principal portion of the loan will be repaid through the ‘internal accruals’ of the institutions. The
Government would service the interest portion through the regular Plan assistance.
All the Centrally Funded Higher Educational Institutions would be eligible for joining as member the
HEFA. For joining as members, the Institution should agree to escrow a specific amount from the internal
accruals to HEFA for a period of 10 years. This secured future flows would be securitised by HEFA for
mobilizing the funds from the market. Each member institution would be eligible for a credit limit as decided
by HEFA based on the amount agreed to be escrowed from the internal accruals.
The HEFA would be jointly promoted by identified Promoter and the Ministry of Human Resource
Development (MHRD). The Government equity would be ` 1,000 crore. The HEFA would also mobilise
CSR funds from PSUs/Corporates, which would in turn be released for promoting research and innovation
in these institutions on grant basis.
The Government has identified Canara Bank as the partner in HEFA after a due process. An MoU and
A Joint Venture Agreement (JVA) between MHRD and Canara Bank were signed on 9th February, 2017 and
16th March, 2017 respectively. HEFA would be registered as an NBFC with RBI.
Progress:
z The registration of the name HEFA is done with Ministry of Corporate affairs.
z Logo and tagline is since finalised.
z HEFA is since registered as a non-profit company (registered under Section 8 of Companies Act
2013) with MHRD, GoI and Canara Bank as the promoters.
z HEFA has been incorporated under the companies Act, 2013 on 31.05.2017.
z TAN and PAN have been allotted to HEFA.
z The premises for the Corporate office is at VI Floor, Naveen Complex, MG Road, Bengaluru
and expected to be completed soon.
Mobilisation of share capital:
z Budget of ` 250 crore has been provisioned as against the total allotment of ` 1,000 crore.
z Minimum capital contribution for NBFC registration with RBI is ` 300 Cr. to which ` 250 Cr.
was contributed by MHRD, GOI and balance ` 50 Cr. wascontributed by Canara Bank to enable
the Company to apply for the NBFC license.
Timelines:
z Application for NBFC to RBI has been filed and under process.
z HEFA is now operational.
NATIONAL TESTING SERVICE
Observations / Recommendations
15.3 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department to create new specialized organization
for conducting entrance examinations and fellowships for admission into higher educational institutions.

17
The Committee believes that this testing agency would  be able to meet its expenditure and conduct
examinations in a free and fair manner. The Committee  also  hopes that  this  agency  would  make  the
examination  reliable.
Action Taken
In pursuance to the Budget Announcement 2017-18, the Ministry is in process of establishing a
National Testing Agency (NTA) as an autonomous and self-sustained premier testing organization to conduct
all entrance examinations for higher education institutions.  Committee of Establishment Expenditure (CEE)
has already been appraised the scheme and approval of the Cabinet is being sought.
The total financial implication on setting up of NTA is estimated to be ` 25.00 Crore for its initial
operationalization in 1st year. NTA is expected to be financially self sustainable from 2nd year onwards.

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Observations / Recommendations
4.6 The Committee observes that out of ` 171.023 crores only ` 41 crores have been utilized till date and
the rest of the money remains un-utilized. Ideally, the entire money should have been utilized by the State
Government. The Committee points out that such under-utilization itself casts aspersions on the functioning
of this scheme. The Committee  has reasons to believe that both Centre and State Governments have not
handled the scheme efficiently and also it seems that there is hardly any coordination between the two
Governments. The Committee wants that Central & the State Governments should ensure success of this
scheme be taking all the necessary measures in consultation with each other.
4.7 The Committee notes that there appears to be the complete absence of monitoring mechanism so far
as implementation of the scheme is concerned. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department
should have a robust monitoring  mechanism for the effective utilization of these funds. The Committee,
further, recommends that there should be incentives and rewards for the State Governments who have used
the funds optimally.
Action Taken (4.6 & 4.7)
The Bureau of Higher Education, in its role as the National Project Directorate (NPD) for RUSA,
regularly co-ordinates with the State Governments in the course of the implementation of the scheme.
Frequent review meetings are held with the states to evaluate their performance, address implementation
issues etc.
z Proper monitoring of the scheme is one of the priorities for MHRD.  With this in mind, various
monitoring mechanisms have been put in place under RUSA.
(a) Bhuvan-RUSA is a satellite based geo-locating mobile app on which institution upload the
physical progress of the work done and upload photos for monitoring purposes.
(b) PFMS:  All beneficiary institutions and states have made efforts for releasing funds through
the Public Financial Management System (PFMS).  This helps in keeping track of fund
flow under the scheme.
(c) RUSA fund tracker:- RUSA fund tracker is a mobile app which helps to keep physical
financial back of a project from its approval stage.
Workshops are held to help states and all institutions understand the operation of these mechanism
NPD lays emphasis on the strict adherence to the norms of the scheme and monitoring methods.  These
might cause some delays in fund releases in the short term but leads to improvement in quality and absorption
capacity of the state in the long term thus leading to qualitative implementation of the scheme.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee takes note of the reply given by  the Department of Higher Education. It
appears both the coordination between the Centre & State Governments and the monitoring
mechanism as set up by the MHRD are not yielding desired result.  Had that been so, more than
18

19
75% funds, would have not remained untilized. This is a serious issue and needs to be addressed
without delay.  The Committee would like to have a progress report in this regard so as to ensure
the full and proper utilization of funds earmarked for the purpose.
PANDIT MADAN MOHAN MALA VIYA NATIONAL MISSION ON TEACHERS & TEACHING
(PMMMNMTT)
Observations / Recommendations
6.5 The Committee notes that this scheme has been formed with a vision of making teaching jobs attractive
and restoring it to a level of a dignified profession. The Committee is constrained to note that the Scheme
since its inception i.e., from 2014 has not made any progress. The information submitted by the Ministry
gives a picture that so far only ` 1.25 crore have been spent and 41 proposals has been received from
universities/institutes from  all over the country and out of 88 centres only 59 have been set-up till date. The
Committee would like to recommend that the mission should look at teacher’s education and training in
holistic manner and strengthen the institutional mechanism at all levels right from school to colleges. The
Committee also impresses upon the Department of Higher Education to expedite the pace of the scheme.
Action Taken
A total of 48 proposals from various Universities/Institutes from all over the country have been approved
till now for setting up institutional arrangements under various components of the Scheme and the remaining
set ups totaling to 82; will be made in the coming years till 2019-20. Regarding the fund release, ` 1.25 crore
were released in the year 2014-15 with the launch of the Scheme on 25th December, 2014, ` 59.95 crore in
the year 2015-16 and ` 70.04 crore in the year 2016-17 and ` 22.14 crore in the current F.Y. 2017-18 till
now; bringing the total release under the Scheme to ` 153.38 crores which indicates that the Scheme is
picking up pace.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee observes that this scheme aims to train teachers and provide them education
and training in a holistic manner besides addressing related issues of teacher preparation, professional
development etc,  comprehensively.  The Committee notes with concern that the Department has
not given year-wise physical and financial targets of the scheme to the Committee.  In the absence
of such details it is difficult to assess the gains of the scheme or ascertain its pace.  The Committee
can only conclude that the attitude of the Department towards  implementation of the Scheme is
lackadaisical lethargic.  The Committee recommends that this scheme should be pushed forward
with mission mode manner.
Observations / Recommendations
10.3 The Committee endorses the existing/ongoing schemes of AICTE towards faculty development. The
Committee further wishes that in addition to these schemes, the AICTE should also explore the possibilities
of providing enhanced research fellowships and also ensure strong industry faculty association. The
Committee further suggests strengthening and empowering of affiliated colleges by giving autonomy so as
to enable them to design specialized courses considering the need of the industry. The Committee strongly
feels in order to gain the credibility, it is essential to ensure transparency in these institutions both in the
government and private as regards its governance and financial management.

20
Action Taken
The committee’s  suggestion regarding enhancing number of research fellowship and fellowship
amount has been noted and to promote academia-industry connect, AICTE-CII Industry-Institute survey is
carried out every year and awards are given to technical institutions in different categories. In the year 2016,
890 institutes responded to AICTE-CII survey and five institutes won the awards.
However, review of existing scheme would be carried out to enhance its reach and to make it more
effective.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee would appreciate if it is apprised of the steps taken by the Department to
enhance the number of Research fellowships. It may also be informed if any proposal to enhance
the fellowship amount is being considered presently. The Committee would like to be informed
about the steps taken regarding academia-industry connect.
FACULTY POSITIONS
Observations / Recommendations
11.11 The Committee expresses its concern over the shortage of faculty positions in all the institutions
including the private ones. It points out that there can be only two possibilities, either our young talented
students are not attracted towards the teaching profession or the recruitment process is a prolonged one and
involves too many procedural formalities. In either case, the Department being the nodal authority for the
entire country so far as higher education sector is concerned has to take proactive role so as to expedite the
filling up a existing vacancies.
11.12 The Committee has been voicing its concern from time to time on the acute shortage  of faculty in
higher educational institutions across the country. The Committee is anguished to find out that all kinds of
institutions right from well established Central Universities to those set up recently, State universities as well
as private universities, premier institutions like IITs, NITs and IIMs, this problem has emerged as the
biggest handicap for the development and growth of Higher Education vis-a-vis maintaining the quality of
education. Situation continues to be grim with no improvement being foreseen in the near future. The
Committee points out that the availability of adequate and qualified faculty is a pre-requisite for quality
education. So far, the efforts of the Department, the regulatory bodies like UGC, AICTC etc. and the
universities and other institutions have not been adequate enough to reach a satisfaction level. The Committee
therefore impress upon all the stakeholders to expedite and ensure that shortages are eliminated or minimized.
11.13 The Committee, however, recognizes the steps taken by Department like increase in the retirement
age up to 65 years and improvement of salary structures.
Action Taken  (11.11, 11.12 & 11.13)
The Universities are autonomous bodies created either under the Central Act or State Acts and the
onus of filling up the vacant posts lies with them. However, to make the teaching profession more attractive
and to draw in good talent at the entry level, the UGC Regulations, 2010 has prescribed norms for improvement
in service conditions for the new entrant, in terms of better working and leave conditions, career advancement
prospects, retirement benefits etc.

21
UNIVERSITIES
The total number of sanctioned teaching posts in various Central Universities is 16600 (2376 Professor,
4708 Associate Professor, 9521 Assistant Professor). Out of the total sanctioned teaching posts of 16600,
5928 teaching posts are lying vacant (1277 Professor, 2173 Associate Professor, 2478 Assistant Professor).
While approving the Budget Estimate (Non-Plan) and Revised Budget Estimate (Non-Plan), from the
year 2010-11 onwards twice in a year, all the Central Universities have been requested by the UGC to fill up
the teaching positions at the earliest.
Further, in order to meet the situation arising out of shortage of teachers in universities and other
teaching institutions and the consequent vacant positions therein, the age of superannuation for teachers in
Central Educational Institution has already been enhanced to sixty five years; vide Department of Higher
Education letter No. F.1-19/2006-U.II dated 23.3.2007.
Besides, subject to availability of vacant positions and fitness, teachers can also be re-employed on
contract appointment beyond the age of sixty five years upto the age of seventy years. Re-employment
beyond the age of superannuation shall, however, be done selectively, for a limited period of 3 years in the
first instance and then for another further period of 2 years purely on the basis of merit, experience, area of
specialization and peer group review and only against available vacant positions.
UGC requested all Vice Chancellors of Central Universities, State Universities and Deemed to be
Universities vide its letter dated 12.11.2014 to make a serious effort to ensure that all vacant positions are
filled by the University before the start of the next academic session.
z Further, the UGC supports ‘operation faculty recharge’ through strengthening high quality research
in science related disciplines and promoting innovative teaching in the universities through
induction of fresh talent at the level of Professors, Associate Professors, and Assistant Professors.
Many universities require the support of professionals and experts beyond those available to the
university in its regular faculty especially in strengthening high quality research in science-
related disciplines, at internationally competitive level and in promoting innovating teaching in
universities. Besides, it has provided positions of Adjunct Faculty and Scholars-in-Residence to
enrich the teaching and research programmes of the university system at M.Phil and Ph.D
levels.
z UGC  implements a Travel Grant Scheme that provides financial assistance to permanent teachers
and librarians of colleges and vice-chancellors of state universities, deemed to be universities
and central universities, recognized under section 2 (f) and 12 (B) of the UGC Act, to present
research papers at international conferences abroad.
z UGC provides financial assistance to teachers teaching in universities and colleges to promote
excellence in teaching and research. Research project may be undertaken by an individual teacher
or a group of teachers. The ceiling of assistance under the scheme is ` 20 lakhs for sciences
including Engineering & Technology, Medical, Pharmacy and Agriculture etc. while for humanities,
Social Science, Languages, Literature, Arts, Law and allied disciplines, the assistance is ` 15.00
lakhs.

22
DEEMED TO BE UNIVERSITIES
The UGC conducted a comprehensive review of 124 Deemed to be Universities in the year 2009.  The
review included availability of faculty as per the norms and standards of the Statutory Council(s) concerned.
The Committees found that faculty was inadequate in 17 Deemed to be Universities and needed further
augmentation in 8 Deemed to be Universities.  The observations/suggestions of the UGC Expert Committees
were sent to the Deemed to be Universities concerned for compliance. These Deemed to be Universities
have submitted compliance in respect of faculty.  Out of the 25 Deemed to be Universities, 24 have taken
corrective measures for augmentation of faculty as suggested by the UGC Expert Committees.
PRIVATE UNIVERSITIES
The UGC has so far inspected 62 Private Universities. A new procedure has been adopted for inspection
of these Private Universities. The Expert Committees are requested to evaluate and comment whether the
faculty is well qualified and well trained; the proportion of permanent faculty adequate, the university followed
due process for recruitment of faculty, etc. After adoption of the new process, 9 Private Universities have
been inspected and the reports are being placed before the Commission.  The Universities would be asked to
comply with the deficiencies pointed out by the UGC Expert Committees.
IITS
Arising of vacancies and filling them up with suitable, qualified candidates is a continuous process.
The IITs have been taking measures to attract quality faculty, which include year-round open advertisements,
invitation through search-cum-selection procedures to alumni/scientists/faculty, advertisements in international
journals, and appointment of NRIs and PIOs to faculty positions on the same terms as applicable to regular
faculty.  In addition, Institutes are engaging contract, adjunct and visiting faculty. The Government has also
launched the Global Initiative for Academic Networks (GIAN) to enable foreign faculty to teach some
courses in the higher educational institutions.  Steps such as outstanding young faculty awards, mobility of
faculty from one Central Educational Institute to another, and pay parity to faculty have also been taken to
attract best faculty in these Institutions.  There is no adverse effect on studies in the institute due to shortage
of faculty, as the same is adequately compensated by the research scholars, contract, adjunct and visiting
faculty.
Other Technical Institutions
AICTE is conscious  of the shortage and availability of qualified faculty in technical institutions and
have launched various schemes to attract young generation towards teaching profession and skill upgradation
of existing faculty.  The faculties are given enormous chances to improve their educational qualification
under Quality Improvement Programme (QIP), Research Promotion Scheme (RPS) and Modernization and
Removal of Obsole Science (MODROBS). Faculty Development Programme (FDP) provides opportunities
to faculty member of AICTE approved Colleges / Institutions to facilitate upgradation of their knowledge
and skill. In addition, under Travel Grant Programme(TG) meritorious faculty gets opportunities to interact
at International Level Seminars, and Symposia, both within and outside India.  Teachers from AICTE approved
Technical Institutions / University departments are eligible for this grant. Proposals are received from Govt./
Govt. aided Engineering Colleges/University Department and self financing AICTE approved technical institutes
which are considered and entitled for the grant. Grants are released for supporting research and other
aspects of technical education.

23
Various Schemes for providing financial assistance to faculty members for quality education/ research
and capacity building programmes are summarized as follows:-
Trainee Teacher Scheme:- Trainee Teacher Scheme was launched in 2016. The scheme   is intended
towards atattracting bright Undergraduate and Postgraduate students to teaching profession by providing
scholarships for pursuing M.Tech/Ph.D Programme and assured job for advancing their professional growth.
The maximum funding is ` 2.5 lakhs maximum for three years over and above other financial assistance/
scholarship, if any.
Under this scheme 50 Proposals were received from Undergraduate and Postgraduate students out of
these 50 Proposals 01 Proposal was recommended by the Expert Committee and is under process.
Quality Improvement Programme (QIP) :- The objective of the scheme is to upgrade the expertise
and capabilities of the faculty members of the degree level institutions in the country. The aim is to
enable the teachers to acquire Master’s/Doctoral degrees. Scholarships are paid @ ` 9000/- per month
for M. Tech and ` 15,000/- per month for Ph.D. for a maximum period of two and three years
respectively.
Year wise breakup; Nos. of Faculty completed/ enrolled, M.Tech, Ph.D
Sl. No. Name of 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
Course
1. Ph.D 552 466 382
2. M.Tech 267 188 102
Scheme of Travel Grant (TG):- The scheme is aimed at promoting research and development activities
in various areas of Technical Education for meritorious faculties to interact at international level to update
the global changes in the field of concerned fields of specialization. Total funding of ` 1.5 lakh (reimbursement
of Airfare, Registration fee and per Diem) once in three year.
Adjunct Faculty (ADF):- With a key objectives to have a strong and robust collaboration between the
educational Institutions and industry & to encourage quality involvement of persons working in industry,
academicians, scholars, practitioners, policy makers in teaching, research, and related services on a regular
basis, a Scheme of Adjunct Faculty has been initiated from the financial year 2015-16. Such involvement
helps in bringing external perspective to regular teaching to make classes more interesting and to further
enrich existing knowledge of faculty members. Maximum Budget of the Scheme is 96 lakhs.
188 proposals were received online & the same were placed before the Committee of Experts to
evaluate. Expert Committee recommended 16 proposals. These proposals are processed in the current
financial year 2016-17.
Research Promotion Scheme (RPS):-  is aimed to create research ambience in the institutes by
promoting research in engineering sciences and innovations in established and newer technologies; and to
provide opportunities to Master’s and Doctoral degree holders faculty members to augment the quality of
faculty and research personnel in the country.
A grant to the tune of ` 23.73 Crores was given to 254 beneficiaries institutes in the last 3 years for
implementation of RPS Scheme.

24
Research Park Scheme:- The Scheme promotes Industry and Institute partnership. Grant of
` 1.00 Crore (per State/UT) is being given under this scheme to each beneficiary. The duration of project is
3-year.
During the financial year 2016-17 the council had released a sum of ` 34,50,667/- under Research
Park Scheme.
        The Government has launched the Global Initiative for Academic Networks (GIAN) to enable foreign
faculty to teach courses in the higher educational institutions during Summer/Winter Breaks. In addition,
Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya National Mission on Teachers and Teaching (PMMMNMTT) also addresses
issues like teacher preparation and their professional development.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee feels that the steps taken by the Ministry of Human Resource Development
particularly, in respect of Central Universities have hardly achieved any result as more than
one-third faculty positions are still vacant.  The Committee does not consider that raising the
age of faculty to 65 is a desired and permanent measure which will help strengthening the
faculty position.  The Committee, therefore, , feels that there is hardly any improvement in
the situation. Further, there has been consistent decline in the enrolment in the Ph.D and
M.Tech programs. As regards the Under Trainee Teacher Scheme, out of 50 proposals, only one
proposal has been recommended by the Expert Committee because the Committee strongly feels
that the Government have to make efforts in a mission mode manner if it actually wants to
address the situation.
Observations / Recommendations
11.14 The Committee recommends that recruitment process should start well in advance before the post is
vacated so that after retirement, the newly recruited person takes up position immediately. The Ministry
should work in tandem with Institutions to have this exercise on yearly basis and recruitment must be done
in advance so that shortage does not develop into crisis. While taking note of the steps taken up by the
Department for filling up the vacancies, the Committee observes that in order to make the teaching profession
more attractive, the government’s effort to allow and encourage the faculty to undertake consultancy and
the financial support, for setting up start up have to be lucrative enough so as to meet the expectations of the
aspirants. The Committee accordingly directs the Department of Higher Education to explore the possibilities
and take necessary steps on priority basis.
Action Taken
For tenure based posts, the University Grants Commission has issued advisory to all Higher Educational
Institutions that recruitment process for posts of Vice-Chancellors and other academic administrators should
be started well before the end of tenure of the incumbent.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee feels that the delay in the recruitment process of teachers/faculties and for
the post of Vice-Chancellor in the academic institutions leads to lowering of academic standards in
these institutions. The Committee also points out that the Department should encourage the
institutions to make the students pursuing PhD/Doctoral degrees to teach some courses at the

25
degree level with some financial support. This would encourage more students to take up teaching
profession and also mitigate the crises of faculty shortage in these institutes.
FACULTY POSITIONS
Observations / Recommendations
11.15 The Committee further recommends that in order to improve the position there should be an increase
in the number of research fellowships for M.Phil, PhD and Post Doctoral Programme to create potential
faculty for universities and colleges and also increase the number of fellowship and amount through NET.
The Department should also provide  an opportunity to the teachers to present papers in academic conferences
seminars or participate in workshops; exchange knowledge and ideas; and the young faculty member to
spend a short period of two weeks to two months at institutions of their choice for a better academic
exposure.
Action Taken
In order to improve the position, UGC has increased in the number of research fellowships for M.Phil,
Ph.D and Post Doctoral Programme to create potential faculty for universities and colleges and also increase
the expenditure in last three years as under:
2014-15 2015-16 Percentage 2016-17 Percentage increase
increase in in 2016-17 over
2015-16 over 2015-16
2014-15
Beneficiaries 51545 74754 45.02 83235 11.34
Expenditure 877.06 1 177.62 34.26 1443.44 22.57
(in crore)
UGC implements a Travel Grant Scheme that provides financial assistance to permanent teachers and
librarians of colleges and vice-chancellors of state universities, deemed to be universities and central
universities, recognized under section 2 (f) and 12 (B) of the UGC Act, to present research papers at
international conferences abroad.
Comments of the Committee
From the reply of the Department, it is evident that the percentage increase of no of
beneficiaries for research fellowships in M.Phil, Ph.D and Post Doctoral Program in the year
2016-17 is comparatively less than the percentage increase for research fellowships in the year
2015-16.  The Committee suggests that wide publicity be given to Research fellowships programme
to attract potential faculties in higher education sector.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED.
-NIL-
26

OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO
The Committee takes note of the Government’s initiative. However, it may be apprised of
impact of the scheme. (Para 3.4)
The Committee takes note of the reply given by  the Department of Higher Education. It
appears both the coordination between the Centre & State Governments and the monitoring
mechanism as set up by the MHRD are not yielding desired result.  Had that been so, more than
75% funds, would have not remained untilized. This is a serious issue and needs to be addressed
without delay.  The Committee would like to have a progress report in this regard so as to ensure
the full and proper utilization of funds earmarked for the purpose. (Para 4.6 & 4.7)
PANDIT MADAN MOHAN MALA VIYA NATIONAL MISSION ON TEACHERS & TEACHING
(PMMMNMTT)
The Committee observes that this scheme aims to train teachers and provide them education
and training in a holistic manner besides addressing related issues of teacher preparation, professional
development etc,  comprehensively.  The Committee notes with concern that the Department has
not given year-wise physical and financial targets of the scheme to the Committee.  In the absence
of such details it is difficult to assess the gains of the scheme or ascertain its pace.  The Committee
can only conclude that the attitude of the Department towards  implementation of the Scheme is
lackadaisical lethargic.  The Committee recommends that this scheme should be pushed forward
with mission mode manner. (Para 65)
The Committee would appreciate if it is apprised of the steps taken by the Department to
enhance the number of Research fellowships. It may also be informed if any proposal to enhance
the fellowship amount is being considered presently. The Committee would like to be informed
about the steps taken regarding academia-industry connect. (Para 10.3)
FACULTY POSITIONS
The Committee feels that the steps taken by the Ministry of Human Resource Development
particularly, in respect of Central Universities have hardly achieved any result as more than
one-third faculty positions are still vacant.  The Committee does not consider that raising the
age of faculty to 65 is a desired and permanent measure which will help strengthening the
faculty position. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is hardly any improvement in the
situation. Further, there has been consistent decline in the enrolment in the Ph.D and M.Tech
programmes. As regards the Under Trainee Teacher Scheme, out of 50 proposals, only one
proposal has been recommended by the Expert Committee because the Committee strongly feels
that the Government have to make efforts in a mission mode manner if it actually wants to
address the situation. (Para 11.11, 11.12 & 11.13)
The Committee feels that the delay in the recruitment process of teachers/faculties and for
the post of Vice-Chancellor in the academic institutions leads to lowering of academic standards in
these institutions. The Committee also points out that the Department should encourage the
institutions to make the students pursuing PhD/Doctoral degrees to teach some courses at the
27

28
degree level with some financial support. This would encourage more students to take up teaching
profession and also mitigate the crises of faculty shortage in these institutes. (Para 11.14)
FACULTY POSITIONS
From the reply of the Department, it is evident that the percentage increase of no. of
beneficiaries for research fellowships in M.Phil, Ph.D and Post Doctoral Programme in the year
2016-17 is comparatively less than the percentage increase for research fellowships in the year
2015-16.  The Committee suggests that wide publicity be given to Research fellowships programme
to attract potential faculties in higher education sector. (Para 11.15)

MINUTES

31
V
FIFTH  MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 4th January,
2018 in Committee Room No. ‘62’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya     —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK  SABHA
5. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
6. Shri Nihal Chand
7. Smt. Geetha Kothapalli
8. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
9. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
10. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
11. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
12. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened to
consider and adopt the draft (i) 294
th Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations /
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty third Report on “Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and
Mid-Day-Meal Scheme”, (ii) 295 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations /
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty fourth Report on “Issues and Challenges before
Higher Education Sector in India”, (iii) 296 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty seventh Report on Demands for Grants
(2017-18) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, (iv) 297th Report on Action Taken by Government on
the observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty eighth Report on Demands for
Grants (2017-18) of the Department of Higher Education, (v) 298th Report on Action Taken by Government
on the observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty ninth Report on Demands
for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development and (vi) 299th Report on the National
Sports University Bill, 2017.

32
3. The Committee considered the draft 294 th, 295th, 296th, 297th, 298th and 299th Reports and adopted them
after some discussion.
4. The Committee, then, decide to present/lay the 294 th, 295th, 296 tth, 297th, 298 th and 299 th Reports to
both the Houses of the Parliament on 5th January, 2018. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his
absence, Shri Partap Singh Bajwa, M.P ., Rajya Sabha to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and
Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra, M.P., Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati, M.P .,
Lok Sabha to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 11.00 A.M.