196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED NINETY- SIXTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN
THE HUNDRED SEVENTY-SECOND REPORT ON
UNIVERSITY AND HIGHER EDUCATION
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17TH AUGUST, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 17TH AUGUST, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2007/SRAVANA, 1929 (SAKA)
CONTENTS
 
1.                  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.                  PREFACE
3.                  REPORT
CHAPTER I    Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the  Government           
 
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not  desire to pursue in view of the  
Government's reply      
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been       
accepted by the Committee      
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited
 
4.         OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE
5.         MINUTES
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2006-07)
 
1.      Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
MEMBERS
 
2.
      Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.      Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4.      Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
5.      Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6.      Smt. Brinda Karat
7.      Shri Uday Pratap Singh
8.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
      

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
9. Smt. Supriya Sule
10.  Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.  Shri Ashok Argal
12.  Shri Basudeb Barman
13.  Shri Harishchandra Chavan
14.  Shri Harisinh Chavda
15.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
16.  Shri Ramswaroop Koli
17.  Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
18.  Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
19.  Smt. Archana Nayak
20.  Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
21.  Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
22.  Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
23.  Shri Chengara Surendran
24.  Dr. Thokchom Meinya
25.  Shri K. Virupakshappa
26.  Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
27.  Shri Francis K. George
28.  Shri Anantkumar Hegde
29.  Shri Rahul Gandhi
30.  Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
31.  Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Smt. Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
 
 
 
PREFACE
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
having been authorised by the Committee do hereby present on its behalf, this Hundred Ninety-sixth Report on Action
Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the Hundred Seventy-second Report on ‘University and
Higher Education’.
 
2.         The Hundred Seventy-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 22
nd May, 2006. After
receiving the action taken replies, the Committee decided to hear the Secretary, Department of Higher Education for
seeking further clarifications on it.  Accordingly, a meeting was held on the 19 th February, 2007 with the Secretary and
other representatives of the Department of Higher Education in which clarifications on certain points were sought.
Subsequently, a questionnaire was also forwarded to the Department and replies were obtained from them.  
 
3.         The draft report was prepared on the basis of action taken notes and the subsequent feedbacks. The report was

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
adopted with some modifications/additions at a meeting of the Committee held on the 17th July, 2007.
 
NEW DELHI; 
July 17, 2007
Asadha 26, 1929 (Saka)
JANARDAN DWIVEDI
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development
                                                                       
REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in its One Hundred Seventy-second Report on University and Higher Education.
 
2.         Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the 172
nd
Report, have been categorized as follows:
 
(i)                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
3.7.1, 3.7.2, 3.8.1, 3.8.2, 3.9.4, 3.13.4, 3.13.5, 3.15.7, 4.5.2, 4.5.5, 4.7.2, 5.1, 5.2, 5.6, 5.7, 8.4.4, 8.5.5, 12.5
and 15.2
(Chapter I) Total – 19
(ii)
                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies:
3.5, 3.13.2, 3.13.8, 3.15.4, 3.15.9, 4.2, 4.5.1, 4.6.1, 4.6.2, 4.6.3, 4.6.4, 4.6.5, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 6.1, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6,
6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.10, 6.14, 6.15, 6.16, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.6, 7.7, 7.9, 7.10, 7.12.2, 7.12.3, 7.12.4, 7.12.5, 7.12.6,
7.14.2, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4.2, 8.5.1, 8.5.3, 8.5.4, 9.3.3, 10.1, 10.2, 10.4, 11, 12.4, 14.2, 14.3 and 14.10
(Chapter II)  Total – 54
(iii)
               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 3.3, 3.4, 3.6, 3.9.1, 3.9.2, 3.9.3, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13.3, 3.13.6, 3.13.7, 3.14.1, 3.14.2, 3.15.1,
3.15.2, 3.15.3, 3.15.5, 3.15.6, 3.15.8, 4.1, 4.3.1, 4.3.2, 4.4, 4.5.3, 4.5.4, 5.8, 5.9, 5.10.1, 5.10.2, 5.10.3, 5.10.4,
5.10.5, 5.10.6, 5.10.7, 5.11.1, 5.11.2, 6.2, 6.3, 6.11, 6.12, 6.13, 7.4, 7.5, 7.11, 7.12.1, 7.12.7, 7.13.1, 7.13.2,
7.13.3, 7.14.1, 8.1, 8.4.1, 8.4.3, 8.5.2, 9.3.4, 9.3.5, 10.3, 10.7, 12.1, 12.3, 13.1, 13.2, 14.4, 14.7, 14.9, 14.11,
14.12 and 15.1
(Chapter-III)  Total - 72
(iv)
              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:
(Chapter – IV) Total - Nil
CHAPTER - I
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
 
3.7       Major Constraints
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.7.1    Several social, economic administrative and other reasons seem to act together as constraints to access and equity
in higher education.  Factors like rural-urban divide, gender disparity, regional imbalances, decreasing public allocation,
economic hardship, increasing cost due to commercialization, etc. are some of the major reasons of this phenomena. This
scenario of higher education, particularly in the ever-expanding competitive environment, does not inspire required
confidence, if India were to play its assigned role at the global level.   The Committee, therefore, believes that India has
to rise to the occasion urgently and make its higher education system not only competitive but also accessible and
affordable to everyone.
 
Action taken
 
Observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted. While it is true that public allocation has been decreasing in

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
real terms over the period 1990-91 to 2002-03, Central Governments outlays in higher and technical education was more
than doubled during the last two years over the allocation for 2003-04. Higher education can be made affordable only
through a major expansion of the public system along side effective statutory regulation of fee where required. The
Constitution (93rd Amendment) Act, 2005 enables the Centre as well as States to do so.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.7.2    Dimension of this problem is not only confined to access to higher education of the age group of 18-23 years.  It
also extends to those in the need of continuous learning and are older than the age group of 18-23 years.  The Committee
feels that the demand for higher education from diverse kind of learners calls for the courses that are flexible; can be
studied off-campuses and credits received are portable.   The Committee desires the Government to take proactive
measures in this regard urgently.
 
Action taken
 
Deemed to be universities are being allowed to have off-campuses provided they maintain the requisite standards.  The
UGC has already issued guidelines for credit-based system, which is flexible and allows credit transfer. However, this
system needs to be adopted by all universities of the country and would take time, considering the autonomous decision
making processes in each University. In order to provide continuous and life long learning, the ODL System is being
strengthened. The role of the Distance Education Council is under review for making it more effective to maintain
standards of Distance Learning. Virtual Web-based learning opportunities as well as certification processes are under
development.
 
3.8       Other Imbalances
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.8.1    The Committee is dismayed to note that there was tremendous imbalance in access to higher education in urban
and rural areas.  Most of the colleges and universities, the Committee notes, are located in urban or semi-urban areas. 
Whatever colleges were in rural areas, less said is, better about their quality and output.  While only 16 out of every 1000
were college graduates in rural areas, 111 out of every 1000 belonged to this category in urban areas.  The same trend is
also discernable in relation to house-hold economic status both in rural as well as urban areas.  Higher education in the
country, the Committee notes, is thus largely a pro-rich and urban phenomenon.
 
3.8.2    Similarly, the gender disparity in higher education in India was yet another area of concern, which has been dealt
with in detail elsewhere in this Report.  The Committee is of the considered opinion that urban bias and gender disparity
in higher education are the two main stumbling blocks to access and equity in this area.  Large sections of our
population, therefore, are denied access to learning for economic, cultural, religious, geographical and other reasons.
 
Action taken (3.8.1 and 3.8.2)
 
For expanding the rural higher education base, the University Grants Commission provides assistance to Colleges and
Universities in rural and backward areas.  Even so, the Hon’ble Committee’s observation regarding the urban-rural gap
is noteworthy and shall be taken into consideration while formulating the XIth Plan with appropriate physical targets to
minimize urban bias.  Similarly steps have been taken to address gender bias. An Empowered Standing Committee of the
UGC on Women’s Studies has been entrusted the task of in-depth study of this problem and to suggest remedial
measures.  The interim reports of the said Empowered Committee are being taken into consideration in the XIth Plan
proposals.
 
3.9       Regional Disparity
 
Recommendations/Observations
3.9.4    The Committee also emphasizes the special focus for improving access and equity in remote regions and

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
geographically disadvantaged places. It also desires special funding and region-specific norms for North-East Region &
Jammu & Kashmir.  The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Government for setting up Central Universities in
North-Eastern States.  The Committee recommends that such universities may be set up in the remaining States of
North-Eastern region including Sikkim at the earliest. The colleges in these areas should be given special funding in
addition to normal development grants by the UGC.  The Committee desires special funding and region-specific norms
for North-East Region & Jammu & Kashmir.
 
Action taken
 
Three Central Universities have been approved “in principle” (Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura) and Bills in this
regard have since been introduced in Parliament. Several steps have been taken in regard to the State of Jammu &
Kashmir as well. As a special measures, a total of 18 new colleges have been sanctioned in the State, including 2 women
only colleges. These institutions are being located by the State Govt. in the backward districts. A center for Kashmiri
Studies will be established with Central assistance, additional assistance to facilitate the setting up of 100 Bed Girls’
Hostel. (One each at Universities of Jammu and Kashmir), special assistance of Rs.1.00 crore each to two college, which
are one Hundred Years old, and sanction of an Academic Staff College at Jammu University and a Women’s Study
Centre at the Kashmir University are some of the initiatives.
 
3.13
          Open University
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.13.4  The Committee’s attention has been drawn to some inherent drawbacks present in this system of education.  Lack
of quality faculty members, non-availability of relevant study material, lack of basic facilities like good libraries, modern
labs, computer, multimedia facilities, etc. are the major issues that need immediate redressal.  Absence of an effective
and efficient information dissemination system to the students about various types of courses, examination schedules,
results, degrees etc. causes great hardship to students.  Even at the IGNOU (HQ), students have to run from pillar to post
for these things. The Committee, therefore, recommends that these aspects to be looked into urgently with a view to
provide an adequate and efficient delivery mechanism and support system in the IGNOU and other Open Universities.  
The Committee is of the considered view that to make Open Universities more attractive and relevant, efforts be made to
ensure quality of study material, timely dispatch thereof, dedicated teachers at the study centres, provision of necessary
infrastructure, use of ICT, etc.
 
Action taken
 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for appropriate action by IGNOU in future.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.13.5  The Committee finds that there is no accreditation system in IGNOU.   It is surprised to note that the work of
neither IGNOU nor any other State Open University any Correspondence Course Institutes (CCI) has ever been assessed
since they started functioning.  As a result, credibility of these institutions vis-a-vis mainstream education system is
poor.  The Committee, therefore, emphasizes the urgent need for an effective assessment and accreditation system for
these institutions so as to enhance and maintain quality of education provided through the distance mode.
 
Action taken
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted. The Distance Education Council is being reviewed for its
strengthening in this regard.
 
3.15     Women & Higher Education
 
Recommendations/Observations
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
3.15.7  The Department in its notes has mentioned the following schemes that were currently being run for the women:
Special scheme for construction of women hostels; establishment of women’s studies organize; Day Care organize in
universities, etc. The Committee notes that neither the Department nor the UGC had any concrete and targeted scheme or
programme for improving the participation of women in higher education.   Such an indifferent approach for this very
crucial aspect is almost perilous. The Committee, therefore, recommends that formulation of targeted/specific schemes
and programmes for this purpose needs to be done by the Government urgently. The Committee has learnt that a very
good scheme for supporting single girl child of a parent for higher education has been announced. The Committee
emphasizes the need for its wide publicity.  Sufficient funds should be provided for this purpose.
 
Action taken
 
The recommendations have been noted for consideration while formulating the XIth Plan.
 
4.5
              Promoting Research
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
4.5.2    Private people are not inclined to support research in universities and research being a capital-intensive activity,
their participation would help greatly. The needs of the institutions, research labs and industries are mutually common.
Therefore, there need to have greater degree of connectivity and cooperation. The Committee strongly feels that needs of
these three entities may be interlinked to make research more relevant and productive. Inability of researchers to secure
employment for themselves is also one of the reasons for such a state of affairs in this area. 
Action taken
 
Recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
4.5.5    The Committee also emphasizes the need for monitoring and evaluation of research in universities by setting up
Monitoring & Evaluation (ME) units under the supervision of a Committee of eminent professors from different
disciplines. It needs coordination with national laboratories. Number of fellowships also needs to be suitably enhanced
so that students are attracted to undertake research in newer areas.
 
Action taken
 
The UGC regularly monitors the progress of the research projects to ensure its smooth functioning and proper utilization
of grants. The recommendations for enhancement of number of fellowships has been noted. The UGC has been advised
for enhancement of the fellowship schemes operated under the UGC.
 
4.7.      Social Sciences & Humanities
 
Recommendations/observations
 
4.7.2   The process of privatization and liberalization have generated new demands, particularly in higher education. It
has led to considerable neglect of social sciences. These disciplines are such branches of knowledge which do not have
any immediate market value. Private  participation has been mainly confined to professional courses. Government
funding, therefore, remains the only source available for social sciences. What is more disturbing is that Government
funding is increasingly being diverted for professional institutions, thus leaving the social sciences in the state of utter
neglect. The Committee is of the view that utility of social sciences to our society, polity, economy, etc. cannot be
overlooked. They add value to one’s life and any study that is value-free, in fact, tends to become sterile. The
Committee, therefore, is of the considered opinion that this imbalance needs to be corrected immediately by making the
study of social sciences scientific, interesting and relevant to present situation. The government and the UGC may set up
an Expert Committee for presenting a blueprint for this purpose.
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
 
Action taken
 
Noted for being conveyed to UGC.
 
V.        QUALITY AND EXCELLENCE
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
5.1       The Committee notes that while setting up the universities, not much attention could be paid to the standards and
quality of teaching/learning processes. Besides, erosion in values, decline in the work ethics and dilution of norms have
also been notices in the Indian university system. Structure of governance in our educational institutions including
universities is not conducive to change of any kind, including that of curriculum.   Anything that does not change with
time becomes redundant soon in the fast moving world.
 
5.2       India, in fact, does not figure at all in the world ranking of top 100 universities.   Even among Asia Pacific
countries, India ranks 6
th in the list, with South Korea and Israel ahead of it. The only institutions appearing in top 500
institutions from India are Indian Institute of Sciences, Bangalore; IIT, Kharagpur and University of Calcutta. Even the
“five star” level by the National Assessment & Accreditation Council (NAAC) or considered as “potential centres of
excellence’ by the UGC does not find a place in top 500 universities except the University of Calcutta.
 
Action taken (5.1 and 5.2)
 
The observations have been noted.
 
The structure of governance varies in Universities and Deemed Universities. Any change in governance structures would
have be consistent with the appreciation of these institution being democratic institutions with collective decision
making bodies for both academics as well as administrative. The authenticity of world ranking of universities is not
known.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
5.6       Question of quality is also linked directly with the quality of teachers; curriculum design & development;
evaluation of teachers and students performance; teacher training; and other infrastructure such as good labs, libraries,
sports facilities, etc. Greater and regular sharing of experiences through networking and otherwise between different
institutions at the national and global plane is highly recommended. Multi-disciplinary curriculum with stress on
developing; problem-solving abilities, augmenting knowledge skill and group activities are essential to provide relevance
and usefulness to real life situations.   Quality of higher education can be greatly enhanced through the use of audio-
visual techniques and the modern information & communication technologies.
 
Action taken
 
Greater use of ICT is envisaged during the XIth Plan and the valuable observations of the Hon’ble Committee shall be
taken into consideration while finalizing the proposals for the Plan.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
5.7       Providing adequate exposure to teachers and students by holding more and more conferences and seminars,
orientation and refresher courses for teachers, making selection process of Lecturers/ Teachers/ Professors more
transparent and shifting from incremental budgeting to performance budgeting are some of the areas, the Committee
feels, if implemented, can go a long way in improving the quality and standard of higher education.
 
Action taken
 
The observations of Hon’ble Committee have been noted.   

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
 
8.4       Private Universities
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.4.4    The Committee was cautioned that some corporate entities might try to open private universities to enhance their
profits under that garb. The possibility of a company opening a private university for the purpose of creating an
affiliating body to get all frivolous or sub-standard courses offered by it affiliated, cannot be ruled out. The Committee,
therefore, desires that the Government should bring a comprehensive legislation for providing effective machinery to
ensure that only genuine and quality private providers of higher education services remain in the field.
 
Action taken
 
According to the existing policy, only “Not for profit” societies or trusts can establish educational institutions.
 
8.5       Unaided Professional Institutions
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.5.5    These institutions, particularly in the field of engineering and management need to have effective partnership
with trade and industry to ensure that the product emerging out of these institutions would be better suited for the job
which they would eventually take up. Such a partnership, the Committee feels, shall not only make the curricula more
relevant and contextual, increase the employability of students and would also enable the sponsors to get some resources.
 
Action taken
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
 
XII.      State Universities
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
12.5     The Committee’s attention was also drawn towards the need for relaxing the requirement of NET qualification
for a person to be appointed as a Lecturer in a university/college because this sometimes prohibited the qualified and
outstanding persons from being inducted in the teaching community, if they have not cleared the NET. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that this issue needs to be considered by the Department and the UGC in a positive spirit.
 
Action taken
 
A review the National Eligibility Test (NET) for its utility, effectiveness and continuation was constituted by the Central
Government under the Chairmanship of Prof. B.L. Mungekar. Based on the recommendation contained in the Interim
Report of the Review Committee, the UGC has since notified the University Grants Commission Regulations for
(Minimum Qualifications Required for the Appointment and Career Advancement of Teachers in Universities and
Institutions Affiliated to it) (Second Amendment Regulations, 2006) on 14.6.2006. It has now been provided that the
candidates having Ph.D. degree in the concerned subjects are exempted from NET for Post Graduate level and Under
Graduate level teaching. The candidates having M.Phil degree in the concerned subjects are exempted from NET for UG
level teaching only.
 
XV.      Conclusion
 
Recommendations/observations
 
15.2     This Report, in fact, has attempted to suggest mechanisms/measures for taking most of the problems and
challenges, if not all, before higher education. The Committee is aware of the fact that doing all this would need huge

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
amount of resources. And how to manage that resources, is a million dollar question today. To begin with, till the
concerns relating to private funding were taken care of, the major share of the required money, the Committee feels, will
have to be primarily provided by the government. As per an estimate, nearly 3400 crores of rupees shall be required for
improving the infrastructure in the existing universities, filling vacancies of the teachers, upgrading the libraries and
laboratories, providing broadband connectivity as also for opining more universities in the coming years. The State
universities and colleges also need to be supported in a big way with a view to bring them at a particular standard. The
Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that efforts should be made for mobilizing this amount for the higher education
by the government, both Centre and State. This may certainly not be impossible to arrange the required resources if the
Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance, Department of Secondary and Higher Education sit together and apply their
mind on this issue. This investment should not be a big price for the benefits that would accrue to the country. Socio-
economic benefits of Higher education are immense and radiate to various areas of life.
 
Action taken
 
Based on the projection made by this Department on requirement for enhanced allocation for the Higher Education
sector, budgetary provision for the year 2006-07 has been increased from Rs.873.27 crores in 2005-06 to Rs.1403.50
crores.
 
CHAPTER - II
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.5       The Committee was informed that there are other ways also of looking at this access ratio which are given here as
follows:
 
(a)
     Percentage in terms of people in 18-23 age – 5-7 per cent
(b)     Percentage in terms of number appearing for class 12th – 30 - 35 per cent
(c)     Percentage in terms of number who has passed class 12th – 40-45 per cent
 
Action taken
 
The percentage in terms of people in the relevant age group (18-23 years) is estimated at 8.97 percent and is marginally
higher inclusive of enrolment in the Open and Distance Learning system of higher education.
 
3.13     Open University
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.13.2  The Committee believes that for a vast country like India where accessibility to higher education is quite low,
Open Universities have the vast potential for taking higher education to more and more people irrespective of different
barriers. This system caters also for in-service persons for whom it is a second chance as well as for regular learners.   It,
therefore, needs to be provided greater thrust by integrating utility courses with personal development and socio-
economic problems. The courses offered could be mainly job-oriented as far as possible. High priority should be given
for opening more study centres particularly covering rural and remote areas with concentration of SC/ST and other
backward communities’ students.
 
Action taken
 
The Open and Distance Learning format has been growing in terms of enrolment. The IGNOU offers a variety of job-
oriented courses. The DEC encourages State Open Universities (SOUs) also to introduce such courses with the opening
up of more and more study centers in backward areas and in scheduled areas, enrolment of weaker sections is expected

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
to increase.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.13.8  The Committee takes note of the fact that the open universities were able to raise some revenue by running
various courses offered through distance mode, there was no facility of fee concession available to eligible students in
the ODL system. The Committee finds such a system to be discriminatory. It feels strongly that the fees in this system
should also be rationalized and the poor and meritorious students be given some kind of fee concessions or assistance.
 
Action taken
 
While the fee in the ODL system is comparatively lower than in the conventional system, State Governments reimburse
Learners belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under scholarship schemes thus effectively providing
for concessional fee.
 
3.15     Women and Higher Education
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.15.4  Of the total women enrolled during 2004-05, as may be noted, more than 50 per cent were in Arts & Humanities.
Of the remaining 50 per cent, 20 per cent were in Sciences; 16 per cent in Commerce & Management; just 1.86 per cent
in education; 4.15 per cent in Engineering & Technology and 3.6 per cent in Medicine. The presence of women in
agriculture, mainstay of Indian economy, is just negligible. It is a matter of great concern that the participation of women
in the areas with great demand such as management, engineering/technology, medicine, etc. is very low in India. Such a
situation, the Committee feels, does not augur well for the future of this nation. Can a nation progress in real terms and
catch up with others in this fiercely competitive world with their women-folk remaining virtually outside the higher
education system? The Committee, therefore, recommends that the participation of women in professional courses,
which is abysmally low at present, needs to be improved manifold without further delay. More and more women as
Engineers, Professors, Lawyers, Doctors, Architects and Entrepreneurs could mould the face of India to a great extent.
 
Action taken
 
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee would be kept in focus while formulating the XIth Plan.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.15.9  The open distance learning, the Committee feels, could be a very potent method to fight gender disability in
higher education. Studies in different areas may be promoted for women in user-friendly manner in the language they
prefer with suitable study materials. Training rural women for the purpose of involving them through community
participation in our development process should also be promoted. Their involvement in Sarva Siksha Abhiyan more
particularly the Mid-Day Meal 
could make these schemes a great success. For achieving these objectives, the Committee
is of the considered view, Government will have to play a pro-active, positive,  interventionist role to ensure access of all
eligible women to the higher education.
 
Action taken
 
The recommendations have been noted.
 
IV.       Relevance
 
Recommendations/observations
 
4.2      The Committee notes that the problem of relevance of higher education is mainly with reference to general
education i.e. Arts, Humanities & Social Science and Law & Commerce, wherein 83% of the 92 lakhs students, i.e. 76

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
lakhs are enrolled. However, in today’s new economic environment need for knowledge-workers and graduates with
sound fundamentals, good analytical abilities and appropriate utility-oriented skills are on rise and they are in great
demand. The Committee finds that most of our universities and colleges are providing out-dated, if not sub-standard
education in these disciplines, leading to the degrees and diplomas of little or no substance. The content as well as the
quality of education is mostly out of context and even if the curriculum is relevant, the teaching process is unscientific
and sub-optimal. Not only this, the Committee came to know that our institutions sometimes copy syllabi from Western
Universities. Standard books used for teaching are from the West and those written indigenously are usually without an
original view on the subject. As a result, solutions to our problems turn out to be highly misplaced. Such an education,
the Committee is of the view, would not have much relevance to our conditions and demands. It is, in fact, one of the
main reasons for increasing disinterest and frustration amongst the country’s youth. The Committee recommends that
the Government must take necessary measures, in consultation with experts, to ensure that required revision in the
content and curriculum is carried out periodically. It has to be in keeping with indigenous conditions and requirements.
There has to be an institutional mechanism to ensure that higher education remained relevant to the changing times.
Process of such revision, the Committee feels, should be an on-going one for making higher education relevant and
useful.
 
Action taken
 
As part of the UGC’s efforts to support teaching-learning innovations in various subjects, a model curriculum is prepared
from time to time by a panel of experts at the undergraduate and postgraduate levels for suitable adoption by the
universities. During 2001, the UGC prepared a model curriculum in 32 subjects with the help of Curriculum
Development Committees. Universities use the UGC Model Curriculum for upgrading their curriculum. This model
curriculum in all subjects has been circulated to all the Institutions for making higher education more relevant and
useful.
4.5
              Promoting Research
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
4.5.1    Research performance is one of the parameters of deciding world ranking of the universities. The fact that only
one of our universities finds place in top 500 universities of the world, speaks volumes about the status of research in our
country. The Committee finds that the research activities were not getting due attention in our universities, which should
have been one of their real basis. In fact, there have emerged the system of premier institutes and laboratories, both in
pure sciences and the social sciences and humanities, where research was moved away from our universities. As a result
of separation of research from teaching, the latter acquired gradually a secondary importance. The Committee, therefore,
is of the opinion that research needs to be closely linked with teaching for which scientific base in our universities needs
to be strengthened that will attract not only talented students but also industry to our university laboratories.
 
Action taken
 
An Expert Committee was constituted to suggest ways of strengthening basic science research in universities and to
attract talented students to basic sciences. The Report of the Committee has been accepted and is being implemented by
the UGC through an Empowered Committee of Experts. The main recommendations under implementation are:
 
i)          Filling up vacant faculty position.
ii)         No of Ph.D’s should increase.
 
The UGC has been advised to earmark allocation for implementation.  
 
4.6
              Promoting Basic Sciences
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
4.6.1    Another worrisome fact that was brought to the notice of the Committee was the future of basic sciences in India.
It came to know that India’s best minds were not turning to pure and basic sciences and those who do not continue. The

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
students are not finding the basic sciences attractive enough to pursue it as a career. Less than 3% of our school children,
the Committee was informed, were generally opting today for pure sciences. Many colleges were closing down their
science departments, not to speak of opening new institutions for imparting science education. The students have more
preference for courses in management, commerce, engineering, IT and related areas.
 
Action taken
 
Noted.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
4.6.2    India has had a long tradition of pure sciences, the Committee is concerned to notice the increasing disinterest
among the younger generations in this area. It was mainly because of non-availability of suitable job opportunities and
other incentives in the pure sciences. The Committee finds this situation disquieting because India badly needs to
integrate R&D activities in sciences with its economic and social programmes, because science must serve the socio-
economic and other needs of our society. Science & Technology has to play a greater role in prevention, mitigation and
management of the impact of natural disasters like earthquakes and Tsunamis. The Committee, therefore, feels that we
must find ways of making the study of pure as well as applied sciences, both in teaching & research, more attractive for
our students, if India were to use science for the welfare of its people. We must augment further our efforts in critical
areas like agricultural production, food processing, energy, transportation, communication, etc. so as to be able to
compete and excel in the global arena. Immediate steps, therefore, need to be taken for popularizing the study of basic
sciences by having career-oriented programmes in applied sciences. Adequate incentive and infrastructure for research &
development is needed urgently. The base for sciences in the universities needs to be rebuilt and strengthened by taking
newer initiatives in the frontier areas.
 
Action taken
 
A Task Force was constituted by the Government in March, 2005 under the Chairmanship of Prof. M. M. Sharma, for
Basic Scientific Research in Universities. The Task Force has made a number of recommendations including creation of
position of Research Scientists at various levels, networking centers in basic sciences, formal linkage between the
universities and National level institutions, up gradation of infrastructure facilities, etc. The recommendations have been
accepted by Government, and the University Grants Commission has been directed to implement the recommendations.
The Universities and colleges are provided funds in an organised manner in all subjects and disciplines to integrate R&D
activities and to create suitable job opportunities and other incentives in the pure sciences. Keeping in view, the need for
professional education, engineering & technology education, selected universities are supported in teaching and research,
besides improving the academic information.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
4.6.3    The de-bureaucratization in most of the scientific & technological institutions, will have to be ensured for
promoting research activities and preserving their academic autonomy.
 
Action taken
 
Recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
4.6.4    The entire science & technological support system, in Committee's view, needs to be restructured for making the
study of basic sciences more attractive. The Committee is of the view that all research institutes may also be persuaded
to have under-graduate teaching programmes. Another feasible approach could be to have a co-ordinating mechanism
where under research institutes participate in teaching as well as take up collaborative research projects with university
faculty and students. Secondly, regular exchange of faculty can be managed between the research institutes and

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
universities.
 
Action taken
 
The suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
4.6.5    The Committee is of the view that there is urgent need for building more centres of excellence in science like
Indian Institute of Sciences. The Committee is happy to learn that two such institutions have already been proposed to be
established at Kolkata & Pune. More such institutions should be provided in other regions of the country. The
Government will have to provide necessary resources and funds for research and development for inventing required
technologies for agriculture, food processing, energy, bio-technology, pharmaceutical and health. These must be treated
as priority areas for such funding.
 
Action taken
 
The suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted. One more IISER is proposed to be set up in Punjab.
 
V.        Quality and Excellence
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
5.3       Such a situation, the Committee feels, does not augur well for the future of higher education in the country. The
Committee, therefore, feels that the issue of quality and excellence of higher education should have been given more
importance in India. Academic ambience in our universities, etc needs to be improved a great deal. India has to create its
new identify as knowledge-creator so as to face the challenges posed by the GATS as also to promote Indian higher
education abroad. Quality and excellence are the watch-words in today’s liberalized environment. Making higher
education globally competitive, therefore, cannot be postponed any further.
 
5.4       The Committee at the same time cannot overlook the fact that India despite severe limitations has created a large
scientific/technical manpower, who have earned a pride of place in the world community. India has not only to sustain
its position but also to be a front-runner in the global competition. This can be done, according to the Committee, only
when the standard and quality of our educational institutions and its graduates are greatly improved. They will have to be
instilled with a high level of creativity, innovation, dedication, patriotism, etc.
 
Action taken (5.3 and 5.4)
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
5.5       Quality in education does not necessarily connote its demand in the job market only.  It also requires students to
acquire basic values and norms of life.  Our education system unfortunately, appears to be neglecting this aspect greatly.
As a result, deviant behaviour, particularly amongst our youth is increasing at alarming proportion that needs to be
arrested. The role of our education system for this purpose must be restored, before it is too late.
Action taken
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.  
 
VI.       GOVERNANCE AND MANAGEMENT
 
Recommendations/Observations
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
6.1       The Committee takes note on the fact that importance of management in education was underlined for the first
time in India by the National Policy on Education (NPE) in 1986.  The Policy called for evolving a long-term planning
and management perspective and its integration with the country’s developmental and manpower needs.  It emphasized
the need for making decentralization, autonomy for educational institutions and the principle of accountability the
guiding principles in remodeling the management of education.   The ‘Programme of Action’ for implementing the NPE
called for specific initiatives for the management in higher education.  Accordingly, a UGC Committee was established
to look into the matter and recommend on the pattern of management of universities.  The Committee was informed that
this UGC Committee stopped short of advocating any major overhaul of university, management.   The NIEPA, the
universities and the management institutes are also not known to offer any major programmes for educational
management.
 
Action taken
 
The observations have been noted. NIEPA has now been declared Deemed to be University with a broader mandate in
teaching and research in educational planning, administration and management.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.4       The Committee feels that it is high time that aspects like performance measurement, quality improvement,
professional development, institutional and cultural change, resource mobilization, marketing of the intellectual
products, public relations etc. are imbued in the practices of higher education management in our country.
 
Action taken
 
The UGC has evaluated the performance of the universities with respect to its performance in the areas of academic,
research and governance with the help of development radars.  Most of the parameters mentioned by the Hon’ble
Committee are used as indicators for evaluating the performance of the universities.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.5       The Committee believes that there is an urgent need to adopt best managerial practices in the structure of higher
education institutions and universities, since these are no longer traditional institutions engaged only in creation,
presentation and dissemination of knowledge. Rather they are progressively being called upon to involve themselves in a
variety of problems and concerns of national development, especially in the social and economic spheres.
 
Action taken
 
The recommendations have been noted.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.6       The Committee finds that there is no effective planning body in universities both central as well as State. The
Committee feels that it is only by better planning and optimum use of resources that universities can improve their
efficiency and can excel.   It is of the opinion that proper strategic planning keeping in view the priorities and options
available be adopted in the planning activities of the universities.
 
Action taken
 
Most of the universities have Academic Council and Executive Council which are involved in the effective planning of
the resources and courses of the universities.  Each university in terms of its autonomous status is free to device planning
mechanism.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
6.7       The Committee is also of the view that autonomy to the universities be made inviolable because it is, the life-
breath to intellectual and academic initiatives and innovations. This autonomy, however, should not lead to autocracy
and it must be ensured that academic bodies were kept away from any kind of interference, political, bureaucratic and
any other views of academicians should have effective say in the management of higher education.
 
Action taken
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.8       The Committee also recommends to ensure that academic decision in the institutions of higher learning is taken
on merit and the government control must be reduced. Any outside interference in appointments of university teachers
and administrators should be totally avoided. Direct interference of Finance Department in financial management of the
universities must also be avoided as it proves to be counterproductive.
 
Action taken
 
The Universities are given full autonomy in appointment of faculty position as per the norms laid by the UGC. There is
no outside interference in appointment, including from the Central Government.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.9       The Committee was informed that instances of uneasy relationship between various bodies, particularly the
Academic Council and the Executive Council in the universities are not very uncommon. This, the Committee feels,
prepares grounds for internal bickering and outside interference that ultimately vitiates the academic atmosphere in the
campuses. All possible measures be taken for avoiding such situations.
 
Action taken
 
The observations have been noted. These are the internal matters of the universities which can be best resolved by
adopting good governance measures by the                 Vice-Chancellors.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.10     The Committee is of the considered opinion that the role of a Vice-Chancellor in a university system is very
crucial. In today’s complex university environment, the person to be appointed as Vice-Chancellor must be the one who
is not only an academic leader but also trained in sound management practices. The Committee during its visit to IIM,
Ahmedabad came to know that the Institute was running an orientation programme for the CBSE school principals. The
Committee is of the opinion that all the IIMs may be requested to develop and run suitable modules for the orientation
and refresher courses for the Vice-Chancellors and Registrars of the universities as also for the heads of other institutions
of higher learning. The Committee also emphasizes the need for running such programmes in education management
specially designed for the government-officials responsible for implementing / supervising primary, secondary and
higher education.
 
Action taken
 
Highly eminent academicians are appointed as Vice-Chancellor. Any such programmes must not be imposed on them.  
A round table conference of all the newly selected Vice-Chancellors is conducted by the AIU from time to time to
familiarize them with techniques involved in professional management of higher education.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
6.14     The Committee was informed that many a time, it has been experienced that University Acts in different States
have provision which are not longer relevant or are not keeping with the emerging challenges. The Committee
recommends that Ministry of Human Resource development should advise the State governments to review, from time
to time, their University Acts and amend them in the light of new requirements and challenged being faced by the
universities. UGC must take a lead in this exercise.
 
Action taken
 
The observations have been noted for following up with the states. Such issues also come under review during the
conferences of Chancellors of State Universities (Governors) with the President of India.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.15     The Committee is also of the opinion that for good governance, there is an urgent need for the use of
Management Information system in the universities. The Committee notes that majority of the universities have done it
in reference to examination & general administration. However academic governance has not been covered under this.
The Committee desires that academic governance be also brought in the Management Information System.
 
Action taken
 
Noted. Universities are encouraged to introduce management information system in the universities.   Universities have
also been provided V-SAT/Radio Link/Leased lines for connecting and a computer centre to enable them to adopt
computerized management information systems.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.16     The Committee is of considered view that system of micro-management be given up and structures of
governance outside universities also need reform. The Committee strongly feels that the internal management of
institutions needs to be strengthened. More autonomy and greater authority to the head of institutions may also be given.
There is a need to create a legal and conducive environment to initiate changes at the institutional level. It also needs to
be underlined that the government works as a facilitator rather than controller in the affairs of institutions of higher
learning.  
 
Action taken
 
The present policy of the Central Government is to encourage and protect autonomy of Institutions of higher learning.
 
VII.      Funding
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
7.1       The higher education system and the pattern of financing it, vary across the world, based on the size and strength
as well as degree of diversification of its institutions.  But the fact remains that they all face a severe constraint of public
finances available for higher education.  India is no exception in this regard.
 
Action taken
 
No comments are required.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
7.2       Funding of higher education in India has been an area of great concern because the resources are limited and
there is a need to balance the growing demands of higher education within the limited resources.  Of late, there has been
an intense debate over the pattern of funding education in general and higher education in particular. Public expenditure

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
on education in India has increased significantly since the inception of planning in the country.  It has increased upto
more than Rs.9000 crores today.  The trend of public expenditure on higher education, the Committee notes, showed a
real rate of growth of 7.5% per annum during the 1950s, which went upto 11% during the 1960s.  In the following
decade, however, the annual growth rate came down to 3.4%, with only marginal recovery during the 1980s.  The public
expenditure per student, the Committee was informed, has also registered a negative growth in the 1990s.  The
Committee also notes that the share of higher education in Five Year Plans after increasing from 0.7% in the First Plan to
1.2% in the Fourth Plan.  It has ever since stagnated at 0.5% upto the Ninth Plan.  During Eighth Plan, it had further
come down to 0.3%.
 
Action taken
 
No comments are required.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
7.3       During the 1990s, the Committee observes, that the process of economic reforms and the concomitant structural
adjustments hit hard the expenditure on all social sector investments, including higher education.   With the general
withdrawal of subsidy and emphasis on cost-recovery, there has been a noticeable fall in the budgetary support to the
recurrent expenses.  This fall is visible not only in government contribution to higher education but also in the share of
higher education to the total expenditure on education.
 
Action taken
 
No comments are required.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
7.6       The Committee is of the view that the declining public finances for higher education coupled with the inflation
and increase in the number of students aspiring for it, severely impair its growth, both quantitative as well as qualitative. 
And this is what has happened in our country.  Reduction in expenditure on higher education, in fact, has affected not
only recruitment of the teachers and creation of physical infrastructure but has also restricted to a great deal access to
higher education particularly, by the poor people.  The Committee feels that for the economic and technological progress
of a country in this era of intense global competition, the country can ill-afford to ignore the higher education sector.  It
was argued before the Committee that lately, we have witnessed shifting of emphasis from higher education to primary
education.  The Committee is of the considered opinion that while universalizing primary education was the
constitutional mandate, the higher education also needs to be supported by increased allocations in the coming years,
should India were to provide higher education of world class standard.
 
Action taken
 
Observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
7.7       The Committee is aware of the resource constraints both with the Central and State Governments which cannot
fill the gap between the supply and demand of the higher education sector.  The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion
that new sources of financing higher education have to be found for bridging this gap.
 
Action taken
 
Observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
7.9       In the light of this, the Committee feels that mobilizing resources from non-government sources has become
imperative now, not only to sustain the system of higher education at its present level but also for its further expansion
both in its qualitative as well as quantitative dimensions.
 
Action taken
 
This Ministry is of the opinion that increased public outlay in higher education cannot be overlooked.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
7.10     An estimate puts this demand at Rs.3,400 crores for the remaining period of 10
th Plan. Managing such a huge
sum is an uphill task. This can be achieved inter alia by promoting distance education, private participation and cost
recovery methods.  Besides, the universities need to recognize the importance of helping themselves through their
internal resource generation.  The Committee also feels that Income Tax concessions can be given to philanthropists and
to the community, should they invest in higher education.
 
Action taken
 
The CABE Committee on “Financing of Higher and Technical Education” has cautioned against increasing student fees,
revenues beyond a threshold, so that higher education remains affordable. Outlay on distance education has been
increased during 2006-07 and would continue to engage attention.
 
7.12     Student Fees
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
7.12.2  It was impressed upon the Committee that student fees were extremely low and had not been revised for
decades.  The Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Five-Year Plan has also underlined the need for hike in the student fees. 
Some people advocated that fee could be one of the major sources of income in the present context.  It was argued by
them that currently, only about 15-20 percent of annual recurring cost per student was recovered from the students in the
form of fees, and remaining 80-85 percent came as subsidies from the government.
Action taken
 
There are limits to increase in student fees as revenue. Percentage of revenues of higher educational institutions cannot
be above a threshold level of 20 per cent, so that higher education is affordable.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
7.12.3  The Committee was also informed, on the other hand that fee income had been continuously on rise and it was
already on higher side and any further rise in it could cause much hardship to an ordinary household.
 
Action taken
 
No comments are required.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
7.12.4  The Committee is fully aware of the implications of hike in fee paid by students, as it may restrict the access to
the higher education. There is a possibility that beneficiaries, particularly from vulnerable groups, social and economic,
would find it difficult to afford the higher education affecting thereby their upward mobility adversely.   The Committee,
therefore, feels that raising of fee and other charges should be considered only after examining its social and economic
implications on the poor people.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should emphasize on
other options also. If the raise in the fee becomes unavoidable, it must be gradual and supplemented/supported by other
assistance.

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
 
Action taken
 
Observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
  
Recommendations/Observations
 
7.12.5  The Committee at the same time is of the opinion that it is not prudent to charge same fees from all students,
irrespective of their socio-economic status.  It is true that the daily pocket-expenses of some students are much more than
the fee they pay per month.  It is an anomaly.  Therefore, there is urgent need for having a rational and just policy in this
regard.  Meritorious students coming from weaker sections of the society need to be financially supported through
effective mechanisms so that their inability to afford the cost of education does not deprive them of higher education.
Therefore, provision of adequate and liberal free-ships and merit-cum-means scholarships to the students coming from
the disadvantaged groups is considered imperative.
 
7.12.6  What is a matter of concern to the Committee is the high fee structure of private colleges/universities.   The
Committee emphasizes that we must keep in mind the social and economic milieu of the students while deciding fee and
other charges.  The private institutions particularly unaided/self-financing colleges must ensure that education was not
made unaffordable to poor and meritorious student.  The Committee feels that a suitable formula for fixing/regulating
fees in private institutions of higher learning needs to be worked out in consultation and agreement with their
management.  The Committee notes that Courts have already suggested some mechanism in this regard.
 
Action taken (7.12.5 and 7.12.6)
 
A draft Central Bill for regulating fees in private unaided institution is pending finalization. The Ministry has announced
various scholarships scheme for the benefit of student community. Article 15(5) of the constitution enables the states to
make laws for the advancement of weaker section in matter of admission to all educational institutions including private
unaided professional educational institutions. Several States have enacted appropriate legislation for regulating fees by
private institutions.
 
7.14     Graduate/Exit Tax
 
Recommendations/observations
 
7.14.2  Imposition of Exit Tax on our students immigrating to other countries for taking up jobs after obtaining their
degrees, particularly from our premier institutions which are run on massive State subsidies, was suggested by some
experts who appeared before the Committee. They argued that the expenditure incurred on those students go without any
return to the country. The Committee would like to point out the changed perception about the traditional brain-drain
theory in the wake of globalization which recognizes certain indirect benefits - developing one’s skill further,
remittances in foreign exchange, etc. The Committee is of the view that students passing out from premier Government
institutions get the best education on payment of nominal fees. In the event of their leaving the country for good,
imposition of Exit Tax on them must be considered. The Committee, therefore, recommends that feasibility of this
proposal needs to be examined and implemented in the larger interest of the country.
 
 
Action taken
 
Noted for being conveyed to the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance.
 
VIII.     PRIVATE INITIATIVE IN HIGHER EDUCATION
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.2       The Committee wonders that despite subsidized education and low fee structure, only about 7% of the students in

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
the age group of 18-23 years could afford to go to Universities and College. And those 83% who are left out, the
Committee feels, are not able to bear even that paltry fees.
 
Action taken
 
Access to higher education depends on both supply (capacity of institutions) as well as demand, which in turn is
determined by various factors including affordability.   Expansion in public investment as well as regulation of non-govt
provision are, therefore, unavoidable.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.3       The Committee understands that a high level of public subsidy reduces the scope for the government to mobilize
additional resources. It is also of the opinion that only the State can have long-term perspective and focus on social
concerns in promoting higher education. The State, therefore, cannot shy away from investing in higher education, as it
is a long-term investment for the overall economic development of the country and its people. Only State can invest in
basic research and development without any profit in financial terms. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that until
the private participation and the concerns associated with it were taken care of, necessary legal framework was put in
place and adequate safeguards were provided for protecting interest of vulnerable sections of out society, the government
must continue to provide necessary for the purpose. Any indiscriminate reduction in subsidies would leave the sector to
the vagaries of market forces. The Committee, therefore, calls upon the Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance and
Department to spare adequate funds for higher education.
 
Action taken
 
The Constitution (93
rd amendment) Act, 2005 requires and enables the States to make suitable Laws for safeguarding
and protecting the interests of the weaker sections of our Society. The Department is of the firm view that public
investment in higher education should be increased substantially. The outlay for the Higher Education is expected to be
enhanced for the 11 th Plan (2007-2012). As a matter of fact, the outlay was increased successively and substantially
during the last two years of the Xth Plan.
8.4       Private Universities
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.4.2    Such a situation created genuine and serious concern in the minds of the parents and the students. Government
and UGC also tried to intervene by issuing certain guidelines/ regulations for establishment and maintenance of standard
in these private universities. But these guidelines, the Committee notes could not have much impact and these
universities continued to function unregulated, offering sub-standard education for a heavy price. Ultimately, the matter
went to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court came out heavily against all the private universities established under
the Chattisgarh Act declaring them illegal as the clause of the Act providing for the establishment of private universities
was declared ultra wires. It is, however, important to note that the Supreme Court did not hold the establishment of
private universities per se illegal.
 
Action taken
A university can be established by an act of parliament or act of State legislature. There is no distinction under the
Constitution between public or private universities.   A university not funded by the State or Public exchequer is
generally called a Private University.
 
8.5       Unaided Professional Institutions
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.5.1    The Country in recent years has witnessed emergence of self-financed institutions offering various courses in
engineering, medical, management, etc. That is mainly run by trusts and societies. Lakhs of enthusiastic men and women
have taken admission in these institutions. For example, if we take only engineering colleges, there was an intake of

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
more than 4 lakh students in 2004-2005 in the self-financed technical institutions scattered in different parts of the
country. The administrative and management structure of these institutions, the Committee came to know, was archaic.
While some of them are doing extremely well, others do not have even the basic infrastructure for the courses being
offered by them. Most of these institutions, the Committee was informed, suffered from acute shortage of qualified
teachers, lack of required facilities for teaching & research, etc. Two main problems bedeviling them are their admission
procedure and the fee structure. Huge sums are charged for admission under different categories followed by hefty
tuition and other fees.
 
Action taken
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted. The shortage of qualified teachers is owing to the
competing demands of the other sectors of the economy. The Central Government is constantly endeavoring to ensure
that talented young persons are attracted to the teaching profession. Several long term measure, including a review of the
remuneration packages are required to be considered. In the short term, the AICTE permits reappointment of teachers
upto the age of 70 years in order to meet the shortages in unaided institutions, subject to capacity of persons thus
appointed. The admission procedure as well as the fee structure in unaided educational institutions are indeed cause for
alertness. The Constitutions (93
rd Amendment) Act, 2005 enables the Centre as well as State to make appropriate laws in
this regard in the interest of the weaker section. Several States have enacted laws for the purpose. A Central law is
pending finalization in this regard.  
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.5.3    While doing so, we must give due regard to views/concerns of the people opening these institutions. Otherwise,
good spirited people would feel discouraged to come forward in this regard.
 
Action taken
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.5.4    Steps should be taken to ensure that these institutions are properly assessed and accredited by the respective
agencies. Furthermore, the Private Institutions be rated by independent rating and their ratings be disseminated through
print and internet across the country. The Committee is of the considered view that such a publicly announced ratings
would help the students in selecting an institution to enroll in; the institutions in upgrading its standards; and the
employers in assessing the quality of graduating from these institutions. The Committee also desires that all such
educational institutions need to come to out with their Annual Reports containing necessary details about the courses
offered, quality of faculty, teaching, students strength, examination results, infrastructure and facilities available, the
corpus available and the source of funding, accreditation ratings, etc.
 
Action taken
 
The recommendations have been noted. The National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) an Inter-
University Centre under the UGC Act rates institutions which are affiliated to Universities or declared on deemed
universities. Statutory Councils such as the AICTE do prescribe and enforce standards in respect of curriculum. In
addition, the Association of Indian Universities (AIU) facilitates equivalence and mutual recognition of degrees among
its member. The web-site of the AICTE now gives all relevant information in respect of recognition institutions
including unaided institutions. Annual Reports of Deemed to be Universities are received by the UGC.
 
9.3       GATS and Higher Education
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
9.3.3    It was argued before the Committee that the liberalization allowed in the area like allowing 100 per cent FDI on

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
automatic route and permitting foreign participation in higher education is essentially a domestic decision and has yet
been included under the obligations of GATS since India was yet to commit its education services under GATS
framework. The Committee appreciates that the liberalization allowed is basically due to our capacity constraints in
higher education. However, the Committee is concerned about the less reputed, fly-by-night operators who lure the
gullible students through their all claims in glossy advertisements making away with their hard-earned money and
spoiling their future. The Committee is of the strong opinion that the capacity  constraints cannot be an excuse for the
survival of sub-standard institutions. The Government should immediately come up with a proper supportive regulatory
mechanism with a view to ensuring that only accredited and known foreign institutions enter the Indian market and by
creating a level playing field for foreign and domestic institutions. The Committee feels that by putting such a
mechanism in place, the country will be better placed to schedule education services under GATS.
 
Action taken
 
While the Government is in process of bringing in a legislation for regulation of entry and operations, maintenance of
quality and prevention of commercialization, in respect of    foreign educational institutions in India, in regard to GATS,
India’s offer at present is as follows:-
 
 
Sl.No. Modes of Supply Limitations on Market Access
 
1. Cross –border supply None, subject to regulations as applicable to domestic providers
in the country of origin.
 
2. Consumption Abroad None
 
3. Commercial pressure None, subject to fees to be charged can be fixed by an
appropriate authority and no capitation fee or profiteering AND,
to regulations in place or to be prescribed by the appropriate
regulatory authority.  100% FDI permitted.
 
4. Presence of Natural persons
 
Unbound
X.        Foreign Universities
 
 Recommendations/Observations
 
10.1     The Committee observes that with the sweeping economic and financial reforms set in motion by Government
of India since beginning of the nineties, nearly all sectors, including education has felt the impact in a big way. A large
number of foreign educational institutions have started establishing their presence in India.
 
Action taken
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
10.2     The Committee notes that the existing laws and regulations of the country do not provide any statutory
mechanism for regulating the operation of such foreign institutions in this country. It is only the AICTE that has come
up with a notification that carries revised regulations for the entry and operation of foreign universities/institutions
imparting technical education in India. The Committee is aware that the C.N.R.Rao Committee has been set up by the
Government for reviewing this aspect. The Committee only hopes that the Government would take necessary interim
measures in this regard before the Rao Committee’s recommendations are considered and accepted.
 
10.4     According to the information compiled by the Association of Indian Universities during the year 2000 on the

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
basis of advertisements appearing in the Indian newspapers, 144 foreign universities and colleges/institutions have been
offering various courses of study to the Indian students. Out of them, 117 offer programmes on their home campuses and
the remaining 27 are conducting programmes on their home partners. The largest number of these institutions is from
UK and Australian followed by USA and Canada and New Zealand. The remaining 14 institutions are from other
countries like Bulgaria, Cyprus, Hong-Kong, France Ireland, Mauritius, Nepal, Romania, Russia and Switzerland. The
Committee is astonished to note that over 100 foreign institutions are offering different courses without any regulation
on their operations, quality of education, management, etc. The Committee notes that the AICTE regulation that permits
the entry of a foreign university/institution either directly or through collaborative arrangement with an Indian
university/institution extends only to technical education. The law is silent on foreign university/institution offering non-
technical education including medicine, law, arts, sciences, social sciences, etc. The Committee feels that this gap needs
to be filled at the earliest. It is incumbent upon the Government and related regulatory bodies like the UGC, the MCI,
etc. to come out with a definite policy/legislation for regulating the entry and operation of foreign university/institution
as soon as possible. Only good institutions, which are accredited in their countries, should be allowed to operate and they
need to get clearance from respective authorities. Fee, etc. charged by these foreign institutions also needs to be
regulated.
 
Action taken (10.2 and 10.4)
 
As mentioned earlier, the Government is in process of bringing in a legislation for regulation of entry and operations,
maintenance of quality and prevention of commercialization, in respect of foreign educational institutions in India. The
recommendations of the CNR Rao Committee has been given due consideration.
 
XI.       Deemed Universities
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Existing institutions may be given university status under a provision in the UGC Act which are known as Deemed
Universities. These institutions offer advance level courses in a particular field, while many of them award general
degrees. Currently, we have 95 deemed universities in different parts of the country. The Committee came to know
through several experts who appeared before it that the quality & standard in many deemed universities were seriously
wanting. It was also informed that the concept of deemed universities has not been able to achieve the desired objectives.
The Committee, therefore, feels that there is an urgent need for reviewing the procedure and criteria for providing
deemed university status to an institution.
 
Action taken
 
Deemed to be University status is granted to the institutions on the recommendations of the University Grants
Commission (UGC), as per the provision under Section 3 of the UGC Act 1956. Therefore, the recommendation was
referred to the UGC. Which has now informed that the Commission is seized of the matter of revising the guidelines for
processing the proposals from the institutions of higher learning seeking deemed to be university status.
 
XII.      State Universities
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
12.4     The Committee at the same time feels that we need not only more qualified but also highly motivated teachers. In
order to attract/retain them, we have to supplement their salaries with an attractive package of perquisites and support for
academic activities coupled with appropriate recognition with outstanding achievement.
 
Action taken
 
The salaries of the teachers of the universities/colleges are considered for enhancement    as and when the Central
Government enhances the salaries of its employees on the basis of recommendations of the Pay Commission. There are
incentives for teachers with Ph.D./M.Phil degrees and a Career Advancement Scheme (CAS) Scheme is also there for all

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
the teachers, under which they are given promotion in accordance with the prescribed length of their service and higher
qualifications.
 
XIV     Role of the UGC
 
Recommendations/observations
 
14.2     The UGC was established to promote, coordinate and determine standards in respect of higher education in the
country. The Committee is of the opinion that the UGC has not been able to live upto the expectations. It has become
unequal to the task and challenges before it.  It is now functioning mainly as grant disbursing body than a body for the
promotion of teaching/research and maintenance of standards in higher education. The institutions of higher learning in
India have become just degree conferring bodies than academic and intellectual entity.
 
14.3     Today, something like 50 to 60 percent of our colleges do not have even the basic infrastructure, qualified
teachers, lab, libraries, etc. there has been no way of regulating the proliferation of such colleges. The Committee is
perturbed to see that after nearly 50 years of the UGC’s existence, there is no set of rules regulating the establishment of
substandard colleges. The Committee is of the opinion that the UGC should not act as Department of the government but
should act as a professionally body in which the university interests should be fully represented.
 
Action taken (14.2 and 14.3)
 
The UGC is discharging its duties in coordinating and determining, maintaining standards of teaching / research in
higher education. In addition the UGC is making all efforts to make Institutions of Higher Learning to function towards
academic excellence.  It is also monitoring various programmes through respective bureau and monitoring Cell. In order
to provide infrastructure facilities the UGC has established six Regional Offices and one NRCB. Through these offices,
the colleges which are recognized under section 2(f) and 12(b) Act of UGC are being provided grants for books and
journals to augment and upgrade libraries, and more lab facilities, building grants, women hostel, etc. The teachers are
provided fellowships to do their M.Phil/Ph.D degrees. Colleges are given grants to organize local state level, national
level and International level seminars. Teachers are provided minor research projects to inculcate research culture at
under graduate level.  
 
Recommendations/observations
 
14.10   It is suggested that full-time members of the UGC to look after different portfolios falling under higher education
be provided for and their numbers be increased in comparison to the present system, which permit for only a full-time
Vice-Chairman to assist the Chairman. Further, these members should chosen from the top three-four experts in a
particular field.
 
Action taken
 
The Chairman of UGC is not only assisted by the Vice Chairman but also by other members of the Commission as well
as various subject experts peer Committees as and when required. The appointment of members is regulated by section 5
of the UGC Act, 1956 and they are chosen from the panel of experts in a particular field.
 
CHAPTER – III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
2.         Higher Education Today : Important issues
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
2.2       Nevertheless, in the light of these achievements, India should not lose sight of the new problems and challenges

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
faced by us today. Access to Higher Education in India has been highly restrictive; only close to 7 per cent of its students
between 18-23 years and able to go for it. While this percentage is as high as 40 per cent in other counties with whom
India has to compete in the coming years. Another problem before our higher education in that of relevance. While it has
grown in quantity, but a lot has to be done for its quality and relevance particularly in the emerging scenario of intense
competitiveness. Management of education in this era also needs to be radically reformed for imparting effective
autonomy and enforcing accountability in the educational institutions. Problem of managing resources is also one of the
major issues before us today.
 
Action taken
 
The Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) in Higher Education in respect of the relevant Age Group (18-23 years) is estimated
by the UGC at 8.97 percent. This ratio is estimated to be close to 10 percent inclusive of the enrolment in the Open and
Distance Learning System of Higher Education. Even so, the GER is much lower than several developing countries and
compares poorly with the GER for developed countries. The problem of low access is sought to be tackled through
enhancing capacity as well as creating rights for the weaker sections of society through the Constitution (93
Amendment) Act, 2005. Issues in respect of quality and relevance of Higher Education are being addressed through the
various schemes of the UGC such as Special Assistance Programme, Scheme for Assistance for Strengthening of
Infrastructure for Science and Technology (ASIST) and Assistance for Strengthening of Infrastructure for Humanities
and Social Sciences (ASIHSS), Centre for Potential of Excellence, Universities / colleges with Potential for Excellence
and Research Projects. Enhanced allocation of funds would enable the Commission to implement these programmes and
with greater spread.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee strongly feels that the Department failed to follow the spirit of the recommendation and has given a
superficial reply. The problem of low access which is supposedly sought to be tackled through the Constitution (93
rd
Amendment) Act, 2005 has been stayed due to the court's intervention. As regards quality and relevance, the Committee
was aware of these schemes while emphasizing quality and relevance. As these schemes existed earlier also and the fact
that the schemes have not delivered the required goods, the Committee's intention was that the Department came up with
some noticeable and relevant schemes to bring about the change in a big way. 
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
2.3       Challenges before Higher Education are no more nation-centric; they have become global now, particularly after
the trade in services has been brought under the GATS. Socio-economic dimension of Higher Education have become
more significant today than ever before. If India were to achieve the developed status in this milieu of global
competition, the Committee feels that there is no option but to reorient its higher education system to be vibrant,
competitive, meaningful and relevant. It will have to grow both in terms of quantity as well as quality, mainly with a
view to converting its vast population as asset, rather than a liability, as has been done by China.
 
Action taken
 
The University Grants Commission has introduced many career Oriented Schemes at the under-graduate level to make
courses more vibrant, competitive and meaningful in the context of global developments. Higher Education institutions
have been encouraged to engage in teaching and research in emerging areas of sciences and technologies, by granting
them the status of Deemed to be Universities in the de novo category.
                                                                                                                                   
Comments of the Committee
 
The reply of the Department is not relevant and fails to attend to the specific queries raised by the Committee in its
recommendation. The Committee is aware that a number of career-oriented courses are being offered by the universities
and colleges. What is, however, disturbing is that no survey has ever been conducted to assess their viability or the
absorption of the students undergoing these courses in industry or in other employments. In the absence of any such
surveys, it may not be long before these courses lost their relevance and became obsolete. Committee’s apprehension is

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
based on the data about various career-oriented programmes offered by universities/colleges under Arts/Social Sciences,
Commerce and Science offered during 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07. The Committee has observed variation,
both upward and downward, not only in the number of courses but also in the trend of either new subjects being
introduced or some subjects being withdrawn during this period. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
assessments of the courses may be carried out at regular intervals to ensure that they retain their relevance and meaning
in the context of the global developments.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
2.4       Our higher education system, Committee is of the view, is faced with many challenges today. The pressure on
higher education system is going to further increase due to large number of additional students expected to join the
higher education institutions in coming years, particularly due to upward pull generated by popular interventions like
Sarva Siksha Abhiyan and Mid-Day Meal Scheme.
 
Action taken
 
These valuable observations of the Hon’ble Committee would be kept in mind while formulating proposals and
strategies for the XIth Plan.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee would like to know the specific proposals and strategies that have been included in the XIth Plan.
 
III.       ACCESS AND EQUITY
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.3       The Committee observes that higher education in India was never freely available to all; it was basically elitist in
nature due mainly to historical and other reasons. Even after its expansion in post-Independence period, it could not be
made a mass activity.   Even today, it is neither fully accessible nor equitous. The Committee is of the opinion that the
issues of access & equity, in fact, are the two core issues to the expansion of higher education and hence, to the overall
progress of a nation. The Committee, therefore, underlines the urgent need for broadening access to higher education by
expanding it and by making it affordable.
 
3.4       The Committee is of the view that the two issues of access and equity are inextricably linked to one another.
There are two aspects of issue of access. Firstly, it can be looked as percentage of our young people (18-23 years) who
are eligible for higher education. Only close to seven per cent of our young people in this age-group today are in higher
education. The corresponding figure in the OECD countries is as high as 45-50 per cent and is over 90 per cent in
countries like Canada.
 
 
 
Action taken (3.3 and 3.4)
 
Concerns of Equity in access to Higher Education had not been adequately addressed until recently. The Constitution
(93
rd Amendment) Act, 2005 enables the Centre as well as the States to further conditions for success in higher
education in a manner that the weaker sections are not excluded from access to higher and technical education.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee fails to understand the contention that the 93
rd Amendment alone could address the concerns of equity
and access to higher education. While this recommendation aimed at extending access to higher education to some
sections of the society, the Committee’s emphasis was for increasing access to all the sections of the society including
the weaker ones. The Committee would, therefore, like to have further comments of the Ministry on this aspect.

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.6       The Committee notes that in the case of (b) and (c) categories, our performance is not too bad; it is comparable to
some of the developed countries.  It, however, feels that it would not be a proper way of looking at this aspect.  We must
look at the ‘access ratio’ in relation to our student population in the eligible group i.e., 7 per cent.   It is far below the
average of other countries. The Committee is of the firm opinion that if India were to compete and survive the intense
global competition in the 21
st century as knowledge/information society, this percentage will have to be increased
sufficiently. The Tenth Plan, the Committee notes, has fixed a target of increasing the access ratio from 7 per cent in
2003 to 10 per cent by 2007. The Committee feels that even this target is unlikely to be achieved with the present level
of our efforts and performance in higher education field. The Committee is happy to note the visible yearning, both in
government as well as private sector, to enhance the access to and equity in our higher education system. The Committee
emphasizes that we would have to set our goals high and work for it relentlessly. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that our aim should be to increase the access ratio to at least 20 per cent by 2015, which could be the threshold limit for
our remaining in global race as also for sustainable development of the country.
 
Action taken
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted and shall be taken into consideration while working out the
physical targets for the 11
th Plan.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee has subsequently learnt that this ratio has been proposed at 15 per cent during the XIth Plan. It, however,
still feels that the target of 15 per cent is less and it should at least be made 20 per cent.
 
3.9       Regional Disparity
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.9.1    The Committee notes the conclusion of a study undertaken by a group of Indian scholars based in Japan and
USA, which had analyzed the funding of Higher education in different states by the Department. The study has shown
that Union Government’s expenditure on higher education to various states was grossly uneven. For example, last year’s
budget’s allocation for the states like Bihar, Rajasthan, Orissa, etc., was highly inadequate. Per person expenditure on
higher education in Bihar was Rs.1.87, in Rajasthan Rs.2.59 and in Orissa it was Rs.4.07 while in States like
Uttaranchal, it was Rs.105.42, in Arunachal Pradesh Rs.105 and in Assam Rs.77.7.
 
3.9.2    Another distinctive feature of regional disparity is visible in the number of colleges/institutions located in
different States. The four Southern States and Maharashtra having 32% of India’s population have 46% of total general
colleges and almost 60% of professional institutions. In contrast, in the States of UP, MP and Bihar (including
Jharkhand) having 34% of population, only 23% of general colleges and only 14% of professional colleges are located.
The Committee is concerned to see that in the most populous States where nearly ¾
th of our population lived, the access
ratio is far below the national average. It presents quite a dismal picture about the existing status of higher education in
the country.
 
3.9.3    The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need to remove this regional disparity.   It is high time that
Central Government takes some initiatives for encouraging and helping the State Governments to set up educational
institutions in tune with the global requirements.
 
Action taken (3.9.1 to 3.9.3)
 
While the Central Government is not aware of the authenticity of the said study mentioned by the Hon. Committee, it
may be mentioned that the Central Governments’ expenditure on higher education is mainly in respect of development
and maintenance of Central Educational Institutions (Central Universities, IITs, etc.) and the Central Government

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
through the UGC provides only supplementary development assistance to State Universities, which are primarily
dependent on State Govts for development   and maintenance.   Therefore, States with no or fewer Central Institutions
would, obviously, have lower per person public expenditure from the Union Budget. This situation can be remedied only
with more public outlay and expansion of Central Institutions.  Recent initiatives of the Central Government e.g. in
respect of National Institutes of Technology are expected to correct regional imbalances. It may be mentioned that the
four Southern States have only two Central Universities (Pondicherry and Hyderabad) and only one IIT (Chennai) and
two IIMs (Kozhikode and Bangalore).   The State of Maharashtra has one IIT and no Central Universities. The Hon’ble
Committee’s observation regarding regional imbalances in higher education is valid. States in the Southern part and the
State of Maharashtra gained from the early initiatives taken by the respective State Governments in promoting higher
education. The access ratio in higher education has to be viewed in the context of the State of School education as well.
Greater awareness and demand for higher and professional education in recent years in the most populous States has led
to creating of more capacity in higher education, which in turn would improve the access ratio. The valuable
observations of the Hon’ble Committee would be taken into serious consideration in the strategies for the XIth Plan.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee notes that the MHRD has not given satisfactory reply to this recommendation. The Ministry has
subsequently informed the Committee about several strategic interventions that have been proposed in the XIth Plan.
The Committee would like to know about the interventions that have finally been included in the XIth Plan. The
Committee also observes that 12 large States not having adequate technical institutions have been approached for taking
corrective steps. Response from these States is awaited. The Committee is of the view that such an initiative followed by
persuasive approach is bound to bear fruit. The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. 
 
3.10
          SCs/STs in Higher Education
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
The Committee notes that the UGC had tried to help the under-privileged sections of the society through some special
schemes. A Remedial Coaching scheme for the benefit of students belonging to the SC/ST and weaker sections of the
society was introduced in 1994.  Another scheme of remedial coaching was introduced with a view to improve the
overall performance of these students in the examinations. The Commission introduced the scheme of establishment of
SC/ST cells in the universities in the year 1983, with a view to provide information regarding facilities available for
SC/ST students in universities and colleges. The SC/ST Cells are closely monitoring the implementation of reservation
policy in higher education. But these attempts, the Committee notes have not helped much.  For example, the enrolment
of SCs in higher education has ranged between 8.6 per cent in 1990-91 to 11.3 per cent in 2002-03. Enrolment of ST
students in higher education was between 2.1 per cent to 3.6 per cent in 1990-91 and 2003-04 respectively.   The
Committee recommends that special programmes for encouraging students from backward and minority communities
also need to be prepared urgently as their participation in higher education is abysmally low, as compared to their
percentage in total population. This poor situation reflects the poor enrolment and retention of all children including the
SC/ST students in school education. All efforts be made to ensure the enrolment and retention of students right from
school level.
 
Action taken
 
The objectives of the Sarva Siksha Abhiyan aim to improve enrolment and retention, which in turn would generate
greater demand from among the weaker sections for higher education.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The reply of the MHRD is not upto the mark. The Committee feels that the existing UGC schemes are meant only for
those who have reached the higher education level. There appears to be no serious effort being made for bringing more
and more students from these categories to the universities. The Committee would, therefore, like to have a more
specific reply in this regard. The Committee is also of the view that there is a need for giving wide publicity to the

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
existing schemes for under-privileged students so that maximum benefit reaches the targeted class. There has to be
maintained a coordinated link between the schools and nearby universities/colleges. It is for the ministry/UGC to play
the role of guiding force in such matters. The Committee would also like to point out that the time has come to both
review the existing schemes for under-privileged students and devise new schemes for them. 
 
3.11
          Convergence of Conventional and Distance Mode
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
The problem of access and equity is closely linked to opportunity. The Committee feels that the solution to the problem
of opportunity lies in convergence of conventional with modern distance education systems with open and flexible
structure. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered opinion that we must exploit our ICT potential for its
penetration to the country’s remotest corners to expand the access to higher education.   The Committee is of the view
that the Government should make an earnest beginning to train the people for utilizing the latest technologies to make
the higher education easily accessible. It would also cut across the rural-urban divide as well as gender disparities in this
regard.
 
Action taken
 
The ICT potential of the EDUSAT is being harnessed by institutions such as Consortium for Educational
Communication (CEC), an Inter University Centre of UGC, EMRCs, the IGNOU, the AICTE, the NECERT, the IITS
and others including several State Universities.   The UGC would work towards further convergence of the different
modes of higher education. A one-stop Education Portal is also being developed with a view to expanding access and
improving quality of learning at various stages of education.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is informed that the EDUSAT capacity is not being utilized to the optimum level and many educational
institutions are not taking advantage of the technology. This needs to be looked into and the MHRD has to devise
adequate strategies and create facilities, technical or otherwise, to enable educational institutions to take advantage of the
facility.
 
3.12
          System of affiliation
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Another issue that Committee wishes to highlight is about system of affiliation.   In India most of its 16000 odd colleges
are affiliated ones. In the absence of proper facilities, many of these colleges perform only classroom teaching in a
traditional way. The Committee was informed that nearly 89 per cent of UG students, 66 per cent of PG students and 85
per cent of the faculty in higher educational institutions, were in these affiliated colleges. Consequently, the M.Sc., MA,
Ph.Ds that are coming out of such colleges are undoubtedly of poor quality. What is worse, in India major affiliating
universities are over-burdened with the administrative works which are unproductive in academic terms. The Committee
is of the view that this certainly telling upon the academic competence of our universities. The VCs of such universities
are left with no time for their academic pursuits. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a cap on
the number of colleges being affiliated to a university. For this, we would need to open more and more universities for
which about 1000 universities and university level institutions be set up by 2015 in the Central, State and private sector.
A country like Japan, it may be noted, has around 700 universities and USA has nearly 3000 of them. Besides, setting up
more universities, we must encourage good colleges and institutions to acquire ‘deemed university’ or autonomous status
by fulfilling the norms laid down in this regard. This, the Committee feels, would not only lessen the burden of
universities but also enhance their quality and output greatly. Besides, the colleges should be encouraged to offer more
and more applied courses by offering job-oriented courses particularly after 10+2. These measures, if taken up in a
planned and fixed schedule would go a long way in decreasing the unnecessary burden on our universities.
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
Action taken
 
The UGC has already initiated a scheme for autonomous colleges which lessens the burden of affiliating university for
preparation of course curricula, its periodic review and conduct of examination. While an appropriate norm for
optimizing the number of colleges that one affiliated to each University can be worked out, establishment of more
Universities would depend on availability of resources during the XIth Plan. UGC is also implementing a scheme of job-
oriented courses in Colleges.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
This scheme sounds to be very good. The Committee would, however, like this scheme to be applied with greater
caution. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that there should be cap on the number of colleges that can be
affiliated to a university.
 
3.13
          Open Universities
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.13.3  In view of many other Open Universities run by the State Governments, the Committee feels the need for closer
relationship and regular interaction between them and the IGNOU, with a view to avoiding unnecessary duplication in
the production of course material, etc. For this, a strong networking has to be developed amongst them. This also calls
for uniformity with regard to the structure of the courses leaving adequate scope for region-specific variations.
 
Action taken
 
The Distance Education Council, under the IGNOU Act serves as a forum for such interaction and harmonization of
standards.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The response to this recommendation which clearly talked about closer relationship, regular interaction and strong
networking between State Open Universities and IGNOU, the Committee notes has not been proper and adequate. The
MHRD is required to submit complete replies to the ideas mentioned by the Committee.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.13.6  The Committee is concerned over the plight of students of open universities who are in different areas of the
country. The Committee notes that they do not have a platform at present to voice their grievances effectively. The
Committee, therefore, emphasizes an urgent need for putting a mechanism in place for the students to highlight/redress
their grievances. Such a machinery can also be utilized for a regular feedback on the efficacy of open learning
programmes.
 
Action Taken
 
The IGNOU has established a Student Support Services division for these purposes.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Student Support Services, as they exist in IGNOU, have not proved to be effective enough to take care of the
concerns of the students raised by the Committee in its recommendation. The Committee reiterates its demand to
strengthen the grievance redressal machinery in IGNOU as well as in other Open Universities.
 
Recommendations/Observations

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
 
3.13.7  The Committee notes that the students of Open and Distance Learning (ODL) are projected as poor cousins of
mainstream students. It has been reported that students coming through ODL channel are found to be lower in ability and
performance as compared to the mainstream students. The Committee is perturbed to note that pass percentage of ODL
students is very unsatisfactory. It strongly feels that this situation needs to be corrected urgently for instilling confidence
in the public about the ODL system. The Committee recommends that all necessary steps be taken urgently for
improving quality as well as standard of education imparted through ODL channel so that it can be made as a popular
and affordable system.
 
Action Taken
 
The recommendations have been noted and conveyed to the DEC & IGNOU.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee would like to have the feedback about the actions taken by the Distance Education Council and IGNOU
in this regard.
 
3.14     Distance Education Council
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.14.1  The Distance Education Council (DEC) has been created under the IGNOU Act for the promotion and
coordination of Open University and distance education system and for the determination of its standard. The Committee
found that the opinion is divided on the power of the DEC to recognize/approve the courses/degrees being offered by the
various other universities/institutions in the country by distance mode. It is argued that the DEC having been created
under the Act of a university should not have such jurisdiction in respect of courses/degrees offered by the other
universities. It may be pointed that the DEC has been issuing notifications to universities asking them to get their
programmes approved quoting a particular Gazette Notification regarding students not being eligible for Central
Government jobs, if they pursue courses not approved by the DEC. Many of the universities are not prepared to accept
the DEC jurisdiction in this regard mainly on the ground that the DEC was a body under IGNOU Act. As a result, a lot
of confusion has been created. The Committee feels that to make the decision explicit, there is a need to have a separate
Act for the DEC for making it a regulatory body for open university and open learning system and distance mode on the
lines of AICTE or UGC.
 
3.14.2     The DEC also provides development funds to open universities and other such institutions from the funds given
by the Central Government. The Committee is happy to note the several initiatives taken by the DEC, such a common
pool of programmes, evolving common standards, system of credit transfer, etc.  The Committee is also of the view that
the DEC should be developed as an apex body for promoting, coordinating and determining standards in distance
education more or less on the lines of the UGC in the case of conventional education.
 
Action taken (3.14.1 and 3.14.2)
 
A proposal for conferring statutory status on the DEC so as to serve as an independent authority for maintaining and co-
coordinating standards in ODL is under consideration of the Government.  
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is happy to note that the Government is considering a proposal for establishing statutory Distance
Education Council by an Act of Parliament. The Committee feels that this is a decision long overdue and should be
expedited for more effective maintenance of standards as well as coordination in higher education through the distance
mode.
 
3.15     Women & Higher Education

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
 
Recommendations/observations
 
3.15.1  National Policy on Education, 1986 had emphasized to gear the entire education system to play a positive role for
the empowerment of women by providing special support services for their education and also by removing factors,
which impede the spread of women education. The ‘Programme of Action, 1992’ also proposed to use education as an
agent of basic change in the status of women for neutralizing all the distortions to have a well-conceived edge in favour
of the women. These well meaning proclamations by the landmark documents, the Committee feels, have remained on
paper only even after more than two decades they were made.  Women’s participation in higher education has been quite
disappointing, despite significant contributions made by them in different areas of life. They constitute almost half of the
total population of India, yet a large proportion of them are still illiterate and ignorant. In Committee’s opinion, the
overall picture of women education, in fact, is of discrimination, limited opportunity, numerous obstacles and utter
neglect.
 
Action taken
 
No comments are required.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
3.15.2  The Department sought to make out a case before the Committee that there had been significant improvement in
the position of women in higher education. The Committee was informed that the enrolment of women in higher
education had increased from 10 per cent of the total enrolment in higher education in 1950-51 to 40 per cent in 2004-05.
It has also been informed that the number of women colleges has increased from 1003 in 1993-94 to 1849 in 2004-05.
The Committee feels that it is not a realistic way of projecting the position of women in the higher education. These
figures become meaningless if compared with the proportion of women in the age group of 18 to 23 years to the total
population in this group. Secondly, their participation (40 per cent) in higher education becomes abysmally low because
this percentage is, in fact, of the 7 per cent of the total youth in the eligible age group that is currently in higher
education.
 
Action Taken
 
The UGC Standing Committee on Women’s Studies Centres is considering new schemes including for their increased
access to higher education. These would be taken in to consideration while formulating the XIth Plan.
 
Comments of the Committee (3.15.1 and 3.15.2)
 
It is surprising to note that even after several decades of our Independence, neither the MHRD nor the UGC appear to
have any comprehensive and integrated programme for encouraging more and more women to take to higher education
as also for supporting them once they have reached the higher education stage. The Committee, therefore, emphasizes
the need for having such a programme in place urgently. On a specific query, the Committee has been informed that
strategies proposed to be pursued under the XIth Plan will be dependent on availability of resources. The Committee
strongly feels that fund constraint should not come in the way of enhancing access to higher education for women. 
 
Recommendations/observations
 
 
3.15.3  The faculty-wise women enrolment as provided in the following table presents a dismal picture.
 
Women Enrolment by Faculty: 2004-05
 
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
S.
No.
Faculty Women Enrolment Percentage of total women
enrolment
1. Arts 21,62,482 51.07
2. Science 8,50,255 20.08
3. Commerce /Management 6,96,548 16.45
4. Education 78,758 1.86
5. Engineering/Technology 1,75,725 4.15
6. Medicine 1,53,706 3.63
7. Agriculture 10,585 0.25
8. Veterinary Science 3,387 0.08
9. Law 68,596 1.62
10. Others 34,298 0.81
 
Action Taken
 
No comments are required, except that the percentage figures are not very meaningful because even the total enrolment
in faculties like Medicine, Education, Agriculture, Law, etc. is only a small fraction of the total enrolment in higher
education. It would be more meaningful to see percentage of women is each of the faculties and identify those where it is
substantially below their overall representation of 40%.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee does not accept such a technical reply to such an important fact pointed out by it. The fact of the matter
is that the representation of women in higher education in India is undoubtedly far below what it ought to have been. The
Committee emphasizes the urgent need for taking corrective measures in this regard.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
3.15.5  The representation of women in higher education, the Committee recommends, needs to be increased
proportionately particularly, when their performance as well as number at the senior secondary level has improved
greatly. Some kind of institutional mechanism for looking into this problem and coordinating various efforts made in this
regard at the national level needs to be put in place. It is high time that the curriculum is redesigned to remove all gender
biases as also to gender sensitize education personnel and administrator. A pro girl-child climate in the community needs
to be created for this.  Provision for enough scholarships, fee concession, hostels, staff quarters, provision for
transportation, etc. for women needs to be provided in the institutions of higher learning.
 
 
 
Action Taken
 
A Post-Graduate Scholarship scheme for Single Girl Child has been introduced with the objective of attracting talent for
pursuing post-graduate studies in basic subjects, which would be strengthened during the XIth Plan. To increase
enrolment of women in universities and colleges by providing a safe environment and to encourage mobility of women
studies to pursue higher studies in universities and colleges of their choice, the UGC has introduced a special scheme of
construction of hostels for women. The UGC also has several schemes oriented towards assisting women in higher
education institutions. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
All the schemes are either not comprehensive enough or they are not being implemented properly. The Committee
expresses its concern about the implementation of the Scholarship Scheme for Single Girl Child. The MHRD and the
UGC need to be more proactive in this regard. The Committee would also like to emphasize that there is a need for
creating awareness about such schemes so as to ensure their reach to the targeted beneficiaries. 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
 
Recommendations/observations
 
3.15.6  The Department appears to have no relevant and accurate statistics in respect of women’s participation in higher
education. Information given by the Department to the Committee was simply taken out of UGC Annual Report 2004-
05. The Committee expected the Department to provide every relevant data in respect of different components reflecting
exact status of women in higher education. So much so, the allocations and expenditure made for the women-specific
programmes, which form a part of gender-budgeting that every Department has to have, was conspicuous by absence in
the note supplied to the Committee. The Committee is at a loss to see as to how the Department was planning for the
expeditious development of women in higher education in the absence of relevant statistics/information.
 
Action Taken
 
The Gender Budgeting Cell is functional at present. In regard to the references to the UGC Annual Report, it may be
mentioned that collection of statistics is within the mandate of the UGC as it is the competent body directly in contact
with State and Central Universities, as higher educational institutions are not expected to report to the Government.
Therefore, the government has to depend on the UGC for authenticated information.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
As regards the allocations and expenditures made for women specific schemes/programmes, the Committee hopes that
the newly created Gender Budgeting Cell would project only those allocations and expenditures which were exclusively
for women.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
3.15.8  The UGC scheme for opening women study centres in the universities, the Committee found, could not pick up
and precious little appears to have been done in this regard. The Committee recommends that it must be ensured that all
the universities both Central as well as State, have these centres in one form or the other, by the end of Tenth Plan
period. For this, adequate funds need to be provided urgently.
 
Action Taken
 
The UGC set up Women’s studies Centre in 72 Universities and a total grant of Rs.779.80 lakhs has been released to the
Centres during 2004-2005. The UGC has already requested universities and colleges in X Plan to apply for women’s
study Centres. Enhanced Plan allocation of Rs.1269.80 crores has been made to UGC during 2006-07 as against
Rs.786.30 crores in 2005-06, from out of which the Commission can assist universities to set up Women Studies
Centres. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not at all happy with the scheme of Women Study Centres as it has never taken off properly. Of the
357 odd universities and equivalent institutions in the country, only 72 of them have Women Study Centres today. The
Committee is further informed that as many as 104 proposals were pending with the UGC and that these will be
considered only in the XIth Plan, as recommended by a Standing Committee of UGC constituted to review the Scheme.
The information provided to the Committee is sketchy and does not give a very clear picture of the recent developments
in the matter. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to submit a detailed note in this regard.
 
IV.       Relevance
 
Recommendations/observations
 
4.1      Education be it primary, Secondary or higher, if it is not contextual and relevant will not be able to meet the

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
challenges and demands of the time. It notes that in today’s world, thing in every walk of life are changing at a very
fast pace. It has, therefore, become a daunting task for education to keep pace with the challenges posed by the
contemporary socio-economic transformation. Higher education, in fact, faces this impact more than other levels.
Relevance of higher education, therefore, becomes of utmost significance for the development and survival of a
nation in the changes global/liberal context. In the Committee’s view, its relevance should be seen with reference to
marketability of the graduate and postgraduate students it produces; with reference to its reach to marginalized
sections; and its relevance for the socio-economic development of a society.
 
Action Taken
 
No comments are required.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not happy with the response of the Ministry; it should have responded to by making specific
comments on the issues raised in the recommendation. Such evasive replies need to be desisted.
 
4.3       Vocational Education
 
Recommendations/observations
 
4.3.1   The Committee notes that as envisaged in the National Policy on Education as also in the revised Plan of Action-
1992, the UGC implemented the recommendations made by the Core Committee on Vocationalisation (Career
Orientation) of Education.  This was to ensure that the students at the first degree level develop knowledge, skills and
attitudes for gainful employment with emphasis on self-employment. Since 1994-95, a large number of colleges and
universities, the Committee was informed, had been identified to provide assistance under the scheme on selective basis.
The Committee was informed that the UGC, in fact, had been receiving very good response from the
universities/colleges to start vocational courses in various subjects, but not all such requests from the
universities/colleges could be agreed to because of the inadequacy of funds. This, according to the Committee, indicates
that the students are accepting the concept of Vocationalisation of Education as it is job-oriented and a move towards
entrepreneurship. The Committee, therefore, recommends that inadequacy of funds should not act as an obstacle to
vocationalisation of education. It would, in fact, reduce the undesired pressure on universities and institutions of higher
learning. Adequate funds be allocated for this purpose.
 
Action Taken
 
Enhanced Plan allocation of Rs.1269.80 crores has been made to UGC during 2006-07 as against Rs.786.30 crores in
2005-06. The UGC is expected to strengthen its scheme of vocational education. During last Parliament Session in the
context of a Starred Question, Secretary had desired certain steps in this regard. If consequential instructions have gone
to UGC, they could be mentioned.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
It appears that the UGC does not have any effective and comprehensive scheme for promoting vocational education in a
big way. The Committee would appreciate if the Department takes up this issue with the UGC. The fund allocation for
this purpose is inadequate that needs to be considerably increased.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
4.3.2   The scheme of vocationalisation of education actually, stipulates a close coordination between the industries and
educational institutions. The institutions intending to avail of the scheme of Vocationalisation of Education and
applying to the UGC for financial assistance, are required to submit a letter of intent to UGC duly signed by the
industries that the students will have on-the-job training and other practical experiences in their industries and that they
will pick up some of the students after completion of particular vocational course. The Committee is of the opinion that

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
linking of education with industry is something very desirable today. The Committee believes that industry-institution
linkages be encouraged as this will take care of many problems simultaneously – promote relevance in the curriculum,
enhance the employability of students, provide training facilities and organization some resources. Such an interface
with industries, Committee believes, would encourage more and more students to opt for the vocational streams instead
of going for the general courses, which have not much demand in the job-market. In the process, industry will also get
suitable trained manpower relevant and dedicated to its needs. A body consisting of eminent persons from industry and
academia be formed to lay down necessary modalities for such a partnership as soon as possible.
 
Action taken
 
The recommendations have been noted. Under the UGC Career Oriented Programmes, Industrial collaboration and
linkage with the concerned Organizations and institutions as well as prospective employment agencies are provided for.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee believes that existing linkage between industry and academia leaves much to be desired. A close relation
between the two could play an effective role in enhancing the quality, relevance, etc. of higher education.
 
4.4.      Dual Degree
 
Recommendations/observations
 
The Committee was informed that the UGC had allowed the system of earning certificate/diploma in utility-oriented
programmes through parallel mode alongwith the regular degree. This is to provide an alternative to the students just in
case. The AICTE has also allowed the system of earning dual degrees simultaneously. The Committee welcomes this
and feels that the system of degree plus certificate/diploma in utility oriented programme appears to be quite germane to
the emerging scenario where demand for skilled manpower in different disciplines is increasing at the global level. The
Committee feels that our ultimate objective should be to ensure that students do not merely have to look for a job;
instead they are able to create jobs for themselves and many others. Need of the hour, according to the Committee, is to
develop in-house faculty and other facilities in the colleges for this purpose. This will make our colleges more vibrant
and attractive. This is an area, the Committee feels, where public-private partnership can play a creative role in
augmenting the activities of our colleges. The Committee at the same time expresses its apprehension about the
possibility of main degree neglected at the cost of utility-oriented one, as a result, a student may not be able to show his
best in either. This aspect needs to be taken care of by the UGC and AICTE.  We must also put a system of accreditation
for such courses.
 
Action taken
 
The recommendations have been conveyed to the UGC and the AICTE. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee has learnt that the UGC has constituted an Expert Committee to assess the impact of dual degree on the
main programme. It would like to be apprised of the latest in this regard.
 
The Committee would also like the Ministry to specifically respond to the recommendation of putting in place a system
of accreditation for dual courses. 
 
4.5       Promoting Research
 
Recommendations/observations
 
4.5.3    Lack of allocation from state kitty is also a reason for poor research activities in the universities. The Committee
observes that only a fraction of UGC fund is spent on research. This is one of the reasons that universities do not have

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
much of R&D efforts. Smaller outlays mean UGC assistance to only a handful of universities. Secondly, of the research
assistance that UGC extends, only a small fraction goes to specific projects; a sizable proportion thereof goes in the form
of individual fellowships. The Committee feels that it would be worthwhile if the bulk of research funds from the UGC
go to specific projects which have been found to be more fruitful and result-oriented the world over.
 
4.5.4    The Committee, therefore, proposes the following measures to help make research a mainstay of our higher
education. Governments, both Central and State and other funding agencies should provide organized support to research
activities for modernizing laboratories and removal of obsolescence in equipments on regular basis. A Research Council
in UGC needs to be set up; the UGC should launch a network for access to research material and data across the
universities.
 
Action taken (4.5.3 and 4.5.4)
 
Recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
 
Comments of the Committee (4.5.3 and 4.5.4)
 
Initially the MHRD did not give specific replies/comments the recommendations contained in paragraphs 4.5.3 and
4.5.4. On further questioning, the Committee was informed about some schemes run by UGC and also about the
constitution of a Task Force/Empowered Committee to promote scientific research in the country. The Committee only
hopes that efforts will be made to implement the recommendations at the earliest. 
 
5.         Quality and Excellence
 
Recommendations/observations
 
5.8       The Committee feels that there is a need for instilling a sense of accountability in teaching community. The
Committee found that the quality of many teachers, if not all, does not inspire confidence as scholars; or researchers or
as educationists. The Committee recommends to carry out some kind of performance-audit of the teachers and in this
process, the students’ participation must also be ensured. The Committee strongly feels that the conditions of service,
remuneration and career advancement of the teachers be linked with their overall performance.
 
Action taken
 
The observations of Hon’ble Committee have been noted.   
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee has been informed that the issue of student’s involvement in performance audit of teachers is a matter
which requires taking into account the response of the academic community before it could be considered for
implementation. It is further learnt that the MHRD is of the view that universities enjoy autonomy in academic matters
and hence suggestions of appraisal of performance of teachers should be left to the discretion of each university to adopt,
as it deems appropriate. The Committee also appreciates the importance of autonomy of the universities. It, however,
believes that no performance audit of the teachers would be complete without student’s participation. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates its recommendation in the matter.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
5.9       The Committee is of the opinion that examination reforms be carried out so that “learning by rote” is replaced by
“learning for joy”. The Committee strongly feels that semester system should be introduced instead of the one-time final
examination. The advantage of the semester system is that assessment of student performance becomes a continuous and
integral part of the teaching-learning process. Also, a mechanism for joint conferring of degree by the university as well
as colleges concerned will make colleges more responsible as their name will also appear on the degree.
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
Action taken
 
According to the UGC, a large number of institutions have been switching over to semester mode of examination vis-à-
vis the conventional mode of annual examination for assessment of student performance. Such a reformative measure
has been very useful for internal and continuous assessment.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is informed that a system of joint conferring of degrees as contained in para 5.9 is operational. A note
about this system may be furnished.
 
5.10     Assessment & Accreditation
 
Recommendations/observations
 
5.10.1  The National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) was established by the UGC in 1994 to assess the
quality and accredit universities and colleges depending upon certain specified parameters/indicators. The Committee
was however, informed that even after almost two decades, the process of assessment and accreditation has not had the
desired impact. Hardly 10 to 15% of the total higher & technical education institutions have gone through this process
mainly due to inadequate infrastructure and other weaknesses in the NAAC.
 
5.10.2  A major weakness in the existing institutional assessment, the Committee notes, is that while it assesses the
performance of the university or colleges as a whole; it does not do it Department-wise. What is known to the people is
the grades and stars, which signify only averages. Academic performance of a university, in fact, is mostly department-
specific. As a result, weaker ones are not exposed. Therefore, the idea of grouping them together for assessment, the
Committee feels, needs to be reconsidered. The Committee recommends that the NAAC should start accrediting
individual departments also of a university in addition to its overall grading, at the earliest.
 
5.10.3  The Committee was informed that accreditation being voluntary, many institutions that have secured
accreditation may not turn up for re-accreditation after five years and may still continue to use the grade obtained earlier.
Others do not turn up for accreditation at all. The Committee is aware that it would be difficult to enforce, if
accreditation is made mandatory. The Committee proposes, as incentive for this purpose, that the accreditation must be
linked with the grants or special assistance/recognition by the UGC and other bodies so that institutions turn up for
accreditation. In USA, the Committee learnt, federal grants are available only to the accredited institutions.
 
5.10.4  The Committee was informed that the process and procedure of assessment and accreditation by the NAAC takes
a long time. It, therefore, emphasizes the urgent needs to identify efficient ways and effective strategies for expediting
the assessment and accreditation by NAAC within a stipulated time frame.
 
5.10.5  The Committee learnt that parameters adopted by the NAAC for evaluating the quality, although useful, leave
some scope for subjectivity in this exercise. The Committee recommends that this aspect should be re-examined with a
view to making these parameters transparent and objective.
 
5.10.6  The Committee also underlines the greater need for evolving an internal self-regulatory quality assurance
mechanism by the accredited institutions for maintaining and upgrading their quality level. This mechanism may also
monitor both academic excellence as well as administrative efficiency of that institution. Periodic assessment of
accredited institution should also be carried out regularly by the NAAC.
 
5.10.7  The Committee, in view of the emerging scenario, is of the opinion that a Government agency like NAAC for
assessment of standards and accreditation of higher educational institutions may not have the desired
credibility/acceptability to our higher education institutions at the international level. In fact, the need for a third party
evaluation model with participation of all the stakeholders in higher education was underlined by some experts who
appeared before the Committee. The Committee also feels that the establishment of an independent accreditation agency
having regional offices in different areas of the country should also be considered. The industry should also have its

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
participation in such a machinery. It should be, more or less, on the lines of quality assurance bodies like ISO and other
rating agencies like CRISIL and ICRA.
 
Action taken (5.10.1 to 5.10.7)
 
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee are noted. There is an urgent need for giving a new orientation and
thrust to the functioning of NAAC so that it could meet the emerging challenges in the higher education system. Keeping
this in view, the Government had recently constituted a three-member Expert Committee to review the functioning of
NAAC. The said Committee has since submitted its report to the Ministry and some of the suggestions made by the said
Committee largely address the concern expressed by the Hon’ble Committee. In order to develop a credible, acceptable
and transparent accreditation process, the Experts have recommended identification of quality parameters and conversion
of scores obtained individually by the institution for each parameter, for computing overall grading of the institution, be
done with great care and clarity. The NAAC has attempted to modify the instrument of assessment with introduction of
key indicators. It has also modified the peer teams selection process which are now selected by computerized random
selection process from a panel approved by a Sub-Committee of the Executive Council of NAAC. Further, a series of
training programmes are also being organized by NAAC to minimize the scope for subjective peer judgment. The
NAAC has been advocating in-house mechanism called Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) to be established in all
accredited institutions and the same has been made mandatory requirement for the institutions opting for re-
accreditation. The report of the Expert Committee also envisages continuation of active post accreditation process to
maintain certain standards for the institutions. The recommendations of the Expert Committee are presently under
consideration of the Government. 
 
Comments of the Committee (5.10.1 to 5.10.7)
 
The Committee is informed that the MHRD had constituted an Expert Committee to review the functioning of the
National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC). The recommendations of the Committee have been accepted
and the UGC has been advised to initiate necessary follow-up action on the recommendations in a time bound manner.
The Committee would like to have a brief status note about these recommendations and the action taken by the UGC.
 
5.11
          National Board of Accreditation
 
Recommendations/observations
 
5.11.1  The accreditation of technical institution is done by the National Board of Accreditation (NBA) established by
AICTE. Although the procedure adopted by the NBA is comprehensive yet the accreditation is a time-taking process.
The Committee feels that this process needs to be streamlined and accelerated to complete the backlog which is building
up. The accreditation work needs to have a global interface which has become important in the emerging regime under
WTO.
 
5.11.2  In view of mushrooming of private professional institutions in different parts of the country having little regard
for the quality of teaching, infrastructure, etc., the Committee emphasizes that every institution must be required to have
its quality assessment done by the NBA within three years of their existence.
 
Action taken (5.11.1 and 5.11.2)
 
Noted for being conveyed to AICTE.
 
Comments of the Committee (5.11.1 and 5.11.2)
 
The Committee is happy to note that the NBA model is being revised. It hopes that the shortcomings of the previous
model will be taken care of in this new model. The Committee is, however, not aware as to whether the recommendation
of the Committee to make quality assessment mandatory for institutions within three years of their existence has been
considered in the revised NBA model. The Committee would like to have a specific reply in this regard.
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
6.         Governance and Management
 
Recommendations/observations
 
6.2       With major interventions by the State for universalisation of education, latest being the SSA and MDM, the
Committee feels, the secondary and then the higher secondary education is bound to face in the coming years
unprecedented pressure of numbers as well as quality. Besides, the emerging new regime under GATS has also posed
newer challenges before higher education. Such a situation calls for a modern system of management for the higher
education to enable India to compete and survive at the global level. The Committee feels that our universities and
institutions of higher learning should be prepared to respond to such demands and challenges, and this cannot be done
without making suitable changes in the system of governance and administrative structures of higher education in the
country.
 
Action taken
 
Observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not at all satisfied with the reply of the MHRD. It would like to know as to what specific steps are
being taken to meet the challenges before higher education today. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
changes made/being made in the system of governance and administrative structures of higher education in the country.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
6.3       The Committee notes that management in education though not unknown in India, works more or less, on old
structure and concepts. It is a matter of concern that most of our universities have become merely examination boards for
conducting examinations and conferring degrees, apart from the major work of granting affiliations. The Committee is
dismayed to note that research as well as pedagogical innovations seems to have taken a back seat in the universities.
The Committee is of the considered opinion that in such a scenario what is needed is the greater autonomy,
professionalism, transparency and accountability in the administration of higher education.
 
Action taken
 
The current policy of the government is to encourage autonomy of institutions of higher learning.  
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is of the considered opinion that encouraging autonomy of institutions of higher learning alone may not
suffice. The MHRD has to evolve a more relevant system based on modern management techniques whereby
professionalism, transparency and accountability in the administration of higher education could be ensured.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
6.11     The Committee takes note of the fact that there are a number of regulatory bodies like the UGC, ICAR, AICTE,
MCI, NCTE concerning various areas of higher education. These bodies fall under different Ministries/Departments. It
was argued before the Committee that the existence of various regulatory bodies not only makes the system complex, but
also gives it a fragmented character. The Committee therefore, recommends that some kind of coordinating mechanism
at the national level be put in place in the best interest of efficiency and effectiveness. A board of Higher education at
National level for the purpose as visualized by the NPE 1986, could not be set up so far, for the reasons not known to the
Committee. The Committee recommends that the Union Ministry of Human Resource Development initiate and
coordinate with other Ministries like Agriculture, Health, Law and Finance to create a National Apex body for
coordination among the various regulatory agencies.
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
Action taken
 
A proposal for setting up of a National Commission for Higher Education is under consideration of the Government
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is of the considered opinion that the setting up of the National Commission for Higher Education should
not be delayed any further. A brief status note on the progress made in this regard may be furnished to the Committee.
 
 
Recommendations/observations
 
6.12     Most of those who gave input to the Committee verbal or written mentioned about the cumbersome procedure
and large scale corruption prevailing in the regulatory bodies mentioned above. The Committee while appreciating the
work being done by these bodies, takes such allegations seriously. Besides, the procedure for granting necessary
clearances, etc. needs to be streamlined and made easier so that institutions/individuals do not feel deterred to approach
these bodies. In view of increasing private participation in technical, medical and management education, these bodies
need to be made more alert, transparent and pro-active in performing their mandate. Their regional offices need to be
increased and made more responsive and efficient. Cases of corruption, deliberate delay, etc. must be dealt with sternly
to establish credibility of these bodies.
 
Action taken
 
In order to further transparency, all the statutory body under the MHRD such as UGC, AICTE have been asked to start
on line system on the internet. The AICTE has switched over to a process of self declaration rather than prior inspection.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The reply to the recommendation is incomplete. The Committee subsequently was informed about certain other
measures including the RTI Act for imparting transparency in the functioning of these institutions. The Committee is,
however, of the considered opinion that the functioning of these institutions still leaves a lot to be desired.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
6.13     Besides, there is no systematic planning and objective statewide assessments of demands and needs for higher
education institutions and facilities. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that a state level mechanism-Higher
Education Council as is functioning in some States, be put in place for coordinated development of higher education in
all the States.
 
Action taken
 
At present only 4 states have established State Council of Higher Education and 3 states have established State Advisory
Boards. The state Governments have to take an active role in establishing the State Councils in every state.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee strongly feels that the MHRD has to play a more pro-active role in this regard. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry must come up with suitable mechanisms to encourage the states to set up Higher
Education Councils.
VII.      Funding
 
Recommendations/observations
 
7.4       The Committee was informed that the Central Government expenditure on higher education in real terms had, in

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
fact, declined because the increase in spending was, in fact, offset by increase in the prices and in the number of students
opting for higher education.   Secondly, the bulk of the central allocation went to the central universities and very little
was left for the State Universities which are virtually left to fend for themselves. Although the State governments
financial crunch is well-known constraint, they could not cut the budget for higher education mainly because their
contribution was mostly for non-plan expenditure including salary, allowances, etc. The Central Government allocation,
in other words, being mainly for plan purposes, any squeeze in it, therefore tells directly upon the development of the
higher educational institutions.
 
Action taken
 
In the budgetary allocation of 2006-07, separate provision have been earmarked for Central Universities and for all other
assistance by the UGC.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the MHRD. The Committee would like to have the specific comments
of the MHRD on the observations made by it.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
7.5       The Committee recalls that the Education Commission (1964-66) had strongly argued for devoting 6% of the
GDP to education which was reiterated by National Policy on Education, 1968 also.  The NCMP has also promised this
target.  However, the goal of allocating 6% of the GDP to education, in Committee’s view, has since remained merely an
ambition than a realized commitment.  While, only 4% of the GNP is currently being spent on education, 0.4% of GNP
is being spent on higher education.
 
Action taken
 
NIEPA had prepared a technical paper on the availability for the resources based on 6% of GDP as it was one of the
targets of NCMP. A Committee under the Chairmanship of Prof. Tapas Majumdar was constituted to quantify actual
allocation of public resources to Education during the first 4 years of Tenth Plan and to quantify total resources which
would become available for education during (2006-07) if public expenditure on education were equal to 6% of GDP.
The recommendations of the Committee were accepted by the Department and forwarded to Planning commission and
depending upon availability of resources, it would be implemented.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee has learnt that the Prof. Tapas Majumdar Committee findings suggest that for raising the public
expenditure on Education to the level of 6% of GDP, an additional average amount of Rs.1,27,000 crore per year over
and above the existing level of public expenditure, would be required during the XIth Plan assuming growth rate of 7%
per annum in GDP. The Committee would, however, like to know the feedback of the Planning Commission in this
regard.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
7.11     The need for the cost recovery in higher education to fight the fiscal crunch in system was emphasized before the
Committee. Cost-recovery, according to the Committee, would imply among others, a reduction in subsidies to higher
education.  This, the Committee feels, would shift the financial burden either to the beneficiaries (students) or to their
users (employers). Student loans, graduate tax, enhancing fees and education cess were some other suggestions made in
this regard.
 
Action taken
 
This Ministry is of the view that cost recovery cannot exceed certain threshold as highlighted by the CABE Committee

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
on “Financing of Higher and Technical Education”.  Particularly as it would directly affect access to higher education by
the weaker section.  In regard to student loan, the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) is concerned with the subject
of loan.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is fully aware of the recommendations of the CABE Committee on 'Financing of Higher Education and
Technical Education'. The Committee's intention is to emphasize the fact that mainly the States should provide adequate
funds for higher education. As regards the students loan, the MHRD should expeditiously take up the matter with the
M/o Finance.  
7.12     Student Fees
 
Recommendations/observations
 
7.12.1  The Tenth Five-Year Plan has emphasized the shift of resources from higher to primary education leaving
thereby lesser funds for the former.  Besides, due to increasing enrolment at upper primary and secondary levels, the
pressure on higher education is likely to increase manifold in coming years.  In such a situation, the Committee feels that
it was high time that the universities made greater efforts to supplement their resources by generating their own
resources, apart from what they may be getting from the UGC and the government. The industry-academia interface, the
Committee feels, can be valuable source of resource mobilization, relevant curricula, R&D, practical training including
employment of our graduates.
 
Action taken
 
There is at present no bar on institution of higher learning collaborating for R&D with other institutes and industries.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The intention of the Committee, while making this recommendation, was to highlight the fact that greater efforts need to
be made by the universities to supplement their resources through various means and industry-academia interface could
be one of these. The reply of the MHRD however does not even touch upon this aspect. The Committee would,
therefore, like to be apprised as to whether adequate efforts are being made by the universities in this regard and if it is
not, what role can the MHRD play in the matter.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
7.12.7  The Committee appreciates the contribution of unaided institutions in supplementing the efforts and resources of
the governments in providing higher education. While working out any formula for this purpose, their interest needs also
to be kept in mind for avoiding the risk of losing this option.
 
Action taken
 
Noted for being conveyed to the UGC.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Response received from the UGC in this regard may be furnished to the Committee.
 
7.13     Student Loan
 
Recommendations/observations
 
7.13.1  Student loan is envisaged by some as one of the means to mobilize resources for higher education. It is argued

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
that such a loan would enable those meritorious students whose parents are not in a position to afford higher education.
The Committee feels that one of the crucial aspects that is overlooked is that the student loan shifts the burden of higher
education from society to the beneficiary under this scheme, individual students have to repay the loan themselves. The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that the student loan programme may not be very popular as it is fraught with many
risks. There is a high possibility that student loans might act as disincentives for students from low-income families
willing to go for higher education. The Committee is particularly apprehensive of student loan for women, which may be
regarded as negative dowry in the Indian society.
 
Action taken
 
Noted for being conveyed to the Ministry of Finance(Banking Division) which deals with the subject of loan.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
7.13.2  The Committee notes that various Commercial Banks charge prohibitive rates of interest and demand collateral
guarantee, etc., which renders it highly unattractive proposition.  This scheme does not provide for any exemptions for
the weaker sections in terms of security, guarantee, repayment period, repayment as per earnings, waivers, etc.   Further,
the high administrative cost of the loan makes the scheme susceptible to failure.  The Committee recommends that the
Government must take necessary measures to study the financial viability of the programme to make it a success and a
convenient alternative to public finances.  
 
Action taken
 
Noted for being conveyed to the Ministry of Finance(Banking Division) which deals with student loan.
 
Comments of the Committee (7.13.1 and 7.13.2)
 
Response of the M/o Finance may be furnished to the Committee. The Committee has further been informed that the
MHRD has proposed for setting up a Higher Education Refinancing Corporation in the Draft Report for the XIth Plan. A
token amount of Rs.1 crore has also been allocated for this purpose in this year’s budget. The Committee, therefore,
hopes that the Ministry would take all the necessary steps to operationalize this Corporation at the earliest.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
7.13.3  The Committee also feels that a student loan can create two types of distortions.  First, only those courses, which
enjoy a premium market, will be preferred, both by loan providers and borrowers. The professional courses may get
priority at the expense of others, which are important from the point of social and national concerns but do not enjoy a
premium in the labour market.  Second, the educational credit market in India is not well developed.   It is recommended
that necessary correctives be initiated to take care of distortions and adverse implications of the student loan by
providing some kind of shield to the poor and meritorious students.  The Committee also recommends that setting up of
an Educational Development Bank of India as suggested from time to time for helping financially poor and needy
students should be considered urgently.
 
Action taken
 
Observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee finds the reply to be incomplete. The MHRD must give specific replies to the recommendations of the
Committee.
 
7.14     Graduate/Exit Tax
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
Recommendations/observations
 
7.14.1  Other measures suggested to the Committee to recover the cost of higher education were what may be called as
“graduate tax”, “exit tax”, “education cess”, etc.  Such taxes are already in vogue in some countries. Graduate tax is
levied on those who use the services of skilled and trained manpower. An employer is required to pay an annual tax to
the government for each graduate recruited by it.  The major drawback, the Committee feels, with this scheme is that it
might lead to substitution of university graduates by lower level educated manpower. Nevertheless, the Committee feels,
that taxing employers based on the type and number of manpower they use has a good rationale and should be
considered seriously for implementation.
 
Action taken
 
Noted for being conveyed to the UGC.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee would like to know the response of the UGC in the matter.
 
VIII     Private initiative in higher Education
 
Recommendations/observations
 
8.1       The Committee notes that private participation in higher education is not new in India. Colleges set up by public
spirited/philanthropic persons have been there for a long time. Most of these colleges, however, enjoyed large-scale
grants from the public exchequer. The public funding, the Committee notes, has its own constraints and the State
support alone will not be sufficient to meet the requirement in this area. In the long run, therefore, the involvement of
private initiatives becomes imperative to meet the challenging demands of expansion and diversification of higher
education in India. However, the Committee is at the same time fully aware of the adverse impact of privatization of
education; it might lead to profit orientation and commercialization of higher education. As has been seen in a few cases
recently, there is an attempt to full cost recovery or more from students. As a result, only those who are able to pay
exorbitant amount of fees are able to go, particularly for engineering, medical and management education and this is
certainly an unacceptable situation.
 
Action taken
 
No comments are required.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is disappointed to note that the MHRD did not find it necessary to comment on such an important aspect
concerning higher education. It desires a specific response from the MHRD in the matter. 
 
8.4       Private Universities
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.4.1    A large number of private universities were recently allowed to be set up by some of the States in India. These
universities with minimum infrastructure, no qualified faculty, etc. started functioning like 'education shops' opening
their off-campus centers in different parts of the country offering various courses. Most of these universities had no
campus of their own and functioned from a one-room tenement with quality being given a complete go-by. Thousands of
students took admission in various courses offered by these one-room-universities which were collecting hefty fees from
the unsuspecting student. Moreover, they did not have necessary clearances etc. from the statutory regulating bodies like
UGC, AICTE, MCI, DCI, etc.
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
Action taken
 
No comments are required.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee does not approve the way in which the Ministry has furnished the Action Taken Note on many
paragraphs wherein they have ignored the recommendations/observations of the Committee and simply commented that
“No comments are required”. The Committee has taken a strong exception to this and recommends that proper, precise
and pointed replies may be furnished to the Committee in future on all its recommendations/observations.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.4.3    The Committee is concerned over the fact that neither there is any regulatory mechanism in the States nor is there
any policy/legislation at Centre for regulation and control of private universities in India. As a result, it is very difficult
to ensure transparency and accountability in the working of private universities. Regulatory bodies like UGC, AICTE,
MCI, DCI, etc., have proved to be ineffective in this case. The Committee in the light of these developments is of the
considered opinion that there is urgent need for proper policy and mechanism to regulate aspects such as admission, fee
structure, quality control, teacher's qualification, physical infrastructure, etc. of the private universities. The regulatory
mechanism must see that higher education was not commercialized to the detriment of the students.
 
Action taken
 
The need for a Central Legislation to regulate the Private Universities was discussed in the Conference of State
Ministers’ of Higher & Technical Education held in Bangalore on 10
th – 11 th January, 2005.  There was no unanimity
among the State Ministers on this issue.  While some States were of the view that there was a need for a Central
legislation on Private Universities, many of them were of the view that a Central Law would be a curb on the powers of
the State Legislatures under Entry 32 of List II in the 7th Schedule of the Constitution.
 
        The UGC had notified the University Grants Commission (Establishment of and Maintenance of Standards in
Private Universities) Regulations, 2003 to control and regulate the functioning of Private Universities in the country. 
The regulation has been held valid by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, in the case of Prof. Yash Pal and another Vs. State of
Chattisgarh.  The Supreme Court’s directives in that case, have been followed up with all the States and the UTs
requesting them that the directives of the Supreme Court and the Regulations framed by the UGC be kept in mind by the
State, while setting up Private Universities.   The UGC has also been instructed to examine all the Acts enacted by the
State Legislatures so as to ensure their conformity with the guidelines of the Hon’ble Supreme Court and relevant UGC
Regulation.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee recommends that it must be ensured that the UGC regulations and the Supreme Court guidelines are
followed in letter and spirit by the private universities. The Committee would like to get a brief note on the status of
implementation of UGC regulations/Supreme Court’s directions regarding private universities. 
 
8.5       Unaided Professional Institutions
 
Recommendations/observations
 
8.5.2    The Committee notes that self-financing institutions were functioning under various authorities, State as well as
central as education is a Concurrent Subject. As a result, we have different syllabi, admission and examination systems
throughout the country. The existing system of diverse regulatory authorities, the Committee feels, is creating avoidable
problems in this regard. This situation gives rise to confusion among the students which undermines the delicate balance
between merit, affordability and equity in professional education. The Committee is of the view that this state of affairs
is mainly due to absence of a national policy in respect of the self-financing professional institutions. This calls for a

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
unified control and regulatory mechanism, having regard to our federal character, for looking after different aspects of
their functioning. The Committee, therefore, emphasizes the need for a transparent national framework for the regulation
& nurturing of such institutions. There is an urgent need for rationalizing the existing plethora of admission tests, which
are creating lot of problems for the students. The Admission to these institutions should be on merit in which total
transparency needs to be maintained. Besides, there is also an urgent need to provide a legal mechanism for
regulating/fixing fees and management and other quota with a view to removing any uncertainty in this regard.
 
Action taken
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted. The shortage of qualified teachers is owing to the
competing demands of the other sectors of the economy. The Central Government is constantly endeavoring to ensure
that talented young persons are attracted to the teaching profession. Several long term measure, including a review of the
remuneration packages are required to be considered. In the short term, the AICTE permits reappointment of teachers
upto the age of 70 years in order to meet the shortages in unaided institutions, subject to capacity of persons thus
appointed. The admission procedure as well as the fee structure in unaided educational  institutions are indeed cause for
alertness. The Constitutions (93
rd Amendment) Act, 2005 enables the Centre as well as State to make appropriate laws in
this regard in the interest of the weaker section. Several States have enacted laws for the purpose. A Central law is
pending finalization in this regard. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee expects the ministry to specifically respond to the recommendations of the Committee.
 
9.3       GATS and Higher Education
 
Recommendations/observations
 
9.3.4    The Committee is of the considered view that markets and globalization represent the key where opportunity and
danger exists and both are closely intertwined.   While the importance of competition and striving to do better are the
pluses, motivation of            profit only is the minus.  The Committee feels that the country should brace itself up to take
the maximum advantage of the opportunities opening with the globalization of     education services. The Government is
advised to adopt an aggressive and pro-active, rather than defensive approach on both import as well as export fronts to
take the benefit    under GATS and concomitant process of liberalization of higher education to other     countries is very
low as compared to its import. Our students are queuing up to go for higher studies to countries like US, UK Canada and
Australia in large numbers. In US, they form the largest group.
 
Action taken
 
Nil
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The MHRD initially did not respond to this important recommendation of the Committee. However, it subsequently
informed about certain measures being taken to promote Indian Education abroad particularly in the Middle East, South-
East Asian countries and Africa. The Committee would like to emphasize that the MHRD needs to be more pro-active so
as to make our presence felt in the international education arena by attracting more and more students from abroad.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
9.3.5    The Committee notes that the Government has constituted a Committee for Promotion of Indian Education
Abroad (COPIE) with the twin objectives of promoting Indian education abroad and regulating operations of foreign
educational institutions in India. The Committee desires that the COPIE takes steps to safeguard and larger national
interest and the interest of the student community in particular.
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
Action taken
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee would like to know about the specific steps taken by the Committee for Promotion of Indian Education
Abroad (COPIE) in the matter.
 
X.        Foreign Universities
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
10.3     The Committee is perturbed to note that there is still no authentic database on operation of foreign educational
institutions in the country, which is a grim reminder of our concern for higher education and our preparedness towards
maximizing the fruits of liberalization in education sector.
 
Action taken
 
A database will be created after finalisation/enactment of the proposed bill.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee does not agree with the clubbing of the finalisation of the legislation on foreign educational institutions
and the creation of a database of such institutions. It has to be done at the earliest independently.   
 
Recommendations/observations
 
10.7     The Committee is also of the opinion that permission to foreign university/institution to operate in the country
should be granted with caution as there is every possibility that even a good foreign university/institution can adopt
double standards in quality so much as that the learning that they provide at their home countries is of high standard
while the distance learning in developing countries by them is sub-standard. The Committee recommends the
establishment of a body that oversees all the activities of a foreign university/institution and allows only the bona fides to
take a plunge in the Indian market having all sensitivities to the moorings and culture of the country.
 
Action taken
 
The suggestions of the Committee have already been taken care of in the proposed legislation pending finalisation.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee strongly feels that the issue of allowing foreign educational institutions in India needs to be decided after
wider consultations as it involves the social and economic concerns and the need for protecting the interest of the weaker
sections of the society.
 
XII.     State Universities
 
Recommendations/observations
 
12.1     The Committee during its visits to some of the State universities found that these were facing serious financial
crunch mainly due to inadequate allocation by their respective State governments. The Committee notes that for every
Rs.100-Rs.70 goes to salaries & superannuation payments; of the remaining Rs.30; Rs.15 goes into pre-emptive claims
like rent, taxes, electricity bills, examination expenses and so on. Thus, precious little is left for maintenance, let alone
development. As a result, libraries & laboratories languish and quality of education is severely affected. This grim

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
scenario is further aggravated with the UGC ceiling of Plan expenditure to mere 3% of the total allocation.   The
Committee feels that this ceiling on Plan expenditure is really unrealistic and it desires that the UGC should increase this
ceiling so that development of infrastructure in the universities could be taken up with a view to improving the quality of
our institutions of higher learning. The Committee also notes that for corpus creation, the universities are offered to raise
one crore to get an additional grant of the same amount from the UGC with the condition to use the interest on that
corpus fund for developmental activities.  With ever increasing decline in the interest rate, this fund also is shrinking day
by day.
 
Action taken
 
The UGC provides only development (Plan) assistance to the state universities to improve the infrastructure and basic
facilities in the universities and to develop excellence in certain identified areas. From the year 2006-07, separate
allocations have been made to UGC for disbursement to State Universities and some other centers.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply to this recommendation. The MHRD has not responded to the specific
suggestion of the Committee to increase the ceiling on the plan expenditure. The reply also has nothing on the issue of
decreasing interest on the corpus funds and its effect on development activities. The Committee would like to have
specific replies in the matter.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
12.3     The Committee expresses its concern about large number of vacancies at different levels in teaching community.
Presently, there is a serious shortage of faculty at the current level of demands. The Committee finds that most of the
State universities and colleges are ill equipped lacking required infrastructure and trained teachers. The Committee views
with serious concern the status of vacant teaching posts. As per the information available with the Committee, in the 16
Central universities, there are 1988 vacancies as on 31.03.2005,with the Banaras Hindu University and Delhi University
having as many as 687 and 396 vacancies respectively. Situation is also far from satisfactory in JNU, Visva Bharati and
Mizoram University. The Committee observes that out of total vacant 1988 posts, 1056 posts belong to Lecturer
category. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for such a large number of posts of Lecturer lying vacant which
is the entry point to a university.  The Committee apprehends that situation may be worse in State universities.   The
Committee is of the view that drastic steps need to be taken so that students are not deprived of proper guidance.
 
Action taken
 
The Government is concerned about the problem of the absence of regular teachers in the universities and colleges in the
state sector. The Ministry of Human Resource Development has taken many steps in order to fill up backlog vacancies
both in general and in reserved categories.
 
(I) A special Recruitment Drive to fill up backlog vacancies reserved for SCs and STs in autonomous
organizations/Public Sector Undertakings under the jurisdiction of various Ministries/Departments had been launched by
the Department of Personnel & Training (DOP&T) in January 2005. Accordingly all the autonomous bodies under the
administrative control of this Bureau were requested to fill up the reserved vacancies and furnish the action taken report.
Being one of item in NCMP, it was emphasized to adhere to the time frame prescribed for the drive and the status report.
The Ministry has since issued directions to UGC in December 2005 to ensure effective implementation of the reservation
policy. On 18
th April 2006, a letter has been issued to the Chief Secretaries of all the States and Union Territories by the
Education Secretary to fill up the vacant posts on expeditious manner.
 
            On perusal of the information received from these autonomous bodies, it was observed that the policy of
reservation is not being implemented in the matter of recruitment to both direct and promotion posts as per laid down
policy. The Registrar of all the Central Universities has been informed vide this Ministry’s letter No.F.4-124/2004.U-5
dated 23
rd May 2006 that UGC may not release the financial assistance under the Plan funds for the second quarter
without obtaining a certificate that all the vacancies in respect of posts under direct recruitment/promotion by way of

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
backlog vacancies reserved for SCs/STs have been duly advertised and filled.
 
(II) The Ministry of Human Resource Development had appointed a Comiittee under the Chairmanship of Prof.
Bhalchandra Mungekar to review the National Eligibility Test (NET). The Committee has given its interim report and
recommended as under:-
 
(i) So far the post-graduate level teaching is concerned, the candidates having Ph.D. degree should be exempted from
acquiring NET qualifications for being considered for the post of Lecturers.
 
(ii)As regards the undergraduate level teaching, the candidates having M.Phil or Ph.D degree should be exempted from
acquiring NET qualifications for being considered for the post of lecturers.
 
The Commission approved the recommendations, in principle, and authorised the Chairman, UGC, to finalize
further details in the matter on receipt of communication from the Ministry of HRD. The MHRD has informed that the
UGC is empowered to make/amend the regulations under Clause (c) & (d) of Sub-Section (1) of Section 26 of the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956. Therefore, the UGC has been authorized to amend UGC (Regulations on
Minimum Qualification for Appointment and Career Advancement of Lecturers, Readers and Professors in the
Universities and Colleges), 2000 and in turn UGC has since notified on 14.6.2006.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee had expressed its serious concern on the status of vacant teaching posts in both Central and State
universities. The latest data about Central universities made available to the Committee confirms its apprehension about
the position worsening further. The Committee has been informed that out of 9192 sanctioned posts in the 18 Central
universities, the number of posts filled is 6795, having 2397 (26%) posts lying vacant as on 31.12.2006. University-wise
break-up of sanctioned and vacant posts reveals a very discouraging scenario. The Committee notes that various steps
taken by the Government have not proved to be very effective. The Committee has been given to understand that a
special recruitment drive for filling up backlog vacancies reserved for SC/ST in Central universities has been undertaken
followed by reminders to all concerned.
 
The Committee views with great concern the assessment made by the Department that due to resource constraint and ban
on recruitment, recruitment is simply not taking place in State universities. The Committee feels that enhancement of
retirement age, anticipated increase in the pay scales (VIth Pay Commission) can only be considered stop-gap measures.
Focus should be to make the teaching profession attractive for the talented youth. The Committee would accordingly
once again emphasize that the problem of decreasing faculty in both Central and State universities should be tackled on a
priority basis.
 
XIII.    Fake Universities/Institutions
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
13.1     As per the information available with the Committee, there are 21 fake universities/institutions located in
different parts of the country, UP having the highest number of such universities (8), closely followed by Delhi (7). The
Committee takes a serious view that these fake universities continue to operate with impunity cheating the innocent
students.  Government seems to be totally helpless. Section 22 of the UGC Act, 1956 provides that the right to
conferring/granting degrees can be exercised only by a university established or incorporated by a or under a Central
Act, Provincial Act or a State Actor an institution specially empowered by an Act of Parliament to confer or grant
degrees.  Section 23 further provides that word ‘university’ can be associated only with those bodies covered under
Section 22. The Committee notes that as per Section 24, a penalty of Rs.1000/- is liable to be imposed in case of
violation of these provisions. This mild penalty has failed to make any impact for obvious reasons. The Committee has
been given to understand that State Governments are being regularly requested by UGC to institute criminal proceedings
against fake institutions. Even UGC has also decided to take action. The Committee would, however, like to point out
that criminal proceedings will not make any difference in the status of such institutions due to the continuation of very
mild penalty provisions.

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
 
13.2     The Committee understands that pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee on Petitions (Lok Sabha), a
Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha in December, 1991 providing for imprisonment upto six months and a fine of not
less than Rs.1 lakh which may extend to Rs.10 lakhs. This Bill was subsequently withdrawn on 1 st June, 1995.
Thereafter, no further project seems to have been made on such a vital issues.  The Committee would like to emphasize
that urgent steps need to be taken for bringing a legislation providing for more stringent penalties for running fake
universities.
 
 
Action taken (13.1 and 13.2)
 
The legislative provisions as they exist on-date are not adequate to check fake Universities functioning in contravention
of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956. The UGC has also approached the concerned State Governments to
prosecute the offenders and to take appropriate punitive action under the India Penal Code. The UGC has been advised
to give wide publicity using all available and effective media to bring out the facts about such institutions to the notice of
public and the student community, including the UGC’s website, cautioning aspiring students against seeking admission
in, or dealing with, such fake institutions. In addition, the Government is contemplating a comprehensive review of the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956 including the existing provision for action against those indulging in fake
educational activities.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee has been reiterating for the last so many years the need for taking urgent steps for bringing a legislation
providing for more stringent penalties for running fake universities. The Committee is, however, constrained to observe
that this problem would perhaps continue to persist, simply because the exercise of comprehensive review of the UGC
Act, 1956 is still being contemplated by the Government. The Committee would once again impress upon the
Department not to further delay this crucial issue.
 
XIV.    Role of the UGC
 
Recommendations/observations
 
14.4     The Committee was informed that the UGC did not have the power to derecognize degrees awarded by any
university. Absence of such power has made it difficult for the UGC to ensure compliance with its priorities and
directives. The Committees however, is of the opinion that the so-called fitness to function norms for the universities be
defined more precisely as this will take care of the unworthy universities even without taking on the power of
derecognizing a degree.
 
Action taken
 
Noted for being conveyed to UGC.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Response of the UGC in the matter may be supplied to the Committee.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
14.7     The Committee recommends a national level body of higher education be established to advise the government
on policy matters, coordinate the activities of the various professional bodies, encourage interface among different areas,
allocate resources in terms of national needs and manpower planning, and establish and manage common infrastructure
and institutions and primacy of professional opinion over other considerations be ensured.
 
Action taken

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
 
A proposal to set up a National Commission on Higher Education is under consideration.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is happy to note that a proposal to set up the National Commission on Higher Education is under
consideration of the Government. The Committee would like to be apprised of the latest status of this proposal.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
14.9     The Committee desired that prescription of minimum standards of fitness for admission to universities or to
technical and professional institutions as well as direct inspection of colleges and other institutions in order to maintain
standards be undertaken by the UGC.  The Committee is of the view that the UGC should put in place a better system of
monitoring and take decisions on the basis of feedback obtained from it.  Throughout its existence, UGC has not even
once insisted that State Government must prepare a Plan of Action in respect of both universities and colleges. The UGC
can ask the State Governments to send it a plan of development for higher education every year.  Therefore, a meeting
can be fixed at the UGC Headquarters. The Committee feels that the UGC’s interaction with States should be more
frequent so that there is no space of doubts in anyone’s mind about the other’s intention. It is suggested that State
Councils of Higher Education be established for the purpose of interaction with the UGC.
 
Action taken
 
Noted for being conveyed to UGC.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The response of UGC as well as the action taken on this vital recommendation may be furnished to the Committee.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
14.11     A suggestion was made to the Committee that the UGC should concentrate only on post-graduate education
leaving under graduate education out of its purview with a view to lessening the responsibility of the UGC of disbursing
small amounts all over the country. Instead it should fund only the autonomous colleges and post-graduate institutions
and in return demand for quality and accountability in a better manner.
 
Action taken
 
Noted for being conveyed to UGC.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the response from UGC in the matter.
 
Recommendations/observations
 
14.12   The Committee is of the opinion that the existing structure and functioning of the UGC need a re-look as the
education scenario has changed drastically. The Committee emphasizes the need for revisiting the UGC Act and
amending it suitably. The Committee notes that in 1998, a Committee was appointed by the Ministry of HRD to examine
amendments to the UGC Act. Report of the Committee was submitted to the Ministry of HRD but Amendment Bill is
yet to be brought before Parliament. Even the Committee on Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions, recently
constituted by the Central Advisory Board of Education (CABE), has also desired for setting up a task force to re-
examine the existing UGC Act to provide for incorporation of new provisions to suit emerging concerns and realities of
higher education and to make the UGC Act a more significant body. The Committee’s attention was also drawn towards
the need for relaxing the requirement of NET qualification for a person to be appointed as a Lecturer in a

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
university/college because this sometimes prohibited the qualified and outstanding persons from being inducted in the
teaching community, if they have not cleared the NET. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this issue needs to
be considered by the Department and the UGC in a positive spirit.
 
Action taken
 
It has been considered desirable to withdraw the University Grants Commission (Amendment) Bill, 1995, which is
pending in Rajya Sabha. The required amendments will be considered in totality to cover the various aspects of higher
education.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that the much delayed UGC (Amendment) Bill, 1995 is now being
withdrawn from the House. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the MHRD to come up with a revised
Amendment Bill at the earliest. The MHRD must also ensure that this bill does not meet the same fate as the earlier one.
 
XV.      Conclusion
 
Recommendations/observations
 
15.1     In view of the new situations and the resulting challenges before higher education in the emerging scenario, the
need for preparing ourselves to face them successfully brooks no delay. India will have to take various measures, legal,
institutional, financial and others well in time so that we are not left behind in this fast changing world. For this, there is
an urgent need for reform and revitalization of education sector to make it relevant and suitable to the emerging socio-
economic and other realities. The National Policy on Education that was formulated nearly two decades ago even before
the process of liberalization had begun, the Committee feels, needs to be revisited with a view to making it more
forward-looking and vibrant. The new concerns also will have to be included in it. Besides, the existing legal framework
in the higher education sector particularly, the UGC Act and the Acts of various State Universities also need to be make
more relevant and effective in the present context.
 
Action taken
 
The Department continued the practice of widest possible consultation in the process of   policy formation in the Higher
Education Sector. The revival of the Central Advisory Board of Education (CABE) is one such step. UGC has since
notified releasing the requirement of NET qualification on 14.6.2006.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee expects the MHRD to give a comprehensive reply in this regard. The Committee would also like to have
a specific reply to its recommendation to review the National Policy on Education.
 
CHAPTER – IV
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
 
Nil
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION AT A GLANCE
2.
                  Higher Education Today : Important issues
Comments of the Committee
The Committee strongly feels that the Department failed to follow the spirit of the recommendation and has
given a superficial reply. The problem of low access which is supposedly sought to be tackled through the Constitution

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
(93rd Amendment) Act, 2005 has been stayed due to the court's intervention. As regards quality and relevance, the
Committee was aware of these schemes while emphasizing quality and relevance. As these schemes existed earlier also
and the fact that the schemes have not delivered the required goods, the Committee's intention was that the Department
came up with some noticeable and relevant schemes to bring about the change in a big way. 
                                                      (Para 2.2)
 
Comments of the Committee
The reply of the Department is not relevant and fails to attend to the specific queries raised by the Committee in its
recommendation. The Committee is aware that a number of career-oriented courses are being offered by the universities
and colleges. What is, however, disturbing is that no survey has ever been conducted to assess their viability or the
absorption of the students undergoing these courses in industry or in other employments. In the absence of any such
surveys, it may not be long before these courses lost their relevance and became obsolete. Committee’s apprehension is
based on the data about various career-oriented programmes offered by universities/colleges under Arts/Social Sciences,
Commerce and Science offered during 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07. The Committee has observed variation,
both upward and downward, not only in the number of courses but also in the trend of either new subjects being
introduced or some subjects being withdrawn during this period. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
assessments of the courses may be carried out at regular intervals to ensure that they retain their relevance and meaning
in the context of the global developments.                                                                                                                       
       (Para 2.3)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee would like to know the specific proposals and strategies that have been included in the XIth Plan.        
                                                               (Para 2.4)
 
III.
               ACCESS AND EQUITY
Comments of the Committee
The Committee fails to understand the contention that the 93 rd Amendment alone could address the concerns of
equity and access to higher education. While this recommendation aimed at extending access to higher education to
some sections of the society, the Committee’s emphasis was for increasing access to all the sections of the society
including the weaker ones. The Committee would, therefore, like to have further comments of the Ministry on this
aspect.                       (Paras 3.3 & 3.4)
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee has subsequently learnt that this ratio has been proposed at 15 per cent during the XIth Plan. It,
however, still feels that the target of 15 per cent is less and it should at least be made 20 per cent.
                                                (Para 3.6)
 
3.9
              Regional Disparity
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that the MHRD has not given satisfactory reply to this recommendation. The Ministry has
subsequently informed the Committee about several strategic interventions that have been proposed in the XIth Plan.
The Committee would like to know about the interventions that have finally been included in the XIth Plan. The
Committee also observes that 12 large States not having adequate technical institutions have been approached for taking
corrective steps. Response from these States is awaited. The Committee is of the view that such an initiative followed by
persuasive approach is bound to bear fruit. The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard.                       (Paras
3.9.1. to 3.9.3)
 
3.14
          SCs/STs in Higher Education
Comments of the Committee
The reply of the MHRD is not upto the mark. The Committee feels that the existing UGC schemes are meant
only for those who have reached the higher education level. There appears to be no serious effort being made for
bringing more and more students from these categories to the universities. The Committee would, therefore, like to have
a more specific reply in this regard. The Committee is also of the view that there is a need for giving wide publicity to

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
the existing schemes for under-privileged students so that maximum benefit reaches the targeted class. There has to be
maintained a coordinated link between the schools and nearby universities/colleges. It is for the ministry/UGC to play
the role of guiding force in such matters. The Committee would also like to point out that the time has come to both
review the existing schemes for under-privileged students and devise new schemes for them.         (Para 3.10.1)
 
3.15
          Convergence of Conventional and Distance Mode
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is informed that the EDUSAT capacity is not being utilized to the optimum level and many
educational institutions are not taking advantage of the technology. This needs to be looked into and the MHRD has to
devise adequate strategies and create  facilities, technical or otherwise, to enable educational institutions to take
advantage of the facility.                                             (Para 3.11.1)
3.16
          System of affiliation
 
Comments of the Committee
 
This scheme sounds to be very good. The Committee would, however, like this scheme to be applied with greater
caution. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that there should be cap on the number of colleges that can be
affiliated to a university.                                                                                  (Para 3.12.1)
 
3.17
          Open Universities
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The response to this recommendation which clearly talked about closer relationship, regular interaction and strong
networking between State Open Universities and IGNOU, the Committee notes has not been proper and adequate. The
MHRD is required to submit complete replies to the ideas mentioned by the Committee.  (Para 3.13.1)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Student Support Services, as they exist in IGNOU, have not proved to be effective enough to take care of the
concerns of the students raised by the Committee in its recommendation. The Committee reiterates its demand to
strengthen the grievance redressal machinery in IGNOU as well as in other Open Universities.   (Para 3.13.6)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee would like to have the feedback about the actions taken by the Distance Education Council and IGNOU
in this regard.                    (Para 3.13.7)
 
3.18
          Distance Education Council
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is happy to note that the Government is considering a proposal for establishing statutory Distance
Education Council by an Act of Parliament. The Committee feels that this is a decision long overdue and should be
expedited for more effective maintenance of standards as well as coordination in higher education through the distance
mode.                                                                    (Paras 3.14.1 & 3.14.2)
 
3.16     Women & Higher Education
 
Comments of the Committee
 
It is surprising to note that even after several decades of our Independence, neither the MHRD nor the UGC appear

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
to have any comprehensive and integrated programme for encouraging more and more women to take to higher
education as also for supporting them once they have reached the higher education stage. The Committee, therefore,
emphasizes the need for having such a programme in place urgently. On a specific query, the Committee has been
informed that strategies proposed to be pursued under the XIth Plan will be dependent on availability of resources. The
Committee strongly feels that fund constraint should not come in the way of enhancing access to higher education for
women.      (Paras 3.15.1 and 3.15.2)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee does not accept such a technical reply to such an important fact pointed out by it. The fact of the
matter is that the representation of women in higher education in India is undoubtedly far below what it ought to have
been. The Committee emphasizes the urgent need for taking corrective measures in this regard.
                                                                                                            (Para 3.15.3)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
All the schemes are either not comprehensive enough or they are not being implemented properly. The Committee
expresses its concern about the implementation of the Scholarship Scheme for Single Girl Child. The MHRD and the
UGC need to be more proactive in this regard. The Committee would also like to emphasize that there is a need for
creating awareness about such schemes so as to ensure their reach to the targeted beneficiaries.                                       
  (Para 3.15.5)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
As regards the allocations and expenditures made for women specific schemes/programmes, the Committee
hopes that the newly created Gender Budgeting Cell would project only those allocations and expenditures which were
exclusively for women.                                                                                     (Para 3.15.6)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not at all happy with the scheme of Women Study Centres as it has never taken off properly. Of the
357 odd universities and equivalent institutions in the country, only 72 of them have Women Study Centres today. The
Committee is further informed that as many as 104 proposals were pending with the UGC and that these will be
considered only in the XIth Plan, as recommended by a Standing Committee of UGC constituted to review the Scheme.
The information provided to the Committee is sketchy and does not give a very clear picture of the recent developments
in the matter. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to submit a detailed note in this
regard.                                               (Para 3.15.8)
 
IV.
              Relevance
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not happy with the response of the Ministry; it should have responded to by making specific
comments on the issues raised in the recommendation. Such evasive replies need to be desisted.                           (Para
4.1)
 
4.3
              Vocational Education
 
Comments of the Committee
 
It appears that the UGC does not have any effective and comprehensive scheme for promoting vocational education in a
big way. The Committee would appreciate if the Department takes up this issue with the UGC. The fund allocation for
this purpose is inadequate that needs to be considerably increased.   (Para 4.3.1)
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee believes that existing linkage between industry and academia leaves much to be desired. A close
relation between the two could play an effective role in enhancing the quality, relevance, etc. of higher education.           
  (Para 4.3.2)
 
4.4.
            Dual Degree
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee has learnt that the UGC has constituted an Expert Committee to assess the impact of dual degree on the
main programme. It would like to be apprised of the latest in this regard.
The Committee would also like the Ministry to specifically respond to the recommendation of putting in place a system
of accreditation for dual courses.                                                                                                                              (Para
4.4.1) 
4.5
              Promoting Research
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Initially the MHRD did not give specific replies/comments the recommendations contained in paragraphs 4.5.3 and
4.5.4. On further questioning, the Committee was informed about some schemes run by UGC and also about the
constitution of a Task Force/Empowered Committee to promote scientific research in the country. The Committee only
hopes that efforts will be made to implement the recommendations at the earliest.                                                (Para
4.5.3 and 4.5.4)
 
5.
                  Quality and Excellence
Comments of the Committee
The Committee has been informed that the issue of student’s involvement in performance audit of teachers is a
matter which requires taking into account the response of the academic community before it could be considered for
implementation. It is further learnt that the MHRD is of the view that universities enjoy autonomy in academic matters
and hence suggestions of appraisal of performance of teachers should be left to the discretion of each university to adopt,
as it deems appropriate. The Committee also appreciates the importance of autonomy of the universities. It, however,
believes that no performance audit of the teachers would be complete without student’s participation. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates its recommendation in the matter.                                 (Para 5.8)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is informed that a system of joint conferring of degrees as contained in para 5.9 is operational. A
note about this system may be furnished.       
                                                                                                               (Para 5.9)
 
5.10
          Assessment & Accreditation
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is informed that the MHRD had constituted an Expert Committee to review the functioning of
the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC). The recommendations of the Committee have been
accepted and the UGC has been advised to initiate necessary follow-up action on the recommendations in a time bound
manner. The Committee would like to have a brief status note about these recommendations and the action taken by the
UGC.        
                                                                                                         (Paras 5.10.1 to 5.10.7)
5.12
          National Board of Accreditation
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is happy to note that the NBA model is being revised. It hopes that the shortcomings of the

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
previous model will be taken care of in this new model. The Committee is, however, not aware as to whether the
recommendation of the Committee to make quality assessment mandatory for institutions within three years of their
existence has been considered in the revised NBA model. The Committee would like to have a specific reply in this
regard.  (Paras 5.11.1 & 5.11.2)
 
6.
                  Governance and Management
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not at all satisfied with the reply of the MHRD. It would like to know as to what specific steps
are being taken to meet the challenges before higher education today. The Committee would also like to be apprised of
the changes made/being made in the system of governance and administrative structures of higher education in the
country.                                              (Para 6.2)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is of the considered opinion that encouraging autonomy of institutions of higher learning alone
may not suffice. The MHRD has to evolve a more relevant system based on modern management techniques whereby
professionalism, transparency and accountability in the administration of higher education could be ensured.        
       (Para 6.3)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is of the considered opinion that the setting up of the National Commission for Higher Education
should not be delayed any further. A brief status note on the progress made in this regard may be furnished to the
Committee.                                                                                                                  (Para 6.11)
Comments of the Committee
 
The reply to the recommendation is incomplete. The Committee subsequently was informed about certain other
measures including the RTI Act for imparting transparency in the functioning of these institutions. The Committee is,
however, of the considered opinion that the functioning of these institutions still leaves a lot to be desired.       (Para
6.12)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee strongly feels that the MHRD has to play a more pro-active role in this regard. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry must come up with suitable mechanisms to encourage the states to set up Higher
Education Councils.                                                                                                              (Para 6.13)
VII.
            Funding
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the MHRD. The Committee would like to have the specific
comments of the MHRD on the observations made by it.
                                                                                                                    (Para 7.4)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee has learnt that the Prof. Tapas Majumdar Committee findings suggest that for raising the public
expenditure on Education to the level of 6% of GDP, an additional average amount of Rs.1,27,000 crore per year over
and above the existing level of public expenditure, would be required during the XIth Plan assuming growth rate of 7%
per annum in GDP. The Committee would, however, like to know the feedback of the Planning Commission in this
regard.                                                                                                                               (Para 7.5)
Comments of the Committee

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
 
The Committee is fully aware of the recommendations of the CABE Committee on 'Financing of Higher
Education and Technical Education'. The Committee's intention is to emphasize the fact that mainly the States should
provide adequate funds for higher education. As regards the students loan, the MHRD should expeditiously take up the
matter with the M/o Finance.                              (Para 7.11)
7.12     Student Fees
 
 Comments of the Committee
 
The intention of the Committee, while making this recommendation, was to highlight the fact that greater efforts
need to be made by the universities to supplement their resources through various means and industry-academia interface
could be one of these. The reply of the MHRD however does not even touch upon this aspect. The Committee would,
therefore, like to be apprised as to whether adequate efforts are being made by the universities in this regard and if it is
not, what role can the MHRD play in the matter.                                              (Para 7.12.1)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Response received from the UGC in this regard may be furnished to the Committee.      (Para 7.12.7)
 
7.13
          Student Loan
Comments of the Committee
Response of the M/o Finance may be furnished to the Committee. The Committee has further been informed that
the MHRD has proposed for setting up a Higher Education Refinancing Corporation in the Draft Report for the XIth
Plan. A token amount of Rs.1 crore has also been allocated for this purpose in this year’s budget. The Committee,
therefore, hopes that the Ministry would take all the necessary steps to operationalize this Corporation at the earliest.
                                                                                                                                     (Para 7.13.1 and 7.13.2)
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee finds the reply to be incomplete. The MHRD must give specific replies to the recommendations of the
Committee.                          (Para 7.13.3)
 
7.14
          Graduate/Exit Tax
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee would like to know the response of the UGC in the matter.                                                                    
                                                                        (Para 7.14.1)
 
VIII      Private initiative in higher Education
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is disappointed to note that the MHRD did not find it necessary to comment on such an important aspect
concerning higher education. It desires a specific response from the MHRD in the matter.                            (Para 8.1)
 
8.4
              Private Universities
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee does not approve the way in which the Ministry has furnished the Action Taken Note on many
paragraphs wherein they have ignored the recommendations/observations of the Committee and simply commented that
“No comments are required”. The Committee has taken a strong exception to this and recommends that proper, precise
and pointed replies may be furnished to the Committee in future on all its recommendations/observations.                 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
    (Para 8.4.1)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee recommends that it must be ensured that the UGC regulations and the Supreme Court guidelines
are followed in letter and spirit by the private universities. The Committee would like to get a brief note on the status of
implementation of UGC regulations/Supreme Court’s directions regarding private universities.                                       
                                                    (Para 8.4.3)
 
8.5
              Unaided Professional Institutions
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee expects the ministry to specifically respond to the recommendations of the Committee.                         
                           (Para 8.5.2)
 
9.3       GATS and Higher Education
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The MHRD initially did not respond to this important recommendation of the Committee. However, it subsequently
informed about certain measures being taken to promote Indian Education abroad particularly in the Middle East, South-
East Asian countries and Africa. The Committee would like to emphasize that the MHRD needs to be more pro-active
so as to make our presence felt in the international education arena by attracting more and more students from abroad.
  (Para 9.3.4)
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee would like to know about the specific steps taken by the Committee for Promotion of Indian
Education Abroad (COPIE) in the matter.     
                                                                                                                        (Para 9.3.5)
X.        Foreign Universities
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee does not agree with the clubbing of the finalisation of the legislation on foreign educational institutions
and the creation of a database of such institutions. It has to be done at the earliest independently.                           (Para
10.3)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee strongly feels that the issue of allowing foreign educational institutions in India needs to be
decided after wider consultations as it involves the social and economic concerns and the need for protecting the interest
of the weaker sections of the society.                                                                               (Para 10.7)
 
XII.      State Universities
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply to this recommendation. The MHRD has not responded to the
specific suggestion of the Committee to increase the ceiling on the plan expenditure. The reply also has nothing on the
issue of decreasing interest on the corpus funds and its effect on development activities. The Committee would like to
have specific replies in the matter.                      (Para 12.1)
 
Comments of the Committee

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
 
The Committee had expressed its serious concern on the status of vacant teaching posts in both Central and State
universities. The latest data about Central universities made available to the Committee confirms its apprehension about
the position worsening further. The Committee has been informed that out of 9192 sanctioned posts in the 18 Central
universities, the number of posts filled is 6795, having 2397 (26%) posts lying vacant as on 31.12.2006. University-wise
break-up of sanctioned and vacant posts reveals a very discouraging scenario. The Committee notes that various steps
taken by the Government have not proved to be very effective. The Committee has been given to understand that a
special recruitment drive for filling up backlog vacancies reserved for SC/ST in Central universities has been
undertaken followed by reminders to all concerned.
 
The Committee views with great concern the assessment made by the Department that due to resource constraint
and ban on recruitment, recruitment is simply not taking place in State universities. The Committee feels that
enhancement of retirement age, anticipated increase in the pay scales (VIth Pay Commission) can only be considered
stop-gap measures. Focus should be to make the teaching profession attractive for the talented youth. The Committee
would accordingly once again emphasize that the problem of decreasing faculty in both Central and State universities
should be tackled on a priority basis.                                           (Para 12.3)
 
XIII.     Fake Universities/Institutions
                                                                                                                       
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee has been reiterating for the last so many years the need for taking urgent steps for bringing a
legislation providing for more stringent penalties for running fake universities. The Committee is, however, constrained
to observe that this problem would perhaps continue to persist, simply because the exercise of comprehensive review of
the UGC Act, 1956 is still being contemplated by the Government. The Committee would once again impress upon the
Department not to further delay this crucial issue.                                                  (Paras 13.1& 13.2)
 
XIV.    Role of the UGC                      
Comments of the Committee
 
Response of the UGC in the matter may be supplied to the Committee.    (Para 14.4)
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is happy to note that a proposal to set up the National Commission on Higher Education is under
consideration of the Government. The Committee would like to be apprised of the latest status of this proposal.             
                                                                                                                                       (Para 14.7)
Comments of the Committee
 
The response of UGC as well as the action taken on this vital recommendation may be furnished to the
Committee.                                           (Para 14.9)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the response from UGC in the matter.           (Para 14.11)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that the much delayed UGC (Amendment) Bill, 1995 is now
being withdrawn from the House. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the MHRD to come up with a revised
Amendment Bill at the earliest. The MHRD must also ensure that this bill does not meet the same fate as the earlier
one.                                                     (Para 14.12)
XV.      Conclusion
Comments of the Committee
 

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
The Committee expects the MHRD to give a comprehensive reply in this regard. The Committee would also like to
have a specific reply to its recommendation to review the National Policy on Education.                    (Para 15.1)
MINUTES
XIX
NINETEETH MEETING
               
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 17 th July, 2007 in Committee
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
5. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6. Smt. Brinda Karat
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
8. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
9. Smt. Supriya Sule
 
LOK SABHA
 
10. Shri Ashok Argal
11. Shri Basudeb Barman
12. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
13. Shri Harisinh Chavda
14. Shri Ramswaroop Koli
15. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
16. Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
17. Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
18. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
19. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
20. Shri K. Virupakshappa
21. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
22. Shri Francis K. George
23. Shri Anantkumar Hegde
24. Shri Rahul Gandhi
25. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
26. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Smt. Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
2.
                  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. He informed the Members that the one-
year term of the Committee is coming to an end on the 4 th August 2007.  He thanked the Members for their contribution
and cooperation for the successful functioning of the Committee.    The Members also thanked the Chairman of this
Committee for conducting the proceedings of the Committee effectively and smoothly.   The Committee also thanked the
officials of the Secretariat for assisting the Committee aptly and promptly and also for their efforts in preparing
comprehensive/detailed draft Reports.

196thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/196threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:40]
 
3.                  The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the following draft reports: (i) *** (ii) *** (iii) Action
Taken Report on the 172nd Report of the Committee on University and Higher Education. The Committee discussed and
adopted the reports one-by–one with certain modifications. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to fix a
suitable date to present/lay the Reports and also nominate members from both the Houses to present/lay the reports.
 
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 p.m.
 
NEW DELHI
17
th July, 2007           
     VIMAL KUMAR
           DEPUTY DIRECTOR
________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matter