PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
ON

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1997-98 (DEMAND No. 41) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF INDIAN SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE AND
HOMOEOPATHY
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd April, 1997)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd April, 1997)

aaa जय्ते

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 1997/Chaitra, 1919 (Saka)

1664/RS F—1-A


CONTENTS

1, ComposITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. PREFACE
3. REPORT

4. MINUTES

Paces
6)-01)
(i)
1—10

11—15


en warTKoo-

SETTIMMOD SBT io uolteoimoD ,
soaiadd ६
rnOWA 4

gxrowMe.



1664/RS F—2-A

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1996-97)

. Shri S.B. Chavan —— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra $. Deo
Dr. B.B. Dutta

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Shri Raj Nath Singh

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha .

. Dr. Mohan Babu

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Shri Jai Prakash

. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

. Shrimati Divya Singh

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

. Dr. C. Silvera

. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
. Shri Dutta Meghe

. Shri 1.6. Sanadi

. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

. Shri Pawan Diwan

. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

. Shri Mukhtar Anees

6)


Gi)

41. Dr. M. Jagannath

42. Dr. Bali Ram

43. Shri Banen Barman

*44. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego
45. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

*Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 26th February, 1997.

1664/ RS F—2-B


PREFACE *

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixty-First Report of the Committee on. the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 41) of the Department of ISM & H, Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare for the year 1997-98.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare and also heard the Secretary and other officials of that Department on the
said Demands for Grants in its meetings held on 1st and 7th April, 1997.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 19th April,
1997.

New De.Hi; S.B. CHAVAN
19th April, 1997 Chairman,

a ee Department-related Parliamentary
Chaitra 29, 1919 (Saka) Standing Committee on

Human Resource Development.

iii)


आर 94301 “Soeine UMM



REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION

1.1 The National Health Policy of 1983 envisaged the necessity to initiate organised
measures to enable each of the systems of Indian Medicine i.e., Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani,
Yoga and Naturopathy as well as Homoeopathy to develop in accordance with its genius,
and find an appropriate role and place for these different systems in the overall health care
delivery system for the benefit of the people. In order to achieve the said goal, a new
Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) has been set up to
promote and develop the Indian Systems of Medicine (Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani,
Homoeopathy and Drugless Therapies like Yoga and Naturopathy).

1.2 The new Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H)
aims at strengthening the educational and research institutions of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homoeopathy, Drug Standardisation and quality control, cultivation of
Medicinal plants, including research, establishment of Specialised ISM&H Centres, etc.

1.3 People of our country have faith in the traditional systems especially as the services
provided are generally cheaper and available everywhere and the remedies are known to be
generally free from side-effects. Further, India has a large resource of about 4.06 lakh
practitioners of ISM and 1.68 lakh practitioners of Homoeopathy, whose services need to be
fully utilised in the national health care delivery system. There are about 311 Under-
graduate and 47 Post-graduate Colleges of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy
producing about 13.292 graduates including diploma holders in Homoeopathy and 482 Post-
graduates every year.

1.4 The Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy have practically grown and
developed in the Indian society on the basis of learning through family traditions of Guru
Shishya Parampara, although a few colleges had come up in the late 19th century and the
earlier part of the 20th century. There was practically no Governmental support to this
system. There were no regulations either, regarding the practice and education standard.
Patients used to approach these indigenous physicians on the basis of faith in their skill,
knowledg- and integrity.

1.5 However, after Independence, institutions like Central Council of Indian Medicines
and Central Council for Homoeopathy were established to register practitioners in these
Systems and to lay down minimum standards for education. The Central Council of
Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, the Central Council of Unani Medicine, the Central
Council of Research in Homoeopathy, the National Institute of Ayurveda at Jaipur and the
National Institute of Homoeopathy at Calcutta have been set up as apex bodies for research
and teaching. In order to formulate Standards for Drugs, Pharmacopoeia Committees for
each of these Systems were set up and supported by the Pharmacopoeia Laboratories for
Indian Medicine (PLIM) and the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia Laboratory (HPL) both
located at Ghaziabad, U.P. The Central Council of Indian Medicine (CIM) and the Central
Council of Homoeopathy (CCH) are responsible for laying down and maintaining uniform
standards of education and regulate the professional practices of the practitioners in the field
of Indian Systems of Medicines and Homoeopathy, respectively.

1

1664/RS F—3-A


Il. EIGHTH FIVE YEAR PLAN

2.1 The Eighth Plan outlay made for ISM&H was Rs. 88 crores. However, the
annual allocations made in all the years of the plan period comes to Rs. 104.44 crores.
The actual expenditure made by the Department is only 92.07 crores. This shows the
seriousness with which ISM&H division earlier and the ISM&H Department now has
been functioning. The Plan allocations made could not be utilised fully during the years
from . 1993-94 to 1996-97. It could utilise the actual allocations fully only in 1992-93.
Unless the Department is very serious in implementing the programmes and improving
the system, it will never be able to strengthen the efficient delivery of services.

2.2 The Department have stated that a comparison of expenditure, vis-a-vis,
allocation for the last two years, i.e. 1995-96, 1996-97 shows that there is a definite
improvement in the utilisation of funds. The Committee, however, is not satisfied with
this. The fact still remains that the full allocation could not be spent even during 1996-97
also. Out of the plan allocation of Rs. 23.19 crores, only Rs. 23.11 crores could be
spent. The Department also lags behind in achieving physical targets in some of the
schemes. Central Research Institute for Yoga could not achieve both physical and
financial targets in any of the years. Similarly, Central Council for Research in Yoga and
Naturopathy could not achieve the financial targets in 1992-93 and 1993-94. The
Department informed the Committee that there is a genuine need for increasing the plan
allocation for ISM&H sector as it has accumulated such deficiencies in almost all the vital
areas which are briefly as under:—

(i) Although there are Central Councils for Research for each of the disciplines and
functioning National Institutes for Ayurveda and Homoeopathy, each of them is
so inadequately provided that these organisations are barely able to maintain
themselves. They need sizeable resources for undertaking meaningful research and
for their continuous improvement.

(ii) The National Institute for Naturopathy at Pune is notionally in existence but it is
operating from only a large residential premises. It has been decided to set up
National Institute of Unani Medicine at Bangalore about 10 years back but
construction and setting up of the Institute has yet to take place.

(iii) The Pharmacopoeial Laboratories are operating from an office building of the
Government of India at Ghaziabad. Land has been allotted for these laboratories
in Ghaziabad. But, for want of resources construction has yet to begin. These
laboratories have a crucial role to play in determination and maintenance of
standards of ISM&H drugs.

(iv) The availability of genuine medicinal plants all over the country is very inadequate
and this is giving rise to spurious materials and their use in drugs. About 150
medicinal plants are already on the endangered list. A large scale initiative for
determination of package of practices for cultivation of medicinal plants and for
their actual large scale cultivation is urgently called for.

(v) There are serious doubts already raised about the quality of ISM&H drugs.
However, the work of determination of pharmacopoeial standards and testing
facilities in the country is substantially incomplete for want of resources. This
needs to be substantially accelerated in the interest of public health.

1664/RS F—3-B


(vi) The standard of ISM&H education in the country is poor. This is largely because
both the infrastructure and manpower resources available in the educational
institutions are grossly inadequate. A substantial step up of financial resources to
these institutions is urgently called for, for improving the standards of ISM&H
education.

2.3 The Committee does not understand as to how the Department and various
organisations created thereunder have been functioning with so many problems afflicting it.
It is a very sorry state of affairs. The whole world is now looking towards the Indian Systems
of Medicine in view of the effectiveness of the medicines and their having no side effects.
But it is unfortunate that our own country has not been able to strengthen our own systems
of medicine. The Committee is, therefore, of the strong view that unless something radical is
done by the Government, the systems cannot be improved and the Indian System of
Medicine will remain as they are now. The Committee also takes strong exception tc
underutilisation of funds as against the allocation made and non-achievement of physical
targets in some of the schemes. The Department will have to strengthen its monitoring
mechanism to ensure better functioning.

Ill. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS

3. For the annual plan 1997-98, the Committee was informed that the Department
sought an outlay of Rs. 144.80 crores. However, the actual allocation made was Rs. 35.3
crores. In view of the various deficiencies being faced by the Department, the Committee is
of the firm belief that additional allocations are required to be provided. The Department
also should ensure better and full utilisation of the funds so that they are in a position to ask
for higher allocations in future.

IV. NINTH FIVE YEAR PLAN

4.1 With a view to evolve major thrust areas in the Ninth Five Year Plan the Planning
Commission had constituted a Working Group on Indian System of Medicine and
Homoeopathy to formulate the Ninth Five Year Plan (1997—2002) under the Chairmanship
of then Secretary, Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy. On the
basis of the report of the Working Group, the Department has formulated proposals in the
fields of:

(a) Upgradation of medical education facilities and improving standard of ISM&H
medical education;

(b) Research and development in the field of ISM&H;
(c) Standardisation of drugs of ISM&H and enforcing quality control on ISM&H drugs;
(d) Making available genuine raw materials for the manufacture of ISM&H drugs;

(e) Development of National Institutes in the field of ISM&H and apex institutions for
research and teaching;

(f) Setting up of intellectual property right cells;

(g) Strengthening of pharmacopoeia laboratory for research and testing of ISM&H
drugs.

4.2 The Department has submitted proposals for an outlay of Rs. 1997.85 crores during
the 9th Five Year Plan to the Planning Commission for development and better utilisation of
ISM assistance for achieving the goal ‘Health for All’ by 2000 A.D.


Vv. AYURVEDA

5. The allocation made for Ayurveda was Rs. 19.13 crores in BE last year which was raised
to Rs. 19.93 crores in RE. This has slightly been increased to Rs. 20.25 crores in 1997-98. This
includes provision for (i) National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur which is expected to serve as a
model institute for teaching training, research and patient-care, (ii) Central Council for
Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, and (iii) maintenance and development grants-in-aid to
Institute of P.G. Training and Research, Jamnagar, a constituent of Gujarat Ayurvedic and
Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, New Delhi. The Committee agrees that as in the case of other
system of medicine, Ayurveda also faces lot of resource crunch. Ayurveda is the oldest Indian
systems of medicines and has good qualities of acceptability and no side-effects. But much work
is not being done on the research and manufacturing of medicines. The Committee desires that
the allocation may be increased sufficiently and the research findings be made public proper
publicity should also take place.

VI. HOMOEOPATHY

6.1 Under the Head Homoeopathy, the BE 1996-97 on the Plan side was Rs. 6.78 crores
which was reduced to Rs. 4.14 crores in RE 1996-97. In BE of 1997-98 it has again been raised to
Rs. 5.11 crores. When the Department was asked to explain the reasons for these variations, it
was informed that it was because of the re-grouping made under the Head ‘Homoeopathy’.
Upgradation of Homoeo PG Colleges was earlier included in miscellaneous group and the same
has been brought under Homoeopathy Head. Likewise, the scheme ‘Assistance to
Undergraduate Colleges of ISM&H’ was included in the Head ‘Homoeopathy’. However, at the
time of Revised Estimates 1996-97 and Budget Estimates 1997-98 the grouping has been re-
arranged so that only those schemes which are concerned with ‘Homoeopathy’ as a core system
found a place under the Head ‘Homoeopathy’. The following are the details:

(Rs. in lakhs)

BE 1996-97 RE 1996-97 BE 1997-98

CCH 20.00 20.75 1.00
Upgradation of Homoeo Colleges 100.00 70.00 75.00
NIH Calcutta 110.00 110.00 150.00
CCRH 180.00 180.00 210.00
HPL, Ghaziabad 68.00 24.00 75.00
478.00 414.00 511.00

OTHER SCHEMES 300 (This has been divided into Rs. 200.00
Assistance to UG Colleges of lakhs for assistance to UG colleges and

Rs. 100.00 lakhs for upgradation of PG
Colleges of Homoeopathy hence the
total of BE 1996-97 went up to
Rs. 478.00 lakhs)

ISMH



6.2. The Committee notes with satisfaction that Homoeopathy has been brought in a
separate consolidated head and hopes that it would facilitate proper allocation of funds
under its sub-head and that the funds would be utilised completely and more meaningfully.

VII. UNANI

7.1 In the case of Unani, the Plan provision has been hiked from Rs. 4.01 crores in
BE 1996-97 to Rs. 4.35 crores in the RE and further Rs. 5.05 crores in BE 1997-98.
Justifying the increased allocation for Unani System, the Department has stated that the
break up of Plan provision (for Unani) is as under:—

(Rs. in lakhs)

Name of Institute BE 1996-97 RE 1996-97 BE 1997-98

Central Council for Research in 300.00 334.00 350.00

Unani Medicine (CCRUM)

National « Institute of - Unani 100.00 100.00 150.00

Medicine (NIUM)

A. M. U., Aligarh 1.00 1.00 5.00
401.00 435.00 505.00

The increase in Revised Estimates 1996-97 is because of an additionality of Rs. 34.00 lakhs
provided to CCRUM to meet its actual requirements. The CCRUM was allocated an
amount of Rs. 321 lakhs during 1995-96 and as against this allocation, only an amount of
Rs. 300 lakhs was provided to the Council in B.E. 1996-97. Moreover, this increase was
provided to meet the impact of D.A., Bonus, Interim Relief and Career Advancement
Scheme implemented in the Council.

7.2 In B.E. 1997-98, CCRUM has been provided with Rs. 350 lakhs which is an
increase of only Rs. 16.00 lakhs over the allocation made to the Council during 1996-97.

7.3 An amount of Rs. 150 lakhs (as against Rs. 100 lakhs in BE/RE 1996-97) has
been provided for N.I.U.M. for the construction of the building, the work on which is
under progress.

7.4 An additionality of Rs. 4.00 lakhs has been provided to Aligarh Muslim University
in BE 1997-98 over the BE/RE 1996-97 which was Rs. 1.00 lakh only.

7.5 The Committee while appreciating the increased allocation in BE 1997-98
recommends that more funds should be made available to Central Council for Research in
Unani Medicine (CCRUM) for its research activities.

Vill. YOGA AND NATUROPATHY

8. For Yoga and Naturopathy, the BE for 1996-97 on the Plan side was Rs. 1.30
crores, which was reduced to Rs. 1.20 crores in the RE 1996-97. However, it has been
increased to Rs.“I.70 crores*in the BE 1997-98. When asked how it proposed to utilise the
additional sum the Department explained that the Government is contemplating to set up
the National Institute of Yoga (NIY) by merging the Central Research Institute for Yoga
(CRIY) with the proposed Institute. Accordingly, as against Rs. 35 lakhs provided for


CRIY in BE 1996-97. Rs. 5 lakhs only are provided/proposed for CRIY in RE 1996-97 and
BE 1997-98.

IX. MEDICAL EDUCATION

9.1 The Committee was informed that the Department has taken steps to check the
growth of new sub-standard colleges in the country. It was stated that the Health Ministry
has taken a decision that no new colleges of ISM&H should be started without the prior
approval of Government of India. The Committee also feels that the prior approval of the
concerned council should be taken besides that of Government of India. The Department of
ISM&H will scrutinise the project reports regarding the infrastructure etc. Letters to the
Presidents of CCIM & CCH have been written in this regard.

9.2 Guidelines to establish a new college and also implement the minimum standards of
infrastructure and education in the existing colleges have been formulated by the CCIM.
Government will notify these norms within 2 months after receiving from CCIM & CCH.

9.3 CCIM had made visits to various colleges and decided to stop admission in sub-
standard colleges from the next financial year.

9.4 The Committee strongly recommends that a task force should be formed to identify
these colleges and suggest suitable action against them. The names of defaulting sub-
standard colleges should be published in the regional and National dailies. The Committee
also advocates that the Universities should not give affiliation to these colleges unless they
get permission from respective Central Councils and State Governments.

9.5 The Committee is pained to note that some colleges under ISM & H charge huge
amounts as donation/capitation fee at the time of admission. The Committee strongly feels
that there is urgent need to stop this wrong practice.

X. NON-AVAILABILITY OF HERBS AND MEDICINAL PLANTS

10.1 The Committee notes that availability of herbs and medicinal plants sufficiently is
the basic ingredient of the Indian systems of medicines. The forest and arid land can be
made better use of by planation of herbs and medicinal plants. There are as many as 150
plants on the endangered list. The Committee, with the idea that in order to maintain the
efficacy of traditional medicines, recommended last year that it was essential to preserve and
cultivate the medicinal plants and herbs by starting plantation on a large scale. The State-
Governments would also make land available for such plantations. On this the Department
have stated that the existing scheme of financing Government and autonomous institutions
to grow certain species of medicinal plants was modified, in order to lay emphasis on
developing agro techniques for growing of medicinal plants, etc. This scheme has been
approved and Rs. 80.00 lakhs have been reappropriated in the current year. This amount
will be utilised to select institutions having infrastructure and the expertise to develop agro-
techniques for medicinal plants. A proposal is also under examination to establish vanaspati
Vans on 100 acres plot in each state in denuded forest areas throughout the country during
the Ninth Plan, it was added. The Committee desires that early decision may be taken on
the proposal of Vanaspati Vans. It was also stated that a conference of the Health Ministers
from different States was held on 18th February, 1997 and resolutions were passed for
increasing the availability of raw materials utilised in the ISM & H. Some of the steps
recommended are:—

“Listing of medicinal substances, survey and collection of medicinal substances,
their germ plasm, folklore, in situ conservation through protection from


7

exploitation, through cultivation and introduction in natural habitats, cooperative
farming, creation of central aurborems, setting up of vanaspati vans, etc. The plan
provision has also been increased for this purpose. Waste land also will be utilised
for purpose of growing medicinal plants.”

The Committee desires that action Plan may be initiated on the above steps.

XI. POOR QUALITY OF DRUGS

11.1 The manufacturers of the drugs under ISM & H do not have sophisticated and
latest technology for ensuring meticulous standards required for the preparation of drugs.
The Committee was given to understand that lot of spurious material was being used by the
manufacturers of traditional drugs. As regards Standardisation of ISM Drugs the
Department stated that there are Pharmacopeia Committees in individual systems, for
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy systems. These were set up separately for each.
These Committees lay down the composition and the standards for individual drug. The
Pharmacopoeia Committee for Ayurveda has so far published two volumes of formularies
covering 634 drugs. Unani Formulary has 441 drugs and Siddha formulary has 248 classical
drugs. Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia Committee has decided standards for 710 drugs in
6 volumes. Out of 634 mentioned in Ayurvedic Formulary of India, standards on
80 single plant origin drugs had been published in Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India Par-I
(Vol. I). Monographs on 70 single drugs are ready for publication and about 75 drugs are in
pipeline on which work has been done by Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicines,
Ghaziabad.

11.2 The Department, however stated that a large part of the work remains yet to be
done largely because the laboratories to support the work of the Pharmacopoeia Committee
have been weak and inadequate in the past. There is one Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for
Indian Medicines and another Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeial Laboratory both at Ghaziabad
but both are working from rented premises with laboratory equipment and scientists staff
being inadequate at present. These deficiencies are now being attempted to be rectified, it
was added. It was also stated that now Department of ISM & H has decided to complete the
task on remaining medicines within Ninth Five Year Plan. A new Central Scheme for
functioning of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Pharmacopoeia Committees to develop
pharmacopoeial standards for ISM durgs has been formulated and implemented during
1996-97. Accordingly, 17 institutions/Research laboratories have been allotted funds to the
tune of Rs. 60 lakhs for laying down the standards on approximately 170 Ayurveda, Siddha
and Unani Plant origin drugs. For standardisation of remaining Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani
drugs, other 100 institutions/Research laboratories are being identified. The Committee
strongly recommends that all the deficiencies be removed immediately.

11.3 In regard to quality control, the Committee was informed that to safeguard public
health, Government has taken several measures. One important measure is prevention of
sub-standard drugs or adulteration in ISM drugs and maintenance of high standards of
quality in ISM drugs. For this, Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 was enacted and Rules were
made thereunder known as Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. It is a Central legislation. It
regulates the (i) Import (ii) manufacture (iii) sales and distribution and (iv) standards of
Drugs and Cosmetics. The Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940 was amended in 1964 (effective
from 8.12.1969) and Chapter IV-A was added in this Act for licensing and quality control of
the manufacturing of ISM Drugs for sale in the market. All necessary provisions of this Act
in Chapter IV-A were further amended in 1982 in which definitions of misbranded/
adulterated and spurious ISM drugs were given and penalty prescribed. To exercise control


8

over drugs of ISM, two drugs organisations are functioning. The first one is the Central
Drugs Standard Control Organisation of the Government of India headed by Drug
Controller General (India) which is responsible for controlling the quality of drugs imported
into the country. The second one is the State Drug control organisation in each State. This
organisation is responsible for exercising quality control over drugs manufactured, sold or
distributed in its territory so as to ensure that people can get ISM drugs of standard quality.
The Drugs Control Cell (ISM) under Department of ISM & H has been set up in May 1992
to assist the Drug Controller General (India) to look after all the work of quality control of
ISM drugs. In addition, statutory Committees/Board as provided under the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act namely, Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board have
been set up. The Committee is of the view that there should be a separate Drug Controller
for ISM Medicines with sufficient powers.

XII. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA, JAIPUR

12. The allocation made for National Institute of Ayurveda for 1997-98 is Rs. 2.00
crores which was the same allocated last year. The Institute has been facing many problems
from several fronts. The Committee visited the Institute and has given a separate report.
The Secretary, during the course of her oral evidence stated that several measures were
taken to re-vitalise the Institute. The Committee would examine the Action Taken Report as
and when received on its report and would give a separate report.

XII. STRENGTHENING OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

13.1 There are four Research Councils, viz. Central Council for Research in Ayurveda,
Central Council of Research in Unani Medicine, Central Council for Research in Yoga and
Naturopathy and Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy. These Councils initiate aid,
guide, develop and coordinate scientific research in the respective systems.

13.2 The Committee is, however, constrained to note that no research activity worth the
name is carried out by these institutions. The Committee strongly feels the need for research
and development in the medicinal plants within the country rather than importing them. The
Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department to accelerate and strengthen the pace
of research activities. The Committee also feels that the research activities cannot be ignored
due to resource constraints and, recommends that sufficient amount needs to be earmarked
to the Institutes for this purpose. The Committee also feels that the research should be more
field oritented. Further, the infrastructure of the research centres should be adequately
strengthended. Research findings should be given adequate publicity and be made available
to the public.

XIV. SIDDHA

14.1 When the Department was asked to comment as to how long will it take to set up
National Institute of Siddha, it was stated that the matter in regard to size and location of
plot of land on which the National Institute of Siddha (NIS) is to be constructed is still
under finalisation in consultation with the Government of Tamil Nadu. The nature of
participation of Government of Tamil Nadu is under discussion with that Government;
hence a token provision has been made in BE 1997-98 which will be reviewed at RE stage of
1997-98 for enhancing budgetary provision if required.

14.2 If land and funds are available, the NIS will be set up during Ninth Five Year Plan,
it was added.

14.3 The Committee feels that the various problems being faced by Siddha system


9

should be identified early. The Committee looks forward to the development of Siddha and
hopes its allocation would be enhanced suitably. The Committee also hopes that suitable
steps should be taken for setting up of National Institute of Siddha in Tamil Nadu at an
early date.

XV. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY, CALCUTTA

This is the only Homoeopathy Institute in the Country which is run by the Central
Government. Many patients are turning forwards Homoeopathy due to low cost of treatment
with little or no side effects. But the Institute has been facing many problems. In view of
this the Committee visited the Institute and gave a separate report. The Committee will
again examine the functioning of the Institute in detail after the Action Taken note is
received. The Institute has got Rs. 1.10 crores which is a repetition of the allocation made
last year. The Committee feels that it needs to be increased.

XVI. PATENT CELL

The Committee was given to understand that a decision has been taken to establish a
patent cell. Provision of Rs. 10 lakhs has been kept in 1997-98 for its establishment. The
Secretary informed the Committee that a Committee to do the preliminary work has been
set up in this regard. The Committee hopes that the preliminary work would be completed
soon.

XVII. INTERNATIONAL CELL

The Committee feels that traditional systems of medicine akin to ISM & H are also
prevalent in other countries particularly China, Japan and Germany etc. It would therefore
be helpful to have international co-operation and coordination in the related systems. hence,
the Department may set up an international cell to look into these issues.

XVII. GENERAL

18.1 Monitoring mechanism : The approach paper to the Ninth Five Year Plan felt that
more practical approach to the programme forumulation, particularly for social sector
programmes was to put the lessons learnt from the experience to the implementation. The
approach papers also felt that in spite of the existence of an elaborate monitoring and
evaluation system, the findings made by the monitoring and evaluation system are not put to
use. The Committee takes a very serious note on this aspect and strongly recommends to the
Department to first strengthen the monitoring mechanism on various schemes and ensure
strict implementation of the findings made by the monitoring agencies. The Committee also
observes with concern that the schemes being taken up by the Central Government are not
properly monitored by the State Governments. Merely handing over the money and getting
report from the State Governments is not going to serve any purpose. The Committee is of
the definite view that the State Governments, where the financial position is bad, divert the
funds, given by the Central Government for a particular schemes, to other purposes such as
for giving salaries to the employees of the State Government, etc. The Committee therefore,
desires that the Centre should impress upon the States about the need to develop a
mechanism to find out whether the money being given to the States for implementation of
various programmes is utilised for the purpose specified and fix responsibility in case the
purpose is defeated.

18.2 NGOs : There are certain areas where the Adivasis are the worst affected lot. The
Committee is constrained to note that not many NGOs are present in tribal areas. One will
find them mostly in areas where the atmosphere and the living conditions are very good.
They would not like to leave big and smaller cities and go into rural areas. The Adivasis are


10

mostly located in far-flung areas. The Committee, therefore, desires that NGOs which are
working in adivasi areas should be given encouragement.

18.3 There is no doubt that there are committed and devoted NGOs in the field, but at
the same time, one cannot rule out the possibility of mushrocm growth of NGOs which are
merely interested in getting assistance from the Government of India. The Deptt. should,
therefore, strengthen its monitoring mechanism to see whether they are working properly or
not and only those NGOs which have proven track record should be given assistance.

XIX. COMMITTED LIABILITY

19.1 The Committee has noted that the committed liability of the plan schemes has not
been reflected in the budgetary allocations for 1997-98 which is the first year of the Ninth
Plan. The Committed expenditure which is accounted in the subsequent plan at the
termination of the previous plan is taken out from the plan and becomes a separete
committed expenditure. If this is not done, the Departments will be handicapped by this
amount of plan expenditure. The exercise of identifying committed liability has not been
done by any of the Departments for 1997-98. Committee in this connection has considered
the report of the Tenth Finance Commission. The Tenth Finance Commission have observed
in this regard as under :

“Although the Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of reference in
deciding the cut-off date for transfer of committed liability on account of plan
scheme, the incremental liabilities that would arise in 1997-98 on account of
8th Plan scheme completed in the next two financial years would have to be
provided for. The Commission are, therefore, of the view that the Planning
Commission may consider providing for the maintenance of such schemes till
1999-2000 in the Plan itself as was done for the schemes of the two Annual Plans
of 1990-91 and 1991-92”.

19.2 The Committee was also given to understand that the Planning Commission issued
circular to all the Departments dated November 5, 1996 sending therewith guidelines for
classification of expenditure. The Ministries were also requested to make necessary provision
as committed non-plan expenditure for the upkeep of existing assets etc. Accordingly, all the
Ministries/Departments were asked to adopt the guidelines while submitted the plan
proposals for Ninth Five Year Plan and annual plan 1997-98. However, the Departments
have not done this exercise. The Committee in this connection heard the views of the
Secretary, Department of Expenditure to clarify the position. He informed the Committee
that even though communications were sent to various Ministries, the Ministries could not
identify the committed expenditure in time. Accordingly a lumpsum amount has been
provided under Demand No. 31. The Department may approach the Department of
Expenditure for their share. The Committees, therefore, desires that the Department may
complete the exercise at the earliest so that they may not be handicapped on account of this.

19.3 The Committee is also constrained to note that many Departments have not done
the exercise of identifying committed expenditure and to get it earmarked separately for
several plan periods. Accordingly, committed expenditure on the plan schemes completed in
7th Plan or earlier and the assets created and staff employed in plan schemes has been
continuing on plan side resulting in severe resource crunch for the Department. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should make a thorough review of
the schemes and identify the committed liability. The Committee is very much surprised that
the guidelines given earlier were not followed at all. For this, responsibility should be fixed.


MINUTES


xi
*TWELFTH MEETING कि

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 1st April, 1997 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.B. Chavan —— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. B.B. Dutta

3. Dr. M. Aram

4. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

5. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
6. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

7. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
8. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

9. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

10. Shri R. Margabandu

11. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

12. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

13. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

15. Shri Sartaj Singh

16. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
17. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

18. Dr. C. Silvera

19. Shri 1.6. Sanadi

20. Shrimati Krishna Bose

21. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

22. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
23. Shri Krishna

24. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigli
25. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

26. Shri Samik Lahiri

27. Dr. M. Jagannath

28. Dr. Bali Ram

29. Shri Ranen Barman

30. Shrimati Hadwig Michael Rego

“Minutes of the Ist to Lith Meetings relate to other matters.

13


14

WITNESSES
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
6) * *
(i) * के
(iii) Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy
. Shrimati Shanta Shastry, Secretary
. Shri Pradeep Bhargava, Joint Secretary
Shri K. Rajinder Singh, Director
Shri B.L. Meena, Director
Shri Om Veer Singh Veerwal, Director
Dr. S.K. Sharma, Adviser
Dr. M.L. Sharma, Assistant Adviser
Dr. (Shrimati) Alia Aman, Deputy Adviser
Dr. Khalid Siddique, Director (Unani)
10. Dr. H.R. Goel, Director (Ayurveda)
11. Dr. Naresh Kumar, Director (Yoga)
12. Dr. C.H.S. Shastri, Director (NIA, Jaipur)
13. Dr. Bhattacharya, Director (NIH, Calcutta)

SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary

Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

5. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the
Department of * * * and Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy in connection with
the examination of Demands for Grants for the year 1997-98.

6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.35 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on 2nd
April, 1997.

०७9० :७9७ ७ | ० ९० ५

***Relates to other matters.


Xv
“FIFTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Saturday, the 19th April, 1997 in Committee
Room 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.B. Chavan —— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
Dr. B.B. Dutta

. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

Dr. Mohan Babu

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

10. Dr. C. Silvera

11. Shri Dutta Meghe

12. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

13. Shri Samik Lahiri

14. Shri S. K. Karvendhan

15. Dr. M. Jagannath

16. Shrimati Hadwig Michael Rego

SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on the Demand for Grants for 1997-98
of the Department of * * * Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (Demand
No. 41) * * *. The Committee, after some discussions, adopted the same with some
modifications.

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati
Ray and Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and
Shri Sartaj Singh and Shri Dau Dayal Joshi to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha. The
Committee decided that the reports may be laid/presented on 22nd April, 1997.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 p.m.

9० :3 9 (४ + (०

*Minutes of the 13th and 14th Meetings relate to other matters.
***Relates to other matters.

15


९.7९९1 rot ! 1901 आए) 120 ४ berdbiands ५३४76 oft .६
ye 88009 * * * १0 tagmitwyed sit) Io
stimmed sit .* * * Cb io
venoiteoniborn

© etd (18902) 3० neh ae — ‘bia npmnisdd 21 boetiorius 59100100 oft .६
bre oe syjesl mi शतक आ 11989: ido) mbuedomad inadiide 20 bas yas
छत 4ot ort eo aoe i, odt yal BO 080 ide bas daria jane nde
"९९ छह 12120 “aiogs: Si 380) 9301991 -9991100:)

betmojbs cori soitimmoD edt .+

aes कक फेकफ OAT ba ‘ysifi0 (01, oicior egnitssM: MAT ubag 1061 silt १० ६७4७0"
हे, आडिडात ditto wi 8785) 1**