PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

EIGHTIETH REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF
AYURVEDA, JAIPUR

(Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 53rd Report of the Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development)

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 9TH DEC., 1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 9TH DEC., 1998)

po

ana

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

AUGUST, 1998/BHADRAPADA, 1920 (SAKA)


ka Li SIR SS SS hc al - ४ Thats cil sie ie ie gibi patie ae tae me Sete १+54८7१ ere



CONTENTS

ComposiTION OF THE COMMITTEE ..

PREFACE..

CuHarTeR I Report..

Cuaprer II Recommendations/Observati
the Government

Carter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies............

CuarTerR IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee........

CxarreR ४ Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government
HAS NOt GIVEN ANY मं, ५५५००३७०००००००००००००००- नोट न *सेस्‍०००००५ ०२०८ पी डिकचच

MINUTES - ६ रा िकश०२७०००००००००+००००* मलिक सके त ज०३ २७ ०९१ tt १४१ 20००7) saunas

2७685
6)-(॥)
(vy)
1—10
11—20
21-22

23)

24
25—34


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1998-99)
1. Shri $.B. Chavan—— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

3. Shri Balkavi Bairagi

4. Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi

5. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

6. Shri O. Rajagopal

7. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

8. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

9. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

10. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

11. Shri M.P.A. Samad Samadani

12. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
13. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
14, Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

15. Dr. Akhtar Hasan Rizvi

LOK SABHA

16. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
17. Shri Sartaj Singh

18. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
19. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
20. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
21. Dr. Sanjay Singh

22. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

23. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

24. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
25. Shri Ashok Singh

26. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
27. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
28. Shri Ashok Gehlot

29. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
30. Shri Ajit Jogi

31. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

32. Shri Laxman Singh

33. Shri Shankar Pannu

34. Shri Abdul Hamid

35. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
36. Shri Samik Lahiri

37. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
38. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja
39. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

40. Shri H.P. Singh

: 6)
252/8 F—§,A


41.
42.
43.
44.

Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy

Shrimati Krishna Bose

Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

(i)

5254/25 1528


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1997-98)
1. Shri $.B. Chavan—— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Dr. B.B. Dutta

4. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

5. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
6. Shri Raj Nath Singh

7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

8. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
9. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

10. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

11. Shri R. Margabandu

12. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

13. Dr. Mohan Babu

14. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

15. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

16. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
17. Shri Sartaj Singh

18. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
19. Shri Jai Prakash (Hardoi)

20. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

21. Maharani Divya Singh

22. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

23. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

24. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

25. Dr. C. Silvera

26. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
27. Shri Dutta Meghe

28. Shri 1.6, Sanadi

29. Shrimati Krishna Bose

30. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

31. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
32. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

33. Shri Pawan Diwan

34. Shri Krishna

35. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
36. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

37. Shri Samik Lahiri

38. Shri S.K. Kaarvendhan

39. Shri Mukhtar Anis

40. Dr. M. Jagannath

41. Dr. Bali Ram

42. Shri Ranen Barman

43. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

44. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

(iii)
5252 |ps €-2A


Gar eee



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Eightieth Report of the Committee on Action
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in its Fifty-third Report on
the functioning of the National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur.

2. The Fifty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on the 250 February,
1997 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 25th February, 1997. Replies of the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Depart-
ment of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy were considered by the Committee.
Clarifications were also sought by the Committee from the Secretary and other Officials of
the Department.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the
27th August, 1997. The Committee at its meeting held on 19th November, 1998 decided to
present the Action Taken Report in the House during the Winter Session of Parliament.

New De.Hi; S.B. CHAVAN
27th August, 1998 Chairman,
picu ee Department-Related Parliamentary
Bhatrapadas 32 ezra Standing Committee on Human

° Resource Development.

()
SASAIBS f-39


CHAPTER-I
REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Fifty-third Report on the functioning of National Institute
of Ayurveda, Jaipur which was presented to Rajya Sabha on 25.2.97 and laid on the Table
of Lok Sabha on 25.2.97.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as ‘follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
3, 4, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.9. 610; 81, 92.101, 111.112, 01.3, bia ioe.

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies: 1, 2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 9.1.

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 6.2, 7.1.

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been received—nil.

3. The Committee will now deal with some of its recommendations on the Action Taken
Notes of the Government.

Para Observations/Recommendations Action Taken

IV. Equipments For 1997-98, Rs. 200 lakhs are
provided under Plan Processing of
Tenders is in its final stage and it
is expected that orders will be
e X-Ray Machines (300 MA & 50 MA); placed for those equipments
which will be recommended by
the Purchase Committee.

4. Major Equipments and Machineries avail-
able with the Institute are:

© Ultra Sound Sonography Machine (Sup-
plied by WHO);

e Anaesthesia Ventilator-Respiratory Gas
Monitor;

@ Dental Unit with X-Ray Machine;

© Medicare and Channel Polyrite; and Elec-
tric Bhatti etc.
The Committee was, however, informed that the
Institute still required a number of equipments
For proper running and development of various



Para

Observations/Recommendations

Action Taken

facilities. It was also stated that the Finance
Committee had already approved purchase of
the equipment, on availability of funds. An
amount of Rs. 66.07 lakhs is required for
acquiring the equipments, it was added. Clarify-
ing the position in this regard, the Director of
the Institute stated that the Department of ISM
& H gives a lumpsum amount as grant to the
Institute and whenever some amount is available
out of this grant, it would be spent on purchas-
ing the equipment. In this manner it would take
a long time to purchase all the equipments listed
and by the time this list is exhausted, another
list will be ready. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that sufficient additional funds may
be made available to the Institute for acquiring
necessary equipments.

Comments of the Committee
Evgn though some steps have been taken by the Institute to procure latest equipments, the
Committee still feels that all the necessary equipments must be procured at the earliest and
the Department should consider providing a one time grant for purchasing equipments.

Para

Observations/Recommendations

Action Taken

ae

V. Staff position

The staff position of the Institute is as under:

Sane- Avail- Vacant Addl.
tioned able require-
ment
Teaching:

Professor 10 Nil 10 ४.
Associate Prof. 23 9 14 12
Asstt. Prof. 24 10 14 5
Lecturer 22 15 7 _—
Jr. Lecturer 16 16 _ _
Torat: 95 50 45 20

Non-teaching:
Group ‘A’ 6 3 3 9
Group ‘B’ 8 1 7 5
Group ‘C’ 213 128 85 75
Group ‘D’ 206 181 25 58
Tora: 433 313 120 147

With the notification of the
amended NIA Service Rules,
1982 in March, 1997, recruitment
action for filling up teaching/non-
teaching posts was initiated. The
vacancies were advertised and ap-
plications received. For testifying
candidature of Group ‘C’ posts,
the Selection Committee of the
Institute met on 15.6.1997. With
regard to teaching posts, one of
the posts of Professor was filled
up in May, 1997, in compliance of
Orders of the Hon’ble High
Court of Rajasthan, Jaipur bench.
The last date for receipt of appli-
cations for teaching posts was
27.5.1997. The Ministry of Fi-
nance is however yet to revive the
teaching posts lying vacant for
more than one year, upgrade 16
posts of Jr. Lecturers (non exist-
ing in CCIM norms) to the posts
of Lecturer and also approve
promotion of Lecturers as Asstt.
Professors. The issues are under
active consideration. As soon as
these orders are issued, interviews
will be fixed. Meanwhile, scrutiny
of applications is being done.


2

From the above, it is very clear that the Institute is running without even a single
professor inspite of 10 sanctioned posts. Out of 95 sanctioned posts on teaching side only
about half are in position. In this connection, the Director of the Institute clarified that in
September, 1994 there were 39 vacancies on teaching side and they continued to remain
vacant. Besides these vacancies, 6 more posts fell vacant from September, 1994 till date
adding the number upto 45, he added. The Committee understands that the quality of
teaching is affected to a great extent by this. When asked about the reasons for this state of
affairs and the action taken to fill up vacant posts, it was statéd that the NIA Service Rules
including the Recruitment Rules made in 1982, were outdated and inappropriate. Some
words were ambiguously worded leading to many litigations. Modified rules were drafted
keeping with the pattern of University system and Medical Colleges. These were not
approved by Hon’ble Minister of State for Health & F.W. and notified on 28th September,
1996. With these new Recruitment Rules, a revised advertisement is being made for various
posts, the Director of the Institute informed the Committee.

Para

‘Observations/Recommendations

Action Taken Report

pry

The Committee views this with great con-
cern. The Committee is not in a position to
understand as to how the training courses
and the hospital are being run with such a
large number of posts lying vacant, on both
teaching and non-teaching side. Now since
the rules have already been modified, there
should not be any difficulty in recruiting the
staff as per the requirement. The Commit-
tee, therefore, strongly recommends that
immediate steps may be taken to fill up all
the sanctioned posts. The additional posts
may also be sanctioned as per requirement.

As submitted under Para 5.1 above,
very sincere efforts are being made to
fill up the sanctioned posts. Besides,
additional teaching posts (profes-
sor—12, Associate Professor—13, Lec-
turer—40, Dy. Med. Supdtt.—1, Pan-
chkarma Specialists—2, Panchkarma
Vaidyas—2 and Vaidyas—9) have
been recommended by Governing
Body. The proposal is being examined
by this Department and will be taken
up with the Ministry of Finance for
approval to creation of posts.

Further Comments

The Secretary further clarified the position that the Selection Committee met on 15.6.1997
for testifying the candidature for Group C posts which were lying vacant for a long time.
Dates for interview for Group A posts have also been fixed, she clarified.

vl

On being asked about the latest position with regard to the teaching/non-teaching posts

still lying vacant, the Secretary during the course of her evidence on 17th August, 1998
informed the Committee that the selection process for the teaching posts would be
completed by November, 1998. Out of the ten sanctioned posts of professors, six had been


4

filled up, two were yet to join and two posts meant for reserved category were lying vacant.
Out of the twenty three posts of Associate Professors, sixteen had been filled up and seven
reserved category posts were lying vacant. All the twenty-four posts of Assistant Professors
had been filled up. Out of the twenty two posts of lecturers, sixteen had been filled up, four
were yet to join and the two reserved posts were lying vacant, twenty two posts of Junior
Lecturers had been upgraded.

With regard to non-teaching posts, the Secretary informed the Committee that 131
Group ‘C’ and 180 Group ‘D’ posts had been filled up. However, the proposal for creation
of additional posts which were essential as per the CCIM norms was not agreed to by the
Ministry of Finance. A fresh proposal was being sent in this regard, the Committee was
informed.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee takes note of the fact that as a result of the concerted efforts made by
the Department, there has been a significant improvement in the filling up of both teaching
and non-teaching posts of the Institute lying vacant since long. However, the Committee is
constrained to note that the ban on the revival of posts lying vacant for more than a year is
applicable in the case of teaching institutions also. The Committee takes a strong exception
to such a rule being followed by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee feels that such a
ban should not be made applicable to teaching institutions. The Committee feels that the
tule should be suitably modified to exclude all educational institutions otherwise the students
will suffer in their studies. The Department should take up this issue strongly with the
Ministry of Finance.

The Committee is of the opinion that the Department should continue their efforts for
creation of teaching posts. If possible, non-teaching posts may be reduced, but only after
adequately taking care of the CCIM norms.

Para Observations/Recommendations Action Taken

VI. Teaching Activities

6.1

The Committee has noted that the
under-graduate course of Ayur-
vedacharya (B.A.M.S.) is spread over
to 44 years of the main course and one
year of Internship. 60 students are ad-
mitted each year. Admission is made
after conducting a Pre-Ayurveda Test.
The Committee was informed that upto
1989 the Test was conducted by the
Institute on All-India basis and from
1990 onwards, the University of Rajas-
than is conducting it. The Committee is,
however, constrained to note that dur-
ing the years 1993 to 1995, no admission
was made because the University did

Admissions were made in 1996 and
are being made during the current
academic year also. The Rajasthan Uni-
versity has been apprised about the
CCIM regulation in this respect. It has
been further decided to discuss this
matter with the University authorities
accordingly, the Vice-Chancellor, Rajas-
than University, who has recently joined
the University, has been requested to
give appointmenmt for discussion of the
problems with officials of the Depart-
ment of ISM & H, Govt. of India.

SASB/bS /- ५९


Para

Observations/Recommendations

Action Taken

6.2

not conduct the Test. While, the Uni-
versity wanted to admit the students
with the Oriental Sanskrit course of
‘Upadhyaya’, the CCIM insisted on ad-
mitting students with Biological Sciences
10+2. The case went upto the Supreme
Court and the Supreme Court held that
the CCIM regulations should only
adopted. It is unfortunate that on such
a small due the whole admission process
was stopped and the admissions could
not be held for 3 years. The Committee
hopes that this would not recur again.

The Committee was given to under-
stand that the students are admitted in
the course practically from Rajasthan
and nearby areas and there is no Na-
tional Character as such. The Commit-
tee also regrets to note that the Institute
is functioning as one of the local Ayur-
vedic Colleges. The Syllabus, and Cur-
riculum are also not of high standards.
This is compounded by the large
number of teaching posts lying vacant
and the sub-standard teaching being im-
parted. Another problem which is also
of a great concern is that examinatioas
are not conducted as per schedule, as a
result of which, the 54 years course is
stretched over to 7 or 8 years. When
the Vice-Chancellor of Rajasthan Uni-
versity was asked about the affiliation of
the Institute, he informed that the affili-
ation for the graduation course was
granted about 20 years ago, initially on
a provisional basis for a few years and
thereafter on a permanent basis. The
Committee’ feels that with so many
problems afflicting the Institute and due
to lack of basic facilities such as suffi-
cient teaching faculty and equipment,
the Institute cannot impart education of
the standard expected of a National
Institute. The Institute should first set
itself right including provision of tke

Students with 10+2 Science stream
with or without Sanskrit are eligible for
admission in BAMS. Rajasthan Univer-
sity conducts examinations in Sanskrit
also alongwith Science subjects in Pre-
Ayurveda (Entrance) Test which is
against the laid down norms. This re-
stricts entry of students from other
States since Science and Sanskrit to-
gether are not available in many States.

With a view to usher greater par-
ticipation at the Nationzl level in the
Pre-Ayurveda Test, it was decided that
no test in Sanskrit should be taken in
Pre-Ayurveda Test for admission in
NIA. Accordingly, the University was
requested but they refused to adhere to
the request and are going ahead with
their policy of taking Sanskrit also in
Pre-Ayurveda Test. Then the State
Government of Rajasthan was re-
quested to allow the Institute for con-
ducting the Pre-Ayurveda Test for its 60
seats. The State Government has not
taken any decision so far. The matter is
being pursued with the State Govern-
ment otherwise this year also admissions
will be made after taking examinations
in Sanskrit also like last year and this
may affect the national character of the
institute as practically no students from



Para

Observations/Recommendations

Action Taken

basic facilities before admitting students
in future, starting with the next
academic year itself. The Department of
ISM & H should also make necessary
endeavours in this regard. Otherwise,
with the present sub-standard education
being imparted in the Institute, the

other States applies. In anticipation that
the Institute shall be set right shortly,
admissions to the M.D. (Ay.) have
been permitted. Similarly, the Universi-
ty is taking steps to make admissions by
conducting PAT (as submitted above)
for BAMS.

products of the Institute cannot be ex-
pected to give a better treatment to the
patients.

Further Comments

The Committee heard the Secretary, Department of ISM&H in this regard on 150
September, 1997. On a specific query as to whether inspite of Supreme Court’s judgement,
the Rajasthan University was insisting on Sanskrit as a compulsory subject for pre-Ayurveda
Entrance Test, the Secretary replied in the affirmative. Clarifying the position, the Secretary
informed the Committee that although CCIM directions were there that for entrance test
Sanskrit need not be compulsory as Science stream students are required for Ayurveda
Course, the State Government and the Rajasthan University still insist on Sanskrit as a
compulsory subject for admission to Ayurveda. It was also agreed that because of these
inadequacies, the Institute was functioning as a local institute and its national character was
not building up.

Subsequently, the Secretary during her evidence on 17th August, 1998 informed the
Committee that after persistent efforts and setting aside all the formalities she had finally
succeeded in discussing this matter with the Vice-Chancellor of the Rajasthan University.
The Rajasthan University have now agreed to allow students of the science stream to appear
for the entrance test for Pre-Ayurveda.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee hopes that with the induction of students belonging to the science
stream in the Institute, it would gradually become national in character. The Committee
desires that the Institute should function as a National Institute at par with AIIMS or to
such level. The Institute should therefore, be developed and extensive research done in
every branch of Ayurveda.

Para Observations/Recommendations Action Taken

6.6 The Committee expresses its con-
cern over the unsatisfactory state of
affairs prevailing in the Institute and the
casual approach shown towards the im-
portant aspect of affiliation of the Insti-
tute with the University by all the
concerned authorities i.e. the National
Institute of Ayurveda, Department of
ISM&H; and last but not least the

noted for taking remedial steps.

The views of the Committee have been


Para

Observations/Recommendations

Action Taken

6.7

Central Council of Indian Medicines
(CCIM). The Committee takes a very
serious note and observes that the De-
partment of ISM&H and the CCIM,
have totally neglected the Institute all
these years. Even though the CCIM is
supposed to review the functioning of
the Institute every year, it does not
appear to have taken any measures to
improve the academic standard of the
Institute, for recruitment of staff and
for overall improvement. The Commit-
tee takes a strong objection to the
casual approach adopted by CCIM to-
wards the NIA, Jaipur, particularly
when it has not so far recognised the
degrees given by the Institute and has
thus put a blind eye to the fact that
examinations are being held regularly.
After the CCIM has reviewed, the
Committee is not able to understand as
to why they did not insist on maintain-
ing certain standards. Any deficiency
found should have been brought to the
notice of the Institute and within a
given time limit the infrastructural defi-
ciency should have been made good.
The Five year rule may be the Universi-
ty’s concern but for granting provisional
affilitation also it is the bounden duty of
the CCIM to see that the deficiency has
been made good within the stipulated
time laid down by it.

Even though the first P.G. course was
started in 1971 and the Rajasthan Uni-
versity is supposed to review it after five
years, it does not appear to have re-
viewed the provisional affilitation so far.
To a specific query, the Vice Chancel-
lor, could not clarify the position relat-
ing to the conditions laid down by the
University for granting provisional affili-
ation. In fact the Committee does not
see any logic as to why the affiliation is
reviewed after five years. The Universi-
ty should take a final decision in the
matter immediately and if the Institute
meets all the requirements, the affilia-
tion should be granted without further
loss of time as it directly affects the
future career of students enrolled in the
Institute for P.G. courses.

The University of Rajasthan has been
granting provisional affiliation to the
Institute on year to year basis. The
Inspector of the University has pointed
out certain shortcomings in the Insti-
tute. Also the Inspection Team of the
CCIM visited the Institute to access
whether the facilities provided as per
the norms. They have made certain
observations regarding non-fulfilment of
the norms in some respects. Action has
been initiate to comply with the require-
ment of the CCIM and the University
of Rajasthan. The major lacunae is non
filling of vacant posts over an year. The
revival of the posts is under active
consideration of the Ministry of Fi-
nance.

sega/ps FSA


Para

Observations/Recommendations

Action Taken

6.8

The CCIM should also conduct its
own review and find out the necessary
requirements that are to be met and
should take appropriate steps at the
earliest. The Department of ISM&H
should ‘not less leave any efforts for
improving the performance of the Insti-
tute and to meet all the requirements
for Graduation and Post-Graduation
courses. The Committee would very
much like that the responsibility should
be fixed for not making any effects for
getting permanent affiliation for the
Post-Graduation courses of the Institute
to the Rajasthan University even though
the first Post Graduation Course was
started in 1971. The Department should
give a compliance report to the Com-
mittee within two months.

This issues is to be discussed in the
meeting with Vice-Chancellor, Rajas-
than University, in which represen-
tatives of the Department of ISM&H
will also be present. However, the new
VC is yet to give a date for the said
meeting. Further, it is possible to write
to CCIM only when the shortcomings
are fulfilled specially appointing of fa-
culty. 'his is delayed for want of ap-
proval from Ministry of Finance.

Further Comments

The Committee was earlier informed that Rajasthan University had formulated its own

regulations which are not in accordance with CCIM regulations. One year’s relaxation has
been given in the Post Graduate course of three years for teachers of NIA which goes
against the CCIM regulations.

Subsequently the Secretary during her evidence on 17th August, 1998 informed the
Committee that the University of Rajasthan has now agreed to conduct the Post Graduate
courses as per the CCIM norms. In this regard, after obtaining the concurrence of the
Ministry of Law, the necessary notification will be issued. So far as the question of
permanent affiliation for the Post Graduate courses of the’ Institute to the Rajasthan
University was concerned, the Secretary informed that all the inadequacies as pointed out by
CCIM team during its visit in November, 1995 have since been removed. The Secretary
expressed the hope that permanent affiliation for Post Graduate courses would be granted to
the Institute.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee appreciates that as a result of concerted efforts made by the
Department, a long standing unresolved issue has been finally settled now.

Para Observations/Recommendations Action Taken
VII. Pharmacy
yet The Institute has a Pharmacy having The Scientific Advisory Committee in

modern as well as conventional equip-
ments and instruments. It is engaged in
the manufacture of medicines for re-
search mostly .for IPD and OPD. When

its meeting held on 14.6.97 decided that
the matter of providing 30 acres of land
may be taken up with the State Govern-
ment and it may be developed as a

S¥S2/PSF-5B


Para

Observations/Recommendations

Action Taken

asked to comment on the scope of large
scale and commercial manufacture of
medicines, it was clarified that the Phar-
macy has a good scope to manufacture
more medicines, if the vacant posts are
filled up. The Committee feels that
there is a tremendous demand for Ay-
urveda medicines in the country. This
potential can be tapped well if the
medicines are produced to the max-
imum capacity. The Committee
reiterates the recommendation made in
the preceding paragraphs to fill up vac-
ancies at the earliest as the rules have
already been modified. The Director

Arborium. The Memorandum of As-
sociation of the NIA does not permit
NIA for commercialisation. Under the
circumstances, it may not be possible to
develop Herbal Garden for cultivation
and manufacturing of medicines im-
mediately. However viability of market
for medicines will have to be ascer-
tained. For this, the Executive Commit-
tee decided that a study may be under-
taken in this regard. Only after these
are cleared proposal for commercialisa-
tion of the Pharmacy can be considered.
A Herbal Garden has already been
started in about 2 acres of land in the

also informed the Committee that the
Institute would start a herbal garden if
the State Government of Rajasthan pro-
vides land. The Committee recommends
that the Department of ISM & H may
take up the matter with the State
Government in this regard.

campus for demonstration purposes.

Further Comments

The Secretary informed the Committee that the Executive Committee was of the
opinion that the main purpose of the Institute is education and the institute should not
indulge too much in commercial activity. The Secretary further stated that a independent
project is being prepared on the subject.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not in agreement with the approach of the Executive Committee. The
Committee notes that although facilities for developing our own indigenous Ayurvedic
medicines exist a large number of Ayurvedic drugs are being imported. The Committee feels
that efforts should be made for acquiring land for the purpose of plantation of medicinal
plants so as to be in a position to manufacture our own Ayurvedic medicines.

General Comments

The Committee had the impression that neither the pay scales of the Institute have been
referred to the 5th Pay Commission nor there has been any success in getting the pay scales
enhanced. The Secretary clarified that the ISM doctors in CGHS had been put on par with
the allopathic doctors and their cases had been referred to the Sth Pay Commission.
However, NIA being an autonomous body, its pay scales are at par with that of Lady
Hardinge College and JIPMER. This was applicable in the case of all Government
Ayurvedic Institutions, it was informed.

The Committee feels that the fact that pay scales of Lady Hardinge Medical College and
JIPMER are applicable to NIA should be made known to all concerned through a circular.
The Committee fails to understand the reasons for making institutions like NIA autonom-
ous. The Committee is of the view that the very idea of giving autonomy to such


10

institutions was to see that in regard to their day-to-day affairs, there would not be any
interference from the Government. However, for all practical purposes they are like
Goverment institutions only.

The Committee feels that if because of the autonomy, these institutions are at a

disadvantage of not having the pay scales prescribed by the Pay Commission, then it will be
better to take a conscious decision whether autonomy should continue at all.


CHAPTER-II
Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government

Para

Observations/Recommendations

Comments/Action Taken

III. Infrastructure

"3.

The Institute has Academic Block,
Hospital Block, Hostels for Boys and
Girls, Animal House, Kitchen Block,
Phermacy etc. The Committee was,
however, informed that the Institute has
no facility for residential quarters for
Staff, Guest House, Administrative
Block etc. Steps are being taken to have
separate Administrative Block, Guest
House etc., the Committee was in-
formed. An amount of Rs. 50.00 lakhs
was sanctioned and negotiations, in this
regard, were being made with the Ra-
jasthan Housing Board, it was added.
The Committee desires that immediate
steps may be taken for early finalisa-
tion.

IV. Equipments

4.

Major Equipments and Machineries av-
ailable with the Institute are:

@ X-Ray Machines (300 MA & 50
MA);

@ Ultra Sound Sonography Machine
(Supplied by WHO);

e Anaesthesia Ventilator-Respiratory
Gas Monitor;

> Dental Unit with X-Ray Machine;
© Medicare Channel Polyrite: and Elec-
tric Bhatti etc.

The Committee was, however, in-
formed that the Institute still required a
number of equipments for proper run-
ning and development of various
facilities. It was also stated that the
Finance Committee had already ap-
proved purchase of the equipment, on
availability of funds. An amoun: of Rs.
66.07 lakhs is required for acquiing the
equipments, it was added. A list of

It has since been decided to acquire
14 ready-built flats from State Govern-
ment Housing Agencies costing about
Rs. 149 lakhs and entire amount has
been made available to the Institute for
making payment to the concerned
Agencies. The Ist Instalment has al-
ready been paid to the Rajasthan Hous-
ing Board and Avas Vikas Sansthan for
12 staff quarters, 1 Guest House and
one Director's residence. They are at
their finishing stage and the RHB and
AVS is yet to issue Demand Notice for
making final payments. It is expected
that the Flats will be handed over in a
short time.

For 1997-98, Rs.200 lakhs are provided
under Plan Processing of Tenders is in
its final stage and it is expected that
orders will be placed for, those equip-
ments which will be recommended by
the Purchase Committee.

a

<2s2 ps /- €


Para

12

Observations/Recommendations

6.6

equipments required for various Depart-
ments is at Annexure-II. Clarifying the
position in this regard, the Director of
the Institute stated that the Department
of ISM & H gives a lumpsum amount as
grant to the Institute and whenever
some amount is available out of this
grant, it would be spent on purchasing
the equipment. In this manner it would
take a long time to purchase all the
equipments listed and by the time this
list is exhausted, another list will be
ready. The Committee, therefore, re-
commends that sufficient additional
funds may be made available to the
Institute for acquiring necessary equip-
ments.

The Committee expresses its concern
over the unsatisfactory state of affairs
prevailing in the Institute and the casual
approach shown towards the important
aspect of affiliation of the Institute with
the University by all the concerned
authorities i.e. the National Institute of
Ayurveda, Department of ISM&H; and
last but not least the Central Council of
Indian Medicines (CCIM). The Com-
mittee takes a very serious note and
oberves that the Department of ISEM&H
and the CCIM, have totally neglected
the Institute all these years. Even
though the CCIM is supposed to review
the functioning of the Institute every
year, it does not appear to have taken
any measures to improve the academic
standard of the Institute, for recruit-
ment of staff and for overall improve-
ment. The Committee takes a strong
objection to the casual approach
adopted by CCIM towards the NIA,
Jaipur, particularly when it has not so
far recognised the degrees given by the
Institute and has thus put a blind eye to
the fact that examinations are being
held regularly. After the CCIM has

Comments/Action Taken

The views of the Committee have been
noted for taking remedial steps.



Para

13

Observations/recommendatious

6.7

6.8

reviewed, the Committee is not able to
understand as to why they did not insist
on maintaining certain standards. Any
deficiency found should have been
brought to the notice of the Institute
and within a given time limit the infras-
tructural deficiency should have been
made good. The Five year rule may be
the University’s concern but for grant-
ing provisional affilitation also it is the
bounden duty of the CCIM to see that
the deficiency has been made good
within the stipulated time laid down by
it.

Even though the First P.G. course was
started in 1971 and the Rajasthan Uni-
versity is supposed to review it after five
years, it does not appear to have re-
viewed the provisional affilitation so far.
To a specific query, the Vice Chancel-
lor, could not clarify the position relat-
ing to the conditions laid down by the
University for granting provisional affili-
ation. In fact the Committee does not
see any logic as to why the affiliation is
reviewed after five years. The Universi-
ty should take a final decision in the
matter immediately and if the Institute
meets all the requirements, the affilia-
tion should be granted without further
loss of time as it directly affects the
future career of students enrolled in the
Institute for P.G. courses.

The CCIM should also conduct its own
review and find out the necessary re-
quirements that are to be met and
should take appropriate steps at the
earliest. The Deptt. of ISM&H should
not less leave any efforts for improving
the performance of the Institute and to
meet all the requirements for Gradua-
tion and Post-Graduation courses. The
Committee would very much like that
the responsibility should be fixed for
not making any effects for getting per-
manent affiliation for the post-gradua-
tion courses of the Institute to the

Comments/Action Taken

The University of Rajasthan has been
granting provisional affiliation to the
Institute on year to year basis. The
Inspector of the University has pointed
out certain shortcomings in the Insti-
tute. Also The Inspection Team of the
CCIM visited the Institute to access
whether the facilities provided as per
the norms. They have made certain
observations regarding non-fulfilment of
the norms in some respects. Action has
been initiate to comply with the require-
ment of the CCIM and the University
of Rajasthan. The major lacunae is non
filling of vacant posts over an year. The
revival of the posts is under active
consideration of the Ministry of
Finance.

This issues is to be discussed in the
meeting with Vice-Chancellor, Rajas-
than University, in which represen-
tatives of the Deptt. of ISM&H will
also be present. However, the new VC
is yet to give a date for the said
meeting. Further, it is possible to write
to CCIM only when the shortcomings
are fulfilled specially appointing of
faculty. This is delayed for want of
approval from Ministry of Finance.



Para

6.9

6.10

14

Observations/recommendations

Rajasthan University even though the
first Post Graduation Course was
started in 1971. The Deptt. should give
a compliance report to the Committee
within two months.

(Comments of the Committee on this

reply
may be seen in Chapter I)
The Committee is also constrained to
note that national character has not yet
been developed in the Institute.
Majority of the teaching staff are taken
over employees of the erstwhile
Government Ayurvedic College who do
not possess the required qualifications.
The teachers as well as the students
have developed the habit of evading
classes due to which there is difficulty in
conducting classes regularly. The Com-
mittee feels that the things should no
longer be allowed to continue in this
manner. A total over-hauling of the
functioning is required. The immediate
step should be to appoint the required
staff.

The Director also stated that the Insti-
tute has applied to the Rajasthan Uni-
versity for autonomy. This would enable
the Institute to hold examinations on its
own from all over the country and give
a national character, he added. He also
stated that the autonomy would also
help in improving academic perform-
ance. But the Committee has got its
own doubts on this. When the Institute
is not able to function well under the
control of the University, then it cannot
be expected to improve its functioning
without University’s supervision. The
Committee, however, not only agrees
that the Institute should reach the level
of autonomous Institution but also ex-
pects it to attain the deemed university
status. But at present, the Institute is
not in a position to do either. Firstly, it
is required to be set right.

Comments/Action Taken

The existing teachers have remained as
teachers of a local college. It is ex-
pected that the condition may improve
with induction of new faculty members.
With regard to national character of the
Institute one of the constraints in grea-
ter participation at the national level is
Sanskrit being compulsory for Pre-Ay-
urveda Test. This is to be dropped in
consultation with VC of the Rajasthan
University.

Efforts are being made to set the Insti-
tute right. In the process the Vice-
Chancellor of the University has been
requested to give appointment to the
Institute Authority and the officers of
the Deptt. of ISM&H as well so as the
problem can be discussed and solutions
found.



Lis)

Para

Observations/recommendations

Comments/Action Taken

For this, the Director of the NIA, the
Vice-Chancellor of Rajasthan University
and the representatives of the Deptt. of
ISM & H should sit together, discuss
the problems and find solutions. The
question of autonomy can be considered
after an year or two when the Institute
starts functioning with adequate teach-
ing staff.

VOI. Research

8.1

The Committee views with concern to
note that no research activity worth
mentioning is undertaken in the Insti-
tute. The presently available faculty
members are not tuned to the work
culture expected in such an Institution
of national importance. Research work
is undertaken in a very few areas such
as Sciatica, Neuralgia etc. with Agri
Karma. Considerable work on Fistula
and Piles with the use of Kshrasutra has
been done by an Associate Professor of
the Institute for which he was awarded
many merit certificates including one by
the Governor of Rajasthan. The Direc-
tor of the Institute also informed the
Committee that the research work being
undertaken in the Institute is not of the
standard of a National Institute. Efforts
are, therefore, required to be made to
uplift the Institute to the status and
level to which it is ordained for and to
enable it to achieve its objectives. The
Allopathic medicines are becoming very
costly day-by-day, besides giving side-
effects. Improving the research activities
is all the more necessary in view of the
post graduation and Ph.D. courses be-
ing run in the Institute. The Institute
should therefore rise to the occasion
and prove the effectiveness of Ayur-
vedic medicines, old and newly in-
vented, through its research so that
people look towards: Ayurveda.

The existing teachers, have remained as
teachers of a local college. It is éx-
pected that the condition may improve
with induction of new faculty members
which is possible only if the Ministry of
Finance allows revival of the required
posts.



16

Para

Observations/recommen dations

Comments/Action Taken

a2

The turn out of patients in the hospital
is comparatively low. The Committee is
of the view that the mishandling of the
Institute on all fronts is the main reason
for this. All-out efforts are, therefore,
required to be taken to reverse the
trend and the make the Institute a real
national Institute in true sense of the
term. With the revised recruitment ru-
les, it is expected that the Institute will
get better talent and with that, the
Hospital will improve qualitatively.
Confidence among the people is also
required to be increased in the effec-
tiveness of the treatment in the Institute
so that people in large numbers come to
the Institute for treatment.

X, Governing body

10.1

The Committee is constrained to learn
that the Governing Body of the Insti-
tute has not been able to meet for the
last six years. The last meeting was held
on 23.9.90 after which the Governing
Body could not meet. The reason given
for not having regular meetings of the
Governing Body is that the Union
Minister of Health & F.W. who hap-
pens to be the ex-officio President of
the National Institute of Ayurveda, is
not able to give time for convening
regular meetings of the Governing Body
due to his pre-occupation. In making
the Minister of Health as the President
of the Governing Body, the idea must
have been to take full advantage of his
presence for taking the decisions on the
problems/issues confronting the Insti-
tute but the fact that the Governing
Body has not been able to meet for a
number of years, has frustrated the very
purpose. Since the Governing Body is
the main forum for decision-making and
review of the work, many issues and
problems relating to the efficient func-
tioning of the Institute have been lying
unresolved all these years. When the
Committee sought to know the action

This is a long term process and has to
be built up gradually. Again this may be
possible only when Ministry of Finance
approves revival and upgradation of cer-
tain posts.

The 15th meeting of the Governing
Body was held on 26.3.1997 under the
chairmanship of the then Union Minis-
ter of State for Health & F.W. The
proposal submitted to the Governing
Body to make provision for appoint-
ment of a person other than the Health
Minister as President, was not approved
by the Governing Body. However, an
Executive Committee under the chair-
manship of the Ayurveda Minister (who
is also the Vice-President of the Gov-
erning Body) was constituted on trial
basis to discuss day-to-day problems.
This Committee held its first meeting on
6.6.1997.



17

Para

Observations/recommenda tions

Comments/Action Taken

being taken in this regard, the represen-
tative of Deptt. of ISM&H informed
that efforts are being made to amend
the bye-laws to ensure regular meetings
of the Governing Body. The Deptt. of
ISM&H is squarely responsible for not
holding regular meetings of the Govern-
ing Body and for allowing the Institute
to deteriorate to the present level. The
Committee takes a strong exception to
this attitude of the Department (Deptt.
of ISM&H now and Deptt. of Health
earlier). The Committee strongly re-
commends that immediate meeting to
resolve all pending problems, should be
called. The Committee also recom-
mends that the rules and bye-laws of
the Governing Body should be amended
so as to make provision for appointment
of a person, other than the Minister of
Health, as Chairman of the Governing
Body, who is high enough in the
hierarcy to take prompt decisions.

XI. Budget

11.1

The allocation made for the Institution
during the last three years are as under:

(Rs. in thousnads)

Actual B.C. RE. 8. ६.
Exp (1995-96) (1995-96) (1996-97):

(1994-95)
Plan 170,00 200,00 170,00 200,00
Non-Plan 200,00 222,00 204,00 224.00

From the above, it may be seen that
during 1995-96, the Budget Estimate of
Rs. 200 lakhs was reduced to Rs. 170
lakhs in R.E. on Plan side. On this the
Department have stated that the reduc-
tion at the R.E. stage was mainly due
to slow construction. The Committee
takes a very serious view of the slow
pace of construction activities going on
in the Institute. This, the Committee

Adequate funds are available during the
current year for acquiring neccessary
modern equipments. As regards con-
struction activity there is no any new
Capital work on this account.



18

Para

11.2

11:3

Observations/Recommendations

feels is mainly due to lack of any
monitoring on the construction ac-
tivities. The construction activities going
on in the Institute are for a Boys
Hostel, Over head Water Tank, Kitchen
Block etc. The Committee desires that
there shall be a regular monitoring of
the construction work. As already sug-
gested earlier, the Department may
grant additional funds to the Institute
for acquiring necessary modern equip-
ments.

The Committee has also noted that the
Institute is in the practice of depositing
in the Bank as FDRs, certain amount
meant for construction work. When the
Committee sought clarification on this,
the representative of the Deptt. to the
Institute, using the State P.W.D. as an
agency to carry out construction work.
The Institute has a Finance Committee
chaired by the Secretary, the Deptt. of
ISM&H and the Finance Committee
took a decision that since the P.W.D.
was taking a long time in instalments,
spread over a period of time. He also
stated that the funds are released as an
when the P.W.D. require. In accord-
ance with this decision, grants which are
given to the Institution were deposited
as FDRs in the name of Executive
Engineer. and as and when they re-
quired funds, the funds are released, it
was added. The Committee feels that it
is an irregular practice which cannot be
allowed in a Govt. Department. Even if
the funds lapse on the completion of the
financial year, it is the responsibility of
the Union Deptt. to allocate the re-
quired funds in the next financial year.
The Committee, therefore, desires that
the Department may look into this in
the light of the financial rules and take
necessary action accordingly.

The Committee was surprised to find
that different methods were being fol-
lowed in the case of committed expendi-
ture of the previous Plan. According to
the understanding of the Committee,
committed expenditure will not get re-

Comments/Action Taken

The Grant-in-aid to the Institute is be-
ing released in terms of General Finan-
cial Rules as laid down by the Ministry
of Finance.

The Institute is following the set norms
in utilisation of Plan and Non-Plan
funds.



Para

19

Observations/recommendations

flected in any shape or form in the
subsequent plan. What is termed as a
Non-Plan expenditure of the subsequent
plan becomes relevant only to the ex-
penditure of new non-plan expenditure
of the subsequent plan period. This
applies in the case of both autonomous
as well as deemed University institu-
tions. In order to get further clarifica-
tion in the matter the Secretary and the
Financial Adviser of the Ministry of
Health & F.W. were specially called to
clarify as to whether this view of the
Committee is correct or not. The Sec-
retary could not come because of ill-
ness. The Financial Adviser appeared
before the Chairman and he confirmed
that the non-plan committed expendi-
ture of the previous plan should not get
reflected into the non-plan expenditure
of the subsequent plan. He also con-
firmed that they are not making any
distinction between the Govt. Institu-
tion and other autonomoys and deemed
University institutions which naturally
means that the confusion which is pre-
vailing in some of institutions in treating
committed expenditure as part of the
new non-plan expenditure should be
clarified by the Deptt. concerned to all
the institutions in the country so that
there should be uniformity in matters of
procedure of not including the commit-
ted non-plan expenditure in the subse-
quent plan’s non-plan expenditure.

The Committee also noticed that in
some of the Institutions where vacancies
were available, they were utilising the
funds’ meant for vacancies, for the pur-
pose of non-plan expenditure, which
according to the Committee is not a
desirable feature. Plan money can not
be diverted for non-plan side or event
the non-plan expenditure should not
have any element of the scheme pro-
vided under the plan. All the vacancies
prevailing in different institutions will
have to be filled in against the non-plan
expenditure of the subequent plan as
the burden of the expenditure will not
be there.

Comments/Action Taken

The NIA shall strictly adhere to the
norms and shall not divert Plan funds. to
Non-Plan or vice-versa. The Ministry of
Finance will be requested in due course
to provide additional funds in Non-Plan
to meet the salaries etc. of the existing
employees and also to provide for
would be filled up posts.



Para

20

Observations/recommendations

XI. The Status of the Institute

12.1

The Committee was informed that the
National Institute of Ayurveda is a re-
gistered society under the Societies Re-
gistration Act, 1860. It is an autonom-
ous institution with a Governing Body.
As an autonomous body, the Institute
function independently vis-a-vis the
Deptt. of ISM&H. The Director of the
Institute, in a note submitted to the
Comittee, pleaded that this autonomous
status is not helping the Institute in any
manner and may be converted into an
attached body of the Deptt. of ISEM&H
on the patter of Jawahar Lal Institute of
Post Graduate Medical Education and
Research, Pondicherry, which is func-
tioning under the Deptt. of Health. The
Director stated that this would effective-
ly check the decay in the Institute and it
will help in its progress. Since it is a
policy matter, the Committee does not
want to go into the merits and de-merits
of the proposal. The Committee desires
that the Deptt. of ISM&H may examine
the proposal and take the decision as
quickly as possible.

XIII. Conclusion

The Committee trusts that the recom-
mendations made in the preceding para-
graphs would be implemented in letter
and spirit. The Department of ISM&H
may send an Action Taken Note within
two months.

Comments/Action Taken

Concerted efforts are being made by the
Department to bring about improve-
ment in NIA in a time bound manner.
The reasoning for giving autonomy to
NIA and similar institutions remains
valid even today. It can not be said with
any degree of surety that if NIA is
converted into a Department college,
progress will be achieved automatically.



CHAPTER-III

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVT.’S REPLIES

Para Observations Comments/Action Taken

I. Introduction

1. The National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur, was Matter of record. No comments.
established on 7th February, 1976 as an Autonom-
ous Body under the Ministry of Health & F.W. by
taking over the erstwhile Government Ayurvedic
College, Jaipur. The Institute complex is spread
over in an area of 13 acres of land situated within
the walled city. The activities of the Institute are
controlled and managed by the following 3 Stand-
ing Committees:

1. Governing Body
2. Finance Committee
3. Scientific Advisory Committee

II. Aims and Objectives

2. The NIA is an apex Institute of Ayurveda engaged Matter of record. No comments.
in teaching, research and health care. The main
objectives for which the Institute is established are
as follows:

1. To promote the growth and development of
Ayurveda;

2. To produce graduates and post graduates in
all bracnches of Ayurveda;

3. To conduct research on various aspects of
Ayurveda;

4. To provide medical care through Ayurvedic
System of Medicine to the suffering hu-
manity;

5. To provide and assist in providing services
and facilities of the highest order for research
evaluation, training, consultation and gui-
dance to Ayurveda System of Medicine;

6. To conduct experiments and develop pattern

of teaching in under-graduate and post-gradu-
ate education.

21


Para Observations

IX.

Comments/Action Taken

6.3 The Committee has also noted that Post-
Graduation Courses are offered in 9 Deptts. with
an intake capacity of 5 in each Deptt. For the first
time, the P.G. courses was started in one Deptt. in
1971. Later on, in 1981 five Deptts. in 1987 one
Deptt. and in 1988 two Deptts. started the P.G.
course.

6.4 During the course of the visit of the Commit-
tee to the Institute, the Committee held discussion
with the Vice-Chancellor, Rajasthan University,
alongwith the Director, NIA, and the Joint Secret-
ary, Deptt. of ISM&H. During the visit, the Vice-
Chancellor informed the Committee that the
Rajasthan University did not grant any affilitation
to the post-Graduate course. However, the Deptt.
of ISM&H later informed the Committee that
affiliation was granted to the P.G. Courses from
the respective years when the courses were started.
In view of the contradictory statements given by
the Vice Chancellor and the Department, the
Chairman again sought clarifications from the Vice
Chancellor, Rajasthan University and the Secret-
ary, Deptt. of ISM&H on the 4th January, 1997.

6.5 The Vice-Chancellor of the Rajasthan Uni-
versity while clarifying the position corrected his
earlier statement and informed that the University
has granted provisional affiliation. He further
stated that the provisional affiliation is reviewed
after five years and if found satisfactory, perma-
nent affiliation is granted. He further informed the
Committee that even though a regular review is
not undertaken every year, yet if the performance
is found unsatisfactory or in case any complaints
are received, the provisional affiliation can be
withdrawn. The Director of the Institute informed
the Committee that the degree given is not recog-
nised by the Central Council of Indian medicines.

Patient Care Activities

9.1 The Institute has 2 hospitals having a capac-
ity of 200 beds at present. Since the inception of
the Institute, 34 lakh patients (medicine days) have
been treated for various diseases. The Committee
is, however, constrained note that the average
occupancy is only about 63%.

Matter of record. No comments.

Matter of record. No comments.

Matter of record. No comments.

Matter of record. No comments.



CHAPTER-IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Please see Chapter I

Sy See


CHAPTER-V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED

Nil

24


MINUTES



शा
SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Monday, the 15th September, 1997 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S. 8. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. 8.8. Dutta

Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

9०५७० ७ | ७७ ७

LOK SABHA

9. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

10. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
11. Shri Sartaj Singh

12. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
13. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

14. Dr. Ram Lakhan singh

15. Dr. C. Silvera

16. Shri 1.6. Sanadi

17. Shrimati Krishna Bose

18. Shri A. Venkataram Reddy
19. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

20. Shri Krishna

21. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
22. Shri Samik Lahiri

23. Shri S. K. Kaarvendhan

24. Dr. M. Jagannath

25. Dr. Bali Ram

26. Shri Ranen Barman

WITNESSES

I. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy)

1. Smt. Shanta Shastri, Secretary
2. Shri Pradip Bhargava, Joint Secretary
3. Shri B.L. Meena, Director

*Minutes of the 1st Meeting relate to other matters.

27


28

4. Shri Kanwar Rajinder Singh, Director
5. Dr. S. K. Sharma, Advisor
6. Vd. Shriram Sharma, President, CCIM

IL. . * * *
Ul. * * *
SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

2. The Committee sought the clarifications from the Secretaries, Department of
ISM&H, *** on some of the points on the Action Taken Reports furnished by the
Departments on the National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta, *** *** *** respectively.
The Committee, thereafter considered the draft Action Taken Reports on the National
Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta, National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur, India’s
Performance in International Sports and functioning of Central Government Health Scheme
and adopted the same after some modifications.

2.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

3. The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Prof. Bharati Ray and
Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri and Dr. M. Jagannath and Shri I.G. Sanadi to present the reports
in Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha respectively.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.25 a.m.

***Relate to other matters.-,


*VIII
EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Monday, the 17th August, 1998 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $. 8. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

3. Shri Balkavi Bairagi

4. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

5. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

6. Shri O. Rajagopal

7. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

8. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

9. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

10. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
11. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
12. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

13. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
14. Shri Sartaj Singh

15. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
16. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
17. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

18. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

19. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
20. Shri Mallangouda Basanagouda Patil
21. Shri Ajit Jogi

22. Shri Shankar Pannu

23. Shri Abdul Hamid

24. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

25. Shrimati Krishna Bose

26. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES

* * *

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy)

1. Smt. Shanta Shastri, Secretary
2. Shri Pradeep Bhargava, Joint Secretary
3. Shri K. Rajinder Singh, Director

* Minutes of the Ist to VIIth Meetings of the Committee relate to other matters.
*** Relate to other matters.

29


30

4. Shri B.L. Meena, Director
5. Dr. L. M. Khan, Acting Director, NIH, Calcutta
6. Dr. C.H.S. Shastri, Director, NIA, Jaipur

* *

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

2. The Committee sought clarifications from the above mentioned witnesses of the
Departments of *** Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy *** in Connection with
the Action Taken Reports *** National Institute of Ayurveda, *** respectively.

3: ५५ * *
3.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

***Relate to other matters.


Ix
NINTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 27th August, 1998 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri 5.8. Chavan —— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

3. Shri Balkavi Bairagi

4. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

5. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

6. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

7. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

8. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav;

9. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

10. Shri M.P.A. Samad Samadani

11. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
12. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav

LOK SABHA

13. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
14. Shri Sartaj Singh

15. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
16. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
17. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

18. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
19. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
20. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
21. Shri Ajit Jogi

22. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

23. Shri Laxman Singh

24. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
25. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

26. Shri H.P. Singh

27. Shrimati Krishna. Bose

28. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
29. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES
* * *
* * *

***Relate to other matters.

SE


32

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

2. * *

*

3. The Committee adopted the following reports subject to some modifications made by

the Chairman:—

0) ¥
Gi) 4

(iii) Action Taken Report on National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur.

(iv) i

(v) ;
4. * .
(जा $
5. . न

*

*

6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m. to meet again on 11th September, 1998.

***Relate to other matters.


*XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 19th November, 1998 in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.8. Chavan —— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri Dina Nath Mishra

Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

9. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam

10. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

11. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

12. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

13. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

14. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

15. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

16. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
17. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
18. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

19. Shri Abdul Hamid

20. Shri Samik Lahiri

21. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

22. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja

23. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

24. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
25. Shrimati Krishna Bose

26. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

27. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES

99 ४३ ६: AS os

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary

ae bd * *

“Minutes of the XIIIth meeting of the Committee relate to other matters.
***Relate to other matters.

33


34

3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate requisite number of Members
for presentation of some Reports of the Committee to the Rajya Sabha and lay the same in
the Lok Sabha during the ensuing session of Parliament.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 p.m.