 
 
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
  February, 2025 /Magha,1946 (Saka) 
 
Report No 
361 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India Scheme 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred Forty First Report on “Review 
of Education Standards, Accreditation Process, Research, 
Examination Reforms and Academic Environment in Deemed/ 
Private Universities/other Higher Education Institutions”  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th February, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred 
Forty First Report on “Review of Education Standards, Accreditation 
Process, Research, Examination Reforms and Academic Environment in 
Deemed/ Private Universities/Other Higher Education Institutions” 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th February, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2025 /Magha,1946 (Saka) 
 
  


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................................................... (i) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS.....................................................................................................        (iii-v) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................ 1- 30 
Chapter-I  -   Recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ............................................................... .....  2-4 
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies...........  5-13 
Chapter-III -  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee....  14-29 
 Chapter-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited…..   30     
   
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE.. ................... 31-33    
6. MINUTES .......................................................................................….......... 34-38  
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
1.  Shri Digvijaya Singh    - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev 
4. Dr. Sikander Kumar 
5. Shrimati Sunetra Ajit Pawar 
6. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
7. Dr. Bhim Singh 
8. Shri Harbhajan Singh  
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
12. Dr. Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
13. Shrimati Rachna Banerjee 
14. Shrimati Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
15. Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary 
16. Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
17. Prof. Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
18. Shri Abhijit Gangopadhyay 
19. Dr. Hemang Joshi 
20. Shri Amar Sharadrao Kale 
21. Shri Kalipada Saren Kherwal 
22.  Adv Dean Kuriakose 
23.  Dr. Sambit Patra 
24.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
25.  Shrimati Daggubati Purandeswari 
26.  Shri Rajeev Rai 
27. Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
28. Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
29.  Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
30. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
31. Dr. T Sumathy alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Director  
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
Shri Ashwani Yadav, Senior Secretariat Assistant  
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Sixty First Report of 
the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Three Hundred and Forty First Report on “Review of Education Standards, Accreditation Process, 
Research, Examination Reforms and Academic Environment i n Deemed/ Private 
Universities/Other Higher Education Institutions ” which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and 
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th July, 2022. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations  contained in  the above 
mentioned Report were received from the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education 
vide their communication dated 18th April, 2024.  
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on  
20th December, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
 20 December, 2024                                                                                                                                      
Agrahayana 29, 1946 (Saka)
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Shri Digvijaya Singh  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
 ABC 
AI 
Academic Bank of Credits  
Artificial Intelligence 
 AICTE 
ARPIT 
All India Council for Technical Education 
Annual Refresher Programme in Teaching 
 ATL 
BoG 
Atal Tinkering Labs  
Board of Governors 
 CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education 
 CFTI 
CHEI 
CIQA 
CMI 
CSR 
Centrally Funded Technical Institute 
Central Higher Educational Institutions 
Centre for Internal Quality Assurance 
Charted Management Institute 
Corporate Social Responsibility 
 DBEIS Department for Business, Energy and Industrial 
Strategy 
 DoHE 
ECIIC 
 
EdWG 
EMM 
Department of Higher Education 
Empowered Committee for Industry and International 
Collaborations 
Education Working Group 
Education Ministers’ Meeting 
 FCRA 
FINTECH 
Foreign Contribution Regulation Act 
Financial Technology 
 GER Gross Enrolment Ratio 
 HECI Higher Education Commission of India 
 HEI 
IA 
ICCR 
Higher Education Institution 
Innovation Ambassadors 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
 IEIF 
IIC 
International Education Innovation Fund 
Institution’s Innovation Council 
 IIT 
IIM 
Indian Institute of Technology 
Indian Institutes of Management 
 IISc Indian Institute of Science 
 IIIT 
IT 
Indian Institute of Information Technology 
Information Technology 
 IL Impact Lecture 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
 KAPILA 
 
LEAP 
LITE 
 
MDP 
MMC 
MITACS 
 
MMTTP 
MoE 
MoEVT 
 Kalam Program for IP (Intellectual Property) Literacy 
and Awareness 
Leadership for Academicians Programme 
Leadership in Teaching Excellence 
 
Management Development Program 
Malaviya Mission Centres 
Mathematics of Information Technology and Complex 
Systems 
Malaviya Mission Teacher Training Programme 
Ministry of Education 
Ministry of Education and Vocational Training 
 MoHUA 
MoSJE 
MSME 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment 
Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
 NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
   
 NCrF 
NEAT 
NEP 
NISP 
NGO 
NHAI 
National Credit Framework 
National Education Alliance of Technologies 
National Education Policy 
National Innovation and Startup Policy 
Non-Governmental Organization 
National Highways Authority of India 
 NIRF 
NIT 
National Institutional Ranking Framework 
National Institute of Technology 
 NITI 
NPPP 
National Institution for Transforming India 
Not-for-Profit Public Private Partnership 
 NPTEL National Programme on Technology Enhanced 
Learning 
 NTU Nanyang Technological University 
 ODL Open Distance Learning 
 PMMMNMTT 
 
PoP 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya National Mission on 
Teachers and Teaching 
Professors of Practice 
 PPP 
R&D 
RFID 
Public Private Partnership 
Research and Development 
Radio Frequency Identification 
 SIC School Innovation Council 
 
(iv) 
 

 
 
 
 SID 
SLM 
SWAYAM 
 
TG 
 
UAE 
Society for Innovation and Development 
Self-Learning Material 
Study Webs of Active–Learning for Young Aspiring 
Minds 
Travel Grant 
 
United Arab Emirates 
 UGC 
UHV 
UKIERI 
USA 
University Grants Commission 
Universal Human Values  
UK India Education and Research Initiative 
United States of America 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
    REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in its 3 41st Report on “ Review of  Education Standards, 
Accreditation Process, Research, Examination Reforms and Academic Environment in Deemed/ Private 
Universities/other Higher Education Institutions”, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the 
Table of Lok Sabha on 04th July, 2022. 
 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations/Observations contained in above 
mentioned Report were received from the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education vide 
their communication dated 18th April, 2024. These have been categorized as follows:  
 
Chapter I: Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras –14, 20, 22, 26  
Total - 04 
 
Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of Government's 
replies:- 
Paras –  1, 12, 13,16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24 
Total - 10 
 
Chapter III: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee:- 
Paras-   2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 15, 25 
Total- 12 
 
 
Chapter-IV:  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited:- 
Paras – Nil 
Total - Nil 
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee recommends for a deep study on improving educational standards through 
innovation in education, especially through the use of technology and based on such a study, a blueprint 
be prepared for each of the HEIs to be followed to enhance the sta ndards of education all across  the 
country. 
(Para 14) 
Action Taken 
 
Establishing and Functioning of Institution’s Innovation Councils (IICs) network in HEIs: 
 
The Department has informed that AICTE and MoE’s Innovation Cell have designed and are 
implementing a unique and first of its kind model called Institution’s Innovation Council (IIC) as an 
approach to institutionalizing innovation and startup culture in HEIs and further to create, streamline and 
strengthen existing ecosystems in HEIs. In jus t 5 years, a vibrant network of Institution's Innovation 
Councils (IICs) in more than 9000+ HEIs have spread across all 36 states and UTs. The IIC structure 
contributes to increasing awareness, encouraging and engaging academia in sustained generation of 
innovations and start-ups from academic institutions. 
A systematic functioning of an IIC in the campus ensures streamlining and strengthening the campus 
ecosystem by following measures: 
• Improving Institutions' Capability and Capacity of faculty in HEIs by  training and deployment as 
Innovation Ambassadors (IA) as on -ground change agent to drive and support innovation and 
entrepreneurship activities. 
• Promoting inter -institutional coordination and knowledge sharing through the Mentor -Mentee 
Program designed for IIC Institutions. 
• Empowering institutions from rural and aspirational districts of the country to get connected with 
regional startup ecosystems through the Impact Lecture (IL) Scries Program designed for IIC 
Institutions. 
• Enabling IIC institution s to build a strong pipeline of inventions, innovations and start -ups from 
HEIs and connecting with pre -incubation, incubation and ecosystem enablers for transformation 
into start-ups. 
• Providing mentoring and funding/grant support to Innovations through YUKTI Innovation 
Challenge (YIC), access to investors and incubation linkages. 
• Bridging higher education with schools through the Mentoring Linkage Support from Institutions' 
Innovation Council (IlCs) in HEIs with Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs) and School In novation 
Councils (SICs) in Schools: 
• Enabling HEIs for adoption of the model course curriculum on innovation and entrepreneurship at 
School, UG and PG level 
• Imbibing an IP driven culture, facilitating IF5 commercialization and technology transfer throu gh 
the INDOVATION Centres setup in various regions of the country. 
• Ensuring and incentivizing HEIs for the IP literary through the implementation of KAPILA 
scheme to support IP filing in HEIs. 
• Providing hand holding support to HEIs in formulating institution's specifics Innovation and 
Startup Policy through the adoption of National Innovation and Startup Policy (NFSP) guidelines 
in HEIs. 

3 
 
• Providing knowledge sharing platform to IIC institutions and celebrating innovation culture by 
organizing Innovative Bharat IIC Regional Meets in different cities across the country on regular 
basis. 
• Facilitating institutions to take part in the Innovation Ranking Framework to Benchmarking I&E 
Ecosystem in HEIs and Schools. 
• Enabling IIC institutions to org anise internal hackathons and connect with National and 
International Hackathons for creative problem solving by putting them in Design Boot -Camps for 
Innovators, conducting Smart India Hackathon and Toycathon and scries of international 
hackathons for stu dents from HEIs and Schools to engage them in creative problem solving and 
startup development. 
 
• IIITs have been designed to impart education in the broad areas of Information Technology. A 
multidisciplinary approach is being implemented in these institu tions. Furthermore, 
recommendations will also be communicated to IITs for necessary action 
 
• The National Education Alliance of Technologies (NEAT) was introduced by AICTE/ MoE to 
verify, aggregate, and deliver EdTech solutions directly to the students, g iving them wide choice 
to select the technological solution that would suit their requirements, thereby improving their 
overall learning. 
 
AICTE is acting as a facilitator to ensure that the solutions are available to socially and 
economically weaker secti on students. AICTE would own and distribute 25 % free coupons from the 
registration of NEAT Portal for learning to the socially/economically weaker section of students as per the 
scheme. ICT therefore, could be adopted at the system level to enhance studen t learning engagement and 
outcomes, including their capacity to learn for life. 
 
 
 
Recommendation  
2. The Committee recommends that the Department of Higher Education should formulate policies/ 
initiatives keeping in view the Master Plans that States formulate towards the higher education sector. 
This will help, on the one hand in better resource allocation and coordination between the States and the 
Ministry in extending financial support, and on the other curb the tendency of politicization of approv als 
for colleges by Universities and State Governments. 
(Para 20) 
Action Taken 
 The Department has informed the Committee that the University Grants Commission as a policy, 
regularly consults all State Universities in matters pertaining to higher education. Further, a Committee 
constituted by AICTE under the Chairmanship of Shri BVR Mohan Reddy, Chairman, Board of 
Governors, IIT Hyder abad prepared short term and medium term perspective plan for engineering 
education wherein suggestions for introduction of courses in new emerging areas,  optimum utilization of 
existing intake capacity, teachers training etc. have been given. The Committee studied the current state of 
engineering education in India. It has analyzed AICTE data on intake capacity at UG and PG Level in 
engineering and enrolment trends across the country, several analyst and associations’ reports on the 
technologies, jobs and skills, and engineering education trends of the future. The recommendation of the 
committee has been implemented by AICTE and major policy decisions have been taken to put 

4 
 
moratorium on opening of new engineering institutions in traditional disciplines upto academic  year 
2023-24 with certain exceptions. 
 
Recommendation  
3. The Committee recommends that the Government give an active con sideration to the demand that 
deemed universities be allowed to use the term 'university' by amending Clause 23 of the UGC Act, 1956 
which states that no institution, other than a university established or incorporated by a Central Act, a 
Provincial Act or  a State Act is entitled to use the word 'University', as the term 'deemed university' 
creates a lot of confusion in foreign countries as there is no concept of deemed university in many parts of 
the world. 
(Para 22) 
 
Action Taken 
 The Committee is informed that NEP 2020 envisages University, worldwide, means a 
multidisciplinary institution of higher learning that offers undergraduate, graduate, and Ph.D. 
programmes, and engages in high -quality teaching and research. The present comp lex nomenclature of 
HEIs in the country such as ‘deemed to be  university’ , ‘affiliating university’ , ‘affiliating technical 
university’, ‘unitary university’ shall be replaced simply by ‘university’ on fulfilling the criteria as per 
norms.  
 
Recommendation  
4. The Committee recommends that the Department advise the HEIs to consider a ‘Unipass’ system 
like in many educational institutions abroad which comprises a digitally enabled card for utilization of all 
internal and external facilities pro vided by the HEIs and government to students. This is especially 
important given that most HEIs in India issue multiple paper cards like health card, library card etc. 
seParately to students. 
(Para 26) 
 
Action Taken 
 The Department has informed the Committee that UGC has taken note of this very important 
recommendation. A policy decision is required to be taken in consultation with the HEIs.   
 
 AICTE welcomes the suggestion given by the Committee and will explore the feasibility of 
introduction of Unipass (Digitally Enabled Card) in AICTE Approved Institutions in place  of 
multiple cards such as Identity Card, Library Card and Health Card etc. 
 Some IIMs provide their students with only one identity card which is RFID enabled and facilities 
multiple functions such as library access, hall ticket for examinations, entry -exit pass, interlinked 
with a biometric system that can track attendance and assist the academic departments to sort details 
in real-time. 
 Some are in process of integrating several internal and external facilities in Unipass system. 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee taking note of the thrust areas and the proposed reforms as outlined for the Higher 
education sector in the National Education Policy (NEP) - 2020 recommends that the Department of 
Higher Education must formulate a visionary blueprint with a clear time bou nd roadmap and strict 
monitoring mechanism, towards each of the policy directions for their successful, effective and time -
bound implementation. 
(Para 1) 
Action Taken 
The Department has submitted that NEP 2020 provides different timelines as well as principles 
and methodology for its implementation. After announcement of National Education Policy 2020, a 
number of consultations / deliberations have been held with stakeh olders for implementation of the 
National Education Policy 2020. Further, actionable activities of National Education Policy 2020 were 
identified/ prepared for the year 2020 -21 and 2021 -2022 and circulated among stakeholders for 
implementation.  
It was also informed that based on the deliberations / consultations with States/UTs  Government, 
18-points action plan capturing the quantifiable targets related to activities of N EP, 2020 has been 
prepared and shared with States/UTs for implementation during the Academic Year 2022-23. Further, a 3-
day National level Conference with Chief Secretaries of States was held on Implementation of NEP, 2020 
and implementation of NEP 2020 was also the agenda item of 7th meeting of the Governing Council of 
NITI Aayog held on 7 th August, 2022. To discuss and deliberate implementation of NEP, 2020 and 
sharing of best practices, with different stakeholders Akhil Bharatiya Shiksha Samagam 2022 and Akhil 
Bharatiya Shiksha Samagam 2023 were organised. The matter of implementation of NEP 2020 and its 
achievement have been taken up with States/UTs through several communications and Consultation -cum-
Review Meetings. Consultation -cum-Review Meeting s with States / UTs of Northern Zone, Western 
Zone, Central/East Zone, North East Zone and S outh Zone held on 28.02.2023, 09.03.2023, 24.03.2023, 
11.05.2023 and 09.06.2023 respectively. 
The Committee was also informed that States/UTs had shared their action taken on 18 Action 
points/ targets for the Academic Year 2022 -23. Out of 36 States / UTs, 33 States/UTs had submitted their 
targets for Academic Year 2022 -23 whereas 31 States/UTs had shared their quantifiable targets and 
achievements. On similar line, States/UTs have been requested to share action taken for the Academic 
Year 2023-24. 
 
Recommendation  
2. The Committee, keeping in view the global trend in student learning, recommends that the 
Department of Higher Education along with its bodies must undertake an expert study to help provide 
avenues towards empowering students to chart the ir education pathways as per their needs and interest, 
leveraging traditional and other partnerships to bolster learning and making efforts towards ensuring 
widespread diffusion of education. The Committee, agreeing with the axiom of students becoming “the  
architect of their own education”, recommends that Universities must push for an open curriculum where 
students, instead of completing a set of core courses, can explore and sample a range of subjects before 
making their choice on what to pursue in depth and move towards taking greater ownership of their 
education, pursue education at their own pace, pave the way for lifelong, self -driven learning. The 

6 
 
Committee recommends that UGC and other regulatory bodies should undertake an exercise towards 
realizing this aim.                   (Para 12) 
3. The Committee recommends the formulation of a Comprehensive National Research Policy 
encompassing all kinds of research activities - both in social as well as physical sciences —with explicitly 
defined norms and quantifiable Parameters. While doing so, the C ommittee also recommends that all our 
well identified national developmental needs in social sector as well as infrastructure and science and 
technology be given high priority.                   (Para 13) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Committee was informed that UGC  has undertaken the following initiatives in light of the 
NEP 2020: 
 
UGC (Establishment and Operationalization of Academic Bank of Credits (ABC) Scheme in Higher 
Education) Regulations, 2021 
 
(i) UGC based on the principles of flexibility; no hard se Parations between disciplines, multi -
disciplinarily and holistic education, conceptual understanding on creativity and critical thinking, ethics 
and human &; constitutional values, life skills, respect for diversity and the local context, with focus on 
equity and inclusion proposed in the NEP 2020 and as per recommendations of NEP -2020, Academic 
Bank of Credits (ABC) has been established which will digitally store the academic credits earned by 
students from HEIs registered with ABC, for awarding degrees/diplom a/PG diploma/certificates taking 
into account credits earned by students. 
(ii) ABC is based on principle of Distributed & Flexible Teaching -Learning that allows a student to 
learn as per his or her convenience, drop education mid -way and pick it up again a s per their choice and 
convenience. This will also address curtailing the dropout ratio while also improving GER. 
(iii) These regulations and its first amendment have been notified in the Gazette of India on 28.07.2021 
and 28.12.2021 respectively and are available on UGC website. 
 
Guidelines for Pursuing Two Academic Programmes Simultaneously 
 
(i) The National Education Policy envisions imaginative and flexible curricular structures to enable 
creative combinations of disciplines for study, that would offer multiple entry and exit points, thus, 
removing currently prevalent rigid boundaries and creati ng new possibilities for life -long learning and 
centrally involve critical and interdisciplinary thinking. UGC framed the guidelines keeping in view the 
proposals envisaged in the National Education Policy - NEP 2020 which emphasizes the need to facilitate  
multiple pathways to learning involving both formal and non -formal education modes. The Guidelines 
have been published and uploaded on the UGC website on 13.04.2022.  
 
Guidelines for Multiple Entry and Exit in Academic Programmes offered in Higher Education Institutions 
 
(i) The proposed multiple entry and exit system is built on imaginative and flexible curricular 
structures facilitating students to choose their learning trajectory and programmes. The system provides 
learners with varied certification opt ions and paves the way for seamless student mobility, between or 
within degree-granting Higher Education Intuitions (HEIs) through a formal system of credit recognition, 
credit accumulation, credit transfers, and credit redemption. The flexibility in acade mic programmes will 
enable learners to seek employment after any level of award and join back as and when feasible to 

7 
 
upgrade qualification and also curtail dropout rate and improve Gross Enrolment Ratio (G ER) in higher 
education 
 
University Grants Commission (Academic Collaboration between Indian and Foreign Higher Educational 
Institutions to offer Twinning, Joint Degree and Dual Degree Programmes) Regulations, 2022 
 
(i) UGC constituted a Committee to frame enabling Regulations on Academic collaboration be tween 
Indian and foreign Higher Education Institutions to offer Joint Degree, Dual Degree and Twinning 
Programme. The Regulations shall promote enhanced academic collaboration with foreign higher 
educational institutions leading towards academic and resear ch excellence in the Indian higher 
educational institutions. lt is expected that academic and research collaboration as well as mobility of 
students and faculty through joint degree and dual degree programmes will be highly beneficial for the 
Indian higher educational institutions to achieve higher global rankings. 
 
These regulations have been notified in the Gazette of India on 02.05.2022 and are available on UGC 
website. 
 
• The model curriculum introduced by AICTE gives wide choice to students to select e lectives from 
diverse/ interdisciplinary areas. It is flexible and concept of minor and major degree has been proposed 
for students who earn 18-20 credits in emerging areas depending whether it is from different discipline or 
from the same discipline. Multidisciplinary approach in education system has been thus encouraged. 
With an aim to provide holistic education, Government of India has launched National Education Policy 
(NEP) 2020 in July 2020. Recognising research as core requisite for better education,  NEP 2020 
envisaged HEIs to focus on research and innovation by setting up start -up incubation centres; technology 
development centres; centres in frontier areas of research; greater industry -academic linkages; and 
interdisciplinary research including humanities and social sciences research.  
 
Further. “Anusandhan National Research Foundation Act, 2023” was notified to establish the Anusandhan 
National Research Foundation. Anusandhan National Research Foundation, an apex body has been 
envisaged to provide h igh-level strategic direction for research, innovation and entrepreneurship in the 
fields of natural sciences including mathematical sciences, engineering and technology, environmental 
and earth sciences, health and agriculture. It also seeks to promote sc ientific and technological interfaces 
of humanities and social sciences. Total estimated cost of Anusandhan National Research Foundation for 
five years is Rs. 50,000 crores. 
 
Research and Development Cell 
 
The NEP -2020 underscore the importance of a Resear ch-oriented approach in education to cultivate 
critical thinking and problem - solving skills among students at every step of their educational journey 
including school education to Higher education. To attain the objectives outlined in the NEP, The UGC 
has issued guidelines for establishing Research and Development Cell in Universities and Colleges in 
India for promoting research culture, guiding and motivating Research Scholars. The UGC is actively 
pursuing the Higher Educational Institutions to establish Research and Development Cells. So far, 1597 
Higher Educational Institutions have established Research and Development Cells. The UGC has also 
organised online lectures by eminent persons for R&D Cell Coordinators/Directors to share best practices. 
 
For Period 2020-2023:- 
No. of Beneficiaries Universities/Colleges= 34 

8 
 
Grant Released  
(Rs. in Crore)= 16.94 
Recommendation  
4. The Committee taking note of the shortage of adequate and qualified faculty to provide quality 
education and observing that many young students are not attracted towards the teaching profession 
since the recruitment process is quite prolonged with many procedural formalities, recommends that the 
Department of Higher Education may consider some reforms to shorten the time. Also, the facult y may be 
encouraged to undertake consultancy on sharing of resources basis in a uniform manner. 
(Para 16) 
Action Taken 
 It has been informed that UGC has prepared the Guidelines for Recruitment of Faculty in 
Universities, Colleges and Institutions Deemed to be Universities outlining the selection procedure and 
the time frame for recruitment which has been circulated to all Universities to adhere the guidelines. The 
Universities has also been requested to take steps to ensure that the vacancies in the Unive rsity as well as 
in the Colleges affiliated to University are filled up at the earliest. 
 
It was further informed that the guidelines aim to address concerns regarding shortage of quality 
teaching faculty in HEIs. The guidelines were uploaded on the offici al UGC website on 04.06.2019. 
Universities are autonomous institutions having autonomy to conduct their affairs pertaining to academic 
and administrative activities. 
 
Further, AICTE has issued gazette notification in 2019 on pay scales, service conditions of faculty 
and supporting staff to provide incentives for better performance and avenues for career progression 
through provision of study leave for acquiring higher qualifications, sabbatical leave for working in an 
industry etc. Appraisal mechanism has b een evolved and 360Degree feedback system has been put in 
place to receive feedback from students which help in performance appraisal of faculty also. 
AICTE has constituted a committee for industry interaction and faculty mobility to develop strong 
linkages between industry and academia and also suggest mobility of faculty from academia to industry 
and corporate leaders to provide their expertise as a Professor/ Associate Professor in Practice in technical 
institution. The Committee has submitted its report  and suggested sabbatical leave to faculty for existing 
faculty members in AICTE approved institutions and lateral entry of industry experts into AICTE 
approved institutions as regular faculty members along with their entitlement of pay and perks. 
 
Recommendation  
5. The Committee recommends that at least on an experimental basis a mechanism for ensuring the 
accountability and performance of faculties in the universities and colleges should be put in place similar 
to that of foreign universities where the performance of college professors/ teachers is evaluated by their 
peers and students. Such performance appraisal would help improve the quality of teaching. 
(Para 17) 
Action Taken 
 
 The Committee has been informed that in order to enhance the quality teach ing, UGC has taken 
many initiatives. High quality teaching is essential to improve student outcomes. Among the various 
measures supported in the UGC Regulation 2018 for improving quality of teaching is performance based 
appraisal system which assesses skil l, knowledge, ability and overall job performance of the faculty 
members. In this regard, UGC Regulation 2018, Clause 6.0 (II) clearly states that the universities may 

9 
 
devise their own self-assessment–cum-performance appraisal forms for teachers in strict adherence to the 
Appendix II, Table 1 to 5 specified in these regulations. Further, Clause 6.0 (VII) states that as per 
UGC/NAAC guidelines all universities/colleges shall established IQAC.   In the Assessment Criteria and 
Methodology Proforma, the IQAC may  also introduce the student feedback system as per the NAAC 
guidelines on institutional Parameters. 
 
It has been further informed that AICTE has issued Gazette Notification in 2019 on pay scales, 
service conditions of faculty and supporting staff to provide incentives for better performance and 
avenues for career progression through provision of study leave for acquiring higher qualifications, 
sabbatical leave for working in an industry etc. Appraisal mechanism has been evolved and 360Degree 
feedback system has been put in place to receive feedback from students which help in performance 
appraisal of faculty also. AICTE has constituted a Committee for industry interaction and faculty mobility 
to develop strong linkages between industry and academia and  also suggest mobility of faculty from 
academia to industry and corporate leaders to provide their expertise as a Professor/ Associate Professor 
in Practice in technical institution. The Committee has submitted its report and suggested sabbatical leave 
to faculty for existing faculty members in AICTE approved institutions and lateral entry of industry 
experts into AICTE approved institutions as regular faculty members along with their entitlement of pay 
and perks. 
 
Recommendation  
6. In order to enhance the  quality of education, especially in the various fields of engineering, the 
Committee recommends for mandatory mentoring of some chosen colleges, especially catering to students 
from a rural background or those located there, by the Indian Institutes of Te chnology (IITs). Such 
mentoring should encompass all aspects, including faculty skill upgradation, infrastructure enhancement 
to help pave the way towards student excellence. IITs should also proactively engage and develop 
Question Banks and Model Tests et c. which can help other Colleges in improving their benchmarks of 
teaching students. 
(Para 18) 
Action Taken 
 The Department has informed the Committee that the recommendation of the Committee has been 
noted. 
 
It was further informed that NPTEL is a project of Ministry of Education, initiated by 7 IITs along 
with the IISc, Bangalore in 2003, to provide quality education to anyone interested in learning from the 
IITs. There are 3000+ unique courses available for self-study on the portal. Also, Unnat Bharat Abhiyan 
is making a Paradigm shift in academic and research program of the country by the vision of 
transformational change in Rural Development processes by leveraging knowledge institutions to help 
build the architecture of an inclusive India. 
 
The Committee was also informed that in order to maintain the quality of Technical education in 
the Country, it has been made mandatory that 60% of the eligible courses are to be accredited. In the 
absence of such accreditation, AICTE shall not grant furth er extension of approval. Accordingly, 
Margdarshan Initiative has been introduced by AICTE for facilitating the technical institutes to improve 
the quality mandate as a whole. The initiative solicits support from senior academicians and well -
established in stitutes to hand hold & mentor other institutes who aspire to achieve accreditation. The 
senior academicians from IITs/ NITs/ other AICTE approved institutes (serving or superannuated) shall 
be nominated as Margdarshak (individual mentors) for guiding bene ficiary institutes. Their principal role 

10 
 
shall be to guide, support and encourage the beneficiary institutions in their development as they work to 
achieve accreditation in alignment with the broad objectives of quality mandate. 
 
 
Recommendation  
7. The Co mmittee recommends policy reform initiatives to fulfill the vision of “Atmanirbhar 
Universities” which abide by the vision of a ‘self -sustaining’ and ‘self -generating’ University. Towards 
the realization of this vision, the Committee also recommends toward s adequate autonomy, growth 
friendly regulatory 48 framework, enabling environment to raise significant financial resources and 
energizing towards innovation, entrepreneurship and collaboration of Universities, under a defined 
policy to be formulated by UGC. 
(Para 19) 
Action Taken 
 The Department has informed the Committee that MoE supports autonomy of HEls alongside the 
maintenance of quality. In order to provide more autonomy to HEls, UGC has notified thefollowing 
regulations to promote autonomy in HEls: 
 University Grants Commission (Conferment of Autonomous Status Upon Colleges and Measures 
for Maintenance of Standards in Autonomous Colleges) Regulations, 2023notified in the Gazette 
on 10 April 2023. 
 University Grants Commission [Categorisation of Univers ities (only) for  Grant of Graded 
Autonomy] (First Amendment) Regulations, 2022 (The Regulations have been revised to amend 
clauses 4.10 and 5.7, which pertain to universities offering programs in Open and Distance 
Learning mode.) 
 
Institutions of Eminence Scheme 
 
It was informed that Government of India approved the scheme of providing Regulatory Architecture 
for setting up / upgrading of 20 Institutions (10 from public sector & 10 from private sector) as world 
class teaching and research institutions calle d as “Institutions of Eminence”. The Regulatory Architecture 
was provided in the form of UGC (Declaration of Government Institutions as Institutions of Eminence) 
Guidelines, 2017 for public Institutions and UGC (Institutions of Eminence Deemed to be Univer sities) 
Regulations, 2017 for private Institutions. 
 
Further, an Empowered Expert Committee (EEC) constituted by the Government of India for the 
purpose of identifying and selection of the Institutions of Eminence recommended a total of 30 
institutions (15  Public and 15 private) The Commission considered the report of the EEC and 
recommended a total of 20 institutions (10 Public and 10 Private including 2 under Greenfield category) 
for recognition as IoE by the Education Ministry. So far, the Government has  notified 8 public and 4 
private institutions as IoEs.   Funds released by UGC on behalf of MoE during:- 
 
- 2022-2023: An amount of ₹ 1,199.99Crore was sanctioned by Ministry of Education for public 
IoE Institutions under the object head 31 & 35, out of which ₹ 1,149.99Crore were released for the 
financial year 2022-2023. 
 
- 2023-2024: An amount of ₹ 1,276.50Crore was sanctioned by Ministry of Education for public 
IoE Institutions under the object head 31 & 35, out of which ₹ 1,276.50Crore were released for the  
financial year 2023-2024 (December). 

11 
 
Recommendation  
8. The Committee recommends adoption of Cluster System in higher education, as a defined policy, 
through sharing of resources such as libraries, infrastructure, Laboratories, best practices and other 
human resources which will prove beneficial and UGC must evolve norms towards such sharing by 
reputed Universities/ IITs etc. 
(Para 21) 
Action Taken 
 The Department has informed the Committee of the following: 
 
Cluster System in Higher Education 
 
The quintessence of Higher Education Institution (HEI), as envisioned in the National Education 
Policy 2020, is one which builds vibrant communities of scholars and peers, break down harmful silos 
between disciplines and enable students to become well -rounded individuals. However, a substantial 
number of HEIs in the country are either single stream institutions or multidisciplinary institutions with 
rigid disciplinary boundaries. To transform the HEIs into multidisciplinary institutions,  in line with the 
NEP 2020, UGC constituted an expert committee.  Based on the suggestions of the committee, UGC has 
notified “Guidelines for Transforming Higher Educational Institutions in to Multidisciplinary Institutions” 
on 02.09.2022. 
Objectives: 
•Transform single -stream in stitutions into large multidisciplinary universities and autonomous degree -
awarding HEIs.  
• Strengthen institutional infrastructure necessary for multidisciplinary education and research. 
 
It was also informed that the main thrust of this policy regarding  higher education is to end the 
fragmentation of higher education by transforming higher education institutions into large 
multidisciplinary universities, colleges, and HEI clusters/Knowledge Hubs, each of which will aim to 
have 3,000 or more students. Thi s would help build vibrant communities of scholars and peers, break 
down harmful silos, enable students to become well-rounded across disciplines including artistic, creative, 
and analytic subjects as well as sports, develop active research communities acr oss disciplines including 
cross-disciplinary research, and increase resource efficiency, both material and human, across higher 
education. 
 
Recommendation  
9. Taking note of the fact that many deemed Universities in order to make quick money were starting 
Open Distance Learning courses undermining the qualitative research work, the Committee strongly 
recommends adequate measures to curb such tendencies after carefully examining the options. 
(Para 23) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 The Committee is informed that UGC had no tified the University Grants Commission (Open and 
Distance Learning Programmes and Online Programmes) Regulations, 2020 in the official Gazette of 
India on 4 th September, 2020 and subsequent amendments in 2021 and 2022. Under these Regulations, 
provisions to encourage access and quality education are:  
 

12 
 
(i) Only quality centric HEIs are permitted to offer ODL/online programmes based on 
NAAC and NIRF eligibility and also, quality of programmes offered is maintained at 
par with standards as defined for the conventional/ODL mode of teaching. 
(ii) Regulations mandate that HEIs can offer Online programmes only if same programme is 
offered in conventional/ODL mode and one batch has passed out from that. 
(iii) HEIs having NAAC score 3.01 and above or having rank in Top -100 in University 
category of NIRF, at least once in two preceding cycles are only allowed to offer ODL 
Programmes. HEIs not fulfilling the above requirement are not all owed to offer 
programmes in ODL mode.   
(iv) HEIs having NAAC score 3.26 and above or having rank in Top -100 in University 
category of NIRF, at least twice in three preceding cycles (at the time of application) can 
start maximum 13 (3 Undergraduate + 10 Postgra duate) Online programme without 
prior approval of the UGC but in compliance to the Regulations and are permitted to 
enrol International Learners also. 
(v) Further, various quality centric provisions are also mentioned under UGC (Open and 
Distance Learning Prog rammes and Online Programmes) Regulations, 2020 which 
cover domains like prohibited programmes, programme delivery, learner support centres 
(for ODL only), active learner engagement, proctored examination, SLM/E -LM, End 
semester examination, non -SWAYAM lea rning platform assessment, mobility of 
learners, equivalence of qualification and complaint handling mechanism. Monitoring of 
HEIs is done via self -regulation through disclosures, declarations, reports, Centre for 
Internal Quality Assurance (CIQA) assessment and third-party audit. 
 
To streamline and regulate the technical education in the areas of computer applications, data 
science & artificial intelligence, Logistics and Travel & Tourism, AICTE has framed guidelines and 
gazette notification has been issued in 2021 for according approval to technical institutions for the same. 
 
Recommendation  
10. The Committee notes that many Universities and IITs as well as IIMs have started Incubation 
Centres. While these are steps in the right direction, the Committee recommends that the advisability of 
evolving a new branch of knowledge creation namely Incubation and Innovation Studies be explored. 
Such studies would help assess the impact of these centres as well as gather new insights into the 
sociology of the new st art-up culture. This will also enable the assessment of incubation and innovation 
activities taking place in universities and monitor its success and failure. 
(Para 24) 
Action Taken 
 The Committee is informed that AICTE has developed model course curriculu m specially to 
introduce MBA Course in Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Venture Development wherein incubation 
has been made mandatory for prospective students. 
 
 IIMs have established incubation centers to promote entrepreneurship and innovation. Some IIMs’ 
Innovation Park are Section 8 Company. These Innovation Park acts as a dynamic resource Centre 
to transform ideas into scalable, viable and profitable businesses.  Through their various activities, 
they are contributing towards building a new start-up “culture in the country”. 
 Apart from start -ups, IIMs also engage their student community in such activities to nurture the 
spirit of entrepreneurship. Many entrepreneurship programs are offered to  students such as: a) 
Summer Entrepreneurship Program, a two month summer program for students to explore their own 

13 
 
venture in lieu of a corporate internship, b) Student Venture Program, a framework for students to 
pursue their venture ambitions and get academic credits and potential investment in the process, a nd 
c) Deferred Placements Program, an opportunity for graduated students to explore their own venture 
and still be able to participate in placement process subsequently, if required. All these programs 
offer financial assistance to students in varying form s, a monthly stipend, prototype funding, and 
investment opportunities through their partner ecosystem. 
 IIMs also conduct events such as Idea hackathons, B -plan competitions, and case study 
competitions, start -up conclaves for student ventures powered by bu siness and domain mentoring 
from entrepreneurs and industry experts.  Further, these recommendations will be intimated to IITs. 
 
 
 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee notes that the National Education Policy, 2020 envisages the creation of the 
Higher Education Commission of India (HECI) as the principal regulator for higher education, with four 
verticals for regulation, accreditation, fu nding, and academic standards and also a Bill to provide for 
HECI is under drafting stage. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that the aspects relating to 
protection of interests of stakeholders, clear demarcation of its jurisdiction to avoid any re gulatory 
overlaps and gaps, independent nature with adequacy of resources and performance accountability be 
given due consideration. The Committee recommends that instead of having too many Parallel regulatory 
bodies in the higher education sector, a simpl ified hierarchy of regulatory bodies may be constituted 
which will have a final say in implementation of Government rules/regulations/acts etc. 
(Para 2) 
Action Taken 
 
 The Committee was informed that the  Government announced the NEP, 2020 on 29.07.2020. 
Regarding the regulatory system of higher education, the NEP, 2020 states that regulation of higher 
education has been too heavy -handed for decades; too much has been attempted to be regulated with too 
little effect. The mechanistic and disempowering nature of the regulatory system has been rife with very 
basic problems, such as heavy concentrations of power within a few bodies, conflicts of interest among 
these bodies, and a resulting lack of accountabilit y. The regulatory system is in need of a complete 
overhaul in order to re -energize the higher education sector and enable it to thrive. To address these 
issues, the NEP envisions setting up of a Higher Education Commission of India. In the backdrop of the 
NEP, 2020, for the implementation of the envisioned Regulatory System of Higher Education, the 
Department of Higher Education has prepared a draft Higher Education Commission of India Bill. The 
matter is being considered by Ministry of Education (MOE) in consultation with stakeholders. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee observes that the multiplicity of regulators leads to inconsistency in 
standards and monitoring, making it difficult for institutions to function effectively. Moreover, 
State Universities, which educate over 90 per cent of the student population, are caught in between 
national and state -level regulations. The draft Higher Education Commission of India Bill (HECI) 
(which seeks to replace UGC as a single regulator) appears to perpetuate many of these same issues 
by maintaining a Central Government - heavy composition and insufficient State representation. 
The proposed HECI Bill will hold significant power, including the ability to grant degree -awarding 
authority and close institutions failing to meet standards. This removes State control and could lead 
to the closure of institutions in rural areas that suffer from infrastructure or faculty shortages. It 
would indirectly fuel privatization especially in rural areas . The Committee, therefore,  
recommends that a simplified hierarchy of regulatory bodies would be more effective, the 
Department should ensure that any such unified regulatory body must have adequate 
representation for all States and there should not be excess centralization.  
 
 

15 
 
Recommendation  
2. The Committee recommends that the Department of Higher Education/ UGC and the Universities 
should collectively review the current state of academia -industry partnerships and take measures to 
strengthen them further as these can greatly h elp to mitigate the shortage of skilled workforce. The 
Committee is of the view that such collaboration between the industry and the higher educational 
institutions would help students develop crucial entrepreneurship/ business skills, provide hands -on 
experience and help create a robust talent pool. 
(Para 3) 
Action Taken 
 
 The Department has informed that UGC has finalized guidelines on Sustainable and Vibrant 
University-Industry Linkage System for Indian Universities. UGC has also requested all Higher 
Education Institutions in its purview to take necessary action for implementation of the guidelines in letter 
and spirit.  
 
 
It was also informed that UGC has formulated ‘Guidelines for Internships/Research Internship for 
Undergraduate students and these are aimed to improve employability skills and help in generating 
competency, capability, professional working skills, expertisation  and confidence among students for 
employability and developing interest/ passion for research.  These guidelines were launched on 2nd 
February, 2024. 
 
National Credit Framework (NCrF):-  
It has been submitted that UGC notified the NCrF on 10.04.2023 to enable seamless integration of 
all forms of learning. It helps in the conversion of learning from various dimensions i.e. academic, 
vocational skills, and experiential learning into qualifications through a common credit framework. It lays 
down the basic principles of creditization of learning. Under the National Credit Framework (NCrF) every 
learning hour can be creditized subject to its assessment. The Credit levels to be assigned across school/ 
higher/ vocational education/ skilling, (independent of the streams, subjects, etc.) are based on the 
cumulative numbers of years of learning with assessment. The assessment is thus mandatory for earning 
credits for all types of learning. The assessments ar e the stages at which the student/ learner needs to be 
formally assessed for progression in academic/ vocational/ skilling streams. 
 
Guidelines for engaging Professor of Practice in Universities and Colleges:-  
UGC has taken a new initiative to bring the i ndustry and other professional expertise into the academic 
institutions through a new category of positions called “Professor of Practice”. This will help to take real -
world practices and experiences into the classrooms and also augment the faculty resourc es in higher 
education institutions. Alongwith the guidelines to engage Professors of Practice (PoP) in Higher 
Educational Institutions, published on 30.09.2022, the UGC has also developed a portal to provide a 
platform to connect aspiring PoPs and the institutions wanting to hire practitioners” 
 
• To address the challenges faced by the Indian IT industry and growth of the domestic IT market, 
the Ministry of Education (MoE), Government of India established twenty Indian Institutes of Information 
Technology (IIIT), on a Not-for-profit Public Private Partnership (N-PPP) basis. The partners in setting up 
the 11 IIITs would be the Ministry of Education, Governments of the respective States where each IIIT 
will be established, and the Industry Partner(s). Student s are encouraged to undergo training in Industry 

16 
 
and take -up industry oriented project works. The institute encourages students to attend national and 
international conferences and competitions by funding them from institute. 
 
• AICTE has made internships mandatory for students at UG and PG Levels to give industrial 
exposure to students. AICTE has developed an internship portal to facilitate internships in Industry and in 
other sectors. The portal brings together the internship opportunities in the Governme nt sector like 
MoHUA, NHAI, Railways, MoSJE, MSMEs, Corporate Sector, NGOs, Startups, and Research 
organizations.  
Institutions are mandatorily required to enter into minimum 5 -MoUs with Industry for internships etc. 
AICTE undertakes Survey for Industry -Linked Technical Institutes annually and maps industry linkages 
of Indian technical institutes in four broad streams – Engineering, Management, Architecture and 
Pharmacy. It showcases the best practices of partnerships with industry and highlights the streng ths and 
weaknesses of the ecosystem of technical education in India. At the end of the survey, awards and 
citations are given to the Best Industry Linked Institutes. 
 
• The Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs) have strong industry connect.  
• Industry experts are invited for regular lectures/adjunct/guest faculty members.  
• Summits and Leadership Workshops are organized where top leaders from industry visit and 
interact with the faculty and staff.  
• Inputs from IIM alumni working in industries are used for Curriculum review and designing of 
Management Development Programmes.  
• IIMs also have industry interaction cells which regularly conducts talks by industry experts.  
• IIMs also conduct Management Development programs (MDP) for the executives from 
business/industry, education, and government sectors, in order to equip them with the advanced 
knowledge and skills in the evolving realities of business and management practices as well as 
applications.  
• Incubation Centres at IIMs also hold various events to which students are invited.  
• Industry Experts conduct Block Seminars and Skill Seminars, Summits & Sessions which bring 
together experts, thinkers and practitioners from India and abroad. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee observes that the Department in its Action Taken Note has emphasized on 
several initiatives aimed at skill development which includes linkages with industry and institutions, 
summits and leadership workshops, entrepreneurship centres at busin ess schools. However, these 
initiatives focus only on certain fraction of students who have commerce or science or technical 
background. It ignores students with humanity related subjects. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should emp hasize more on students from non -technical, 
humanities and related backgrounds. There should be opportunities in institutes to bring in 
expertise of established persons of a field. For instance, established writers, storytellers propagating 
writing skills as a potential career option. Similarly, there should be increased field visits for 
students enrolled in archaeology, geology, etc. Further, the Ministry should also take initiatives to 
generate awareness on further career/ education opportunities in these  fields and collaborate with 
other Ministries to provide associated opportunities.   
 
 
 
 

17 
 
Digital University 
Recommendation  
3. The Committee appreciating the move towards establishing a Digital University to provide access 
to students across the country of  world-class quality universal education with personalized learning 
experience at their doorsteps, recommends towards developing more such hubs and spoke models of 
education delivery. The Committee recommends that public universities can act as hubs with l ocal 
institutions serving as the spokes, and can thus become a carrier of quality education to all parts of the 
country. Further, the Committee recommends that a new Phygital or Physical plus Digital (hybrid) way of 
instructions be experimented with in a structured manner and its impact assessed scientifically. 
(Para 4) 
Action Taken 
 The Committee was informed that Government of India in its Budget 2022 -2023 has announced 
establishment of Digital University which is as follows: 
 
“A Digital University will b e established to provide access to students across the country for 
world-class quality universal education with personalised learning experience at their doorsteps. This will 
be made available in different Indian languages and ICT formats. The University w ill be built on a 
networked hub -spoke model, with the hub building cutting edge ICT expertise. The best public 
universities and institutions in the country will collaborate as a network of hub-spokes.” 
 
It was also informed that following collaborative models are also being worked out: 
• UGC has prepared a concept note on Blended mode of teaching and learning in Higher 
Educational Institutions, 2022 which allows HEIs to teach up to 40% of syllabus of each course 
(other than SWAYAM course) through online mode and the remaining 60% syllabus of the 
concerned courses is to be taught in offline mode. Examination for both 40% online and 60% 
offline teaching will be conducted offline.  
• IIMs conduct programmes for corporate executives/government officers and ex ecutives of 
other organizations in online/hybrid modes. Libraries in IIMs have digital access both for faculty 
and students which helps in providing learning experience at their doorstep. Apart from courses in 
physical mode, IIMs also conduct online mode o f classes and assessments by using different 
audio-visual technologies for smooth delivery of the curriculum. The Institutes also have high -end 
technology in the form of hybrid classrooms for conducting classes to both offline and online 
students at the same time seamlessly. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  The Committee observes that the National Digital University (NDU) promises inclusive, 
flexible, and affordable education aligned with NEP goals. However, it foundation, SWAYAM, 
faces significant challenges. Since 2017, less than 4 per cent of enrolled students have completed 
SWAYAM courses. Complaints include outdated content, inflexible teaching, and poor 
infrastructure. Teachers report inadequate training, low compensation, and technical hurdles, 
undermining their efficiency. The 1:15 teacher -student ratio is disregarded in the online model, 
leading to overcrowded virtual classrooms. Additionally, only 4 per cent of SC/ST and 7 per cent of 
OBC students have internet -enabled computers, per Oxfam India 2022 , questioning NDU's equity 
claims. 
 The Committee feels that digital initiatives will only provide lukewarm response in terms of 
engagement unless the Department starts proactively assisting in placements wherever possible or 
establishing a platform associate d with SWAYAM for connecting recruiters to students. The 

18 
 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should also take steps to ensure courses 
are completed by candidates, since major private online platforms suffer from this. The 
Department should also consider establishing a separate cell for ensuring greater participation of 
students from underprivileged sections of society and should also monitor their enrolment and 
progress diligently. 
 
Recommendation  
4. The Committee recommends that donations and community contribution towards higher education 
institutions should be encouraged through appropriate policy measures. Donations by individuals, alumni 
and institutions should be encouraged through tax incentives. All donations to the higher education  
institutions should be 100% tax deductible. Institutions building a vibrant Alumni Base may be given 
some incentives in taxes and other charges. 
(Para 5) 
Action Taken 
 The Department has informed the Committee that IIMs welcome donations by individuals, alumni 
and institutions with tax incentives as per prevailing rules of the Government of India. As per IIM Act 
2017, IIMs are Institutes of National Importance and has applied for 80 G (2) (a) (iiif) of Income Tax Act, 
1961 which will give the donors inclu ding alumni 100% tax exemption. Some IIMs have established 
funds under Section 8 of Company’s Act to receive donations/ raise grant and endowment in India and 
Overseas to facilitate tax -effective contributions from its alumni and well -wishers. Some IIMs ha ve also 
applied for FCRA registration, which will enable it to source donations from foreign based organizations 
& donors including Alumni. Further, under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), IIMs receive funding 
in India. 
 
Further, Ministry of Education  is also encouraging Centrally Funded Technical Institutes (CFTIs) 
for enhancement of Endowment Funds for the purpose of Mobilizing donation and contributions from 
wisher, alumni, Industry and Philanthropy. In this regard, the detailed guidelines have also  been issued by 
this Department. Further Section 35 of the Income Tax Act provides for 100% deduction of payment 
made to the IITs /National Universities for Scientific Research purposes. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The Committee notes the work done by the Ministry and the IIMs in particular in this 
regard. However, the Ministry should work to ensure that Section 35 of the Income Tax Act 
provide 100% deduction of payment made to the IITs /National Universities not just for scientific 
research purposes but fo r all purposes – as recommended by the Committee , to ensure maximum 
mobilization of funds for central universities.  
 
Recommendation  
5. The Committee, noting that sincere efforts are required to attract and retain faculty with good 
research skills, recommends for undertaking a review of the current system of faculty recruitment, 
appraisal, assessment, promotions and for developing a rewards -based regime on performance measured 
through research contributions and publications. Also, the model of appoin ting talented alumni/senior 
students/Ph.D. scholars as Teaching Assistants, beneficial to the Universities, faculty and research 
students, be studied and implemented. This will help such researchers/scholars to get exposure to the 
teaching skill and to mitigate the shortage of faculty in universities/institutions.    

19 
 
(Para 6) 
6. The Committee recommends that world class training programmes for academic administrators 
be developed as high quality education administration has generally remained a neglected as pect of the 
Indian higher education system. Also, courses such as Bachelor of School/College/University 
Management Science for non -teaching staff to manage educational services, exam management, 
academic administrations need to be formulated as they form t he backbone of any educational institution. 
The Committee further recommends that there should be Institutional Leadership/ Management course for 
aspiring/existing Principals/ Administrative Heads of the Colleges/ Universities to give them exposure to 
the management skills required to lead the institutions.        (Para 8) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Committee has been informed that UGC with an objective to conduct academic and 
performance audit of selected Central Universities had constituted Expert Committees to visit the 
respective Universities and conduct the audit on academic, research, financial and infrastructural 
Parameters and submit its report to the UGC for consideration. The Expert Committees have since 
conducted the audit of the selected Central Universities and submitted their reports to the UGC. 
 
Further, for capacity building and training of the faculty members of HEIs, Central Sector Scheme 
of Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya National Mission on Teachers & Teaching (PMMMNMTT) was 
launched in December 2014  aimed to improve the quality of Education at all levels by infusing quality 
and excellence in our teachers, students and teaching learning. The following are the achievements under 
the scheme:- 
95 units have been set up under 9 components of the scheme. I n addition, 3 components viz. Induction 
Training Program for newly recruited faculties, Annual Refresher Programme in Teaching  (ARPIT) and 
Leadership for Academicians Programme (LEAP) have also been initiated. In all, 98 units have been 
established under the scheme. 
(a) Total Infrastructure developed- 119 numbers of Buildings / Labs/ Studio /Classrooms established 
and equipment purchased. 
(b) Total beneficiaries - 11.39 lakh faculties (Offline - 1.80 Lakhs and  online- 9.59 lakhs) lakhs) 
including 5737 teachers are graduated from SoE pre-service programs (B.Ed&M.Ed) 
(c) Total States covered- 23 including North East States 
 
(i) In the light of NEP 2020 and G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration held on 9 -10 September 2023 
which inter-alia prescribes ‘Extend support to educational institutions and teachers to enable them to keep 
pace with emerging trends and technological advances including AT. The Scheme PMMMNMTT has 
been re-envisioned and relaunched on 05.09.2023 with total outlay of Rs, 361.59 crore for the years 2023-
24 to 2025 -26. The new version of the scheme envisions to build competencies in faculty for better 
teaching, learning, research and academic leadership by aligning them with Indian values and updating 
their knowledge and skills according to the needs of society and NEP 2020. 
(ii) After re-envisioning of Malaviya Mission Teacher Training Programme  (MMTTP), the prospect 
of the scheme has been upgraded in terms of its components, targets and outcome. Apart from 
conventional programmes (Faculty Induction Programme, Refresher course and Short term programme), 
the scheme MMTTP has now some new components like NEP Orientation and Sensitization programme, 
Capacity Building of Specific Learning Disabilities, Capacity Building on Design & Entrepreneurship. 
Nurturing Future Leadership Program, Academic Leadership Programme, Teacher Connect Program etc. 

20 
 
(i) At present, 137 institutions have been identified as a part of Malaviya Mission Teacher Training 
Program. These centres will be c alled as Malaviya Mission Centres (MMC). These centers will conduct 
above different types of programmes. 
(ii) Out of 137 centers, 116 centers will conduct conventional programmes, 20 new centers (IITs & 
IIMs) have been identified for Nurturing Future Leadership  Program, IIT Jammu has been identified for 
Academic Leadership Programme which will conduct capacity building programme for existing faculties 
and IIITDM Kancheepuram will conduct Capacity Building on Design & Entrepreneurship for 50 HEIs. 
(iii) Proposed Outcome of the Scheme: 
(a) All Faculty members will get sensitized and oriented on NEP 2020 to make India global 
knowledge superpower by imparting holistic education, imbibing the ideals of Bhartiya- centric ethics and 
human values. 
(b) Teachers and Learners will acquire the concept of the Indian Knowledge Systems 
(BharatiyaGyanParamPara), integrate in the curriculum and apply it in real life for the advancement and 
creation of knowledge including in Bharatiya Languages. 
(c) The learners will develop 21st Century skill s and become reflective practitioners to innovatively 
generate and apply ideas respecting biodiversity and sustainability. 
(d) The learners shall conduct quality research to solve contemporary problems through innovation 
and entrepreneurship. 
(e) The learners will develop the capacity to integrate ICT tools into the learning process and become 
lifelong self-motivated learners. 
(f) The faculty will contribute to institution, society and nation building. 
 
Brief Note on vacancies filled up in CHEIs under Mission  Recruitment 
The Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) under Ministry of Education are statutory autonomous 
organizations established under respective Central Acts of Parliament and governed by provisions of the 
Acts/Statutes/Ordinances/Regulations made thereunder. Occurring of vacancies and filling thereof is a 
continuous process. The vacancies arise due to retirement, resignation and additional requirements on 
account of enhanced students’ strength. 
 
The institutions have been taking measures to attract quality fac ulty, which include year -round 
open advertisements, invitation through search -cum-selection procedures to alumni/scientists/faculty etc. 
The institutions also recruit ad -hoc faculty, invite guest lecturers, visiting faculty, conduct Faculty 
Development programmes ensuring optimal faculty strength and smooth running of classes. 
Further, in order to enable HEIs to engage industry experts and professionals as guest faculty in HEIs to 
share the wealth of knowledge gained over their long careers with students, t he UGC has developed 
Guidelines for engaging Professors of Practice in universities and colleges. 
 
‘RozgarMela’ is one of the steps toward fulfilment of the commitment of the Government to 
accord highest priority to fill all vacant posts. The Department of  Higher Education, Ministry of 
Education, is also committed to this cause and identified more than 32000 vacancies in all the Central 
Higher Educational Institutions (CHEIs) across the country. As on 12 th February 2024, a total of 22286 
vacancies have been filled up in Central Higher Educational Institutions (CHEIs) since September 2022. 
These appointments include teaching positions like Professors, Associate Professors, and Assistant 
Professors along with Support staff viz. Registrars, Deputy and Assistant  Registrars, Librarians etc. Also, 
these 22286 appointments do not include promotions. The details of vacancies filled up to 12.2.2024 in 
Mission Mode,  is tabled as under: 
S. No. Group of Institutions Vacancies filled in 
Mission Mode 

21 
 
1. Central Universities 9817 
2 Indian Institutes of Technology 5117 
3 National Institutes of Technology 5286 
4 Indian Institutes of Management 695 
5 Indian Institute of Information 
Technology 
420 
6 Indian Institutes of Science 
Education and Research/Indian 
Institute of Science 
508 
7 Standalone Institutes like BoATs, 
NITTTRs, NITIE etc. 
309 
8 Others CHEIs 134 
 Total 22286 
 
 
The key objectives of this program is to provide Leadershi p and Management training workshops 
to deans, principals and aspiring managers from AICTE approved institutes and Polytechnics. Accredited 
by Charted Management institute (CMI), the selected delegates undertake three workshops; between these 
workshops, the  participants or the team of the participants work on a “Change project” within their 
organization, allowing them to put into practice the leadership and management skills they are developing 
through this training. The Change Management component of the pr ogramme results in significant, 
measurable impact on the participating institutions. The enhancement of the change projects is expected 
to lead to considerable and immediate impact. Successful completion of the Change project and 
submission of assignment a llow the delegates to receive the CMI Level 5 Certificate in Leadership and 
Management. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The Committee notes the Ministry’s attempts to secure adequate talent for our higher 
educational institutes. However, action should be taken on the Committee’s specific 
recommendation on appointing talented alumni/senior students/Ph.D. scholars as Teaching  
Assistants. It can be done on a trial basis in a few universities and evaluated before being scaled up 
nationally. Finally, the Committee also directs the  Department to share the report of the Expert 
Committee and its Membership at the earliest. 
 The Comm ittee further observes that most universities especially under the Central 
Government have a higher amount of contractual workforce. As many as four thousand teachers 
are employed in Central Universities in temporary posts. This shift away from permanent, secure 
government jobs towards casual, short-term contracts has been driven by the Government's retreat 
from public education and the increasing influence of neo -liberal policies. Contractual positions 
AICTE-Leadership in Teaching Excellence (AICTE -LITE)-AICTE’s Leadership in Teaching 
Excellence (LITE) is a national programme aims to bring modern software engineering knowledge 
through proven online teaching-learning methods to 100,000 teachers and 2.4 Crore students in India. UK 
India Education and Research Initiative (UKIERI) on Leadership Development: AICTE signed an 
agreement on Sep tember 2016, with Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (DBEIS), 
UK, on the joint operation of the activities under UK India Education and Research Initiative (UKIERI) 
Phase-III. 

22 
 
offer no job security, no salary increments, and lack of social security benefits like promotions, 
pensions, or paid leave. Despite, these disadvantages, such jobs have become highly sought after due 
to the scarcity of permanent jobs, particularly in fields like social sciences and humanities.  
Contractual faculties also face institutional hurdles when attempting to conduct research, including 
lack of access to research grants and insufficient institutional recognition. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should work on regularizat ion of jobs to 
provide job security and ensure fair working conditions as well to enhance capacity building  which 
will motivate them to put effort for improving research and pedagogy. 
 
Recommendation  
7. The Committee recommends enhancing international collaborations in the form of student 
exchanges, faculty exchanges, joint teaching, research, conferences, publications, executive education 
programmes and study -abroad programmes as such activities will not only broaden the horizon of the 
participants but  will also help in promoting the global engagement of Indian higher education 
institutions. The Committee strongly recommends that the Department must review and take appropriate 
action on the Destination India Report prepared by the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR). 
(Para 7) 
Action Taken 
 
 The Committee has been informed that in line with the recommendations of the Hon’ble 
Parliamentary Committee, and also taking into consideration the findings of the Destination India Report 
of ICCR, the Ministry of Education has taken several steps to enhance international collaboration and 
promote global engagement of Indian Higher Education institutions. Some of these include : 
1. In order to foster academic collaboration between Indian and foreign HEIs  UGC has 
brought out Regulations enabling Joint/ Dual and Twinning Degrees between Indian and foreign 
HEIs, under which students can do a few semesters in each of the partner countries toward 
fulfilment of the programme.  50 Indian HEIs are already offerin g Joint / Dual/ Twinning degree 
programmes in collaboration with foreign HEIs.  
2. UGC has brought out Regulations for foreign HEIs to set up branch campuses in India. 
Applications are being invited from interested universities on a portal set up for this purpose. 
3. GIFT City in Gujarat has also been opened up for foreign universities to set up campuses 
in select disciplines like STEM, FINTECH etc. Wollongong and Deakin universities of Australia 
are  already in the process of setting up their branches and will start their courses very soon 
4. Indian HEIs are setting up campuses abroad – IIT Delhi has set up its branch in Abu Dhabi 
and IIT Madras in Tanzania- Zanzibar.  
5. In order to promote active research collaboration with top international universities in 
priority areas like critical and emerging technology, semiconductors, AI, health, sustainable 
agriculture, energy etc, an Empowered Committee for Industry and International Collaborations 
(ECIIC)"consisting of top IIT leadership  has been set up. This c ommittee will be the apex body 
for giving direction to all research collaborations in these priority areas, and will also hand -hold 
HEIs across the country for entering into such collaborations.  Some of the lead initiatives under 
this are  the ongoing col laboration with US universities for setting up the India -US Global 
Challenges Institute, and the focused Phase -4 of the programme Scheme for Promotion of 
Academic Collaboration (SPARC) under which Indian HEIs enter into research collaborations 
with foreign HEIs from 28 select countries.  
6. In order to provide a single window framework for international students to come and 
study in Indian HEIs the Ministry of Education has made a Study In India portal in collaboration 
with Ministry of Home Affairs and Mini stry of External Affairs . Every foreign student coming to 

23 
 
study in any Indian institution will be required to come through this portal. A unique ID will be 
generated which will be used for issuing Visa. The FRRO and the Indian Missions will also have 
access to the portal. This system will remove the visa issues being faced by international students 
and give them all information about Indian HEIs at a single window.  
7. HEIs are being encouraged to establish Offices of International Affairs to hand -hold 
international students and make their on -campus experience a good one. 179 HEIs have set up 
such offices. 
Consultations: 
 
• G20 Education Working Group (EdWG) and Education Ministers’ Meeting (EMM):- 
The G20 EdWG and Education Ministers’ Meetings culminated i nto G20 Outcome document and 
Chair’s Summary. The Chair’s Summary outlined the key priorities for G20 countries under each theme. 
The outcome documents included the Education Working Group Report: One Earth, One Family, One 
Future through Education and the Compendium on Education Policies and Programmes in G20 countries. 
 
• India-US Working Group on Education and Skill Development:- 
As announced by the leaders during the India -US 2+2 Dialogue 2022, India -US Working Group 
on Education and Skill Development w as formally launched virtually on 22nd May 2023. The 
Working Group decided to form four sub -committees namely, (i) Skilling and vocational 
education, (ii) Certification and recognition, (iii) Matchmaking between U.S. and Indian higher 
educational institutions and (iv) Engaging with the Private Sector, to deliberate ways to enhance 
educational collaboration between India and USA. 
 
• Engagements with UAE:- 
A delegation led by Hon’ble Education Minister, India visited UAE in Nov 2023. Some key 
outcomes during the visit are: 
a. A Memorandum of Understanding was signed in the field of Education between the 
Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the United Arab Emirates to 
strengthen existing educational cooperation, facilitating student and fac ulty mobility and various 
other initiatives.  
b. 1st Master’s course in Energy Transition and Sustainability will commence in January 
2024 in IIT Delhi Abu Dhabi Campus. 
c. Hon’ble EM and H.E Sultan Ahmed bin Sulayem, Chairman & CEO of DP World 
witnessed the signing of an agreement between NSDC International and We One, DP World for 
employment opportunities and skill development of front -line workforce thereby creating more 
avenues for global talent mobility and connecting Indian youth to relevant overseas employment 
opportunities.  
d. Hon’ble EM announced CBSE India will open a regional office in Dubai for better 
administration and for the benefit of Indian diaspora.  
 
• Engagements with Australia in the field of Education:- 
a. Mechanism for Mutual Recognit ion of Qualifications was signed by the two Ministers 
(during 27 Feb to 3 Mar 2023 Australian Education Min. visit to India). 
b. International Education Innovation Fund (IEIF) Critical Skills Project was announced by 
the Australian side wherein Australian Government will provide AUS$1.82 million until mid-2024 
to deliver a project on Developing Critical Skills Courses in India 

24 
 
c. 11 institutional MoUs were signed at the event and exchanged in front of the two Ministers 
(during 27 Feb to 3 Mar 2023 Australian Education Min visit to India). 
d. Five Institutional MoUs were signed and exchanged in front on the Hon’ble Ministers, for 
skill, academic and research collaboration in Nov. 2023. 
 
• Engagement with Singapore:- 
3rd edition of India-Singapore hackathon was held in the month of July, 2023 at Indian Institute of 
Technology (IIT), Gandhinagar. The event was jointly organized by All India Council for 
Technical Education (AICTE) of Ministry of Education, India and Nanyang Technological 
University (NTU), Singapore attended by over 600 students. 
 
• IITs have MoU with various national and international Universities, technical and 
scientific Institutions which involves faculty exchange and student exchanges and knowledge 
transfer. As mentioned in the National Educat ional Policy 2020, a committee was constituted to 
frame broad guidelines for opening of Offshore campuses of IITs, which is under examination in 
the Ministry. An MoU for setting up of campus of IIT Madras in Zanzibar - Tanzania  has been 
signed on 5 -7-2023 between the Ministry of Education (MoE), Govt. of India, IIT Madras and 
Ministry of Education and Vocational Training (MoEVT) Zanzibar - Tanzania.  Further an MoU 
Has also been signed between Ministry of Education (MoE), Govt. of India, IIT Delhi and Abu 
Dhabi, Department of Education and knowledge (United Arab Emirates), on 15.07.2023, for 
setting up of campus of IIT Delhi in Abu Dhabi.  
 
• IIITs are signing MoU with various Industries, National laboratories and reputed Higher 
Education Institutions as per IIIT Act, 2014 and IIIT(PPP) Act, 2017, which inspires institutes to 
lead, organise and conduct research and innovation in information technology and allied fields of 
knowledge in such manner as the Institute may think fit, including in collaboration or in  
association with any other Institute, educational institution, research organisation or body 
corporate. 
 
• AICTE is implementing following schemes to promote international collaboration:- 
a. AICTE-INAE-TG (Travel Grant for Students): The scheme works to e ncourage 
engineering students to engage in research. It provides partial travel assistance and registration 
fees to Bachelors and Masters Level engineering students for presenting a research paper in an 
international scientific event (conference/ seminar/ symposium/ workshop/ exhibition etc.). 
b. Support to Students for Participating in Competition Abroad (SSPCA): The objective of 
the scheme is to provide travel assistance registration fees to a team of minimum 2 to 10 Bachelor 
students for attending compet ition on scientific events at international level in order to encourage 
engineering students to improve their knowledge of technical education. 
c. AICTE-MITACS Globalink Research Internship (GRI) Scheme (UG) Scheme: It aims to 
provide internships to studen ts from non -affluent families in India, the opportunity to engage in 
research collaboration with Canadian universities, and promote a research oriented career. 
d. Accelerate International Implementation Plan (Mobility for research with an industry 
partner in Canada): 
 
(i) AICTE had MoU with MITACS, Canada for implementing the Accelerate International 
Programme to support 30 students studying in the Masters programmes from India to participate in 
advanced research projects with a Canadian industry partner fo r 4 to 6 months under the 

25 
 
supervision of their home university academic supervisor and, where applicable, a host university 
academic supervisor. This is applicable for 3 years, starting January 1, 2021 and ending December 
31, 2023. 
• IIMs have dedicated In ternational Relations cell and student/faculty exchange 
programmes. International Students are also admitted under the “Study in India Programme”. IIMs 
have been collaborating with several reputed educational institutes globally. In order to strengthen 
student, faculty exchange and joint teaching and research, IIMs have signed MoU with various 
universities located in different parts of the world. IIMs provide multi -cultural environment for 
students' overall development and improving their ability to think g lobally. The Institute offers 
students numerous options for studying or working abroad for periods ranging from two weeks to 
three months during various courses to promote internationalization of higher education. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The Committee acknowledges  the Department's efforts to secure international 
collaboration in higher education. However, more can be done on this front. For instance, 
according to the Department's response, the AICTE-INAE-TG (Travel Grant for Students) 
provides only partial travel assistance and registr ation fees to students. Department should 
also amend the scheme to enable full and complete financial assistance for all expenditures 
incurred on travel and on registration fees by students for presenting a research paper in an 
international scientific event i.e. conference/ seminar/ symposium/ workshop/ exhibition etc.. 
 
Recommendation  
 
8. The Committee notes that even after several decades, many State Universities regularly fail in 
smooth and flawless conduct of examinations. Instances like —  
a) Question paper leak  
b) Administering a wrong question paper 
c) Confusion about seating arrangements and Exam centre  
d) Rampant cases of copying  
e) Framing questions that are out of syllabi  
f) Wrong examiners being appointed for assessment; and  
g) Student-Examiner Nexus  
etc. are still not uncommon. Hence the Committee recommends that the Parameter of the Institution’s 
exam management competency be also considered as a 46 mandatory norm towards consideration of 
accreditation. The NAAC and NBA should award marks to such universities/institutes who conduct 
examinations smoothly. Besides, experiment s like the Question Bank system and adoption of complete 
digitization of the examination process by institutes/universities to ensure fair and timely conduct of 
examination and declaration of results, amongst others may be incentivised. 
(Para 9) 

26 
 
9. The Committee notes the need to carefully examine, assess and analyze the issues and challenges 
for NBA and NAAC, through compilation of a structured feedback of HEIs so that requisite reform 
process can be taken forward to make these bodies a benchmark for qu ality accreditation. Also, it is 
recommended that the norms for frequency and periodicity of the accreditations be defined so that 
institutions do not develop a tendency to carry the score for years, without a review, which leads to 
complacency, and undermines quality mechanisms.                (Para 10) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Department has informed that with regard to NAAC assessment and accreditation a 
Committee was constituted under the Chairpersonship of Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Chairperson BoG, IIT 
Kanpur &  Chairperson, Standing Committee of IIT Council. The draft report of this Committee was 
placed in the public domain from 19 th May, 2023 to 22 nd June, 2023; later extended upto 15 th July, 2023 
and again from 8 th August, 2023 to 15 th August, 2023. Further, a s a part of stakeholder consultation, an 
Online Consultative Workshop on Reforms in Assessment, Accreditation and Ranking of HEIs was also 
held on 7 th July, 2023. After consideration of about 1450 feedback received from various categories of 
stakeholders on the draft report, the Committee submitted its final report on ‘Transformative Reforms for 
Strengthening Periodic Assessment and Accreditation of all HEIs in India’. The Committee has 
considered the introduction of strategic reforms consistent with the vi sion of the National Education 
Policy, 2020 and the need for adopting a simple, trust -based, objective and rationalized system for 
accreditation and ranking of HEIs with a verifiable and secured centralized database through technology -
driven systems. Metho dologies for facilitating Ease of Doing Business for the stakeholders, duly 
facilitating students in making more informed choices for selection of institutions/ programmes have also 
been considered by the Committee. The recommendations also focus on scheme s for raising the 
participation of HEIs as well as accreditation levels, towards eminence, significance and global acclaim.  
 
It was further informed that the recommendations made by the Dr. Radhakrishnan Committee 
have been accepted by the Ministry. The r eport is available on the website of the M/o Education at 
https://www.education.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/document-reports/reforms_moe.pdf . 
 
After acceptance of report, National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) in its 
meeting held on 27.01.2024 decided that Binary Accreditation for HEIs shall be implemented in the next 
four months and Maturity -Based Graded Accreditation by December, 2024. Methodologies and formats 
used in the assessment and accreditation process are already being redesigned using One Nation One Data 
platform. Implementation of binary accreditation is in line with NEP 2020 and as per global practices.  
 
The Department has also informed the Committee that to bring qualitative changes in examination 
system, AICTE came out with Bloom’s Taxonomy based exam reforms policy for technical institutions 
and is conducting workshops/ training programmes on Examination Reforms for Controllers of 
Examination, Deans and Senior Faculty members of various universities and institutions. The faculty 
trained through the workshops are expected to train faculty of their respective institutions. Question banks 
are being developed to prepare model question papers. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
The Committee notes the reply given by the Department regarding smooth and flawless 
conduct of examinations for avoiding instances such as Question paper leak, Administering a wrong 
question pap er, Confusion about seating arrangements and Exam centre, etc.  However, the 
Committee feels that still, there is an urgent need to address instances , especially Question paper 

27 
 
leak and administering a wrong question paper  etc. and therefore, the Committee observes that the 
reply of the Department should have also taken care of this aspect . Therefore, the Committee 
desires to be apprised of the reform process to be undertaken in addition to constitution of Dr. 
Radhakrishnan Committee in order to make NAAC an d NBA a benc hmark for quality 
accreditation and to address the issues as recommended by the Committee. 
Further, the Department should bring out the methodologies and formats used in the 
assessment and accreditation process which are already being redesigne d using One Nation One 
Data platform, so that, institutions do not develop a tendency to carry the score for years, without a 
review, which leads to complacency, and undermines quality mechanisms . In addition to this, 
AICTE, NTA, NBA and NAAC should also be consulted to chalk out an effective strategy  in this 
regard, in a time bound manner. 
 
Recommendation  
10. The Committee recommends that the experiment of providing courses in humanities in techn ology 
institutions be reviewed so as to assess its impact on the academic climate in such institutions. However, 
keeping in view the broad thrust of NEP, 2020 towards holistic and multidisciplinary education, the 
Committee also recommends the incorporation  of social sciences/ humanities/ arts modules in the 
technical education curriculum for the development of students with well-rounded personalities.  
(Para 11) 
Action Taken 
  
 The Department has informed the Committee that Para 11.4 of NEP 2020 envisages HEIs to move 
towards more holistic and multidisciplinary education with more arts and humanities. Students of arts and 
humanities will aim to learn more science and all will make an effort to incorporate more vocational 
subjects and soft skills. Section 6 (1) (a) of the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961 already provides 
statutory power to IITs to be a multi -disciplinary institution. Most of the IITs are already offering courses 
in the stream of humanities and social sciences, ma y come up with more courses in line with the 
recommendation of NEP, 2020. IITs, which at present are confined to only engineering and science may 
think of starting programmes in other streams from the new academic session and build up capacities 
accordingly. Humanities are being taught as a course in most of the IITs since long.   
 
It was also informed that the Act and the Statutes of respective IIIT provide full autonomy to the 
Institute in their academic affairs including design course curriculum as per r equirement. AICTE with the 
help of industry -academia experts, has framed the curriculum for model curriculum for UG Level 
programmes and introduced Humanities and Social Sciences including Management courses provision of 
awarding minor degree in Universal Human Values (UHV) has been made for students who earn 18 -20 
credits in UHV. This will provide an opportunity to students to have a holistic worldview along with 
technical skills and they would strive to ensure value-based living for themselves as well as the society. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
The Committee  had recommended the incorporation of social sciences/ humanities/ arts 
modules in the technical education curriculum for the development of students with well -rounded 
personalities. But in the reply, the Department has mentioned only about IIT and IIIT, and there is 
no mention of other HEIs and various Institutions under State/UT Governments to provide holistic 
and multidisciplinary education . The Committee, therefore recommends that other HEIs should 
also include courses from  the stream of humanities and social sciences, and come up with more 
courses in line with the recommendations of NEP, 2020. 

28 
 
 
Recommendation  
11. Noting the growing commercialization of education in certain States and the disturbing  trend of 
many colleges associating with coaching classes to prepare their enrolled students in certain cities, 
making the learning process a farce through this unholy nexus between coaching classes and colleges, the 
Committee recommends that the Governmen t, in coordination with State Governments must work out 
mechanisms to curb such trends and punish such institutions by derecognizing them. Towards this end, 
the Committee recommends that a study group may be set up by the Central Government to assess the 
ground realities. 
(Para 15) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed the Committee that the recommendation of the Committee has been 
noted. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
The Committee observers that  the Department has not taken any action against the 
recommendation of the Committee which categorically stat es that in view of growing 
commercialization of education in certain stat es and the disturbing trend of making the learning 
process a farce through unh oly nexus between coaching classes and colleges, mechanism to curb 
such trends and to punish such institutions by  derecognizing them is inevitable for sake of quality 
education and students. The Committee had further recommended for setting up of study gro ups 
by the Central Government t o assess the ground realities . However, the Department is silent about 
the action taken, so far, in this regard. 
 
The Committee therefore, reiterates that Department should proactively  identity and  take 
action against those colleges which have nexus with coaching classes and derecognize these colleges.  
Further, the Committee recommends  for setting up of a study group by Central Government in 
time bound manner, so that this evil can be eradicated from root and to apprise the Committee in 
this regard.  
 
Recommendation  
12. While the increasing usage of cutting edge technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, Machine 
Learning, Robotics, Virtual Reality etc. is welcome for several reasons, the Committee recommends that a 
task force should be set up at central level to explore the possibility of incorporating these new emerging 
49 technologies in contemporary syllabi and develop them for increasing the employment opportunities. 
(Para 25) 
Action Taken 
 The Department has informed the Committee that AICTE is approving B.Tech Programme in Data 
Science and Artificial Intelligence and encouraging technical Institutions to introduce new emerging 
technologies in course curriculum of traditional disciplines also. Through ATAL Academy, it is imparting 
training to faculty members on new emerging technologies under Faculty Development Programme. It 
will extend its cooperation to the proposed Task Force, as suggested. 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
The Committee takes note of the Action Taken Note furnished by the Department and 
expresses its anguish over the fact that response given therein against the recommendation to set up 
task force for incorporating e merging technologies in contemporary syllabi to increase the 
employment opportunities is not satisfactory .  The Committee, th erefore, recommends to set up 
Task Force as stated earlier and furnish a status Note o n progress made thereon for perusal and 
consideration of the Committee.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

30 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
    

31 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE 
 
 
1. The Committee observes that the multiplicity of regulators leads to inconsistency in 
standards and monitoring, making it difficult for institutions to function effectively. Moreover, 
State Universities, which educate over 90 per cent of the student populat ion, are caught in between 
national and state -level regulations. The draft Higher Education Commission of India Bill (HECI) 
(which seeks to replace UGC as a single regulator) appears to perpetuate many of these same issues 
by maintaining a Central Governme nt- heavy composition and insufficient State representation. 
The proposed HECI Bill will hold significant power, including the ability to grant degree -awarding 
authority and close institutions failing to meet standards. This removes State control and could lead 
to the closure of institutions in rural areas that suffer from infrastructure or faculty shortages. It 
would indirectly fuel privatization especially in rural areas . The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that a simplified hierarchy of regulatory bodie s would be more effective, the 
Department should ensure that any such unified regulatory body must have adequate 
representation for all States and there should not be excess centralization.  
 (Para 2) 
 
2. The Committee observes that the Department in its A ction Taken Note has emphasized on 
several initiatives aimed at skill development which includes linkages with industry and institutions, 
summits and leadership workshops, entrepreneurship centres at business schools. However, these 
initiatives focus only on certain fraction of students who have commerce or science or technical 
background. It ignores students with humanity related subjects. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should emphasize more on students from non -technical, 
humanities and related backgrounds. There should be opportunities in institutes to bring in 
expertise of established persons of a field. For instance, established writers, storytellers propagating 
writing skills as a potential career option. Similarly, there shou ld be increased field visits for 
students enrolled in archaeology, geology, etc. Further, the Ministry should also take initiatives to 
generate awareness on further career/ education opportunities in these fields and collaborate with 
other Ministries to provide associated opportunities.  
(Para 3) 
 
3. The Committee observes that the National Digital University (NDU) promises inclusive, 
flexible, and affordable education aligned with NEP goals. However, it foundation, SWAYAM, 
faces significant challenges. Since 2017, less than 4 per cent of enrolled students have completed 
SWAYAM courses. Complaints include outdated content, inflexible teaching, and poor 
infrastructure. Teachers report inadequate training, low compensation, and technical hurdles, 
undermining their efficiency. The 1:15 teacher -student ratio is disregarded in the online model, 
leading to overcrowded virtual classrooms. Additionally, only 4 per cent of SC/ST and 7 per cent of 
OBC students have internet -enabled computers, per Oxfam India 2022, q uestioning NDU's equity 
claims. 
 The Committee feels that digital initiatives will only provide lukewarm response in terms of 
engagement unless the Department starts proactively assisting in placements wherever possible or 
establishing a platform associate d with SWAYAM for connecting recruiters to students. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should also take steps to ensure courses 
are completed by candidates, since major private online platforms suffer from this. The 
Department should also consider establishing a separate cell for ensuring greater participation of 

32 
 
students from underprivileged sections of society and should also monitor their enrolment and 
progress diligently. 
(Para 4) 
 
4.  The Committee notes the work done by the Ministry and the IIMs in particular in this 
regard. However, the Ministry should work to ensure that Section 35 of the Income Tax Act 
provide 100% deduction of payment made to the IITs /National Universities not jus t for scientific 
research purposes but for all purposes – as recommended by the Committee, to ensure maximum 
mobilization of funds for central universities.  
(Para 5) 
5. The Committee notes the Ministry’s attempts to secure adequate talent for our higher 
educational institutes. However, action should be taken on the Committee’s specific 
recommendation on appointing talented alumni/senior students/Ph.D. scholars as Teaching 
Assistants. It can be done on a trial basis in a few universities and evaluated befo re being scaled up 
nationally. Finally, the Committee also directs the Department to share the report of the Expert 
Committee and its Membership at the earliest. 
 The Committee further observes that most universities especially under the Central 
Government have a higher amount of contractual workforce. As many as four thousand teachers 
are employed in Central Universities in temporary posts. This shift away from permanent, secure 
government jobs towards casual, short-term contracts has been driven by the Go vernment's retreat 
from public education and the increasing influence of neo -liberal policies. Contractual positions 
offer no job security, no salary increments, and lack of social security benefits like promotions, 
pensions, or paid leave. Despite, these disadvantages, such jobs have become highly sought after due 
to the scarcity of permanent jobs, particularly in fields like social sciences and humanities. 
Contractual faculties also face institutional hurdles when attempting to conduct research, including  
lack of access to research grants and insufficient institutional recognition. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should work on regularization of jobs to 
provide job security and ensure fair working conditions as well to enh ance capacity building which 
will motivate them to put effort for improving research and pedagogy. 
 
 (Para 6 and 8) 
 
 
   
6. The Committee acknowledges the Department's efforts to secure international collaboration 
in higher education. However, more can be done on this front. For instance, according to the 
Department's response, the AICTE -INAE-TG (Travel Grant for Students) provides only partial 
travel assistance and registration fees to students. Department should also amend the scheme to 
enable full and co mplete financial assistance for all expenditures incurred on travel and on 
registration fees by students for presenting a research paper in an international scientific event i.e. 
conference/ seminar/ symposium/ workshop/ exhibition etc. 
(Para 7) 
 
7. The Co mmittee notes the reply given by the Department regarding smooth and flawless 
conduct of examinations for avoiding instances such as Question paper leak, Administering a wrong 
question paper, Confusion about seating arrangements and Exam centre, etc. Howev er, the 
Committee feels that still, there is an urgent need to address instances, especially Question paper 
leak and administering a wrong question paper etc. and therefore, the Committee observes that the 

33 
 
reply of the Department should have also taken car e of this aspect. Therefore, the Committee 
desires to be apprised of the reform process to be undertaken in addition to constitution of Dr. 
Radhakrishnan Committee in order to make NAAC and NBA a benchmark for quality 
accreditation and to address the issues as recommended by the Committee. 
 
Further, the Department should bring out the methodologies and formats used in the 
assessment and accreditation process which are already being redesigned using One Nation One 
Data platform, so that, institutions do not develop a tendency to carry the score for years, without a 
review, which leads to complacency, and undermines quality mechanisms . In addition to this, 
AICTE, NTA, NBA and NAAC should also be consulted to chalk out an effective strategy in this 
regard, in a time bound manner. 
(Para 9 &10) 
 
8. The Committee had recommended the incorporation of social sciences/ humanities/ arts 
modules in the technical education curriculum for the development of students with well -rounded 
personalities. But in the reply, the D epartment has mentioned only about IIT and IIIT, and there is 
no mention of other HEIs and various Institutions under State/UT Governments to provide holistic 
and multidisciplinary education . The Committee, therefore recommends that other HEIs should 
also include courses from the stream of humanities and social sciences, and come up with more 
courses in line with the recommendations of NEP, 2020. 
(Para 11) 
 
9. The Committee observers that the Department has not taken any action against the 
recommendation of  the Committee which categorically states that in view of growing 
commercialization of education in certain states and the disturbing trend of making the learning 
process a farce through unholy nexus between coaching classes and colleges, mechanism to curb  
such trends and to punish such institutions by derecognizing them is inevitable for sake of quality 
education and students. The Committee had further recommended for setting up of study groups 
by the Central Government to assess the ground realities. Howe ver, the Department is silent about 
the action taken, so far, in this regard. 
 
The Committee therefore, reiterates that Department should proactively identity and  take 
action against those colleges which have nexus with coaching classes and derecognize th ese colleges.  
Further, the Committee recommends for setting up of a study group by Central Government in 
time bound manner, so that this evil can be eradicated from root and to apprise the Committee in 
this regard.  
 
(Para 15) 
 
10. The Committee takes note of the Action Taken Note furnished by the Department and 
expresses its anguish over the fact that response given therein against the recommendation to set up 
task force for incorporating emerging technologies in contemporary syllabi to increase the 
employment opportunities is not satisfactory.  The Committee, therefore, recommends to set up 
Task Force as stated earlier and furnish a status Note on progress made thereon for perusal and 
consideration of the Committee.  
(Para 25) 
  

34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
  

35 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT -RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, 
CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 9:30 A.M. on Monday, 
the 16th December, 2024 in Committee Room - ‘1’, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.       Shri Digvijaya Singh    - Chairman 
2.         Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3.         Dr. Sikander Kumar  
4.         Smt. Sunetra Ajit Pawar 
5.         Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
6.        Dr. Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
7.        Smt. Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
8.        Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary  
9.        Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
10.      Prof. Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
11.      Dr. Hemang Joshi 
12.      Adv Dean Kuriakose 
13.      Dr. D Purandeswari 
14.      Shri Rajeev Rai 
15.      Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
16.      Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
 17.     Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
18.      Dr. T Sumathy Alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary                                                                                                                                                                                                      
2. Shri J. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Smt. A.S. Chakravani, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
  
 

36 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He, then, 
informed that the agenda for the meeting was to consider and adopt the following draft Reports as under- 
a) * * * 
b) 361st Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
341st report on “Review of Education Standards, Accreditation Process, Research, Examinatio n 
Reforms and Academic Environment in Deemed/ Private Universities/other Higher Education 
Institutions” pertaining to the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education.; 
2. The Committee, thereafter, discussed the aforesaid draft Reports one by one an d after brief 
discussion, decided to consider and adopt these Reports during the next meeting of Committee on 
20th December, 2024 
3. The meeting adjourned at 10:17 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       J.K. Mallick  
16th December, 2024                                                                                            Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** Pertains to other matter 
  

37 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT -RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, 
CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports  met at 9:45 A.M. on Friday, 
the 20 th December, 2024 in Committee Room - ‘1’, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
3.       Shri Digvijaya Singh    - Chairman 
2.         Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3.         Ms. Sushmita Dev 
4.         Dr. Sikander Kumar 
5.         Smt. Sunetra Ajit Pawar 
6.         Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
7.         Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
8.        Dr. Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
9.        Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary  
10.      Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
11.      Prof. Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
12.      Adv Dean Kuriakose 
13.      Dr. Sambit Patra 
14.      Shri Rajeev Rai 
15.      Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
16.      Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
17.      Dr. T Sumathy Alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
5. Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary                                                                                                                                                                                                      
6. Shri J. K. Mallick, Director 
7. Smt. A.S. Chakravani, Deputy Secretary 
8. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
  
 

38 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He, then, 
informed that the agenda for the meeting was to consider and adopt the following draft Reports as under- 
a) * * * 
b) 361st Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
341st report on “Review of Education Standards, Accreditation Process, Research, Examination 
Reforms and Academic Environment in Deemed/ Private Universities/other Higher Education 
Institutions” pertaining to the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education.; 
4. The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports one by one and after brief 
discussion, adopted the *** and 361st Reports with certain modifications.  
5. Thereafter, the Committee decided to present/lay the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament  
during first week of the Budget Session, 2025 of the Parliament  i.e. first week of February 2025 . 
The Committee also authorized the Secretariat to correct patent errors and consequential changes 
in the said reports. 
6. The Committee also authorized Chairman of the Committee, to decide the names of Members for 
laying/presentation of Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sab ha during the 
upcoming Budget Session as per their availability during the said Session. 
 5. The meeting adjourned at 10:15 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       J.K. Mallick  
20th December, 2024                                                                                            Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** Pertains to other matter 
 