PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

ay FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT
: . ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1997-98 (DEMAND NO. 48) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd April, 1997)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd April, 1997)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 1997/Chaitra, 1919 (Saka)

1567/RS F—1-A 4


C:O:N:. TEN TS

1. ComposiTION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. PREFACE
3. Report

4, MINUTES

PAGES
(i)-Gi)
(iii)
1—15

17—21:


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1996-97)

1. Shri $.8. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S$. Deo
3. Dr. B.B. Dutta :
4. Dr. M. Aram

5. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik
6. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
7. Shri Raj Nath Singh -

8. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
9. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
10. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

11. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

12. Shri R. Margabandu

13. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

14. Dr. Mohan Babu

15. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

16, Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
17. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
18. Shri Sartaj Singh
19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Shri Jai Prakash
21. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
22. Shrimati Divya Singh
23. Shri Mahant Abedyanath
Sg 24, Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
25. Chaudhary Paragi Lal
26. Dr. C. Silvera
27. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
28. Shri Dutta Meghe
29. Shri 1.0. Sanadi
30. Shrimati Krishna Bose
31. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao
32. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
33. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi
34. Shri Pawan Diwan
35. Shri Krishna
36. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
37. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
5 38. Shri Samik Lahiri
39. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

0)

1567 / RS F—2-A.



Gi)

40. Shri Mukhtar Anees

41. Dr. M. Jagannath

42. Dr. Bali Ram

43. Shri Banen Ramrman

*44. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego ; क्र
45. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

‘Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 26th February, 1997.

1567/RS F—2-B


~*¥

han :

PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifty-sixth Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demard No. 48) of the Department of Education, Ministry of Human
Resource Development for the year 1997-98.

2. The Committee considered-the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development and also heard
the Secretary and other Officials of that Departmeat on the said Demands for Grants in its
meeting held on 2nd April. 1997. :

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 19th April,
1997.

$.8. CHAVAN
New DELHI; है Chairman,
April 19, 1997 Department-related Parliamentary
SS Standing Committee on
Chaitra 29, 1919 (Saka) Human Resource Development.

(iti)



REPORT

I. INTRODUCTION

1.1 The main function of the Department of Education is to evolve educational policy
and also to coordinate and determine standards in higher education, including research. The
Department mainly undertakes the Programmes relating to elementary education, Secondary
education, University and higher education, adult education and technical education. The
Department also coordinates various programmes of assistance and other activities with
UNESCO and other foreign agencies.

1.2. The literacy rate in the country as per-the 1950-51 census was 18%. While the Male
literacy was 27.2%, the Female literacy was just 9%. This showed that female literacy was
just one-third of the then male literacy indicating a wide gap between the two. In
comparison to 1950-51 census, the Census Report 1990-91 shows the literacy rate to be
52.2%. The male literacy is reported to be 64% whereas female literacy is 39.4%. This

~f shows that the wide gap between male and female literacy which was existing in 1950-51 is
bridged only marginally by 1990-91. This calls for a serious thinking in our planning and
implementation of various programmes to bridge the gap between male and female literacy.

1.3. The Eighth Five Year Plan (1992—97) had set the target of achieving 100% literacy
among the people of age group of 15 to 35 years. This involved changing the literacy status
of about 100 million people. The sector-wise plan outlay on education during eighth Five
Year Plan (Central) was Rs. 7,443 crores out of which Rs. 4148.75 crores was earmarked for
central Schemes and Rs. 3294.25 crores for Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The sector-wise
plan outlay on education during the Eighth Five Year Plan (States/UTs.) was Rs. 12,156.73
crores. Thus, the total sector-wise plan outlay on education during Eighth Five Year Plan
(Central+State/UTs.) was almost Rs. 19,600 crores. As against the initial outlay of Rs. 7443
crores (centre) for Eighth Five Year Plan, an amount of Rs. 5867.39 crores was already
utilised till March, 1996 leaving a balance of Rs. 1575.61 crores for the last Annual Plan of

4 Eighth Plan Period. However, the expenditure upto March, 1997 shows it to be Rs. 2058.07
a crores which confirms an increased expenditure (of Rs. 482.46 crores) i.e. Rs. 7925.46 crores
177 56 against the original estimate of Rs. 7,443 crores for the whole Eighth Five Year
Plan@The Eighth Plan aimed at Universal Primary Education through both full-time formal
| | Schools and part-time non-formal arrangements for working children and girls in particular.
1 | Special emphasis was also to be laid on tribal education with 00०6 regard to their social,
! economic and cultural disparities prevailing in the society for long. The physical target for
f the Eighth Plan is 3.5 lakh Non-Formal Education Centres. However, only 2.80 lakh have
| been sanctioned till 1996-97. Hence, the Committee feels that the progress in these areas is
| | still very less and recommends that efforts should continue in these areas with greater
concern.

॥ व 1.4. The Approach Papers on the Ninth Five Year Plan indicates apart from carrying
रे : out the directions given by National Policy on Education (NPE) (1992),-and keeping in view
the declaration of education as an aspect of fundamental human right to life, making the ©
nation fully literate by the year 2005 will be a committed goal. Around 6% of the GDP will
be earmarked for the education sector by the year 2000 A.D. and 50% of that will be spent
on primary education. Further subtantial funds will be earmarked for imparting technical

1

1567/ RS F—3-A.



2

and Vocational skills and training, in order to turn out more employable and self-employed
youths. National Literacy Mission (NLM) will achieve the coverage of 100 million adults by
the year 1998-99 with special attention and efforts for the spread of literacy among women
particularly in the States with high incidence of illiteracy. The girl child will be a special
focus of attention in every initiative to promote the spread of education. The unfinished task
of Universal Elementary Education (UEE) will be completed with the intensive focus on the
backward States/districts, the girl child and other disadvantaged population groups,
emphasising decentralised and disaggregated planning with the participation of NGOs, the
corporate sector and various other groups. Linkages will be developed between adult
education and formal and non-formal education including open learning. Emphasis on Adult
Education will be on restoring the lost momentum and to make it more effective. Similarly
in Secondary Education the major issue is one of modification and diversification of curricula
so as to provide skill-training through well-structured vocational courses, planned with
community involvement and support, enlisting the Community Polytechnics and Agricultural
Polytechnics in the task. In Higher education the existing infrastructure needs to be nurtured
in order to enhance the country’s competitiveness in the global market. Fees will be
restructured on unit cost criteria and paying capacity of the beneficiaries. Additional
resources will be generated by involving industry and commerce and through contribution
., from community. 223.

1.5. Committed Liability:-—The Committee has noted that the committed liability of the
plan schemes has not been reflected in the budgetary allocations for 1997-98 which ‘is the
first year of. the Ninth Plan. The Committed expenditure which is accounted in_ the
subsequent plan at the termination of the previous plan is taken out from the plan and
becomes a separate committed expenditure. If this is not done,.the Departments will be
handicapped by this amount of plan expenditure. The exercise of identifying committed
liability has not been done by any of the Departments for 1997-98. Committee in this
connection has considered the report of the Tenth Finance Commission. The Tenth Finance
Commission have observed in this regard as under. -

“Although the Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of reference in
deciding the “out-off date for transfer of committed liability on account of plan
scheme, the incremental liabilities that would arise in 1997-98 on account of 8th Plan
scheme completed in the next two financial years would have to be provided for. The
Commission are, therefore, of the view that the Planning Commission may consider
providing for the maintenance of such scheme till 1990-2000 in the Plan itself as was
done for the schemes of the two Annual Plans. of 1990-91 and 1991-92”.

The Committee was also given to understand that the Planning Commission issued
circular to all the Departments dated November’5, 1996 sending therewith guidelines for
classification of expenditure. The Ministries were also requested to make necessary provision
as committed non-plan expenditure for the upkeep of existing assets etc. Accordingly, all the
Ministries/Departments were asked to adopt the guidelines while submitting the plan
proposals for Ninth Five Year Plan and annual plan 1997-98. However, the Departments
have not done this exercise. The Committee in this connection heard the views of the
Secretary. Department of Expenditure to clarify the position. He informed the Committee
that even though communications were sent to various Ministries, the Ministries could not
identify the committed expenditure in time. Accordingly a lumpsum amount has been
provided under Demand No. 31. The Department may approach the’ Department of
expenditure for their share. The Committee, also desires that the Department may complete
the exercise at the earliest so that they may not be handicapped on account of this. The

1567/RS F—3-B


3

Committee is also constrained to note that many Departments have not done the exercise of
identifying committed expenditure and to get it earmarked separately for several plan
periods. Accordingly the committed expenditure plan schemes completed in 7th Plan or even
earlier and the assets created and staff employed in plan schemes has been continuing on
plan side resulting in severe resource crunch for the Departments. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should make a thorough review of the schemes
and identify the committed liability.

1.6 The total budgetary allocation for the Department for 1996-97 was Rs. 4479.92
crores (plan: Rs. 3386.54 + Non-Plan: 1093.38 crores) which was around 3.95% of the total
Central Budget. The Budgetary allocation for 1997-98 is Rs. 5231.63 crores of which Rs.
4094.13 crores is on plan-side and Rs. 1137.50 crores is on Non-Plan side. Compared to last
year’s plan allocation of Rs. 3386.54 crores at B.E. 1996-97 which was reduced to Rs.
2573.04 crores at RE 1996-97 due to under utilisation in especially the Midday Meal Scheme,
the plan allocation for 1997-98 Rs. 4094.13 crores shows a significant increase primarily for
the overall increase in allocation to Elementary Education and making Universal Elementary
Education a fundamental Right upto the age group of 14 years.

1.7 The Secretary, Department of Education informed the Committee that in the Ninth
Plan, the Budgetary share of Central Government and State Governments, if taken together,
is proposed to, be of the order of Rs. 109 lakh crores as compared to Rs. 19,600 crores,
during the Eighth Plan. This would be assuming the rate of growth of 7% per annum. If the
economy continues to grow at higher rates as was the case in the previous years, this may’
have to be revised ‘accordingly. The Secretary explained.that as on today, the expenditure on’
education both of the Central Government and the State Governments, if taken together, is’
to the tune of 3.7% of GDP. Therefore, if we have to raise it to the tune of 6% GDP by-
2000 A.D., we will have to make suitable budgetary provisions in the Ninth Plan period.
The Secretary also informed that this figure of 3.7% of the GDP includes the budgetary
allocations of the Centre as well as the states including all the other Denartments which are
related to educational activities like Youth Affairs and Sports, etc. Thus, the aim of 6%
SDP. pre-supposes a joint effort both of the Central Government and State Governments.

‘/ 1.8 A number of externally aided projects like Shiksha Karmi, Lok Jumbish, Bihar
Education, Mahila Samakhya, U.P. Education, South Orrisa, District Primary Education,
projects ate functioning under Elementary Education for which an amount of Rs. 707.14
crores has been allocated under the Annual Plan outlay (1997-98). Similarly, for Population
Eduation Project under Secondary Education an amount of Rs. 5 crores was allocated under
the Eighth Plan outlay. The Committee notes that the budgetary allocation for these
externally aided projects forms part of budgetary allocations under-various plan outlays. The
Committee feels that the allocation for these externally aided projects should be over and
above the regular budgetary allocation and they should not be taken as replacement for
normal allocation unless it is sepcifically provided for the Ninth Five Year Plan.

1.9 Recognising. the need for a literate population and universalizing Elementary
Education as a crucial input for nation building, the Committee stressed on the need of
qualitative progress of the National Policy on Education (NPE), 1986 and the Programme of
Action (POA), 1992 which envisages that free and compulsory education of satisfactory
qaulity should be provided to all children upto the age of 14 years before the

commencement of the 21st century. However, the Committee was constrained to note that. ~ -

47.8 per cent of the country’s population (1991 census) are still illiterate and it would be a
gigantic task to achieve the goal of universalizing elementary Education within the remaining
period of 8 years, i.e upto.2005 A.D. Hence the Committee feels that unless a well thought



a 5... ++

4

out strategy and perspective planning is done by the Government, the goal of achieving
100% literacy by 2005 AD seems to be a remote possibility.

Il. ELEMENTARY EDUCATION

} 2.1 The Committee enquired that be the flow of funds every year during the Ninth Plan
to reach the target of Universalisation of Elementary Education by the end of the Ninth
1 Plan? The Department in its reply stated that the estimated Ninth Plan outlay should be of
the order of 1,31,000 crores if the target of 6% of GDP on Education is to be achieved by
the end of Ninth Plan, i.e. by the year 2001-2002. If 50% of this outlay is to be the Central
share, the total Ninth Plan Central sector outlay for Education would be Rs. 65,000 crores.
The yearly flow of funds should be Rs. 10,500 crores, 12,000 crores, 13,000 crores, 14,000
| crores and 15,500 crores during the years 1997-98, 1998-99, 1999-2000, 2000-2001 and 20001-
002. However, the actual outlay for 1997-98 is only 4093,13 crores. The Committee
{/expressed its concern over the non-implementation of Kothari Committee recommendation
to raise the allocation for Education to 6% of GDP within 20 years (i.e. 1988). At present
only 3.7% of the GDP is allocated for Education. Hence the Committee recommends that if
the target of 6% GDP for Education is to’be made a reality there is a great urgency for
restructuring the Central and State budgets and making more allocations for education. The
Committee expressed its concern over the issue of there existing no clear direction and
strategy for Universalisation of Elementary Education (UEE) and that the budgetary
allocations for elementary education for 1997-98 did not reflect the Government’s
commitment to achieving UEE. The Department in its reply stated that in pursuance of the
National Policy on Education, 1986, as modified in 1992, concerted efforts were being made
by Central/State Governments to achieve the goal of UEE before we enter the 2151
Century. The Centrally sponsored Schemes of Operation Blackboard, Non-Formal
Education, Teacher Education and externally aided projects of primary education like
DPEP, were aimed at supplementing the efforts of States and UTs for promotion of primary
education. The proposals for Ninth Plan envisage intensification of efforts towards UEE with
a focus on the needs of backward areas, disadvantaged groups and girls. The Department
. further clarified that it had been amply reflected in the budgetary allocation 11806 for
elementary education in the Annual Plan for 1997-98 wherein the BE 1997-98 for elementary
education has increased from Rs. 2264.68 crores in 1996-97 to Rs. 2543.08 crores in 1997-98,
which is an increase of 12.3%. Moreover, of the total budget of the Department of
Education for 1997-98, 65.28% has been allocated for the elementary education sector.
However, the Committee observes that if the allocations made for elementary education is
seen under the heads of various schemes then one finds that a bigger chunk goes to the Mid-
day meals scheme and District Primary Education Programme (DPEP). Hence the
Commitee feels that DPEP should cover more and more backward underdeveloped and
tribal areas. Moreover, the Committee recommends that externally aided projects should be
over and above and must not be a substitute for the various plan allocations. There is
equally a greater need for very practical steps to be taken to make Compulsory Primary
Education a reality Committee feels that there is a need to see that quality of education is
not diluted. The course curricula should be interesting, relevant and joyful, as it is only
through a playful method that the child is attracted towards education.

2.2 Operation Blackboard eae

The Committee expressed its concern over the slow progress of construction of class- -
rooms in UP and lack of monitoring of the scheme. The Department in its reply stated that
the construction: of school buildings is the responsibility of the State Governments. 48% of
the funds for construction are provided under JRY by Ministry of Rural Areas and



5

Employment if States raise 40% non-JRY and 12% JRY share. Slow pace of construction is
mainly due to the financial constraints and operational difficulties being faced by the State
Governments. The target for construction of class-rooms in UP was 33,283 which has been
completed as per the information made available to the Department by the State
Government. Moreover, in U.P., teaching/learning equipment has been sanctioned. for 70,438
primary schools and posts of 8891 additional teachers have been sanctioned and filled up.
Posts of 1180 third teachers have also been sanctioned for primary schools with enrolment
exceeding 100. Monitoring of construction and implementation of Operation Blackboard
‘\scheme is done through quarterly progress reports submitted by the state Governments. In
addition, the District Collectors also monitor construction -of school buildings through JRY
1 funds along with other schemes of JRY. The Committee, expressing its concern over the
\ progress in its practical sense and recommends that the rural and undevelop areas should be
| provided with teachers in the first preference where there is not even one, and third additioanl
} teachers may be covered thereafter. The Committee further recommends that there should be
a ban on teacher’s deputation and if at all a teacher is put under deputation the District,
Education Officer should be held responsible and made answerable for that. Hence the
Committee feels strict monitoring is required for reaching the targets.

2.3 Residential Primary Schools in Rural Areas

The Committee desired to know the status of the scheme of assisting NGOs to set up
| Residential Primary Schools. The Department in its reply stated that this scheme was
, announced in the budget of 1996-97 by the Finance Minister. The Department of Education

constituted a Committee headed by the Union Education Secretary to formulate guidelines to

operationalise the scheme. The draft guidelines formulated by the Committees were sent to

the Planning Commission for their approval. The Planning Commission has now suggested

that the scheme should be considered on the ground that children in Classes I—V are too

। young to be alienated from their parents. They have suggested that a feasibility study through

NCERT should be conducted to consider the different modules of residential schools as well

as age factor of the children. The Committee feels that this aspect should have been examined

in the initial year of the scheme itself. The Committee recommends that there should be areas

of 3pecific approach and particularly residential primary schools in the Tribal areas should be

encouraged and a convergence approach of NFE and Residential schools needs to be
implemented.

2.4. Teachers Training Programme

The Committee expressed the need for satellite based in service training for teachers to
be carried out more effectively. The Department in its reply stated that the Satellite based in-
service training for teachers had been pilot testéd-for inservice training course of ptimary

' teachers in a one week programme in Karnataka for about 850 teachers and in Madhya
Pradesh for 1,450 teachers during 1996-97 with positive results. A pilot project in application
of interactive television in distance education for inservice training for Primary Teachers with’.
a coverage of 8,000 teachers in Gujarat and. Madhya Pradesh was on the anvil. This was

1 planned as a prelude to the National Action Plan (NAP) for Inservice Primary Teacher

i ; Training through distance education which has been formulated with the assistance of Asian

| Development Bank (ADB) & UNESCO. Preparatory activities of NAP had been initiated. A
\ provision of Rs. 25 crore had been made for this purpose in 1997-98. The Committee _
| recommends that Satellite based in-service training for teachers needs to be undertaken with
\ all effective monitoring mechanisms without further delay if teachers are to be made more.
| adapted to the changing educational needs of the society. In this context, there is also an
ye । urgent need for training the teachers inculcating the values of Human Rights in them.
५2

ca

sf 1567 /RS F—+



2.5 Non-Formal Education

This is a programme run by the Central Government for children of 6—14 age-group
who remain outside the formal system due to various reasons. The main thrust is on the
educationally backward States, urban slums, hilly, tribal and desert areas. This programme
is, at present in opezation in 21 States/UTs. The BE of 1997-98 i.e. 324.86 crore as
compared to last year’s BE and RE i.e. Rs. 158.25 crore shows an increase of more than
double of its amount. The Committee expressed its desire to know the grounds for this steep
hike. The Department in its reply stated that the enhancement in the allocation was due to
price escalation and for providing motivation to the NFE functionaries. It was also proposed
to strengthen the administrative set up both at the National and State Levels for improving
monitoring and supervision of the programme. The Committee is, however, of the view that
mere provision of additional funds would not serve the purpose. The Committee was
constrained to note that monitoring mechanism was not effective in the NFE in general and
NFE schemes of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Rajasthan in particular. The Committee
recommends that instructors-should be appointed on the basis of efficiency and commitment
The Committee is not happy with the performance of this scheme and strongly feels that
there should be an effective network whereby proper and timely feedback is obtained from
implementing agencies and appropriate action taken thereon. Hence the Committee
recommends decentralisation of management, increase in the number of girl centres,
development of locally relevant teaching-learning materials, intensive training of NFE 7
functionaries and greater involvement of local community, The Committee feels that there
are some NGOs who are doing good jobs but some others who have tried to exploit the
scheme. Hence, the Committee recommends that strict monitoring must be done while
selecting the NGOs. (A Sub-committee has been constituted to make an indepth study of
{| the various aspects on Non-Formal Education and to make report thereon).

2.6 District Primary Education Programme (DPEP)

}
|

नी

The Committee expressed its anguish over the DPEP—a prestigious project—which has
created a sort of division in elementary education through high rate of payment; takes care
of only primary stage whereas the right to education is upto 14 years of age. The
Department in its reply stated that the DPEP has started showing positive results in
improving primary educaiton system in the areas of implementation, as confirmed by reports
of various Supervision Missions. Since such areas need not remain ‘islands of excellence’ and
as several States are demanding coverage of ‘more and more districts, DPEP is being

| .substantially expanded. As per the Cabinet decision, the entire country is to be covered in
| phases. This will be as per the availability of resources. Further, the experiences of DPEP in
areas of text-books development and teacher-training are gradually being replicated in non-
DPEP areas. The Department further clarified that the members of Missions, organised by
international organisations, are paid as per international norms by the agency concerned.
However, the Committee feels that the workers under the DPEP should be paid according
to the local norms and not according to the international norms.

' Mid-day Meal Scheme

The Committee expressed its concern over the need to evaluate the impact of the
scheme and to assess whether it has been found to be contributing to. increase. in
participation and attendance in primary schools and whether it has any impact on the
nutritional status of children and about some irregularities like pilferage of foodgrains meant
for the children under the scheme and supply of sub-standard foodgrains in Uttar Pradesh.
The Department’s reply stated that the National Programme of Nutritional Support to 4

1567/RS F—4-B



है

7

Primary Education, commonly known as Mid-day Meal Scheme, launched on 15th August,
1995, in the country, was intended to give a boost to universalisation of primary education
\ by increasing enrolment, retention and attendance and simultaneously impacting on nutrition
\of students in primary classes. It was to be implemented in all States and Union Territories.
5.57 crore children in about 5 lakh schools in 4426 blocks in 475 districts have been covered
under the scheme so far. The whole country needed to be covered in 1997-98, the
Department clarified. As the scheme had been launched last year, no evaluation of its
impact had been conducted so far. Regarding the UP irregularities case the Department
further stated that the matter has been taken by the up concerned authorities. Regarding the
reducation in the RE of 1996-97 under the Mid-day Meals Scheme, the Department stated
that this was due to Operational Problems such as Non-availability of up to date enrolement
data, difficulties in the coordination. between nodal departments of State Governments,
District Administration etc. inefficiencies of Public Distribution System, problem of
foodgrain transportation and time consuming process of raising bills and claiming
reimbursement by FCI against foodgrains supplied in different States. The Committee feels
, that the Mid-day Meal Scheme is a noble idea for the malnourished children. However,
reports have shown that there is rampant irregularities which requires to be checked. Hence,
, the Committee recommends that there is greater need for adequate and efficient monitoring
mechanism and other strategies to be developed to attract the children for education.

2.8. Drop-out rates

The Committee expresses its concern over the issue of drop-out rates particularly among
girls, SC/ST children in Primary and Upper Primary Schools and the need for improvement
in ratio between Primary and Upper Primary Schools. The Department in its reply stated
that the Eighth Five Year Plan target of reduction of drop-out rates between classes I—V
and I—VIII was from the existing 46% and 60% to 20% and 40% respectively. The drop-
out rates have shown declining trend during the first four years of the Eighth Five Year
Plan. The steps taken by the Department to reduce the drop-out rates in general and for
girls in particular include micro-planning and community mobilisation, greater involvement
of Panchayati Raj Institutions, setting up Village Education Committees, improvement of
School Infrastructure through operation Blackboard Scheme, restructuring -and
reorganisation of institutions of Teacher Education, introduction of Minimum Levels of
Learning and implementation of Mid-day-Meal Programme, the Department clarified. The
steps taken by the State Governments to reduce drop-out rates for Elementary Schools
especially among SCs/STs children include incentives such as free text-books, uniform and
attendance scholarships. All States have exempted children in elementary classes (Classes
1-- शा) from payment of tuition fee, the Department informed. Regarding the
improvement in ratio between Primary and Upper Primary Schools the Committee was
constrained to note that the existing ratio of Primary and Upper Primary is about 3.5:1. The
Programme of Action (POA) 1992 envisages reduction in the ratio to 2:1. Hence the
Committee recommends -that there is greater urgency for constant monitoring and
involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions in supervision and adoption of area specific
strategies at District Levels and involvement of NGOs and voluntary Agencies of proven
track record. The Committee feels that in the rural areas even till today due to conservative
social background, particularly girls after maturity. are not sent to co-eudcational institutions.
Hence the Committee is of the view that from the upper-primary stage onwards there is a
meed for separate schools for girls in the rural areas. (A Sub-Committee has been constituted
10 make an indepth study of the various aspects of the problems of Drop-Outs and to make
‘a report thereon).

“yp



पा. SECONDARY EDUCATION

3.1 The Committee expressed its concern over the gradual reduction in the allocation
for Secondary Education. The BE of 1996-97 for total Secondary Education was Rs. 713.41
crore which was reduced to Rs. 708.61 crores in the RE of that year. The BE of 1997-98 has
further reduced it to Rs. 684.29 crore only. The Department in its reply stated that the
allocation of plan funds was the domain of the Planning Commission. Overall there had
been a decline of Rs. 25.57 crores in the 1997-98 as compared to 1996-97 in that sector. The
Committee is not happy with this remark and recommends that adequate allocation should
be made for secondary education at its RE stage.

3.2. Kendriya Vidyalayas

| The Department stated that in the case of both Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and
Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti, the Budget Estimate provided was not commensurate with the
actual requirements of these organisations. In particular Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan was
handicapped by a severe shortage of funds. Additional funds were provided under
Supplementary Grant only towards the end of the year due to which funds could not be
spent adequately. The committee is constrained to note that a substantial amount of money
was being provided to Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and Novodaya Vidyalaya Sainiti late in
the year, which could be spent after mid-March, 1997. The Committee feels ‘that the
assessment of requirements should be made well in advance and demand for it be placed
much earlier so that the amount is spent with adequate utility. The Committee feels that
there would be no improvement in the financial position of Kendriya ‘Vidyalayas during the
year 1997-98, rather it would deteriorate further. The alloction of Rs. 250 crores was too
inadequate to meet even the committed liabilities on account of Pay and Allowances, on-
going construction works etc. Salary alone to employees of Kendriya Vidyalayas would entail
an expenditure of Rs. 371.80 crores. 20 Vidyalayas have been approved for opening during
1997-98, construction of which would require funds amounting to Rs. 140 crores. 360
Vidyalayas continue to exist without permanent school building. The Committee is of the
view that instead of opening new schools, emphasis should be on providing infrastructural
facilities to Kendriya Vidyalayas. The Committee recommends that sufficient allocation be
made in Kendriya Vidyalayas for acclerate their expansion.

3.3. Navodaya Vidyalayas 5

The Committee enquired whether the norms laid down by the Navodaya Vidyalaaya
Samiti with respect to enrolment of SC/ST children were being fulfilled. The Department in
its reply stated that the Novodaya Vidyalaya scheme provides for reservation of seats for
children belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their population
in the concerned district subject to national minimum levels being ‘maintained. Figures of the
enrolled in Class VI for the year 1995-96 are given below:—

Scheduled Caste Scheduled Tribe \
Norms Enrolment Norms Enrolment ।
15% 23% 7.5% 12.7%
The committee is happy to note that various norms made for reservation of seats for न

| SCs and STs are fulfilled and hopes that this practice would continue in future also.



J
|
|

+ been an overall decrease in funds allocated in the Secondary Sector by the

3.4 Vocational Education

The Committee is constrained to note that Vocational Training is not sufficient for
getting job after completion of the training and the Department is not very serious in
introducing new vocational courses and the way the courses are being taught is also not
satisfactory. The Department in its reply stated that in order to provide job opportunities to
vocational students, efforts have been made to involve industry in implementation of the
Programme. Facilities are being provided for one year apprenticeship training after
completion of the + 2 course so as to give students hands on experience, 34 additional
subject fields have been included under the Apprentices Act for the purpose of
apprenticeship training bringing the total to 94. An Inter-Ministerial Committee for
Amendment of Recruitment Rules has also been set up to identify posts in various
Departments/Ministries for which + 2 vocational students could be made eligible or given
preference. The Department further clarified that many States/UTs lave taken the initiative
to provide opportunities for professional advancement through reservation of some seats for
the vocational students for admission to second year of. polytechnics; and admission to
degree level courses in Humanities. Steps are also being taken to develop bridge courses by
which vocational students can make up for the deficiencies in academic subjects particularly
in Science and Mathematics at the +2 level. The Department also stated that the four
external agencies through whom the vocational programme at the + 2 level has been
evaluated are:—

(1) Operations Research Group, New Delhi (Northern and North Eastern Region.
ORG was also the overall Coordinating
agency for .the country).

(2) Tata Instt. of Social Science, Mumbai (Western Region)
(3) Centre for Media Studies, New Delhi. (Southern Region)

(4) Xavier Labour Relations Instt. (XLRI), (Eastern Region)
Jamshedpur.

The Department further clarified that during 1996-97 the BE of Rs. 82 a was
reduced at RE state to Rs. 52 crores as many States had unspent balance which had to be
adjusted as this is the close of the VIIIth Five Year Plan. Moreover, the focus was on
consolidation and qualitative improvement of the Programme, so expansion of the
Programme in States in most cases was not considered. For 1997-98, BE of Rs. 82 crores
was proposed. However, an allocation of only Rs. 60 crores has been agreed to. There 185

Commission.

On the relevance of career counselling the Department again stated that the Scheme of
Vocationalisation of Secondary Education provides for vocational guidance facility in
vocational schools. For this purpose, one trained graduate teacher in the school is expected
to be trained in vocational guidance to carry out the functions with the assistance of a
trained counsellor at the district level. This has, however, to be undertaken by the States/
UTs like Haryana and Chandigarh and no financial assistance is provided by the Central
Government for the purpose. Already some States/UTs have made a beginning in this
direction on the issue of evaluation of Vocational Education particularly in Madhya Pradesh
the Department clarified that ORG, New Delhi had evaluated the programme in the
Northern region including M.P., review meetings are organised every year with each state
individually, field visits are conducted by officers of the Department and Central Institute of



10

Vocational Education (CIVE) provides technical and academic support and Joint Evaluation
Teams comprising of representatives from CIVE, State Government concerned and a
voluntary organisation of proven track record for evaluating the performance of NGOs have
been curd Homes toe Howeyer, the Committee was not happy over the practical achievements in
E tegard-Hencé the’Commitee recommends that Vocational Education be properly linked
with Industries and corporate groups. Where eit are no industries the focus should be in
the areas of Agriculture, Fisheries, Dairying et¢//The Committee is of the view that there is
a strong felt need for greater decentralisation and flexibility of Vocational Educational based
on area specific needs. (A Sub-Committee has been constituted to make an indepth study of
the various aspects of Vocational Education and to make a report 112९0 22

.5 Education Technology Programme (INSAT CELL)

The Committee expressed the need for the telecast of syllabus based programme during
school hours. The Department in its reply stated that a proposal for starting a dedicated
educational channel has been under consideration of this Ministry, for quite some time.
After detailed discussions, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has agreed to allocate
three hours on DD-III, for telecast of educational programmes. The time allocated by the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting is from 7.10 a.m. each day, 7 days a week. The
request of the Department of Education for allocating a time slot during the normal school
hours was not agreed to by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, on account of
other prior overriding commitments. Nevertheless, a decision has been taken to utilise the
time slots made available for telecasting tutorial kind of programmes. On science subjects,
for classes X to XII. Programmes on these subjects are under preparation by the Central
Institute of Educational Technology, under the NCERT. In addition to telecast of syllabus
based programmes, general awareness programmes are also proposed to be telecast during
the allocated time, the Department informed. The Department of Education, also has
excellent in-house facilities for producing educational programmes. These include the
Central Institute of Educational Technology located at NCERT, New Delhi and 6 State
Institutes of Educational Technology set up at Ahmedabad, Pune, Patna, Bhubaneshwar,
Lucknow and Hyderabad. The Indira Gandhi National Open University has recently set up
an Educational Media Production Centre which has the most modern and sophisticated
equipment. This Centre is currently engaged in producing programmes relating to the
various courses, presently offered by IGNOU. The Consortium for Educational
Communication in association with Educational Media Research Centres located all over the
country is also engaged in producing programmes which are currently telecast over the
national network on Doordarshan, the Department clarified. The Department further
informed that the above institutions have some of the best talents available in the country in
terms of media and technical expertise. However, nadia ला felt, necessary programmes are

..also produced by seeking outside help from other media € The Committee was happy

to kiow that-a three-hour allotment-(i.e~7-to-10 A:m.) for Educational Programmes in DD
III has been consented by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. However the

| Committee feels that the normal school hours should be avoided for telecast of educational

|

programmes so that students can watch it in their homes and the normal school teaching
hours will not be hampered. Hence the Committee recommends that the Department should

persue this matter with the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting more vigorously, =

(5.6 Promotion of Science Laboratories

The Committee was constrained to note about the inadequate supply of Science
equipment in Institutions. The Department in its reply stated that the Department of
Education has been administering a Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Improvement of Science

as


il

Education in Schools”. The Scheme was initiated during 1997-98. The Scheme aims at
improving the quality of science education and promoting scientific temper, as envisaged in
the National Policy on Education, 1986. Under the scheme, financial assistance is provided
to State GovernmenvUnion Territory Administrations and Voluntary Agencies. While
voluntary agencies are provided assistance for conduct of experimental and innovative
programmes, States/UTs are assisted for provision of science kits to upper primary schools,
upgradation and strengthening of science, laboratories in secondary and senior secondary
schools; supply of books on science related subjects to secondary and senior secondary
schools and training of science and mathematics teachers. The Department further clarified
that all the State Governments and UT Administrations have received assistance under the
scheme during the period 1987-88 to 1995-96. Many Voluntary agencies have also availed of
assistance for conduct of various innovative programmes and a total of Rs. 228.54 crore has
been released so far under the scheme, since 1987-88. 48% of Government/Government
aided schools in the country have been covered so far. It is proposed to cover the remaining

52% schools during the 9th Plan, the Department informed. सबने हि eon: was
Bla satisfied with the practical progréss made_in_this direction_til Committee

hence 5 that Science Education should not lag behind and low cost science
equipment should be made available which is high imperative for the progress of Science
Education. The Committee further recommends that the Grants for promotion of Science
Laboratories should be included in the MP Local Area Development Schemes (MPLADS).

3.7 Need for Value-Based Education

The Committee expressed its deep concern over the decaying standard of education and
enquired about the number of Agencies assisted for strengthening Culture and Values. The
Department in its reply stated that the allocation for the Scheme of Culture and Values had
been on the average Rs. 1 crore every year. The number of agencies vary because the
proposals were for different amounts of grants. A lesser number of agencies was not
necessarily indicative of under-utilisation of funds. In the year wegen 97, the amount spent till
a 997 was Rs. 110 lakhs and the number of age! agencies assisted w; Committee
‘was not satisfied wi ie progress madétill now in the val ue education in true spirit. Hence
the Committee recommends that NCERT, SCERT and other institutions and voluntary
organisations should also be involved to redefine their priorities in this regard. Our culture
and ethos must find a proper place in our educational system. There is equally an urgent
need to inculcate Human Rights in Education. The Department stated that those are now
dealt through inclusion of concerns relating to protection of environment, barriers for the
education of socially disadvantaged groups as well as disabled children. The Committee
recommends that this issue of value education should be prioritised and given special ,
importance for successful implementation. (A Sub-Committee-has been constituted to make
an indepth study of the various aspects of Value-Based Education and make a report

0 कल

3.8 Reduction in the Load of School Bag

The Committee was constrained to note about the inadequate progress made in
reducing the load of school bag (Yashpal Committee). The Department in its reply stated
that the question of load of curriculum on children is to be viewed in the context of the
following:

(i) Physical load of the school bag: This is largely a phenomenon confined to urban

schools which prescribe a battery of Textbooks.

(ii) A Mental load arising out of the fact that students are unable to comprehend their



12

curriculum because of a multitude of Textbooks and an inadequate preparation on
the part of Teachers to do effective teachisig.

The Yasphal Committee’s recommendations have been shared with all the States who have

been advised to re-examine school textbooks from the point of view of load. The States

Tesponse has been positive. The question is quite complex and the results have to be

watched over a period of “The Committee was not happy over the inordinate delay in
/*the implementation of the Yashpal Committee Report and recommends that the Committee
{ report be implemented without further delay if ‘reduce the burden and save the child’ is to
ifs made a reality.

+3:9°Out-of-Course Question Paper set in CBSE Examinations in Physics and Mathematics
of Class XII

The Committee expressed its concern over the Difficult Question Paper set in CBSE
Examination in Physics and Mathematics of Class XII held this year. The Department in its
| reply stated that the CBSE has developed an intensive in-house exercise for framing
i question papers. It identifies resource experts and practitioners in the paper setting exercise.
1 Guidelines are issued to the paper-setters. The CBSE frames 3 sets of question papers which
| helps in combating the problem of mass-copying. The CBSE has also distinctive system of
| pre-testing of the marking scheme and finalising the marking scheme after the examination is
1 over. Examiners are given a sample of answers and the scheme of marking prepared by
| experts. However, the Committee is of the view that the questions from outside syllabus
| should not be set at all

3.10 Private Tultions

One of the reasons forcing the students to go for private tuitions is the poor quality of
education imparted by the teachers in the regular schools. Teachers do not take interest in
improving their own skills 4nd knowledge. Once they are appointed’ permanently’ to their
jobs, there is hardly any interest or initiative left in them to upgrade their knowledge and
skills in various fields. The net result is that the Committee observes, it is the student who
suffers ultimately. There is no fear of retrenchement in the mind of teachers as they are

manent and there is no proper system of re-orientation and training for them. Hence the
Province recommends that the Private Tuitions be ‘totally banned,

UNIVERSITY AND HIGHER EDUCATION
4.1 University Grants Commission

The University -Grants Commission had submitted a proposal for allocation of
Rs. 829.14 crores under Plan and Rs. 644.23 crores under Non-Plan in 1997-98. However,
keeping in view the overall constraint of financial resources that Government decided to
allocate Rs. 359.10 crores under Plan and Rs. 450 crores under Non-Plan. The Committee
notes that the plan allocations, although stepped up, still fall short of expectation of UGC
for Rs. 829.14 crores during 1997-98. The Committee takes serious note of the fact that, in
the event of requirements not being met fully, core programmes of UGC specially in
Sciences and Engineering and Technology are likely to suffer deterioration and degradation.
The Committee is surprised to note that Non-Plan outlay of UGC has been reduced from
Rs. 465 crores to 450 crores during 1997-98. The Committee is given to understand that in
the existing scheme of things, expenditures on plan schemes completed at the end of a plan
are treated as committed non-plan expenditure in the subsequent plan period. Although the
Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of reference in deciding the cut-of date
for transfer of committed liability on account of plan scheme, the incremental liabilities that
would arise in 1997-98 on account of Eighth Plan scheme completed in the next two financial



13

years would have to be provided for. In views of the specific recommendation of Tenth
Finance Commission, UGC ae oposal for allocation of Rs. 644.23 crores under Non-Plan in
ene 7-98 cannot be reduced{The Committee, therefore, expresses its deep concern that
spite Of clear cut indication from the Finance Commission the transfer of committed
liability has not taken place. Hence the Committee recommends that adequate allocation be
made for UGC at the RE stage and steps be taken in this regard.

4.2 On the question of career counselling units of the Department clarified that such
‘units existed on all campuses. There is a need to establish them in colleges. The Committee
jis of the view that sufficient steps must be taken in this regard so that youths do not act as
/ burdens on society and contribute positively in the task of Nation building. The UGC must
examine such implications. The. Committee was anguished to note about the leakage of
UGC question papers in Delhi for the test of. Junior Research Fellowship (JRF) and
National Eligibility Test (NET) for Lectureship in December 1996 for which retest was
conducted in Delhi only. The Department in its reply stated that leakage of NET question
| paper was under investigation of CBI and there was no report of leakage of the paper in
centres outside Delhi. Hence, the Committee strongly feels that this sort of leakage cases
| should be checked strictly and proper legal action taken against culprits and the old out-
| dated teaching through reference notes and guide-books followed by teachers must be
| stoppéd. The students should be encouraged to read original texts. Research works in the
| Universities must also be properly done.
|
4.3 Programme to Strengthen Scientific Research

The Committee expressed its concern for strengthening Scientific Research for which
there is a greater need for adequate allocation for Science in higher education. The
Department in its reply stated that from the Higher Education Budget no institution
exclusively devoted to science was “tives and 00122, A provision of Rs, 28 crores has been made for
promotion of science education in व अल व seein ena Committee expresses the
[2 भीम आ that in order to India progr ience” education it not be neglected. Hence
adequate allocations must be made for it.

"4. Need for Strengthening the Rural Educational Base

The Committee expressed its opinion that a separate admission processes for rural and
urban areas may be followed as rural students do not enjoy the advanced facilities as
compared to students in urban areas. The Department in its reply stated that separate
admission processes for students from rural areas would not-be desirable. However the

E feels that pre-coaching or pre-training facilities be made available to the rural

students so that they will be in a position to compete with the urban students, Hence
Committee recommends that Department should take necessary steps in this direction and
separate criterion for admission of rural students should be made keeping in view the poor
academic environment of the rural areas.

4.5 University Courses in Library Science

The Committee expressed its concern over the issue of University courses in Library
Science, whereas the job opportunity in this regard was limited. Moreover a rural youth
taking a training in Library Science may find himself in a difficult position as majority of the
Libraries are located outside. Hence the Committee is of the view that in case of
professional courses.- Area-specific approach needs to be followed. It must be need based.

Pence while opening institutes these aspects must be taken care of.
¥.


VA 14

ADULT EDUCATION

ek The Committee expressed its concern over the issue of literacy rate and stated that the
National Literacy Mission is a high priority area. As per the 1991 Census, the literacy rate
was 52% which is a shame. It compares unfavourably with other neighbouring countries such
as Myanmar and Sri Lanka and also vis-a-vis Thailand,Japan and Singapore. Hence the
Committee desired to know about the plan of the Department to achieve the commitment
made by the Government to make India Literate by 2005 A.D. The Department in its reply
stated that there is a greater need for involvement of the Panchayati Raj Institutions and
womens’ leadership in the literacy movement, and much higher allocations would be
necessary to achieve the goal of full literacy. The term full literacy does not signify coverage
of the entire non-literate population in’a district, but the non-literate population in age-
group of 15—35. The present literacy rate at India is based on 1991 Census. However, the
National Literacy Mission’s estimate is that the literacy rate of this point of time should be
around 60%. Out of about 13 crore non-literates so far accessed by National Literacy
Mission. 9 crore are currently enrolled, and 6 crore persons in the age-group 15—35 have
been made literate. If the current tempo of social mobilisation is maintained, the desired
level of literacy could be achieved by 2005 A.D. as indicated in the Common Minimum
Programme. Universalisation of Elementary Education, and compulsory primary education
will help ensure that accretions to the non-literate populace will be kept to a minimum. In
order to achieve the objective of full literacy by 2005 A.D., National Literacy Mission’s
thrust areas would be the following:—

To ensure that the backlog of illiterates are brought into the literacy fold

To cover the remaining districts in the country under literacy campaigns

To revitalise OPERATION RESTORATION
|| To take the neo-literates into continuing education
\ To strive to increase the involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions and NGOs
To decentralise and delegate both administrative and financial powers to.State and
District level institutions.

(A Sub-Committee has been constituted to make an indepth study of the various aspects of
Adult Education and to make a report thereon).

VI. LANGUAGES
6. Necessity of Emphasising the Teaching of Sanskrit

The Committee observes that Sanskrit is very often treated as a classical language.

| However, Sanskrit is very much a living language. If at all a Commission is established in
| this regard, the classical languages should not be clubbed with Sanskrit, giving the wrong
| impression that Sanskrit is a classical language. The Scientific and logical basis of Sanskrit
\ has made it the most important basic medium as a Computer language and this aspect of
। Sanskrit should be strengthened. The Research which is being conducted at the Academy of
\ Sanskrit Research, Melkote, Karnataka funded by the Government of India, should be
encouraged strengthened and widely publicised. Sanskrit Universities and in the Sanskrit
Departments and other Universities should be strengthened and asked to conduct more
jresearch in fields of Sanskrit and Computer.

| VIL. TECHNICAL EDUCATION

7.1 The Committee wanted to know whether the Community Polytechnics offer-special
| subjects. The Department in its reply stated that the Community Polytechnics offer a variety
| of Trades—related subjects including those focussed on civil engineering, electrical/
| electronics engineering, mechanical engineering and other agro-based matters. The subjects
| are chosen keeping in view the needs of areas in which the extension centres of the
| Polytechnics are located. The Committee also wanted to know whether there was any plan


15

cover more Polytechnics under the scheme of Community Polytechnics. The Department
further clarified that the scheme envisages setting up of 460 additional Community
olytechnics during the Ninth Plan period and the passouts of the Community Polytechnics
6 mainly self-employable and some also find employment in industry and agriculture in
areas. Observing the above replies the Committee recommends that there should be
ore and more special subjects and it should be instituted in greater geographic regions.

7.2 Curriculum Development

The Committee expressed the necessity of the Curriculum Development. The
Department in its reply stated that the Centre’s Curriculum Development Cell of Quality
Improvement Programmes (07) in the country has developed two documents:—

(1) The Model Curriculum and Syllabi for Core subjects for four years degree
programme in Engineering. (June 1981 publication, M/HRD)

(2) #०ण year degree course in Engineering, April, 1984 publication, M/HRD.
These were circulated to the institutions of technical education who were free to adopt or
modify their curricula to suit their requirements in consultation with representatives from
academia and industries. Upgradation of Undergraduate Curriculum in Engineering and
Technology has become inevitable due to the existing and emerging gap between the
industries and educational institutions. The Department further stated that in view of the
fast changing technological scenario. All India Committee on Technical Education (AICTE)
has now taken steps to see that curricula is changed once in 2 to 3 years. However the
Committee feels that the curricula needs to be changed and adopted in a reasonable time
duration. The Committee is also constrained to.note that the speed with which technology
advances and the slow pace with which the curriculum renewal takes place does not
commensurate. Hence the Committee recommends that sufficient adaptation of curriculum
be made according to the pace of technology advancement, and all technical Institutes
should see that it is being carried out.

1

५. VIII. FUND FOR GOLDEN JUBILEE OF INDIA’s INDEPENDENCE

8. The Committee expressed its concern over the Budget Estimate of 1997-98 for the
i Jubilee of India’s Independence which is Rs. 200.00 crores and the way this amount
is proposed to be spent. The Department in its reply stated that a sum of Rs. 200 crores has
been indicatéd in the Budget of the Department of Education for 1997-98 for the Golden
Jubilee Celebrations of India’s Independence. Out of this sum Rs. 50 crores is to be given to
the Department of Science and Technology. Proposals for utilisation of Rs. 150 crores are
being examined. The Committee is not happy with the slow pace “at which it is being
examined and recommends that the proposals for utilisation of funds be examined well in
advance so that the Golden Jubilee Anniversary can be started from 15th August, 1997 in a
befitting manner. The Committee further feels the necessity that in this Golden Jubilee Year
of India’s Independence, every positive effort must be made in bringing out an educational
model where every individual feels that “the mind is without fear and the head is held high,
where knowledge is free... where the clear stream of reason has not lost its way into the
dreary desert sand of dead habit...Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my country

awake”.


+

MINUTES



xm
“THIRTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 2nd April, 1997 in Main
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Dr. B.B. Dutta

Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
Shri R. Margabandu

. Dr. Mohan Babu

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

12. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

13. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

14. Shri Sartaj Singh

15. Shri Mahadecpak Singh Shakya
16. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

17. Dr. C. Silvera

18. Shri 1.0. Sanadi

19. Shrimati Krishna Bose

20. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

21. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
22. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

23. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome awe
24. Shri Samik Lahiri

25. Dr. M. Jagannath

26. Shri Ranen Barman

27. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

WITNESSES
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Education

1. Shri P.R. Dasgupta, Secretary

2. Shri Champak Chatterji, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Bhaskar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
4. Shri’ R.S. Pandey, Joint Secretary

FS ear avawn

a

*Minutes of the Ist to 12th Meetings relate to other matters.

19



20

. Shri Abhimanyu Singh, Joint Secretary

. Shri Rudra Gangadharan, Joint Secretary

. Shri Naved Masood, Joint Secretary

. Dr. $.0. Awale, Joint Educational Adviser

. Prof. D.P. Agarwal, Joint Educational Adviser

. Shri P.H.S. Rao, Joint Educational Adviser

. Shri Satyamoorthy, Financial Adviser (HRD)

. Shri T.K. Das, Chief Controller of Accounts

. Dr. (Shrimati) A.S. Desai, Chairperson, U.G.C.

. Shrimati Lizzi Jacob, Commissioner, KVS

. Shri Anurag Bhatnagar, Director (NVS)

. Shri M.B. Menon, Chairman, National Open School (NOS)
. Shri Kuldeep Mathur, Director (NIEPA) हे
. Dr. A.K. Sharma, Director (NCERT)

. Prof. J.S. Rajput, Chairman (NCTE)

. Dr. Rame Gowde, Chairman, (AICTE)

SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the

Department of Education in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants for the
year 1997-98.

3rd

3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on
April, 1997.



Xv
“FIFTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Saturday, the 19th April, 1997 in Committee
Room 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PIAAWEYD

PRESENT MEMBERS

2 Shri SB Chaven “Chatman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo

Dr. 8.8. Dutta~ ~
Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

Dr. Mohan Babu
LOK SABHA

. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Dr. C. Silvera

. Shri Dutta Meghe

. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

. Dr. M. Jagannath

. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Demands for Grants for 1997-98

of the Department of Education (Demand No. 48),****

The Committee, after some discussions, adopted the same with some modifica-

tions.

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati

Ray and Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and
Shri Sartaj Singh and Shri Dau Dayal Joshi to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha. The
Committee decided that the reports may be laid/presented on 22nd April, 1997.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 p.m.

“Minutes of the 14th Mecting relates to other matter.
****Relates to other matters.

2