PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 241
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON HUMAN  RESOURCE  DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FORTY-FIRST  REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIC DEPOSITORY BILL, 2011
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/PHALGUNA, 1933-34 (SAKA)MARCH, 2012/PHALGUNA, 1933-34 (SAKA)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13  MARCH, 2012)TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 13  MARCH, 2012)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13  MARCH, 2012)TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 13  MARCH, 2012)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

95
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FORTY-FIRST REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIC DEPOSITORY BILL, 2011
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13 TH MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 13 TH MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/PHALGUNA, 1933-34 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—23
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 24—34
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 35—48
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 49—92

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Shri Pramod Kureel
7. Shri N.K. Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
12. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
13. Shri Mirza Mehboob Beg
14. Shri Sameer Bhujbal
15. Shri P.K. Biju
16. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
17. Shri Suresh Channabasappa Angadi
18. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
19. Shri Rahul Gandhi
20. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
21. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
22. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
23. Km. Saroj Pandey
24. Shri Prasanna Kumar Patasani
25. Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla
26. Shri Ashok Tanwar
27. Shri Joseph Toppo
28. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
29. Shri P. Viswanathan
30. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
31. Shri Rathod Ramesh
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Smt. Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and
Forty First Report of the Committee on the National Academic Depository Bill, 2011.
2. The National Academic Depository Bill, 2011 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on
5 September, 2011. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill to the Committee on 16 September,
2011 for examination and report.
3. The Committee issued a Press Release on 5 October, 2011 for inviting views and suggestions
of the general public as well as the stakeholders on the Bill. The Committee received nine memoranda
in response to the Press Release. The memoranda were forwarded to the Department of Higher
Education for comments. Views of the stakeholders and the comments of the Department were taken
note of while formulating the observations and recommendations of the Committee. The Committee
held extensive deliberations with both Government and Private Sector stakeholders which included,
Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Chairman, University Grants Commission, Chairman, All
India Council of Technical Education, Chairman, Central Board of Secondary Education, Director, IIT,
Kanpur, and representatives of the Securities and Exchange Board of India, ICICI, Association of
Indian Universities, Indian Council of Universities, Education Promotion Society for India and Sarthak
Advocates and Solicitors.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in six sittings held on 23 November, 2011, 12, 13 and
27 January, 2012 and 6 and 22 February, 2012.
5. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied on the following:
(i) Background Note on the Bill and Note on the clauses of the Bill received from the
Department of Higher Education.
(ii) Presentation made and clarifications given by the Secretary, Department of Higher
Education.
(iii) Feedback received from the Department on the questionnaires and memoranda of the
stakeholders along with the issues raised by the Members during the course of the oral
evidence; and
(iv) Replies to the questionnaires and feedback received from the stakeholders heard by the
Committee.
6. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting
held on 22 February, 2012.
OSCAR FERNANDES
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 22, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Phalguna 1933-34  (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.
Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II Section 2 dated the 5.9.2011.
Lok Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 3168 dated the 16.9.2011.

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The National Academic Depository Bill, 2011 was referred to the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha
in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 16 September, 2011 for examination and report.
1.2 The Bill seeks to provide for maintenance of national database of academic awards in
electronic format in a depository to be known as the National Academic Depository and for
verification and authentication of such awards and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
1.3 The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill reads as follows:-
Educational Institutions, such as universities, colleges and polytechnics and Boards of
School Education, issue academic awards to students including degrees, diplomas and
certificates along with marks-sheets of the secondary, higher secondary and higher
education levels. Those who are entering into employment require a credible, authentic and
easily accessible mechanism for access to, and verification of academic awards granted by
various universities, colleges and polytechnics and Boards of School Education.
Keeping the academic awards in electronic depository would provide benefits to educational
institutions, students and employers by enabling online access of academic awards which
shall eliminate the need for any person to approach educational institutions, for obtaining
transcripts of such awards or marks-sheets for verification. It would also eliminate
fraudulent practices such as forging of certificates and marks-sheets by facilitating online
verification thereof. Therefore, a need has been felt for a simplified mechanism to verify
academic awards.
The proposed legislation provides for maintenance of a national database of such academic
awards in electronic format in a depositor y to be known as the National Academic
Depository and for verification and authentication of such awards. The establishment of
National Academic Depository analogous to depositories in the financial sector is a
technology-based solution to ensure confidentiality, authenticity and fidelity of academic
records enabling online verification and easy retrieval of details of academic awards. It
would also reduce the need for institutions to preserve physical records related to academic
performance of students over a long time.
1.4 The Secretary, Department of Higher Education in her deposition before the Committee on
23 November, 2011 gave an overview of the background which necessitated the proposed
legislation. With the tremendous growth in the education sector, mobility of students across levels
of education as well as between institutions of learning was increasing manifold. There was also
a need for a simplified mechanism to verify academic qualifications for those entering into
employment who required a credible, authentic and easily accessible mechanism for access to and
verification of academic awards. The Secretary pointed out that several problems were being
noticed in the prevailing manual system of maintenance of academic records being faced by the
institutions, students, alumni and employers. These problems were difficulty in preservation of the
academic records and their spoilage over time; cumbersome and time-consuming retrieval and
verification process of academic qualifications; difficulty in obtaining duplicates and transcripts;
problems relating to fake/forged certificates and the consequent damage to the credibility of

2
qualifications issued by educational institutions. The Department was, accordingly, contemplating
the establishment of a national database of academic qualifications created and maintained in an
electronic format by an identified and registered depository.
1.5 The Secretary drew the attention of the Committee to the fact that the Government had
made dematerialization of financial securities mandatory through a legislation not only to ensure the
trading of financial security flawless but also make the entire process more transparent.
Emphasizing that educational certificates and awards were an even more important guarantor of the
future than financial security, the Secretary mentioned that they were highly susceptible to frauds
and harassment with respect to authentication. In such a scenario, Government was of the view
that it was important that these certificates should also be subject to dematerialization to enable
better future for the students.
1.6 The Secretary then dwelt upon the main features of the Bill. The proposed Electronic
Depository would hold details of academic certificates of students in dematerialized form. Various
academic degree granting institutions would establish connectivity with the Electronic Depository
to upload details of academic certificates. The Electronic Depository would be accessible online by
all the authorized academic institutions admitting students for higher education, employers and
Government organizations etc. for verification of academic certificates of prospective candidates.
While the total access to the Electronic Depository would be online, the Depository would establish
network of facilitation centres for candidates to submit dematerialization requests of past academic
certificates and requests for authentication. The system would also have the necessary security
feature to ensure that only authorized users had access to authorized functions. The Committee
was also given to understand that no expenditure from the Government side was expected as it
would be a fully user service charge-based service provision with users being educational
institutions, employers and other stakeholders.
1.7 During the course of deliberations, the Chairman, AICTE informed the Committee that
requests were received from bodies abroad and also from several other agencies, asking for
authentication of documents issued by some universities or other bodies. In such cases, concerned
university had to be approached by AICTE for confirmation. The proposed legislation would prove
to be extremely useful in the sense that all the documents – the marks-sheets, the passing
certificates would be made available in electronic form through a proper document management
system, taking care of all possibilities of external intervention. Emphasizing upon the need for such
a legislation, the Chairman, CBSE apprised the Committee that there were a number of fake Boards
having similar nomenclature like the Central Board of  Higher Education and the Central Board of
Education and many a times students were duped into taking fake certificates from them. With the
proposed legislation coming into force, students would be better placed as only authenticated
Boards and Institutions would be authorized to lodge their data.
1.8 To have an idea about any similar mechanism prevalent in any other country, the
Department was asked to apprise the Committee in this regard. In response, the Committee was
given to understand that in no country, there was an Act mandating dematerialization of academic
awards. Committee’s attention was drawn to the Family Education Rights and Privacy Act, 1974
of USA which provided for regulation of educational awards of students. Besides that, a non-
profit organization, the National Student Clearinghouse founded by the higher education
community was involved in streamlining the student record verification process for colleges and
universities, students and alumni, lending institutions, employers and other organizations, in strict
compliance with the Family Education Rights and Privacy Act, 1974. The only other country to
have such a mechanism was Tanzania which had the Central Depositories Act, 2003 which was,
however, meant for having a system for central handling of securities for the purpose of
dematerializing.

3
1.9 The Committee was also informed that most of the universities in advanced countries like
UK and USA maintained awards and certificates in electronic form and the services of issuing
transcripts, online verification of awards etc. were made available to students on internet. Many
private agencies were also involved in offering of services of verification of authenticity of
certificates etc. for students and employers. However, Indian Universities were not well-equipped
for this purpose. It was also emphasized that in our country, it was very difficult to ensure unified
national database through voluntary persuasion and, accordingly, the legislation had been proposed.
1.10 The Committee welcomes the proposed legislation having the laudable objective of
maintenance of a national database of academic awards in electronic format by an identified
registered depository. This would evolve as a credible, authentic and easily accessible
mechanism for access to and verification of academic awards, thereby putting an end to the
present cumbersome and time-consuming process of verification/authentication of degrees/
certificates. The Committee believes that with the coming into effect of the proposed
legislation, the interests of students as well as employers would be served well. Also, the
menace of rampant usage of fake certificates in the academic sphere would be curtailed to
an extent. The Committee feels that by bringing such a legislation, the first of its kind in
the world our country would act as a role model for other countries to follow. Gradually,
with the kind of high level of IT expertise available indigenously, India can become a hub
for such kind of exchange of information in the world.
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
2.1 The Committee was informed by the Department that the legislative proposal was referred
to various Ministries/Departments, namely, Home Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services,
Agricultural Research and Education, Textiles, Health and Family Welfare, AYUSH, Information
Technology, Environment and Forests, Legal Affairs and Legislative Department. Planning
Commission, UGC, AICTE and CBSE were also consulted. On a specific query about any
reservations expressed/suggestions given by the Ministries/Departments, the Committee was
informed that in the inter-Ministerial consultations, no Ministry had opposed the proposed
legislation. The Ministries of Textiles, Environment and Forests, Science and Technology and the
Departments of AYUSH and Information Technology had supported the proposal. Planning
Commission had conveyed its ‘in principle’ approval. However, on an analysis of the feedback
given by the authorities, the Committee observes that some very pertinent issues about the viability
of the proposed legislation were raised by the Planning Commission, CBSE and the Council of
Boards of Secondary Education and also the Ministries of Finance and Information Technology.
Need for a new Act covering academic instruments, affordable user-charges, a clear-cut regulatory
framework for the National Academic Depository, acceptance by all the States/academic
institutions, financial implications for all concerned, adjudication of cases connected with NAD
under the IT Act were the main concerns raised.
2.2 On being asked about consultation with State Governments, the Committee was informed
that the legislative proposal was discussed at the 57th meeting of the Central Advisory Board of
Education (CABE), the highest body to advise the Central and State Governments in the field of
education, held on 19 June, 2010. The meeting was attended by Ministers-in-charge of Education
from various States and all States had concurred with the proposal. A perusal of the list of State
Ministers attending the CABE meeting, however, reveals that there was no Minister from the States/
UTs of Bihar, Jharkhand, Tripura, Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep. Not only this, Ministers from
West Bengal, Maharashtra, Odisha, Nagaland, Gujarat and U.P. either represented school education
or higher/technical education. The Committee was also informed that comments of State Education
Secretaries on the legislative proposal were sought on 9 June, 2010. While only four States, i.e.
Kerala, Jharkhand, Punjab and Nagaland responded, no objection was received from any State. The

4
legislative proposal was also discussed in the meeting of State Boards of School Education held on
3 August, 2010. The Committee observes that suggestions like issuing of duplicate certificates by
the concerned Board/Council, deletion of clause relating to imposition of penalty on academic
institutions and sharing of revenue generated by NAD with institutions were raised in that meeting.
2.3 While UGC and AICTE were duly consulted and gave their concurrence, Committee’s query
about views, if any, received from other regulatory bodies elicited the response of the Department
that no separate reference was made to regulatory bodies like the Medical Council of India, Dental
Council, Nursing Council and the Council of Architecture. Justification given was that these bodies
regulated professional education whereas the present proposal was entirely academic in nature.
2.4 The Committee was informed that with a view to have the opinion of experts on this policy
initiative, the Ministry had constituted a Task Force under the Chairmanship of Prof. Sanjay
Dhande, Director, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur, the other members of the Task
Force being Prof. Debashis Chatterjee, Director IIM, Kozhikode, Prof. S.S. Mantha, Chairman,
AICTE, Prof. Ved Prakash, Vice-Chairman, UGC, Shri Vineet Joshi, Chairman, CBSE, nominee of
Ministry of Finance and AS&FA, MHRD. The legislative proposal was finalized, based on the
recommendations made by the Task Force. Thereafter, the CBSE was entrusted with a pilot project
in order to establish the Proof of Concept (POC). CBSE had awarded the pilot project for
establishment of a National Academic Depository (NAD) to the Central Depository Services (India)
Ltd. (CDSL) and National Securities Depositories Limited (NSDL). As part of the pilot
implementation, CBSE had made available the academic awards of Central Teacher’s Eligibility Test
(CTET) 2011 and CBSE Board XIIth Standard Exam 2011 on the NAD Portals and had also
requested all Heads of Institutions affiliated to CBSE to make use of this facility and send a
feedback to the CBSE on the NAD system to further improve the system. As on 26 July, 2011,
7,94,074 records pertaining to Central Teachers’ Eligibility Test, 2011 and 7,70,042 records
pertaining to CBSE Board XII Standard Exam, 2011 had been uploaded by CBSE. The Committee
was also informed that while 781 visitors had been reported on NAD Portal, users registered were
279 and verifications done were 118.
2.5 The Committee observed that all the stakeholders were not involved in the consultation
process. What was more a cause of concern was that this exercise could not be considered to
be complete as response was not forthcoming from many of those consulted. The Committee,
accordingly, made an attempt to elicit views from all concerned in the limited time available with
it. The Committee started this exercise by issuing a Press Release on 22 October, 2011 for eliciting
views and suggestions from the general public and stakeholders on the proposed legislation. Nine
memoranda raising wide-ranging issues received from the stakeholders were forwarded to the
Department for its comments. The Committee also approached all the State Governments/UT
Administrations in order to ascertain their views/suggestions on the proposed legislation before it.
However, this attempt of the Committee failed to yield the desired result as only seven State
Governments/UT Administrations, i.e. Assam, Odisha, Nagaland, Maharashtra, Daman & Diu, Dadra
& Nagar Haveli and Andaman & Nicobar Administration came forward with their feedback. While
the proposed legislation was found acceptable by all these States/UTs, its financial implication,
keeping in view availability of limited resources, was pointed out as a cause of concern by the
State Governments of Odisha and Nagaland.
2.6 Besides holding initial deliberations with the Secretary, Department of Higher Education on
23 November, 2011, the Committee heard the views of Chairman, CBSE, Chairman, UGC and
Chairman, AICTE. The Committee also had the opportunity to interact with the Director, IIT
Kanpur who had submitted the Concept Paper and also was the Chairman of the Task Force
constituted for giving recommendations based on the Concept Paper for formulating the legislation.
Representatives of SEBI, NSDL and CDSL also appeared before the Committee and gave an idea

5
about the functioning of the two securities depositories which were envisaged to take up the role
of the proposed academic depository. Keeping in view, the increasing participation of private sector
in higher education, the Committee felt that their views were also very relevant so far as the
proposed legislation was concerned. The Committee, accordingly, interacted with representatives of
Association of Indian Universities, Council of Indian Universities, Education Promotion Society of
India and also Sarthak Advocates and ICICI Bank. The proposed legislation was considered a
welcome step by all the stakeholders appearing before the Committee. However, some very relevant
and specific suggestions for bringing out modifications in the proposed legislation were also placed
before the Committee. Finally, the Committee held a meeting with the representatives of the
Department for seeking clarifications on certain pertinent issues raised by the stakeholders as also
those identified by the Committee. All these interactions not only gave the Committee a better
insight for having an understanding of the various provisions of the Bill but also enabled it to
formulate its observations and recommendations in the right perspective.
III. Committee’s observations/recommendations on various clauses of the Bill are given in the
succeeding paragraphs:–
Clause 2 : APPLICATION OF ACT
3.1 Clause 2 makes provision for application of Act. It provides that the proposed legislation
shall apply to all academic institutions specified in the Schedule.
3.2 The Committee notes that this clause states that the Bill would apply to all academic
institutions specified in the Schedule. However, a perusal of the Schedule reveals that it contains
a list of 39 bodies which conduct school ending examinations which includes, besides the Central
Board of Secondary Education, Council for the Indian School Certificate Examination and National
Institute of Open Schooling, various State Boards as well as State Open Schools. However,
applicability of the proposed legislation extends to institutions imparting higher education
also. The Committee is of the view that reference to the Schedule is confusing and is likely
to cause complications.
3.3 On clarification being sought in this regard, the Department replied as under:
“The term ‘Schedule’ mentioned in the Definitions clause 3(1)(c) of the Bill defines an
academic institution to mean a higher education institution or body in secondary education
conducting examination at the conclusion of class tenth or class twelfth specified in the
Schedule. However, clause 9 of the Bill makes it mandatory for all academic institutions
and not only those listed in the Schedule to lodge the academic awards issued by it with
the National Academic Depository. Therefore, as rightly pointed out, clause 2 of the Bill
has to be modified to read “This Act shall apply to all academic institutions. ”
3.4 The Committee is happy to note that its query about relevance of the use of the
term ‘Schedule’ in clause 2 has been found justified and, accordingly, the clause is proposed
to be modified. The Committee would, however, like to point out that the mention of
Schedule in clause 3(1)(c) in the definition of the term ‘academic institution’ was not
objected to by it. Also, the Committee is well aware of the fact that academic awards issued
by all academic institutions will have to be deposited with NAD on the enactment of the
proposed legislation. Its reservations were specifically directed towards the use of the term
‘Schedule’ in clause 2.
3.5 The Committee would also like to point out that the list of bodies included in the
Schedule needs to be considered indicative. It may so happen that a new State Board may
be created or a new State Open School may come into being or those Boards/Schools listed
at present may become non-functional. However, any such modification can be carried out

6
only after the approval of the Parliament. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that a
proviso as reproduced below may be added in clause 2 so as to facilitate modifications in
the Schedule expeditiously:
“Provided that the Central Government may, as and when considered necessary, by notification in
the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule.”
IV. Clause 3 : DEFINITIONS
4.1 Clause 3 deals with definitions. Clause 3(1)(b) defines the term ‘academic award’ as
follows:
“academic award” means any certificate or degree or diploma granted by a Board, Council,
School, university or an academic institution or higher educational institution established by
or under any law, for the time being in force, to do so;
4.2 The Committee notes that as mentioned in clause 3(2), words and expressions used and not
defined herein but defined in the Information Technology Act, 2000 or the General Clauses Act,
1897 and not inconsistent with this Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in
these two Acts. Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that the capitalized terms ‘Board’,
‘Council’ and ‘School’ included in the definition of the term ‘academic award’ were not defined
in the  Bill. However, a perusal of the IT Act, 2000 and the General Clauses Act, 1897 revealed
that the three terms had not been defined therein. The Department in this regard clarified that this
was a drafting mistake and the terms Board, Council and School need not be capitalized and this
would be corrected in consultation with the Law Ministry.
4.3 Another ambiguity brought to the Committee’s notice was lack of cross reference to the
Schedule in the definition of the term ‘academic award’ which would lead to certain amount of
linguistic ambiguity. Response of the Department was that a cross reference to the Schedule in
Clause 3(1)(b) would be incorporated in consultation with the Law Ministry. The Committee finds
merit in the objection raised with regard to inclusion of definition of the terms ‘Board’,
‘Council” and ‘School’ in the Bill. Even after a reference to the Schedule in clause 3(1)(b),
inclusion of definition of the terms ‘Board’, ‘Council’ and ‘School’ will make things very
clear. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the definitions of these terms may be
included under the Definitions clause.
4.4 Another suggestion made to the Committee was that when awards/certificates were to be
deposited in the NAD, marks-sheets should also be included as they were also an equally important
document. It was clarified by the Department that all academic institutions starting with secondary
boards upwards including universities shall be obligated to lodge in the NAD and this would include
marks-sheets also. The Committee believes that there should be no confusion and ambiguity
about such basic details with regard to documents to be deposited in the Depository, be it
award/degree/diploma. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a
specific mention of the term ‘marks-sheet’ under the definition of the term ‘academic
award’.
4.5 Committee’s query about consultation with regulatory bodies like Medical Council of
India, Dental Council, Nursing Council and the Council of Architecture elicited a nil response
from the Department. In addition, it was also clarified that these bodies were regulating
professional education whereas the present proposal was entirely academic in nature. The
Committee has serious reservation on the clarification given by the Department. Not only
this, the Committee would also like to draw attention to other categories of professional
education being mandated by regulatory bodies like Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India, Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India, Institute of Company Secretaries

7
of India, Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers etc. From this, it
implies that such awards or certificates or degrees or whichever name the professional
qualification earned is known as will not be eligible for lodging in the NAD. Such an
approach is likely to lead to a situation when an individual holding very high professional
qualifications will stand deprived from taking benefit of facilities available at NAD while
seeking employment or for further education in India or abroad. In a way, prospective
employers will also not be in a position to take services of highly qualified professionals.
The Committee strongly feels that there appears to be no justification in excluding the
professional education from the purview of this legislation. Awards/certificates/degrees,
whether academic or professional need to be treated equally, keeping in view the interests
of students/professionals as well as employers. The Committee, therefore, strongly
advocates the need for inclusion of professional awards such as medical, engineering,
architecture, nursing, dental, chartered accountancy, company secretary and so on under
the proposed legislation. The definition of ‘academic award’ may be modified accordingly
so as to cover all such recognized professional qualifications. If need be, separate
definition for such qualifications may be formulated.
4.6 Clause 3(1)(c) provides for the definition of the term “academic institution” which reads as
follows:–
“academic institution” means a higher educational institution or a body in secondary
education conducting examinations at the conclusion of class tenth or class twelfth specified
in the Schedule”
4.7 The definition of the term ‘academic institution’ is applicable with respect to two categories
of educational institutions, school level and those beyond school level. So far as school level
certificates are concerned, academic institution would include a body in secondary education
conducting examinations at the conclusion of class tenth or class twelfth specified in the Schedule.
The Committee observes that this list contains names of 39 boards/councils/schools, both Central
and State level. Committee’s attention has been drawn by Foreign School Boards like the
International Baccalaureate Organization operating in the country which do not find a mention in
the Schedule containing a list of Indian School Boards.
4.8 When asked to clarify, the Department submitted that foreign boards cannot be mandated
by Indian Laws to mandatorily lodge their awards with NAD, but they could lodge their awards
on their own volition and the Bill does not prevent them from doing so. The Committee also notes
that there is another foreign authority, i.e. International General Certificate of Secondary Education
under the Cambridge International Examination operational in the country. A considerable number
of schools spread across the country are imparting school education to Indian students through
these international set-ups. While a large number of students of such international boards go abroad
for further studies, it is also equally true that quite a few students seek admission in Indian
universities. To protect their interests as well as those of employers, their school-leaving
certificates also need to be deposited in NAD. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
a proviso specifying that foreign boards conducting school leaving examination through duly,
recognized schools in the country will also have the option to lodge their awards with NAD
may be incorporated in the definition of the term ‘academic institution’.
4.9 Clause 3(1)(i) deals with the definition of the term ‘diploma’ which reads as follows:–
“diploma” means such award, not being a degree, granted by a higher educational
institution certifying that the recipient has successfully completed a course of study of not
less than nine months duration.

8
4.10 The Committee was informed that the definition of the term ‘diploma’ is linked to the
definition of the term ‘higher educational institution’ which is defined inter alia to mean an
institution of learning imparting higher education beyond twelve years of schooling, leading to the
award of degree or diploma. This definition is restrictive to the extent that there may be diplomas
of less than nine months in duration, particularly in the field of vocational education. Such diplomas
of not less than nine months duration would not be covered. Further, as per this definition, a
diploma obtained prior to the completion of twelve years of formal schooling would not be covered
under the Bill.
4.11 A very large number of Industrial Training Institutes have been set up in different parts of
the country by Central and State Governments which provide training of different durations from
one year to three years to students who have passed class tenth examination. However, the
Committee was constrained to note that keeping in view linking of higher educational institutions
with giving of diplomas, diplomas granted to tenth pass students would remain outside the ambit
of the proposed legislation. Committee’s query in this regard elicited a very discouraging response
from the Department whose stand was that there appeared to be no need to revisit the definition
of the term, ‘diploma’. It was emphasized that diploma is for any course of not less than nine
months duration and granted by a higher educational institution. Diplomas granted by any other
institution would not be covered. Diploma obtained prior to completion of 12 years of formal
schooling was also not covered by the provision of the Bill.
4.12 T he Committee is of the considered view that one of the main purpose of setting up
of the National Academic Depository is to facilitate the student community by maintaining/
storing electronic form of awards, easy access to the awards, and making authentication a
less cumbersome process. The Committee reiterates that all kinds of awards, be it
professional or technical should be covered under the Bill. The Committee notes that in the
Concept Paper for the setting up of NAD, the certificates earned by students in ITIs and
other institutions form the basis of the legislative proposal. Moreover, the duration of
diploma should not be restricted so long as it imparts vocational education and gainful
employment to an individual. The Committee is also aware that many of the diplomas are
issued by institutions which fall under the domain of other Ministries/Departments. One
such example is that of ITIs which are set up under the Ministry of Labour. Likewise State
Governments also set up institutions which conduct short term diploma courses. Like in the
case of academic awards, where degrees/certificates conferring professional qualifications
have also to be brought under the ambit of NAD, the same analogy should be made
applicable in the case of diplomas. In case, lodging of such diploma certificates in NAD
involves procedural complications, the Department can easily act in coordination with these
Ministries/Departments/State Governments and find out a solution as ultimately it is for the
benefit of students and employers.
V. Clause 4 : APPOINTMENT OF NATIONAL ACADEMIC DEPOSITORY
5.1 This clause provides for appointment of the National Academic Depository. It provides that
the Central Government shall, by notification, appoint a depositor y to act as the  “National Academic
Depository” on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed for the purpose of establishing
and maintaining the national database of academic awards in electronic format.
5.2 It further provides that no depository shall be ap pointed as t he National Academic
Depository unless (i) it is a depository having a certificate of registration as such under sub-section
(IA) of section 12 or-the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 or is a fully owned
subsidiary of such depository; (ii) it has, in its memorandum of association, specified provision of
depository services for academic awards as one of its objects; and (iii) it fulfils such other terms
and conditions as may be prescribed.

9
5.3 It also provides that the National Academic Depository appointed under sub-clause (1) shall
not commence its operations unless it is so authorized, in writing, by the Central Government. It
also provides that the Central Government shall not authorize commencement of operations unless
it is satisfied that the National Academic Depository fulfils the conditions laid down under sub-
clause (4) and before authorizing for commencement of operations, the Central Government may
cause to be undertaken, physical verification of the provision of systems, safeguards, mechanisms,
manual and facilities by the National Academic Depository.
5.4 It also provides that the Central Government shall undertake the review of the functioning
of the National Academic Depository, on expiry of a period of ten years from the date of
notification under sub-clause (1), and if (i) it is satisfied with the functioning of the National
Academic Depository, may renew the appointment of such Depository for a further period of ten
years; or (ii) it is not satisfied with the functioning of the National Academic Depository, may
revoke the appointment of such Depository and the provisions of sub-clauses (2), (3), (4), (5), (6)
and (7) of clause 6 shall apply accordingly.
5.5 The Committee observed that the mandatory eligibility criteria for an Academic Depository is
its registration under section 12 (1A) of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992. In
view of very obvious distinct features of depositories dealing with securities and those dealing with
academic awards, clarifications were sought from the Department in this regard. Response of the
Department was that the data to be handled and maintained by NAD was extremely crucial and
sensitive. It was, therefore, imperative that the task was performed by a credible entity, having the
requisite experience and mandatory certifications and that the field was not left open to just anyone
who may not have the competence to deliver. Accordingly, it was felt that such entities must be
registered with SEBI which followed stiff norms and ensured that the prescribed criteria was fulfilled.
It was also mentioned that registration under the SEBI Act was merely one of the pre-conditions for
the depository to be eligible to be appointed as NAD. In its memorandum of association, the
depository should have depository services for academic awards as one of its objects.
5.6 Doubts raised by the Committee about the viability of a Depository of securities or its
subsidiary functioning as an academic depository were sought to be allayed by the response of the
Department that before undertaking the operations of NAD, the registered entity would also have
to obtain permission from SEBI and it would ensure that the NAD was under necessary control
and supervision of SEBI as well as the Government. It was also mentioned that SEBI would not
have any role to play in the selection, appointment or monitoring of the performance of the NAD
which were adequately covered under the proposed legislation. It was assured that with a separate
legislation in place to govern operations and conduct of NAD and the entities interfacing with it,
any likely complication would be addressed.
5.7 In order to have a proper assessment about the appointment of a depository as the National
Academic Depository fulfilling the eligibility criteria of being registered under the SEBI Act, and any
likely complications arising as a result in future, the Committee made an analysis of the criteria laid
down under the SEBI Act, 1992 and the SEBI (Depositories and Participants) Regulations for
registration of a depository as also the work handled by the Securities depository and to be handled
by NAD.
5.8 Section 12(1A) of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 reads as follows:–
No depository, participant, custodian of securities, foreign institutional investor, credit
rating agency or any other intermediary associated with the securities market as the Board
may by notification in this behalf specify, shall buy or sell or deal in securities except under
and in accordance with the conditions of a certificate of registration obtained from the
Board in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.

10
The Committee observes that the term ‘Securities’ as defined under clause 2(h) of the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 includes shares, scrips, stocks, bonds, debentures,
Government securities etc. ‘Academic Award’ is not a security as defined under the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956. The Depository registered with SEBI interfaces with Securities
Market Participants which include Stock Exchanges, Clearing House/Clearing Corporation of Stock
Exchanges, Depository Participants, Issuers/Registrar and Transfer Agents and Investors. In
contrast, National Academic Depository will interface with Universities, Boards, Academic Award
Holders, Entities authorized to verify academic awards and Depository Agents and prospective
employers.
5.9 The Committee notes that the following entities are authorized to be registered as a
depository under the SEBI (Depositories and Participants) Regulations, 1996:
– a public financial institution (section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956).
– a bank included under the RBI Act, 1934 (Second Schedule).
– a foreign bank operating in India with the approval of RBI.
– a recognized stock exchange.
– a body corporate engaged in providing financial services with not less than 75 percent
equity capital by any of the institutions indicated above, jointly or severally securities
business.
– a body corporate involved constituted or recognized in a foreign country and approved
by the Central Government.
– an institution providing financial services established outside India and approved by the
Central Government.
In other words, any entity or its subsidiary dealing with securities or providing financial
services, functional in the country or those operating outside the country would fulfill the eligibility
criteria for being appointed as the National Academic Depository. The Committee was given to
understand that the objective behind bringing NAD under the SEBI Act was to ensure that NAD
had prior experience and the requisite technical, managerial and financial expertise to provide the
services and discharge the mandated functions.
5.10 When asked about the viability of a Depository of Securities or its subsidiary functioning
as an academic depository, the Committee was informed that CBSE had awarded a pilot project for
establishment of a National Academic Depository to the Central Depository Services (India) Ltd.
(CDSL) and National Securities Depositories Ltd. (NSDL). In this pilot project, CDSL and NSDL
were providing an interface to various agencies intending to verify online whether an academic
qualification has been issued by CBSE. As part of the pilot implementation, CBSE had made
available the academic awards of Central Teachers Eligibility Test (CTET) 2011 and CBSE Board
XII standard Exam 2011 on the NAD portals. All Heads of Institutions affiliated to CBSE had been
requested to make use of this facility and send a feedback to the CBSE on the NAD System.
5.11 The Committee was informed that 7,94,074 records were deposited on the CTET 2011 and
7, 70, 042 records were posted on the CBSE Board XII standard Exam 2011, upto 26 July, 2011.
However, so far as using the services of these two pilot projects was concerned, only 781 visitors
were reported on the NAD portal, with users registered being only 279 and verifications done only
in respect of 118 entries. Committee’s attention was also drawn to the constitution of an Evaluation
Committee for evaluating these pilot projects. Representatives of IIT Mumbai, BHU Varanasi, Delhi
University and CBSE were there on the Evaluation Committee.

11
5.12 The Committee observes that this Evaluation Committee is yet to give its report.
During its deliberation with the representatives of the Department on 27 January, 2012, the
Committee was given to understand that it would take about one month’s time for the
Evaluation Committee to give its report. The Committee feels that the Evaluation
Committee having experts from academic world as its members is best suited for giving its
recommendations on the viability of Securities Depositories handling the work of Academic
Depository. The Committee hopes that its recommendations as and when received would
prove very useful for this new venture.
5.13 Another area of serious concern for the Committee is the element of ambiguity so far as
the supervisory mechanism envisaged for the functioning of NAD is concerned. Clause 4(1) simply
states that the Central Government shall be the appointing authority for NAD. As indicated in sub-
clause (5), the Central Government before authorising the commencement of operations, may cause
to be undertaken physical verification of the provision of systems, safeguards, mechanisms, manual
and facilities specified in sub-clause (4). The Committee is of the opinion that this provision
lacks clarity as it merely mentions the Central Government as the regulatory authority.
The regulatory authority is an important aspect of the proposed legislation and it should be
specifically provided for therein. Even the Planning Commission has pointed out that no
clear cut regulatory framework has been suggested for regulating the functioning of NAD
or the national data base. This needs to be factored into the legislation ab initio to avoid
any confusion. The Committee finds the following response of the Department to the
reservations of the Planning Commission totally unconvincing:
“Regulatory framework is adequately provided for in the legislation in clauses 4, 15, 26,
27, 28 and 29. These clauses are meant to ensure that NAD functions as per the
directions of the Central Government. Despite these clauses, in case NAD  fails to
discharge its functions as expected, clause 6 provides for the revocation of  appointment
of NAD.”
5.14 The Committee would like to point out that clause 15 relates to Accounts and Audit
of NAD, clause 26 is about crediting sums realized by way of compensation or penalty or
fine to Consolidated Fund of India, clause 27 relates to returns and information to be
provided by NAD, clause 28 is about power of Central Government to give directions and
clause 29 relates to power of Central Government to inspect. Suggestion of the Planning
Commission which the Committee fully supports pertains to having a well-defined and
structured regulatory framework in the legislation itself. Auditing of Accounts, crediting of
sums in the Consolidated Fund, filing of returns and other information, directions of
Government and inspection of NAD cannot be considered an alternative to a proper
regulatory framework.
5.15 Committee’s attention has been drawn to the fact that along with the criteria for registration
under the SEBI Act, the National Academic Depository will have to have in its memorandum of
association, specified provision of depository services for academic awards as one of its objects.
The Committee, while appreciating the inclusion of a specific condition keeping in view the
distinct features of academic awards vis-a-vis securities, would like to draw the attention
towards section 11 of the SEBI Act whereunder SEBI Board has been entrusted the function
of registering as well as regulating the working of the depositories. Thus, every depository
registered under the SEBI Act or its subsidiary including that dealing with academic awards
will be under the regulatory framework laid down by SEBI Board.
5.16 Committee’s doubts about viability of such an entity operating under two separate Acts are
strengthened by the conflicting response received form the Department. It has been informed that
before undertaking the operations of NAD, the registered entity will also have to obtain permission

12
from SEBI and it will ensure that NAD is under necessary control and supervision of SEBI as well
as the Government. It has also been given to understand that SEBI has no role to play in the
selection, appointment or the monitoring of the performance of NAD as the same are adequately
covered under the proposed legislation.
5.17 The Committee is of the view that this legislation should specifically provide for a
regulatory authority which could comprise of experts or representatives from the field of
education, information technology, finance and the representative of the Ministry of HRD.
This regulatory framework can be easily evolved on the lines of the framework of SEBI
Board provided in the SEBI Act. Since this Bill specifically deals in the academic awards,
degrees etc., it should have the regulators primarily from the field of education along with
technology  experts to take care of the technical aspects.
5.18 Response received from the Department on the Committee’s query about NSDL and CDSL
not set up through an Act of Parliament and NAD proposed through an Act of Parliament throws
some light on the issue of regulatory framework for NAD, although in an indirect manner.
Committee was informed that the primary objective was to make lodging of academic awards by
academic institutions mandatory and creation of NAD through an Act was therefore a corollary to
the primary objective. Committee’s attention was also drawn to a parallel available in the shape of
the Central Identity Data Repository through the National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010.
5.19 A perusal of both these Bills reveals that both seek to provide for maintenance of database
and for verification and authentication thereof – one for academic awards and the other for
identification number of individuals residing in the country. However, there is a major difference.
The NIAI Bill envisages the setting up of a National Identification Authority, giving its composition
and outlining the qualifications, terms of office and other allied aspects and also powers and
functions of the authority. One of its functions is establishing, operating and maintaining of the
Central Identities Data Repository. Both the National Identification Authority and the Central
Identities Data Repository have been assigned a very crucial mandate and will be working in direct
and close collaboration with each other.
5.20 The Committee observes that the data to be h andled and maintained by the National
Academic Depository and the Central Identities Data Repository is crucial and sensitive, rather it
is more sensitive in the case of the Central Identities Data Repository. When a National
Identification Authority can be mandated for establishing, operating and maintaining of a
Central Repository, a similar Authority can very well be mandated to have the responsibility
of handling the affairs of National Academic Depository. The only hurdle is the use of
terminology. However, the National Academic Depository can very well be called National
Academic Repository. As informed by the Department, the two terms are actually synonyms
for each other and their dictionary meaning is also the same. The contention that usage of
the term ‘Depository’ has been made only because it is legally defined does not seem to be
a convincing and need not be considered binding. The Committee would like to point out
that by replacing the term ‘depository’ by the term ‘repository’, compulsion of NAD being
registered under the SEBI Act will also not be there.
5.21 The Committee would also like to draw attention to the Concept Paper on the
Electronic Depositories of Academic Certificates prepared by Shri Sanjay G. Dhande,
Director, IIT, Kanpur which forms the basis of the proposed legislation. This Concept Paper
also talks about a National Academic Instrument Depository which will be similar to the
depositories of financial instruments. It also mentions that the composition of such an
organization/corporation will be spelt out in the Act. As suggested in the Concept Paper, a
Task Force under the Chairmanship of Shri Sanjay G. Dhande was set up to give its
recommendations for the legislative proposal. Committee’s attempts to procure a copy of

13
the recommendations of the Task Force failed to materialize. However, a copy of the
minutes of the second meeting of the Task Force held on 15 February, 2010 was made
available by the Department. Para 6 of minutes of this meeting reproduced below is very
pertinent in the present context:
“While the SEBI Act, 1992 provides for registration of depositories and the Depositories Act,
1996 provides a legal mandate detailing the obligations and duties as well as the structure
under which the depository is to operate the said legislations apply to financial instruments
only. In order to extend their applicability to academic instruments qualifications, the said
legislations would require to be studied from the legal angle in order to consider if the said
Acts would need to be amended in order to extend its applicability to academic institutes/
qualifications and if so, the clauses to be modified/amended.”
5.22 The Committee also notes that both UGC and AICTE, while concurring with the
registration of academic depository under the SEBI Act, have pointed out that the regulation
of the functioning and all other incidental aspects of NAD must be regulated by the
appointing authority under the Bill. It has been mentioned by these two authorities that the
above division of function is justified as the Central Government/Ministry of HRD is much
more familiar with the problem that is required to be addressed. The Association of Indian
Universities is also of the view that NAD should be an independent body. The very fact that
need for involvement of authorities concerned with academic matters has been upheld by
all the stakeholders appearing before the Committee should put an end to any ambiguity
in this matter. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that necessary modifications on
the lines of National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010 and SEBI Board constituted
under the SEBI Act, 2000 may be brought about in clause 4 and other relevant clauses so
that a proper regulatory framework for maintenance of a national database of academic
awards entrusted to an independent authority and other allied functionaries is put in place.
5.23 Clause 4(6) provides that the Central Government shall undertake the review of the
functioning of the National Academic Depository on expiry of a period often years from the date
of notification. If the Government is satisfied of its functioning, it will renew the appointment of
NAD for a further period of ten years and if not satisfied, it may revoke its appointment as
envisaged under clause 6. Finding the period of review to be too long, attention of the Department
was drawn to the desirability of inspection being carried out at a shorter interval. Response of the
Department was that a period of ten years was considered adequate for review of the functioning
of NAD and renewal of the appointment for a further period of ten years. The Committee finds
no justification for resorting to revocation powers under clause 6 as it can be done after
completing all the procedural formalities. It would be better to have a mechanism whereunder
inspection is carried out at a shorter interval of five years and appointment is renewed for a period
of five years only. The Committee, accordingly, recommends modification of sub-clause (6).
5.24 The Committee would also like to point out that the eligibility criteria for the
proposed National Academic Repository will have to be modified. Keeping in view the nature
of items to be kept in the Repository, it would be prudent to engage authorities involved
in the higher education sector. It can be a joint venture where well-established authorities/
statutory bodies like UGC, AICTE, CBSE, Accreditation Authority, Central Universities/
Professional Bodies along with those working in the IT Sector can be made the stakeholders
for setting up the National Academic Repository and its functioning.
VI. Clause 7 : SEGREGATION OF ACTIVITIES AND BUSINESS
6.1 This clause provides that where the National Academic Depository is carrying on any
activity or business besides that of acting as depository for the national database, then National

14
Academic Depository shall keep the activities relating to the business of academic depository
separate and segregated from all other activities.
6.2 With the criteria of registration of NAD under section 12(1A) of the SEBI Act proposed to
be deleted, requirement of clause 7 relating to segregation of activities and business would also not
be there. The Committee, accordingly, recommends deletion of clause 7.
VII. Clause 8 : REGISTRATION OF ACADEMIC DEPOSITORY AGENT
7.1 Clause 8 envisages that NAD shall register one or more academic depository agents, on
payment of such charges as it may deem fit. In turn, ADAs would charge user fee from the
customers for services they will provide on behalf of NAD. The clause also provides certain
conditions for the appointment of ADA. As per Clause 8(4), the academic depository agent shall
provide, as the National Academic Depository may deem fit, one or more of the services to be
provided by the National Academic Depository under clause 5 on its behalf.
7.2 The Committee observes that clause 5 enumerates ten services which are mandated to be
provided by NAD. Out of these services, following services can be considered very significant:
– register academic institutions
– provide access to the national database for registered academic institutions
– provide efficient online verification of academic award
– ensure that the national database is accessible online to authorized persons.
In other words, an academic depository agent can function as a full-fledged Academic
Depository, virtually replacing NAD. Not only this, there is not much clarity on the qualifications
of ADAs. They may prove to be fraudulent and may have other motives.
7.3 On these apprehensions being brought to the notice of the Department, it was clarified that
the extent of the work that NAD can outsource to ADAs would be at the discretion of NAD. The
flexibility has been built in to ensure the volume of data to be handled etc. It has the freedom to
engage ADAs which are envisaged to set up facilitation centres to issue transcripts and provide
other services under the Bill. The existing Citizen Service Centres set up by Ministry of Information
Technology, bank branches and educational institutions and interested private companies can be
registered by NAD to act as Depository Agents. The appointment of academic depository agents
by NAD is being provided to facilitate and decentralize the lodging of academic awards to ensure
efficiency.
7.4 The extent of delegation/outsourcing by NAD should also be re-examined to assess
whether NAD should be enabled to potentially outsource all its functions. The Committee
would like to emphasize that all the services of NAD cannot and should not be delegated
to the ADAs, especially the core activities as these related to maintenance of data by NAD
which is of a very sensitive nature. The Committee is happy to note that the pertinent issue
about the viability of outsourcing the services entrusted to NAD to any number of Academic
Depository Agents and its implications has been found acceptable by the Department which
has agreed to review the same. The Committee also recommends that the Bill needs to
provide more stringent criterion to be adopted by NAD while selecting and registering an
academic depository agent. Regulatory bodies like UGC, AICTE and CBSE and even well-
established academic institutions can function as ADAs. UGC, AICTE and CBSE with their
regional/State offices and units and Universities having a well-knit set up of colleges can be
considered the most effective ADAs, as they are well -equipped and well-conversant with
academic matters. The Committee, accordingly, is of the view that only such entities be
made eligible to function as ADAs.

15
VIII. Clause 9 : MANDATORY LODGING OF ACADEMIC AWARD BY ACADEMIC
INSTITUTIONS IN DEPOSITORY
8.1 This clause provides that every academic institution shall lodge with the National Academic
Depository, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, all academic awards issued by it after
the commencement of this Act, to all its students. Sub-clause (5) reads as follows:
“The National Academic Depository shall be entitled to recover reasonable cost of training
from each academic institution:
Provided that in case of any dispute, about the reasonableness of the cost of
training, between the National Academic Depository or any academic institution, such
dispute shall be referred to the State Educational Tribunal established under the
Educational Tribunals Act, 2011, having jurisdiction, for adjudication:
Provided further that the decision of the State Educational Tribunal on the dispute
shall be final and binding on all parties.”
8.2 It was clarified by the Department that proviso to Clause 9 (5) provided that any dispute
on reasonableness of cost of training shall be referred to the State Educational Tribunal (SET)
whose decisions would be final and binding. The parallel clause in the Educational Tribunal Bill
2011 was Clause 15( d) which provided for the SET to exercise powers and authority in relation
to matters as may be assigned to it by any other law for the time being in force. The NAD Bill
once enacted would assign disputes relating to training costs to SET for resolution.
8.3 The Committee, while noting the reply furnished by the Department regarding
adjudication of disputes to recover the cost of training by NAD from academic institutions by
State Educational Tribunals would like to point out that the National Educational Tribunal as
well as State Educational Tribunals have jurisdiction only pertaining to the higher educational
institutions whereas the present legislation pertains to both the school boards/councils as well
as higher educational institutions which means that these Tribunals would not be having any
control over the school boards and councils with regard to adjudication matters. The
Committee observes that this is an inherent legal weakness in the implementation of this
provision of the Bill. The Committee would also like to point out that the element of dispute
with regard to reasonableness of training charges would not be there if training is imparted
as per the prescribed rates. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that such rates can be
prescribed through the rules to be made under this legislation.
IX. Clause 10 : DUTY OF ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS
9.1 This clause provides that it shall be the duty of every academic institution to verify, on a
request made to it by the National Academic Depository within a period of seven days from the
date of receipt of such request, any academic award purported to be, or have been, issued by it
and included or proposed to be included in the national database of academic awards.
9.2 Divergent views were expressed by various Stakeholders/Associations regarding the period
within which an academic award is to be verified by an academic institution. It was suggested that
the time period of seven days be made to seven working days. It was also pointed out that in view
of the advanced technology available, the time period be reduced to one day and instantly. Another
viewpoint was that fifteen working days period would be required, while as per the assessment of
another stakeholder, three months period was required.
9.3 On taking up this issue with the Department, the Committee was informed that the
suggestion to provide this service through use of technology within a much shorter time-frame was

16
welcome. However, this time-period had been proposed as a measure of ample caution so that
unnecessary stress and pressure was not created on the system leading to complications. While the
system enabled authentication of certificates instantly, it was desirable to keep this time-period to
provide for any contingencies.
9.4 The Committee, while taking note of the views expressed by the experts/stakeholders
regarding the time period to be provided for the verification/ authentication of academic
awards by NAD/ADA from seven days as given in the Bill to that of seven working days or
up to fifteen days or for three months, is of the opinion that the time of seven days as
given in the Bill is somewhat long. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this time-
limit of seven days may be reviewed after six months of commencement of the Act so that
verification process is completed in shorter period.
X. Clause 11 : LODGING OF ACADEMIC AWARDS BY ANY PERSON
10.1 Clause 11 relating to lodging of academic awards by any person reads as follows:
“Any person may request the National Academic Depository, in such form and manner as
may be prescribed, to lodge the academic award received, prior to the commencement of this
Act, by such person from an academic institution.
The National Academic Depository, on receipt of the request under sub-section (1 ), shall,
after verification and authentication of such academic award from the academic institution
which has issued such award, lodge it in the national database.”
10.2 Queries were raised by many witnesses and experts before the Committee about the manner
in which old awards/certificates will be registered, especially in the case of institutions no longer
in existence and the criteria for verification. It was clarified by the Department that it was a service
provided to an individual for lodging an academic award in case he or she desired to maintain his
awards online and in electronic form, for the awards he/she received prior to coming into force
of this Bill. However, certificates issued prior to coming into force of the Bill could be lodged only
after they were properly verified by NAD with reference to the Board/University which issued it.
Only if NAD was satisfied about genuineness of such an award, it would be maintained. If the
issuing Institution was no longer in existence, and the genuineness of award could not be verified
then it would not be allowed to be maintained in the national database. It was also emphasized that
there would be legal implication with respect to the implementation of the Law retrospectively,
besides academic institutions may not be having necessary infrastructure to do so or the records
with them may not be available in proper form.
10.3 The Committee takes note of suggestions given by the various experts/stakeholders
and the response of the Department. The Committee is of the view that academic awards
pertaining to previous ten years from the date of coming into force subject to their
availability and proper verification should be mandatorily lodged with the academic
depository as such persons would still be in the job/labour market and they may be
benefitting from services envisaged under the proposed legislation.
XI. Clauses 16 to 24 : OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
11.1 Chapter IV of the Bill deals with offences and penalties for contravention of various
provisions. It provides for penalties for damage caused to the computer systems or network
concerned with the national database by any person and in such case, the liability shall extend
to levy of penalty which may extend to Rs. one crore. (Clause 16). In case of contravention
in the discharge of duties and performance of functions by NAD or by academic depository

17
agent, NAD shall be liable for penalty which may extend to Rs. 50 lakh for each instance of
failure or contravention (Clause 17). An academic institution that fails to discharge its duties shall
be liable for a penalty of upto Rs.5 lakh for each such instance of failure or contravention.
(Clause 18) The adjudication of penalties in respect of persons shall be by the State Educational
Tribunal and in respect of NAD or academic institutions shall be by the National Educational
Tribunal. (Clause 19).
11.2 The Committee was given to understand that the penalties proposed in the Bill were
patterned after the provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000. The IT Act provides for
a penalty of Rs. 1 crore for damage to computer, computer system (Section 43) which is similar
to what has been provided in clause 16 of the Bill relating to compensation for damage to computer
system. The quantum of penalties is the stiffest in case of the offence of not providing data on
revocation of appointment or wrong certification by NAD (Rs.10 crore or imprisonment of ten
years) which is the most serious offence. In case of failure to discharge the duties or provide the
required services, it is Rs. 50 lakh which is considered deterrent enough as it could be in addition
to prosecution. The Committee observes that the offences prescribed under sections 65 and 66 of
the IT Act in respect of hacking and tampering etc. shall be applicable to offences under clauses
20 and 21. Besides, if NAD fails to provide the records on revocation of its appointment or
wrongly certifies the records so provided, the promoters, directors, managers etc. of NAD shall
be liable for imprisonment upto ten years and with fine which may extend to Rs. 10 crore under
clause 22. Committee’s attention was also drawn to chapter VI A of the SEBI Act which provides
for penalties and adjudication. In most cases, the SEBI Act prescribes a penalty of upto Rs. 1
crore, the maximum being Rs. 25 crore for insider trading.
11.3 The Committee observes that specification for various contraventions and offences and
criteria for fixing of quantum of penalty and imprisonment term are broadly based on similar
provisions enshrined in the IT Act and the SEBI Act. Besides that, offences under Clause 16, 17
and 18 being primarily civil in nature, are proposed to be dealt with by the National Educational
Tribunal. However, offences under clauses 20 to 24 relate to offences by companies, societies and
trusts, which are punishable by imprisonment as well, are proposed to be dealt with by the relevant
Criminal Courts.
11.4 The Committee, while agreeing with the intention behind the imposition of heavy penalty and
harsh imprisonment term in view of nature of contraventions and offences and also supported by
similar provisions in the IT Act and the SEBI Act, has some reservations on certain provisions and
implications thereof. The first problem area noticed by the Committee is the National
Educational Tribunal being made the adjudicating authority for cases relating to damage to
computers, computer system etc. (Clause 16), penalty for contravention by NAD/Depository
Agent (clause 17) and penalty for academic institution (clause 18). The Committee observes
that the National Educational Tribunal/State Educational Tribunals are proposed to be set up
for effective and expeditious adjudication of disputes involving teachers and other employees
of higher educational institutions and other stakeholders (including students, universities,
institutions and statutory regulatory authorities) and to adjudicate penalties for indulging in
unfair practices in higher education.
11.5 On a specific query about the authority of Educational Tribunal to deal with cases under
the proposed legislation, the Committee was informed that clauses 15(d) and 31 (e) of the
Educational Tribunals Act allow State Educational Tribunal and National Educational Tribunal
respectively to exercise power and authority in relation to any matter as may be assigned to it by
any other law for the time being in force. Accordingly, the NAD Bill, once enacted, will assign
matters under clauses 16, 17 and 18 to the NET along with matters under clause 9 to SET for
adjudication.

18
11.6 The Committee would like to point out that the National Educational Tribunal as well
as the State Educational Tribunals are envisaged to be given the mandate to handle cases
relating to higher education sector. This is clearly borne out by the Statement of Objects
and Reasons to the Educational Tribunal Bill, 2010 which specifies that the legislation
proposes to establish a two-tier structure of Educational Tribunals at national and state level
to adjudicate on the entire gamut of disputes arising in the higher education system
through a fast track, speedy recourse to justice delivery. The Committee fails to
comprehend the applicability of a legislation dealing with higher education being entrusted
the power to handle School Boards related cases also. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that clause 19 enabling the National Educational Tribunal to handle matters
under clauses 16, 17 and 18 needs to be reviewed. Such a provision cannot be considered
legally tenable.
11.7 Another drawback noticed by the Committee relates to clause 16 on compensation
for damage to computer, computer system etc. The Committee observes that this clause is
identical to clause 43 of the IT Act. Both the provisions impose penalty for various
unauthorized acts of a person causing damage to computer, computer system etc. The
Committee finds that sub-section (h) of section 43 of the IT Act as reproduced below is
missing in clause 16 of the Bill:
“43(h) charges the services availed of by a person to the account of another person by
tampering with or manipulating any computer, computer system or computer network.”
The Committee feels that the above provision should also be incorporated in clause
16 of the Bill. The other problem-area pertaining to clause 16 which has drawn the attention
of the Committee is the need for making the adjudication mechanism available under the
IT Act applicable on clause 16 as done in the case of clauses 20 and 21. This can be easily
done by making a reference to section 46 about power to adjudicate of the IT Act, 2000 in
clause 16 as done in clauses 21 and 22.
11.8 A comparative analysis of clause 21 of the Bill and section 66 of the IT Act, 2000 reveals
that both the provisions relate to offence of hacking into national database. However, sub-
section (1) of Section 66 of the IT Act, 2000 which reads as follows has not been included
in the Bill:
(1) Whoever with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely to cause wrongful loss
or damage to the public or any person destroys or deletes or alters any information
residing in a computer resource or diminishes its value or utility or affects it injuriously
by any means, commits hack;
The Committee strongly feels that in order to have more clarity, the above provision
should also be incorporated in clause 21 of the Bill. When section 43 of the IT Act, 2000
can be reproduced as clause 16 in the present Bill, the same approach should have been
adopted with regard to clauses 21 and 22 as well.
XII. Clause 25 : COGNIZANCE OF OFFENCES
12.1 Clause 25 relating to cognizance of offences lays down that no court shall take
cognizance of any offence punishable under the Bill or the rules made thereunder, except on a
complaint made by the Central Government/State Government/NAD/any officer or person
authorized by the Central Government/State Government/NAD. Rationale for having such a
provision is not clear. The Committee is of the view that such a provision would prove to be
restrictive if an academic institution has a genuine grievance against NAD or the Central
Government. In such a situation, as a matter of natural justice, one should not be denied judicial

19
relief. The Committee would also like to point out that in view of educational institutions
and employers spread across the country, access to judicial courts should not be debarred
because this will limit their access. Clause 25 may, accordingly, be suitably modified. The
Committee also observes that offences under clauses 20 and 21 are to be dealt with under
the IT Act (Sections 65 and 66) which does not have a provision like clause 25. Under the
IT Act, any person aggrieved by the decision of Cyber Appellate Tribunal can appeal to the
High Court.
XIII. Clause 28 : POWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO GIVE DIRECTIONS
13.1 Clause 28 lays down that the Central Government would have the power to give directions
on questions of policy to NAD from time to time. However, NAD will not get any opportunity to
express its views before giving of such a direction by the Central Government. The Committee
finds this provision to be somewhat unjustified. NAD along with depository agents and institutions/
universities/school/boards will be responsible for handling the entire operations for creation of a
national database and providing access thereto. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
under clause 28, NAD should be given an opportunity to give its view before issuance of any
direction on question of policy by the Central Government.
XIV. MISCELLANEOUS
14.1 During the course of deliberations with various stakeholders, a number of issues were
raised which, though not directly related to the proposed legislation before the Committee, were
very relevant and crucial. The Committee is of the view that these issues, if addressed in the right
perspective, will go a long way in strengthening the proposed legislation. Committee’s observations
on some of the most important issues are given below:
(i) Mechanism for maintaining a database on caste certificates issued to students
14.2 The Committee observes that under our existing education system both at the school level
and higher education, reservation policy for students belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes, Other Backward Classes and also from economically weaker sections of society plays a
very vital role in making the reach of educational facilities possible for such students. Specially in
the higher education sector, specified number of seats in institutions are earmarked for such
students. However, in the recent times, quite a few instances of misuse of this special facility by
unscrupulous elements have been reported from some premier institutions of the country. Chances
are there of quite a few similar incidents going unreported. Against such a backdrop, the Committee
felt that there was a need for having a mechanism whereunder information on the authenticity of
caste certificates is made available to all concerned.
14.3 On this issue being raised with the Department, the Committee was informed that issue/
authentication of caste certificates was outside the purview of the Bill as it was the function of
State Governments and its nominated authorities. These subjects not being with the Ministry of
HRD as per Allocation of Business Rules, the Ministry cannot make any legislation pertaining to
such subjects.
14.4 The Committee is not fully convinced with the contention of the Ministry. The
Committee is of the view that this issue can be very easily handled by seeking the
assistance of the nodal Ministry i.e.  Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
Information available with that Ministry can be put on the website of NAD by having
linkage/connectivity with their website. Such an initiative will go a long way in curbing the
instances of misuse in the admission for reserved categories of seats.

20
(ii) School level Certificate
14.5 Apart from the performance of students in the school leaving examination, their
performance in sports, NCC, NSS and performing arts and other activities also serve as a
benchmark for getting admission to different Graduate Courses. The Committee finds that across
the country in a very large number of universities and institutions, there is a fixed quota
of students who have excelled in such activities for admission in higher education courses.
Extra weightage is given to such students so that they get admission in colleges in spite of
not fulfilling eligibility criteria so far as their academic record is concerned. Therefore, such
awards/certificates are very important and also need to be given similar treatment when
compared with academic awards. The Committee, therefore, feels that such certificates/
awards should also be brought under the National Academic Depository. Modification in the
relevant clauses may accordingly, be carried out. This will also help in curbing misuse of
this facility by using fake certificates.
(iii) Information about fake universities/institutions/degrees/certificates
14.6 One concern which was raised by almost all the stakeholders was the menace of fake
universities/institutions functioning in the country without any hindrance. Instances of students
being duped by such universities/institutions keep on being reported in media. The Committee
is aware that the law is being strengthened so as to put a stop to such unscrupulous activities.
But simultaneously, it is equally important if student community and their guardians are also
made aware and remain alert. It is a well-established fact that prevention is always better than
cure.
14.7 On this matter being taken up with the Department, it was clarified that since only
authorized institutions can upload their data on the NAD database, fake Boards/Institutions cannot
become the users. However, assurance was given by the Department that NAD would be asked
to display on its website the names of fake Boards/Institutions. The Committee observes that
UGC is already maintaining a list of fake universities on its website which can very well
be maintained on the website of NAD. The Committee is also of the view that
simultaneously a list of recognized universities, institutions, schools, boards etc. authorized
to award degree, diploma, certificates etc. should also be made available on the NAD
website. The Committee strongly feels that such a move will prove beneficial for our young
students. The Committee would also take this opportunity to point out that deterrent steps
need to be taken by all concerned to curb the menace of fake universities /institutions. It
is high time that the Central Government takes a pro-active role in this direction.
(iv) S tatus of degrees/certificates awarded by foreign universities/institutions
14.8 Many stakeholders appearing before the Committee drew its attention to a large number of
foreign institutions operating in India which awarded either on their own or under various kinds
of arrangements with Indian Institutions degrees/diplomas to students in India. It was felt that such
degrees/diplomas also need to be brought under the proposed legislation. Another viewpoint put
forth before the Committee was that Indian students getting academic awards from foreign
universities should be allowed to register themselves in NAD on return to India and NAD should
provide verification and confirm authenticity in such cases.
14.9 It was clarified by the Department that if an academic institution in India issues a
recognized academic award relating to a joint degree, it would have to be lodged with NAD.
However, Indian academic institutions imparting courses of study outside India would be covered
only if they were located in India and permitted by the competent authority to offer such courses.

21
If in future, foreign education providers are allowed to operate in India, consequent on enactment
of the Foreign Universities Bill, the domestic laws would apply to them also and they would have
to lodge their academic awards with NAD.
14.10 The Committee finds the clarification given by the Department with regard to foreign
degrees/certificates satisfactory and in accordance with the present position. As and when
the Foreign Universities Bill comes into force, a mechanism will have to be evolved so that
degrees obtained from foreign universities are also registered with NAD, thus making it
easier for employers to verify such degrees and providing employment opportunities to
Indian Students.
(v) Application of the RTI Act, 2005
14.11 Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that NAD would be a private entity appointed
by the Central Government under the proposed legislation. Thus, it would not be a public authority
as defined under the RTI Act, 2005. It was emphasized that NAD would be the sole repository
of academic awards and would be performing a significant public function in maintaining such
awards, verifying them etc. Therefore, there was a need to include a provision in the Bill, making
the RTI Act specifically applicable to NAD. The Committee is happy to note that the
suggestion has been found acceptable by the Department and provision about applicability
of RTI Act would be incorporated in the Bill.
(vi) Equivalence Certificates
14.12 A suggestion placed before the Committee related to expanding the domain of the proposed
depository by authorizing it to issue equivalence certificates to prospective employers. It was felt
that there should be a provision for registering of an equalization certificate under which a foreign
job provider asks as to whether a particular degree awarded by an institution is equivalent to the
degree of other institutions.
14.13 Response of the Department to this very pertinent issue was not positive as equivalence was
considered an altogether different issue. Linking the dematting of academic degree with equivalence
was not considered desirable. It was pointed out that in case of need, any employer, including a
foreign job provider could get authentication of the degree stored in the depository by following
the prescribed procedure.
14.14 The Committee feels that the matter of equivalence certificates is associated with
the career prospects of our young students and needs to be looked into from that
perspective. The Committee has been given to understand that the Association of Indian
Universities has already been empowered to evaluate and issue equivalence certificates in
respect of degrees obtained by candidates from foreign universities. The Committee is of
the view that this facility can be expanded by Association of Indian Universities working in
co-ordination with NAD in this vital area. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
via media for providing this service through NAD be worked out.
(vii) Revenue Model for NAD
14.15 The Committee observes that the proposed legislation does not have a Financial
Memorandum. When asked to clarify the same, it was clarified by the Department that no
Government expenditure was expected as it would be a fully user service based provision with
users being educational institutions, employers and other stakeholders. Following were the possible
heads under which fees could be charged:

22
Sl. No. Chargeable Head Payable by
1. Verification of Academic A wards Institutions, Employers,
Background Checking
Agencies
2. Issuance of Digitally Signed Authentication Certificate Holder
Certificates
3. Dematerialization of Academic Awards Certificate Holder
4. Mapping of Awards to Certificate Holder Certificate Holder
5. Any other value added service to the entity Entity seeking such a
seeking such service service
The user fees will have to decided by the Government by framing rules under Section 12 (1)
keeping in mind the cost of providing each such service. The fees will have to be rational and
reasonable.
14.16 Issue of non-charging of user fees from certificate-holders of weaker sections of society
was raised by some stakeholders. However, the Department was of the view that it would be
difficult to give differential treatment to two different classes of individuals in an electronic system.
Even if this was done, it would involve physical verification of documents to be carried out which
may open up avenues of corruption.
14.17 The Committee appreciates the confidence of the Department that the proposed
legislation would be a fully user based service, requiring no financial assistance from
Government. The Committee would, however, like to draw the attention of the Department
to the reservations expressed by the Ministry of Finance about the financial viability of the
proposed legislation. It was pointed out that financial sustainability of NAD was dependent
upon one-time fee for registration and annual maintenance fee. Acceptance by all the
States/academic institutions was also not clear. No alternative regarding financial resources
had been suggested. The Committee also takes note of the response of the Department that
academic institutions may also become depository agents. This would not only facilitate easy
access of students/clients to the depository through the academic institution with its existing
network and infrastructure but also help in covering the cost of training the manpower and
maintaining online connectivity with the depository.
14.18 Committee’s attention has also been drawn by observations of CBSE that it would have to
maintain continuous electronic means of communication with NAD and ADAs along with training
of its officials at its own cost. Registration fee etc. would also have to be paid by CBSE. All these
aspects would have financial implications for CBSE which would have to meet the additional
expenditure by proportionately increasing the examination fees in future. Department’s response is
that considering the huge network and reach of CBSE, the manpower, IT infrastructure available
with it, CBSE may explore the option of becoming one of the ADAs. In addition, some of CBSE-
affiliated schools/regions/offices can function as Facilitation Centers.
14.19 The Committee does not find the above clarification of the Department convincing.
The Committee feels that securities depositories and academic depositories cannot be
equated so far as their revenue-earning is concerned. Sources of earning for securities
depositories are custody fees, transaction fees and other operational income. In contrast,

23
source of income for academic depositories would be user charges. Main users would be
School Boards and higher educational institutions comprising of both well established
entities as well as those not being very financially strong. Besides that, student community
will be allowed access to NAD on payment of nominal charges. The Committee is, therefore,
of the view that some kind of initial support would have to be provided by the Government
for setting up of NAD and making it financially viable. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that this most vital aspect about the setting up of NAD needs to be looked into
and resolved keeping in view all the allied aspects.
(viii) Applicability of the Proposed Legislation
14.20 The proposed legislation would extend to the whole of India, including the State of Jammu
& Kashmir. The Committee observes that under clauses 9 and 19, matters of dispute relating to
cost of training and adjudication of penalties will be handled by the State Educational Tribunals and
the National Educational Tribunal respectively. However, the Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010
excludes the State of Jammu & Kashmir from its purview. Apparently, the Educational Tribunals
do not have the power to adjudicate in any matter relating to higher education so far as the State
of Jammu & Kashmir is concerned. The Committee is of the view that this contradiction needs
to be resolved at the earliest and the relevant provisions modified accordingly.
14.21 A number of bills relating to higher education have been referred to the Committee during
the last two years. The Committee notes that while the Prohibition of Unfair Practices in
Technical Educational Institutions, Medical Institutions and Universities Bill, 2010, the
Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010, the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher
Educational Institutions Bill, 2010 do not extend to the State of Jammu & Kashmir, the
Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry and Operations) Bill, 2010, the
National Academic Depository Bill, 2011 and the Higher Education and Research Bill, 2011
are applicable to the entire country. The Committee finds that there are chances of
complications arising due to the non-applicability of the Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010 to
the State of Jammu & Kashmir when the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of
Entry and Operations) Bill, 2010 and the Higher Education and Research Bill, 2011, come
into force. In the case of these two legislations also, adjudication process are proposed to
be given to Educational Tribunals. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this aspect
may be examined by the Department and corrective action taken accordingly.
15. The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any amendments.
16. The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
17. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the amended
additions suggested by it.
18. The Committee would like the Department to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions which could not be incorporated in the Bill.

24
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
I. INTRODUCTION
The Committee welcomes the proposed legislation having the laudable objective of
maintenance of a national database of academic awards in electronic format by an identified
registered depository. This would evolve as a credible, authentic and easily accessible
mechanism for access to and verification of academic awards, thereby putting an end to the
present cumbersome and time-consuming process of verification/authentication of degrees/
certificates. The Committee believes that with the coming into effect of the proposed
legislation, the interests of students as well as employers would be served well. Also, the
menace of rampant usage of fake certificates in the academic sphere would be curtailed to
an extent. The Committee feels that by bringing such a legislation, the first of its kind in
the world our country would act as a role model for other countries to follow. Gradually,
with the kind of high level of IT expertise available indigenously, India can become a hub
for such kind of exchange of information in the world. (Para 1.10)
III. Committee’s observations/recommendations on various clauses of the Bill are given
in the succeeding paragraphs:–
Clause 2 : APPLICATION OF ACT
The Committee notes that this clause states that the Bill would apply to all academic
institutions specified in the Schedule. However, a perusal of the Schedule reveals that it
contains a list of 39 bodies which conduct school ending examinations which includes,
besides the Central Board of Secondary Education, Council for the Indian School Certificate
Examination and National Institute of Open Schooling, various State Boards as well as State
Open Schools. However, applicability of the proposed legislation extends to institutions
imparting higher education also. The Committee is of the view that reference to the
Schedule is confusing and is likely to cause complications. (Para 3.2)
The Committee is happy to note that its query about relevance of the use of the
term ‘Schedule’ in clause 2 has been found justified and, accordingly, the clause is proposed
to be modified. The Committee would, however, like to point out that the mention of
Schedule in clause 3(1)(c) in the definition of the term ‘academic institution’ was not
objected to by it. Also, the Committee is well aware of the fact that academic awards issued
by all academic institutions will have to be deposited with NAD on the enactment of the
proposed legislation. Its reservations were specifically directed towards the use of the term
‘Schedule’ in clause 2. (Para 3.4)
The Committee would also like to point out that the list of bodies included in the
Schedule needs to be considered indicative. It may so happen that a new State Board may
be created or a new State Open School may come into being or those Boards/Schools listed
at present may become non-functional. However, any such modification can be carried out
only after the approval of the Parliament. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that a
proviso as reproduced below may be added in clause 2 so as to facilitate modifications in
the Schedule expeditiously:
24

25
“Provided that the Central Government may, as and when considered necessary, by
notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule” (Para 3.5)
IV. Clause 3 : DEFINITIONS
Another ambiguity brought to the Committee’s notice was lack of cross reference
to the Schedule in the definition of the term ‘academic award’ which would lead to
certain amount of linguistic ambiguity. Response of the Department was that a cross
reference to the Schedule in Clause 3(1)(b) would be incorporated in consultation with
the Law Ministry. The Committee finds merit in the objection raised with regard to
inclusion of definition of the terms ‘Board’, ‘Council” and ‘School’ in the Bill. Even
after a reference to the Schedule in clause 3(1)(b), inclusion of definition of the terms
‘Board’, ‘Council’ and ‘School’ will make things very clear. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that the definitions of these terms may be included under the Definitions
clause. (Para 4.3)
Another suggestion made to the Committee was that when awards/certificates were
to be deposited in the NAD, marks-sheets should also be included as they were also an
equally important document. It was clarified by the Department that all academic
institutions starting with secondary boards upwards including universities shall be obligated
to lodge in the NAD and this would include marks-sheets also. The Committee believes that
there should be no confusion and ambiguity about such basic details with regard to
documents to be deposited in the Depository, be it award/degree/diploma. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that there should be a specific mention of the term ‘marks-sheet’
under the definition of the term ‘academic award’. (Para 4.4)
Committee’s query about consultation with regulatory bodies like Medical Council
of India, Dental Council, Nursing Council and the Council of Architecture elicited a nil
response from the Department. In addition, it was also clarified that these bodies were
regulating professional education whereas the present proposal was entirely academic in
nature. The Committee has serious reservation on the clarification given by the
Department. Not only this, the Committee would also like to draw attention to other
categories of professional education being mandated by regulatory bodies like Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India, Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India,
Institute of Company Secretaries of India, Institution of Electronics and
Telecommunication Engineers etc. From this, it implies that such awards or certificates or
degrees or whichever name the professional qualification earned is known as will not be
eligible for lodging in the NAD. Such an approach is likely to lead to a situation when an
individual holding very high professional qualifications will stand deprived from taking
benefit of facilities available at NAD while seeking employment or for further education
in India or abroad. In a way, prospective employers will also not be in a position to take
services of highly qualified professionals. The Committee strongly feels that there appears
to be no justification in excluding the professional education from the purview of this
legislation. Awards/certificates/degrees, whether academic or professional need to be
treated equally, keeping in view the interests of students/professionals as well as
employers. The Committee, therefore, strongly advocates the need for inclusion of
professional awards such as medical, engineering, architecture, nursing, dental, chartered
accountancy, company secretary and so on under the proposed legislation. The definition
of ‘academic award’ may be modified accordingly so as to cover all such recognized
professional qualifications. If need be, separate definition for such qualifications may be
formulated. (Para 4.5)

26
When asked to clarify about the exclusion of Foreign Board and inclusion of Boards
of both Central and State level in the Schedule of the Bill, the Department submitted that
foreign boards cannot be mandated by Indian Laws to mandatorily lodge their awards with
NAD, but they could lodge their awards on their own volition and the Bill does not prevent
them from doing so. The Committee also notes that there is another foreign authority, i.e.
International General Certificate of Secondary Education under the Cambridge
International Examination operational in the country. A considerable number of schools
spread across the country are imparting school education to Indian students through these
international set-ups. While a large number of students of such international boards go
abroad for further studies, it is also equally true that quite a few students seek admission
in Indian universities. To protect their interests as well as those of employers, their school-
leaving certificates also need to be deposited in NAD. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that a proviso specifying that foreign boards conducting school leaving
examination through duly, recognized schools in the country will also have the option to
lodge their awards with NAD may be incorporated in the definition of the term ‘academic
institution’. (Para 4.8)
The Committee is of the considered view that one of the main purpose of setting up
of the National Academic Depository is to facilitate the student community by maintaining/
storing electronic form of awards, easy access to the awards, and making authentication a
less cumbersome process. The Committee reiterates that all kinds of awards, be it
professional or technical should be covered under the Bill. The Committee notes that in the
Concept Paper for the setting up of NAD, the certificates earned by students in ITIs and
other institutions form the basis of the legislative proposal. Moreover, the duration of
diploma should not be restricted so long as it imparts vocational education and gainful
employment to an individual. The Committee is also aware that many of the diplomas are
issued by institutions which fall under the domain of other Ministries/Departments. One
such example is that of ITIs which are set up under the Ministry of Labour. Likewise State
Governments also set up institutions which conduct short term diploma courses. Like in the
case of academic awards, where degrees/certificates conferring professional qualifications
have also to be brought under the ambit of NAD, the same analogy should be made
applicable in the case of diplomas. In case, lodging of such diploma certificates in NAD
involves procedural complications, the Department can easily act in coordination with these
Ministries/Departments/State Governments and find out a solution as ultimately it is for the
benefit of students and employers. (Para 4.12)
V. Clause 4 : APPOINTMENT OF NATIONAL ACADEMIC DEPOSITORY
The Committee observes that this Evaluation Committee is yet to give its report.
During its deliberation with the representatives of the Department on 27 January, 2012, the
Committee was given to understand that it would take about one month’s time for the
Evaluation Committee to give its report. The Committee feels that the Evaluation
Committee having experts from academic world as its members is best suited for giving its
recommendations on the viability of Securities Depositories handling the work of Academic
Depository. The Committee hopes that its recommendations as and when received would
prove very useful for this new venture. (Para 5.12)
Another area of serious concern for the Committee is the element of ambiguity so
far as the supervisory mechanism envisaged for the functioning of NAD is concerned.
Clause 4(1) simply states that the Central Government shall be the appointing authority for
NAD. As indicated in sub-clause (5), the Central Government before authorising the
commencement of operations, may cause to be undertaken physical verification of the

27
provision of systems, safeguards, mechanisms, manual and facilities specified in sub-clause
(4). The Committee is of the opinion that this provision lacks clarity as it merely mentions
the Central Government as the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority is an
important aspect of the proposed legislation and it should be specifically provided for
therein. Even the Planning Commission has pointed out that no clear cut regulatory
framework has been suggested for regulating the functioning of NAD or the national data
base. This needs to be factored into the legislation ab initio to avoid any confusion. The
Committee finds the following response of the Department to the reservations of the
Planning Commission totally unconvincing:
“Regulatory framework is adequately provided for in the legislation in clauses 4, 15, 26,
27, 28 and 29. These clauses are meant to ensure that NAD functions as per the
directions of the Central Government. Despite these clauses, in case NAD fails to
discharge its functions as expected, clause 6 provides for the revocation of appointment
of NAD.” (Para 5.13)
The Committee would like to point out that clause 15 relates to Accounts and Audit
of NAD, clause 26 is about crediting sums realized by way of compensation or penalty or
fine to Consolidated Fund of India, clause 27 relates to returns and information to be
provided by NAD, clause 28 is about power of Central Government to give directions and
clause 29 relates to power of Central Government to inspect. Suggestion of the Planning
Commission which the Committee fully supports pertains to having a well-defined and
structured regulatory framework in the legislation itself. Auditing of Accounts, crediting of
sums in the Consolidated Fund, filing of returns and other information, directions of
Government and inspection of NAD cannot be considered an alternative to a proper
regulatory framework. (Para 5.14)
Committee’s attention has been drawn to the fact that along with the criteria for
registration under the SEBI Act, the National Academic Depository will have to have in its
memorandum of association, specified provision of depository services for academic awards
as one of its objects. The Committee, while appreciating the inclusion of a specific condition
keeping in view the distinct features of academic awards vis-a.-vis securities, would like to
draw the attention towards section 11 of the SEBI Act whereunder SEBI Board has been
entrusted the function of registering as well as regulating the working of the depositories.
Thus, every depository registered under the SEBI Act or its subsidiary including that dealing
with academic awards will be under the regulatory framework laid down by SEBI Board.
(Para 5.15)
The Committee is of the view that this legislation should specifically provide for a
regulatory authority which could comprise of experts or representatives from the field of
education, information technology, finance and the representative of the Ministry of HRD.
This regulatory framework can be easily evolved on the lines of the framework of SEBI
Board provided in the SEBI Act. Since this Bill specifically deals in the academic awards,
degrees etc., it should have the regulators primarily from the field of education along with
technology experts to take care of the technical aspects. (Para 5.17)
The Committee observes that the data to be handled and maintained by the National
Academic Depository and the Central Identities Data Repository is crucial and sensitive,
rather it is more sensitive in the case of the Central Identities Data Repository. When a
National Identification Authority can be mandated for establishing, operating and
maintaining of a Central Repository, a similar Authority can very well be mandated to have
the responsibility of handling the affairs of National Academic Depository. The only hurdle
is the use of terminology. However, the National Academic Depository can very well be

28
called National Academic Repository. As informed by the Department, the two terms are
actually synonyms for each other and their dictionary meaning is also the same. The
contention that usage of the term ‘Depository’ has been made only because it is legally
defined does not seem to be a convincing and need not be considered binding. The
Committee would like to point out that by replacing the term ‘depository’ by the term
‘repository’, compulsion of NAD being registered under the SEBI Act will also not be there.
(Para 5.20)
The Committee would also like to draw attention to the Concept Paper on the
Electronic Depositories of Academic Certificates prepared by Shri Sanjay G. Dhande,
Director, IIT, Kanpur which forms the basis of the proposed legislation. This Concept Paper
also talks about a National Academic Instrument Depository which will be similar to the
depositories of financial instruments. It also mentions that the composition of such an
organization/corporation will be spelt out in the Act. As suggested in the Concept Paper, a
Task Force under the Chairmanship of Shri Sanjay G. Dhande was set up to give its
recommendations for the legislative proposal. Committee’s attempts to procure a copy of
the recommendations of the Task Force failed to materialize. However, a copy of the
minutes of the second meeting of the Task Force held on 15 February, 2010 was made
available by the Department. Para 6 of minutes of this meeting reproduced below is very
pertinent in the present context:
“While the SEBI Act, 1992 provides for registration of depositories and the Depositories
Act, 1996 provides a legal mandate detailing the obligations and duties as well as the structure
under which the depository is to operate the said legislations apply to financial instruments only.
In order to extend their applicability to academic instruments qualifications, the said legislations
would require to be studied from the legal angle in order to consider if the said Acts would need
to be amended in order to extend its applicability to academic institutes/qualifications and if so,
the clauses to be modified/amended.” (Para 5.21)
The Committee also notes that both UGC and AICTE, while concurring with the
registration of academic depository under the SEBI Act, have pointed out that the regulation
of the functioning and all other incidental aspects of NAD must be regulated by the
appointing authority under the Bill. It has been mentioned by these two authorities that the
above division of function is justified as the Central Government/Ministry of HRD is much
more familiar with the problem that is required to be addressed. The Association of Indian
Universities is also of the view that NAD should be an independent body. The very fact that
need for involvement of authorities concerned with academic matters has been upheld by
all the stakeholders appearing before the Committee should put an end to any ambiguity
in this matter. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that necessary modifications on
the lines of National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010 and SEBI Board constituted
under the SEBI Act, 2000 may be brought about in clause 4 and other relevant clauses so
that a proper regulatory framework for maintenance of a national database of academic
awards entrusted to an independent authority and other allied functionaries is put in place.
(Para 5.22)
The Committee would also like to point out that the eligibility criteria for the
proposed National Academic Repository will have to be modified. Keeping in view the nature
of items to be kept in the Repository, it would be prudent to engage authorities involved
in the higher education sector. It can be a joint venture where well-established authorities/
statutory bodies like UGC, AICTE, CBSE, Accreditation Authority, Central Universities/
Professional Bodies along with those working in the IT Sector can be made the stakeholders
for setting up the National Academic Repository and its functioning. (Para 5.24)

29
VI. Clause 7 : SEGREGATION OF ACTIVITIES AND BUSINESS
With the criteria of registration of NAD under section 12(1A) of the SEBI Act
proposed to be deleted, requirement of clause 7 relating to segregation of activities and
business would also not be there. The Committee, accordingly, recommends deletion of
clause 7. (Para 6.2)
VII. Clause 8 : REGISTRATION OF ACADEMIC DEPOSITORY AGENT
The extent of delegation/outsourcing by NAD should also be re-examined to assess
whether NAD should be enabled to potentially outsource all its functions. The Committee
would like to emphasize that all the services of NAD cannot and should not be delegated
to the ADAs, especially the core activities as these related to maintenance of data by NAD
which is of a very sensitive nature. The Committee is happy to note that the pertinent issue
about the viability of outsourcing the services entrusted to NAD to any number of Academic
Depository Agents and its implications has been found acceptable by the Department which
has agreed to review the same. The Committee also recommends that the Bill needs to
provide more stringent criterion to be adopted by NAD while selecting and registering an
academic depository agent. Regulatory bodies like UGC, AICTE and CBSE and even well
-established academic institutions can function as ADAs. UGC, AICTE and CBSE with their
regional/State offices and units and Universities having a well-knit set up of colleges can be
considered the most effective ADAs, as they are well -equipped and well-conversant with
academic matters. The Committee, accordingly, is of the view that only such entities be
made eligible to function as ADAs. (Para 7.4)
VIII. Clause 9 : MANDATORY LODGING OF ACADEMIC AWARD BY ACADEMIC
INSTITUTIONS IN DEPOSITORY
The Committee, while noting the reply furnished by the Department regarding
adjudication of disputes to recover the cost of training by NAD from academic institutions
by State Educational Tribunals would like to point out that the National Educational Tribunal
as well as State Educational Tribunals have jurisdiction only pertaining to the higher
educational institutions whereas the present legislation pertains to both the school boards/
councils as well as higher educational institutions which means that these Tribunals would
not be having any control over the school boards and councils with regard to adjudication
matters. The Committee observes that this is an inherent legal weakness in the
implementation of this provision of the Bill. The Committee would also like to point out
that the element of dispute with regard to reasonableness of training charges would not be
there if training is imparted as per the prescribed rates. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that such rates can be prescribed through the rules to be made under this
legislation. (Para 8.3)
IX. Clause 10 : DUTY OF ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS
The Committee, while taking note of the views expressed by the experts/stakeholders
regarding the time period to be provided for the verification/ authentication of academic
awards by NAD/ ADA from seven days as given in the Bill to that of seven working days
or up to fifteen days or for three months, is of the opinion that the time of seven days as
given in the Bill is somewhat long. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this time-
limit of seven days may be reviewed after six months of commencement of the Act so that
verification process is completed in shorter period. (Para 9.4)

30
X. Clause 11 : LODGING OF ACADEMIC AWARDS BY ANY PERSON
The Committee takes note of suggestions given by the various experts/stakeholders
and the response of the Department. The Committee is of the view that academic awards
pertaining to previous ten years from the date of coming into force subject to their
availability and proper verification should be mandatorily lodged with the academic
depository as such persons would still be in the job/labour market and they may be
benefitting from services envisaged under the proposed legislation. (Para 10.3)
XI. Clauses 16 to 24 : OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
The Committee, while agreeing with the intention behind the imposition of heavy
penalty and harsh imprisonment term in view of nature of contraventions and offences and
also supported by similar provisions in the IT Act and the SEBI Act, has some reservations
on certain provisions and implications thereof. The first problem area noticed by the
Committee is the National Educational Tribunal being made the adjudicating authority for
cases relating to damage to computers, computer system etc. (Clause 16), penalty for
contravention by NAD/Depository Agent (clause 17) and penalty for academic institution
(clause 18). The Committee observes that the National Educational Tribunal/State
Educational Tribunals are proposed to be set up for effective and expeditious adjudication of
disputes involving teachers and other employees of higher educational institutions and other
stakeholders (including students, universities, institutions and statutory regulatory
authorities) and to adjudicate penalties for indulging in unfair practices in higher education.
(Para 11.4)
The Committee would like to point out that the National Educational Tribunal as well
as the State Educational Tribunals are envisaged to be given the mandate to handle cases
relating to higher education sector. This is clearly borne out by the Statement of Objects and
Reasons to the Educational Tribunal Bill, 2010 which specifies that the legislation proposes to
establish a two-tier structure of Educational Tribunals at national and state level to adjudicate
on the entire gamut of disputes arising in the higher education system through a fast track,
speedy recourse to justice delivery. The Committee fails to comprehend the applicability of a
legislation dealing with higher education being entrusted the power to handle School Boards
related cases also. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that clause 19 enabling the
National Educational Tribunal to handle matters under clauses 16, 17 and 18 needs to be
reviewed. Such a provision cannot be considered legally tenable. (Para 11.6)
Another drawback noticed by the Committee relates to clause 16 on compensation
for damage to computer, computer system etc. The Committee observes that this clause is
identical to clause 43 of the IT Act. Both the provisions impose penalty for various
unauthorized acts of a person causing damage to computer, computer system etc. The
Committee finds that sub-section (h) of section 43 of the IT Act as reproduced below is
missing in clause 16 of the Bill:
“43(h) charges the services availed of by a person to the account of another person by
tampering with or manipulating any computer, computer system or computer network.”
The Committee feels that the above provision should also be incorporated in clause
16 of the Bill. The other problem-area pertaining to clause 16 which has drawn the attention
of the Committee is the need for making the adjudication mechanism available under the
IT Act applicable on clause 16 as done in the case of clauses 20 and 21. This can be easily
done by making a reference to section 46 about power to adjudicate of the IT Act, 2000 in
clause 16 as done in clauses 21 and 22. (Para 11.7)

31
A comparative analysis of clause 21 of the Bill and section 66 of the IT Act, 2000
reveals that both the provisions relate to offence of hacking into national database.
However, sub-section (1) of Section 66 of the IT Act, 2000 which reads as follows has not
been included in the Bill:
(1) Whoever with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely to cause wrongful loss
or damage to the public or any person destroys or deletes or alters any information
residing in a computer resource or diminishes its value or utility or affects it injuriously
by any means, commits hack;
The Committee strongly feels that in order to have more clarity, the above provision
should also be incorporated in clause 21 of the Bill. When section 43 of the IT Act, 2000
can be reproduced as clause 16 in the present Bill, the same approach should have been
adopted with regard to clauses 21 and 22 as well. (Para 11.8)
XII. Clause 25 : COGNIZANCE OF OFFENCES
Clause 25 relating to cognizance of offences lays down that no court shall take
cognizance of any offence punishable under the Bill or the rules made thereunder, except
on a complaint made by the Central Government/State Government/NAD/any officer or
person authorized by the Central Government/State Government/NAD. Rationale for having
such a provision is not clear. The Committee is of the view that such a provision would
prove to be restrictive if an academic institution has a genuine grievance against NAD or
the Central Government. In such a situation, as a matter of natural justice, one should not
be denied judicial relief. The Committee would also like to point out that in view of
educational institutions and employers spread across the country, access to judicial courts
should not be debarred because this will limit their access. Clause 25 may, accordingly, be
suitably modified. The Committee also observes that offences under clauses 20 and 21 are
to be dealt with under the IT Act (Sections 65 and 66) which does not have a provision like
clause 25. Under the IT Act, any person aggrieved by the decision of Cyber Appellate
Tribunal can appeal to the High Court. (Para 12.1)
XIII. Clause 28 : POWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO GIVE DIRECTIONS
Clause 28 lays down that the Central Government would have the power to give
directions on questions of policy to NAD from time to time. However, NAD will not get any
opportunity to express its views before giving of such a direction by the Central
Government. The Committee finds this provision to be somewhat unjustified. NAD along
with depository agents and institutions/universities/school/boards will be responsible for
handling the entire operations for creation of a national database and providing access
thereto. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that under clause 28, NAD should be
given an opportunity to give its view before issuance of any direction on question of policy
by the Central Government. (Para 13.1)
XIV. MISCELLANEOUS
During the course of deliberations with various stakeholders, a number of issues
were raised which, though not directly related to the proposed legislation before the
Committee, were very relevant and crucial. The Committee is of the view that these issues,
if addressed in the right perspective, will go a long way in strengthening the proposed
legislation. Committee’s observations on some of the most important issues are given
below:

32
(i) Mechanism for maintaining a database on caste certificates issued to students
The Committee is not fully convinced with the contention of the Ministry that the
issue/authentication of caste certificates was outside the purview of the Ministry. The
Committee is of the view that this issue can be very easily handled by seeking the
assistance of the nodal Ministry i.e.  Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
Information available with that Ministry can be put on the website of NAD by having
linkage/connectivity with their website. Such an initiative will go a long way in curbing the
instances of misuse in the admission for reserved categories of seats. (Para 14.1)
(ii) School level Certificate
Apart from the performance of students in the school leaving examination, their
performance in sports, NCC, NSS and performing arts and other activities also serve as a
benchmark for getting admission to different Graduate Courses. The Committee finds that
across the country in a very large number of universities and institutions, there is a fixed
quota of students who have excelled in such activities for admission in higher education
courses. Extra weightage is given to such students so that they get admission in colleges
in spite of not fulfilling eligibility criteria so far as their academic record is concerned.
Therefore, such awards/certificates are very important and also need to be given similar
treatment when compared with academic awards. The Committee, therefore, feels that such
certificates/awards should also be brought under the National Academic Depository.
Modification in the relevant clauses may accordingly, be carried out. This will also help in
curbing misuse of this facility by using fake certificates. (Para 14.5)
(iii) Information about fake universities/institutions/degrees/certificates
On this matter being taken up with the Department, it was clarified that since only
authorized institutions can upload their data on the NAD database, fake Boards/Institutions
cannot become the users. However, assurance was given by the Department that NAD would
be asked to display on its website the names of fake Boards/Institutions. The Committee
observes that UGC is already maintaining a list of fake universities on its website which
can very well be maintained on the website of NAD. The Committee is also of the view that
simultaneously a list of recognized universities, institutions, schools, boards etc. authorized
to award degree, diploma, certificates etc. should also be made available on the NAD website.
The Committee strongly feels that such a move will prove beneficial for our young students.
The Committee would also take this opportunity to point out that deterrent steps need to
be taken by all concerned to curb the menace of fake universities/institutions. It is high
time that the Central Government takes a pro-active role in this direction. (Para 14.7)
(iv) S tatus of degrees/certificates awarded by foreign universities/institutions
The Committee finds the clarification given by the Department with regard to foreign
degrees/certificates satisfactory and in accordance with the present position. As and when
the Foreign Universities Bill comes into force, a mechanism will have to be evolved so that
degrees obtained from foreign universities are also registered with NAD, thus making it
easier for employers to verify such degrees and providing employment opportunities to
Indian Students. (Para 14.10)
(v) Application of the RTI Act, 2005
Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that NAD would be a private entity

33
appointed by the Central Government under the proposed legislation. Thus, it would not be
a public authority as defined under the RTI Act, 2005. It was emphasized that NAD would
be the sole repository of academic awards and would be performing a significant public
function in maintaining such awards, verifying them etc. Therefore, there was a need to
include a provision in the Bill, making the RTI Act specifically applicable to NAD. The
Committee is happy to note that the suggestion has been found acceptable by the
Department and provision about applicability of RTI Act would be incorporated in the Bill.
(Para 14.11)
(vi) Equivalence Certificates
The Committee feels that the matter of equivalence certificates is associated with
the career prospects of our young students and needs to be looked into from that
perspective. The Committee has been given to understand that the Association of Indian
Universities has already been empowered to evaluate and issue equivalence certificates in
respect of degrees obtained by candidates from foreign universities. The Committee is of
the view that this facility can be expanded by Association of Indian Universities working in
co-ordination with NAD in this vital area. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
via media for providing this service through NAD be worked out. (Para 14.14)
(vii) Revenue Model for NAD
The Committee appreciates the confidence of the Department that the proposed
legislation would be a fully user based service, requiring no financial assistance form
Government. The Committee would, however, like to draw the attention of the Department
to the reservations expressed by the Ministry of Finance about the financial viability of the
proposed legislation. It was pointed out that financial sustainability of NAD was dependent
upon one-time fee for registration and annual maintenance fee. Acceptance by all the
States/academic institutions was also not clear. No alternative regarding financial resources
had been suggested. The Committee also takes note of the response of the Department that
academic institutions may also become depository agents. This would not only facilitate easy
access of students/clients to the depository through the academic institution with its existing
network and infrastructure but also help in covering the cost of training the manpower and
maintaining online connectivity with the depository. (Para 14.17)
The Committee does not find the clarification of the Department convincing that the
role of CBSE as one of the academic depository agents would be financially unviable. The
Committee feels that securities depositories and academic depositories cannot be equated so
far as their revenue-earning is concerned. Sources of earning for securities depositories are
custody fees, transaction fees and other operational income. In contrast, source of income
for academic depositories would be user charges. Main users would be School Boards and
higher educational institutions comprising of both well established entities as well as those
not being very financially strong. Besides that, student community will be allowed access to
NAD on payment of nominal charges. The Committee is therefore, of the view that some
kind of initial support would have to be provided by the Government for setting up of NAD
and making it financially viable. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that this most
vital aspect about the setting up of NAD needs to be looked into and resolved keeping in
view all the allied aspects. (Para 14.19)
(viii) Applicability of the Proposed Legislation
A number of bills relating to higher education have been referred to the

34
Committee during the last two years. The Committee notes that while the Prohibition of
Unfair Practices in Technical Educational Institutions, Medical Institutions and
Universities Bill, 2010, the Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010, the National Accreditation
Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010 do not extend to the
State of Jammu & Kashmir, the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry and
Operations) Bill, 2010, the National Academic Depository Bill, 2011 and the Higher
Education and Research Bill, 2011 are applicable to the entire country. The Committee
finds that there are chances of complications arising due to the non-applicability of the
Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010 to the State of Jammu & Kashmir when the Foreign
Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry and Operations) Bill, 2010 and the Higher
Education and Research Bill, 2011, come into force. In the case of these two legislations
also, adjudication process are proposed to be given to Educational Tribunals. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that this aspect may be examined by the Department
and corrective action taken accordingly. (Para 14.21)

35
MINUTES

VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the
23rd November, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri N.K. Singh – In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
3. Shri Prakash Javadekar
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Pramod Kureel
6. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
9. Shri Mirza Mehboob Beg
10. Shri P.K. Biju
11. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
12. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
13. Shri Kapil Muni Karwaria
14. Kumari Saroj Pandey
15. Shri Balkrishna Khanderao Shukla
16. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
37

38
LIST OF WITNESSES
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIC DEPOSITORY BILL, 2011
Department of Higher Education (Ministry of Human Resource Development)
1. Shrimati Vibha Puri Das, Secretary (HE)
2. Prof. S.S. Mantha, Chairman, AICTE
3. Shri Vineet Joshi, Chairman, CBSE
4. Shri R.P. Sisodia, Joint Secretary, MHRD
5. Dr. N.A. Kazmi, Secretary, UGC
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development on the National Academic Depository Bill, 2011. The Chairman, while reviewing the
status of the Bills pending with the Committee informed the Members that the deadline for
presenting Reports on the Protection of Women Against Sexual Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010,
and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offence Bill, 2011 is 31
st December, 2011 and that of
the National Academic Depository Bill, 2011 is 15 th December, 2011 respectively. The Committee
would therefore, be engaged in concluding its work on the Protection of Women Against Sexual
Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010 and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Bill, 2011.
It would, therefore, require more time to deliberate on the National Academic Depository Bill, 2011.
The Committee, accordingly, decided to seek extension of time for presentation of the Report on
the National Academic Depository Bill, 2011 upto 31
st January, 2012 and authorized the Chairman
to approach the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in this regard. The Chairman also informed the
Members that the next meeting of the Committee will be on 30 th November, 2011
3. The Committee then heard the Secretary, Department of Higher Education on the National
Academic Depository Bill, 2011. The Secretary made a detailed power-point presentation
highlighting various provisions of the Bill. The Members raised queries, some of which were replied
to by the Secretary. The Committee decided to send a detailed questionnaire on the Bill to the
Department for its written replies.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the
30th November, 2011.

39
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
12th January, 2012 in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri Pramod Kureel
6. Shri N.K. Singh
7. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
12. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
13. Shri Prasanna Kumar Patasani
14. Shri Joseph Toppo
15. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
16. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
LIST OF WITNESSES
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIC DEPOSITORY BILL, 2011
I. University Grants Commission (UGC)
Prof. Ved Prakash, Chairman
39

40
II. Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE)
1. Shri Vineet Joshi, Chairman
2. Shri M.C. Sharma, Controller of Examinations
III. All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE)
Shri S.S Mantha, Chairman
IV. IIT, Kanpur
Prof. Sanjay G. Dhande, Director
V . Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
1. Shri Rajeev Kumar Agarwal, WTM
2. Shri S. Raman, Executive Director
3. Shri S.V .M.D. Rao, Chief General Manager
4. Shri Sameer Gupte, Vice President & Head of the NADP
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear a number of experts on the National Academic Depository Bill, 2011. *** ***
3. Thereafter, the Chairman, while reviewing the progress on the National Academic
Depository Bill, 2011 pending before the Committee, informed the Members that the deadline for
presenting the Report on the Bill was 31st January, 2012. The Committee was scheduled to hear
a number of stakeholders on the Bill in its meetings fixed for 12
th and 13 th January, 2012. The
Committee would be seeking clarifications from the Secretary, Department of Higher Education on
certain issues related to the Bill before taking up clause-by-clause consideration. Only thereafter, the
Committee would take up the consideration and adoption of the draft Report on the Bill. Therefore,
the Committee, taking into account the further work involved in the Bill, decided to seek extension
of time from the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha upto 29
th February, 2012 for presenting its Report
on the Bill.
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Chairmen of DGC, AICTE, CBSE,
Director, lIT, Kanpur and the representatives of SEBI on the National Academic Depository Bill,
2011. Members raised queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to
send questionnaire to all the witnesses.
5. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M. to meet again on 13 th January, 2012 at
11.00 A.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

41
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the
13th January, 2012 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg
6. Shri P.  K. Biju
7. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
8. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
9. Shri Joseph Toppo
10. Shri Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
11. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
LIST OF WITNESSES
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIC DEPOSITORY BILL, 2011
I. Education Promotion Society of India (EPSI)
1. Shri Ashok Mittal, Chancellor, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara
2. Shri P.K. Gupta, Chancellor, Sharda University, Greater Noida
II. Indian Council of Universities (ICU)
1. Brig. (Dr.) S.S. Pabla, Vice-Chancellor, Manipal University, Jaipur
41

42
2. Dr. Umesh Sharma, Director, Sunrise University
3. Dr. G.S. Yadava, Acting Vice-Chancellor, Lingaya's University
4. Shri Devinder Narain, Shobhit University
5. Shri R.D. Kaushik, Director, Lovely Professional University
III. Association of Indian Universities (AIU)
1. Prof. Arun Divakar Nath Bajpai, Secretary-General
2. Shri Sambhav Srivastava, In-charge, Evaluation Division
IV. Sarthak Advocates and Solicitors
1. Shri Abhishek Tripathi
2. Ms. Mani Gupta
V . ICICI
1. Shri Maninder Juneja
2. Shri Neelkanthan Pillai
3. Shri Vikrant Thakur
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear a number of experts on the National Academic Depository Bill, 2011.
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of Education Promotion
Society of India (EPSI), Indian Council of Universities (lCU), Association of Indian Universities
(AIU), Sarthak Advocates and ICICI on the National Academic Depository Bill, 2011. Members
raised queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to send
questionnaire to EPSI, ICU and AIU.
4 . ***    *
5. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

43
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the
27th January, 2012 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Pramod Kureel
5. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
6. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
7. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg
8. Shri P.  K. Biju
9. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
10. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
11. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
12. Shri Prasanna Kumar Patasani
13. Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla
14. Shri Joseph Toppo
15. Shri Ramesh Rathod
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
LIST OF WITNESSES
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIC DEPOSITORY BILL, 2011
I. Department of Higher Education (Ministry of Human Resource Development)
1. Shri R.P. Sisodia, Joint Secretary
43

44
2. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary & LC
3. Prof. Ved Prakash, Chairman, UGC
4. Dr. S.S. Mantha, Chairman, AICTE
5. Shri Vineet Joshi, Chairman, CBSE
6. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
7. Shri Harpreet Singh, Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to have a final discussion with the Joint Secretary and other officials of the Department
of Higher Education on various issues and concerns expressed by stakeholders and members on
the National Academic Depository Bill, 2011. The Chairman and the members decided to have a
clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its next meeting. ***
3. * * *
4. Thereafter, the Joint Secretary and other officials of the Department of Higher Education
briefed the Committee on various issues and concerns on the National Academic Depository Bill,
2011. The Chairman and members then sought further clarifications on certain issues such as
rationale behind bringing this Bill, revenue model of National Academic Depository, the monitoring
mechanism, registration of National Academic Depository under the SEBI Act and the role of
depository agents etc. which were replied to by the officials.
5. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

45
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, the
6th February, 2012 in Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
6. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg
8. Shri P.K. Biju
9. Shri Suresh Chanbassappa Angadi
10. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
11. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
12. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
13. Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla
14. Shri Ramesh Rathod
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Deputy Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to have a clause-by-clause consideration of the National Academic Depository Bill, 2011.
3. Based on the deliberations with the various stakeholders and the clarifications given by the
Department of Higher Education, the Committee was of the view that some of the provisions of
the Bill like its applicability, definitions of terms like ‘academic award’, ‘diploma’, ‘academic
45

46
institutions’ etc., setting up of the National Academic Depository, role of academic depository
agents, penalties for various contraventions etc. required modifications. The Committee also felt
that issues like fixation of user-charges, mechanism for having information about fake Universities/
institutions, viability of inclusion of academic awards of previous years etc. had to be taken care
of. The Committee, thereafter, directed the Secretariat to draft a Report on the Bill for
consideration of the same in its next meeting.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.

47
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the
22nd February, 2012 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri Pramod Kureel
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
7. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
8. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
9. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
10. Shri P.K. Biju
11. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
12. Shri Suresh Chanbassappa Angadi
13. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
14. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
15. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
16. Shri Prasanna Kumar Patasani
17. Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla
18. Shri Joseph Toppo
19. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
20. Shri Ramesh Rathod
** *
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
47
*** Relates to other matter.

48
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the draft 241 st Report on the National Academic Depository Bill,
2011 ***
3. The Committee, then considered and adopted the draft 241 st Report on the National
Academic Depository Bill, 2011 after few modifications. Due to some urgent work in the
constituency of the Chairman of the Committee and his unavailability till 29 February, 2012, the
Committee authorized the Chairman to request Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to grant permission
to present the Report on this Bill in both the Houses of Parliament in the first week of the
forthcoming session.
4. * * *
5. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

49
ANNEXURE

51
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
on 5 Sep., 2011
Bill No. 42 of 201 1
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIC DEPOSITORY BILL, 2011
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Application of Act.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
NATIONAL A CADEMIC  D EPOSITORY
4. Appointment of National Academic Depository.
5. Services to be provided by National Academic Depository.
6. Revocation of appointment of National Academic Depository.
7. Segregation of activities and business.
8. Registration of academic depository agent.
CHAPTER III
M
ANDATORY LODGING  OF ACADEMIC  AW ARDS AND SERVICES PROVIDED
9. Mandatory lodging of academic awards by academic institutions in depository.
10. Duty of academic institutions.
11. Lodging of academic awards by any person.
12. Process of verification and authentication.
13. Certain requirements of National Academic Depository.
14. Connectivity.
15. Accounts and Audit of National Academic Depository.

52
CHAPTER IV
OFFENCES  AND PENALTIES
CLAUSES
16. Compensation for damage to computer, computer system, etc.
17. Penalty for contravention by National Academic Depository or academic depository
agent.
18. Penalty for contravention by academic institution.
19. Adjudication of penalties.
20. Offence of tampering with computer source documents.
21. Offence of hacking into national database.
22. Offence of not providing data on revocation of appointment or wrong certification.
23. Offences by companies.
24. Offences by societies, trusts, etc.
25. Cognizance of offences.
26. Crediting sums realised by way of compensation or penalty or fine to Consolidated
Fund of India.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
27. Returns and information to be provided by National Academic Depository.
28. Power of Central Government to give directions.
29. Power of Central Government to inspect.
30. Power to investigate contraventions.
31. Access to computers and data.
32. Application of other laws not barred.
33. Protection of action taken in good faith.
34. Power of Central Government to make rules.
35. Power of Central Government to amend Schedule.
36. Power to remove difficulties.
THE SCHEDULE

53
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 42 of 201 1
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIC DEPOSITORY BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to provide for maintenance of national database of academic
awards in electronic format in a depository to be known as
the National Academic Depository and for verification and
authentication of such awards and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Academic
Depository Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification, appoint:
53
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

54
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different
provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to
the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to
the coming into force of that provision.
2. This Act shall apply to all academic institutions specified in
the Schedule.
3. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(a) “academic depository agent” means an academic
depository agent registered by the National Academic
Depository under sub-section ( 1) of section 8;
(b) “academic award” means any certificate or degree
or diploma granted by a Board, Council, School, university or
an academic institution or higher educational institution
established by or under any law, for the time being in force,
to do so;
(c) “academic institution” means a higher educational
institution or a body in secondary education conducting
examinations at the conclusion of class tenth or class twelfth
specified in the Schedule;
(d) “certificate” means an award granted by any of the
bodies specified in the Schedule, certifying that the recipient
has successfully passed an examination conducted at the
conclusion of class tenth or class twelfth, as the case may
be;
(e) “college” means any institution, whether known as
such or by any other name which provides for a course of
study for obtaining any qualification from a university and
which, in accordance with the rules and regulations of such
university, is recognised as competent to provide for such
course of study and present students undergoing such course
of study for the examination for the award of such
qualification;
(f) “computer source code” means the listing of
programmes, computer commands, design and layout and
programme analysis of computer resource in any form;
(g) “data centre” means such place where
representation of information or records in the national
database are stored, or being prepared or have been prepared
in a formalised manner and is intended to be, or is being, or
has been, processed using a computer source code, in a
computer system or computer network;
(h) “degree” means an award, granted by a university
or academic institution established by or under any Jaw, for
the time being in force, to do so, certifying that the recipient
has successfully completed a course of study;
Application of
Act.
Definitions.

55
(i) “diploma” means such award, not being a degree,
granted by a higher educational institution certifying that the
recipient has successfully completed a course of study of not
less than nine months duration;
(j) “distance education system” means the system of
imparting education through any means of communication,
such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspondence course,
seminars, contact programmes or the combination of any two
or more of such means;
(k) “depository” means a depository which has been
granted certificate of registration under sub-section ( 1A) of
section 12 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India
Act, 1992 and includes a fully owned subsidiary of such
depository;
(l) “higher educational institution” means an institution
of learning including an university, an institution deemed to be
a university, a college, an institution of national importance
declared as such by an Act of Parliament, or a constituent
unit of such institution, imparting (whether through conduct
of regular classes or distance education systems) higher
education beyond twelve years of schooling leading to the
award of a degree or diploma;
(m) “institution deemed to be university” means an
institution declared by the Central Government as deemed to
be a university under section 3 of the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956:
(n) “National Academic Depository” means a depository
appointed as the National Academic Depository under sub-
section ( 1) of section 4;
(o) “national database” means the col1ection, in an
electronic format, of awards, by academic institutions, and
related data;
(p) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette and the expression “notify” with its cognate
meanings and grammatical variation shall be construed
accordingly;
(q) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the
Central Government;
(r) “record” means data, image or information
concerning the national database generated, received, stored,
processed or sent in an electronic form;
(s) “secondary education” means education from ninth
class to twelfth class and includes such education imparted
by open schools through distance education systems;
15 of 1992.
3 of 1956.

56
(t) “university” means a university established or
incorporated by or under a Central Act, or a State Act, and
includes an institution deemed to be university.
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined herein but
defined in the Information Technology Act, 2000 or in the General
Clauses Act, 1897, and not inconsistent with this Act shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Information
Technology Act, 2000 or in the General Clauses Act, 1897.
CHAPTER II
N
ATIONAL A CADEMIC D EPOSITORY
4. (1) The Central Government shal1, by notification, appoint,
on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed, a depository to
act as the “National Academic Depository” to establish and maintain
the national database of academic awards in electronic format.
 ( 2) No depository shall be appointed as the National
Academic Depository unless—
(i) it is a depository having a certificate of registration
as such under sub-section ( 1A) of section 12 of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 or is a fully
owned subsidiary of such depository;
(ii) it has, in its memorandum of association, specified
provision of depository services for academic awards as one
of its objects; and
(iii) it fulfils such other terms and conditions as may
be prescribed.
(3) The National Academic Depository appointed under sub-
section ( 1) shall not commence its operations unless it is so
authorised, in writing, by the Central Government.
(4) The Central Government shall not authorise
commencement of operations under sub-section ( 3) unless it is
satisfied that the National Academic Depository has established,—
(i) adequate systems for storage in, access to, and
retrieval of records, from the national database while ensuring
its confidentiality, accuracy and authenticity;
(ii) adequate systems and safeguards to ensure that its
automatic data processing systems are secure by being
protected against unauthorised access, alteration. destruction,
disclosure or manipulation;
(iii) an adequate network through which the Nationa1
Academic Depository shall maintain continuous electronic
communications with academic institutions, academic
depository agents and facilitation centres;
15 of 1992.
Appointment of
National
Academic
Depository
21 of 2000.
10 of 1897.

57
(iv) adequate systems and safeguards to secure the
network referred to in clause ( iii) from unauthorised access,
entry or manipulation;
(v) adequate systems and safeguards to prevent
destruction, unauthorised disclosure and manipulation of
records in the national database;
(vi) adequate number of facilitation centres, established
by it or on its behalf, for providing services required to be
provided by it under this Act;
(vii) adequate systems for recovery of data in the
national database, in case of any loss, destruction or any
other contingency;
(viii ) arrangements for secured storage and
maintenance of back-up data at a location different from the
main data centre where the national database has been hosted;
(ix) an operations manual explaining all aspects of its
functioning, including the interface and method of
transmission of information between academic institutions,
academic depository agents and facilitation centres;
(x) adequate safeguards to ensure that physical access
to its premises, facilities, data centres (including data back-up
locations), automatic data processing systems and electronic
data communication network is secure, control1ed, monitored
and recorded; and
(xi) such other requirements which may be necessary
for proper functioning of the National Academic Depository as
may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government, before authorising for
commencement of operations, may cause to be undertaken, physical
verification of the provision of systems, safeguards, mechanisms,
manual and facilities specified in sub-section ( 4) by the National
Academic Depository.
(6) The Central Government shall, on expiry of a period of
ten years from the date of notification under sub-section ( 1),
undertake the review of the functioning of the National Academic
Depository, and if—
(i) it is satisfied with the functioning of the National
Academic Depository, may renew the appointment of such
Depository for a further period of ten years; or
(ii) it is not satisfied with the functioning of the
National Academic Depository, may revoke the appointment of
such Depository and the provisions of sub-sections ( 2), ( 3),
(4), ( 5), ( 6) and ( 7) of section 6 shall apply accordingly.

58
5. (1) It shall be the duty of the National Academic
Depository, after it has been authorised to commence operations
under sub-section (4) of section 4, to provide or cause to be
provided all such services as may be necessary to—
(a) register academic institutions;
(b) provide access to the national database for
registered academic institutions;
(c) facilitate academic institutions to efficiently lodge, in
the national database, the academic awards of such
institutions;
(d) provide adequate training to academic institutions in
the process of lodging and retrieval of records of academic
awards from the national database;
(e) provide efficient online verification of any specific
academic award lodged in the national database;
(f) verify and authenticate any specific academic award
in the national database when so requested by any person
whose academic awards are maintained in the national
database or any other person authorised by him;
(g) provide an authenticated copy of any specific
academic award in the national database when so requested
by any person whose academic awards are maintained in the
national database to him or any other person authorised by
him;
(h) maintain the authenticity, integrity and confidentiality
of the national database;
(i) ensure that the national database is, at al1 times,
accessible online to authorised persons;
(j) ensure that databases and software programmes are
developed and designed in such a way as to facilitate online
interaction and exchange of information with the Central
identities Data Repository created by the National
Identification Authority of India, under the National
Identification Authority of India Act, 2011, for persons whose
academic awards are maintained in the national database;
(k) perform, consistent with the provisions of this Act,
such other duties as may be prescribed.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, the
expression “authorised person” means any person authorised by the
National Academic Depository and includes academic depository
agents and academic institutions.
(2) For the purposes of providing the services under sub-
section ( 1), the National Academic Depository shall establish such
number of facilitation centres at such places as it may deem fit.
Services to be
provided by
National
Academic
Depository.
 of 2011.

59
6. ( 1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied after
making such inquiry as it deems fit, revoke the appointment of the
National Academic Depository on any or all of the fol1owing
grounds, namely:—
(a) where the National Academic Depository, in the
opinion of the Central Government, makes wilful or
continuous default in any act of commission or omission as
required by or under this Act or the rules made thereunder;
(b) where the National Academic Depository commits
breach of any of the terms or conditions of the appointment
which is expressly declared by such appointment to render it
liable to revocation;
(c) where the National Academic Depository fails,
within the period fixed in this behalf by its appointment, or
any longer period which the Central Government may have
granted therefor, to show, to the satisfaction of the Central
Government, that such depository is in a position ful1y and
efficiently to provide the services required of it and discharge
the duties and obligations imposed on it by its appointment;
(d) where in the opinion of the Central Government the
financial position of the National Academic Depository is such
that such depository is unable ful1y and efficiently to provide
the services required of it or discharge the duties and
obligations imposed on it, by its appointment;
(e) fails to comply with any other requirement, as may
be prescribed.
(2) No appointment shall be revoked under sub-section ( 1)
unless the Central Government has given to the National Academic
Depository not less than thirty days notice, in writing, stating the
grounds on which it is proposed to revoke the appointment, and has
considered any cause shown by it within the period of that notice,
against the proposed revocation.
(3) Where the Central Government revokes the appointment
under this section, it shal1 serve an order of revocation upon the
National Academic Depository and fix a date on which the
revocation shall take effect; and such revocation shall be without
prejudice to the action which may be taken against it under this Act
or any other law for the time being in force.
(4) The Central Government may, instead of revoking an
appointment under sub-section ( 1), permit such appointment to
remain in force subject to such further terms and conditions as it
thinks fit to impose, and any further terms or conditions so imposed
shall be binding upon and be observed by the National Academic
Depository and shal1 be of like force and effect as if they were
contained in the appointment under section 4.
Revocation of
appointment of
National
Academic
Depository.

60
(5) Where the Central Government revokes the appointment
under this section, the National Academic Depository shall, not later
than the date specified under sub-section ( 4) as the date on which
the revocation shall take effect, provide, in such form and manner
as may be prescribed, all the records and data comprised in the
national database and the computer source code, to the Central
Government or to any other authority, as it may direct.
(6) The Central Government shall publish the revocation of
the appointment of the National Academic Depository in the Official
Gazette, display on its website and also give public notice in respect
thereof in such manner as may be prescribed.
(7) The National Academic Depository shall, while providing
the national database under sub-section ( 5), certify that the national
database and every record contained in such database is authentic
and in accordance with the record of academic awards lodged with
it by academic institutions; and no record, or any part of record,
has been changed or modified or altered.
7. Where the National Academic Depository is carrying on
any activity or business besides that of acting as depository for the
national database, then—
(i) the activities relating to the business as National
Academic Depository shall be separate and segregated from all
other activities; and
(ii) its officers and employees (other than the officers
in its Governing Body or Board of Directors or by whatever
other equivalent name called) engaged in providing services
under this Act shall not be engaged in any other activity or
business carried on by it; and
(iii) the accounts of incomes and expenditures relating
to the national database shall be separate and distinct from
accounts relating to other activities or businesses carried on
by it.
8. (1) The National Academic Depository shall register, in
such manner and on the payment of such charges as it may deem
fit, one or more academic depository agents to assist it in the
provision of services under this Act on behalf of the National
Academic Depository:
Provided that no person shall be registered by the National
Academic Depository as an academic depository agent. 1f he—
(i) is a minor; or
(ii) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction; or
Segregation of
activities and
business.
Registration of
academic
depository
agent.

61
(iii) has been found guilty of criminal misappropriation
or criminal breach of trust or cheating or forgery or an
abetment or attempt to commit any such offence by a court-
of competent jurisdiction; or
(iv) does not possess such qualifications and experience
or does not fulfil such criteria relating to capital adequacy
requirement and other requirements, terms and conditions as
may be prescribed.
(2) No person shall be registered, by the National Academic
Depository, as an academic depository agent, if such person holds,
directly or otherwise, any equity share capital or any other interest
in the National Academic Depository:
Provided that no person, being a promoter of the National
Academic Depository, shall hold any equity share capital of an
academic depository agent or any other interest therein.
(3) The National Academic Depository shall enter into an
agreement, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, with the
academic depository agents registered by it under sub-section ( 1).
(4) The academic depository agent shall provide, as the
National Academic Depository may deem fit, one or more of the
services to be provided by the National Academic Depository under
Section 5 on its behalf.
(5) Any thing done or omitted to be done by a registered
academic depository agent in the performance of duties or provision
of services by such agent shall be deemed to have been done or
omitted to be done with the knowledge and consent of the National
Academic Depository and the National Academic Depository shall
also be liable as if the things had been done or omitted to have been
done by itself.
(6) Every academic depository agent shall follow such code
of conduct specified by the National Academic Depository with the
prior approval of the Central Government, in the provision of
services or discharge of duties and obligations by it.
(7) The National Academic Depository may, without prejudice
to any other proceedings under this Act or any other law for the
time being in force, revoke, for default, or deficiency in provision
of services or in discharge of duties and obligations, the registration
of any academic depository agent.
CHAPTER III
M
ANDATORY LODGING OF ACADEMIC AW ARDS AND SERVICES PROVIDED
9. ( 1) Every academic institution shall lodge with the National
Academic Depository, in such form and manner as may be
prescribed, all academic awards issued by it after the
commencement of this Act, to all its students.
Mandatory
lodging of
academic awards
by academic
institution in
depository.

62
(2) Every academic institution shall nominate, within three
months of the appointment of the National Academic Depository,
such number of its officers or employees as it may deem fit for
training in the procedure and process to be provided by the National
Academic Depository and thereafter such nomination shall be made
by such institution on a regular basis at such intervals as such
institution deems fit.
(3) The National Academic Depository shall, immediately after
the commencement of this Act, provide adequate training in the
procedure and processes involved in lodging academic awards with
the National Academic Depository, to such number of persons,
being in the employment of every academic institution, and as may
be nominated by the academic institution,
(4) Without prejudice to any of the provisions of this Act or
duty imposed under any law for the time being in force, it shall be
the duty of every academic institution to have in its employment at
all times sufficient number of its officers and employees trained
under sub-section ( 3).
(5) The National Academic Depository shall be entitled to
recover reasonable cost of training from each academic institution:
Provided that in case of any dispute, about the reasonableness
of the cost of training, between the National Academic Depository
or any academic institution, such dispute shall be referred to the
State Educational Tribunal established under the Educational
Tribunals Act, 2011, having jurisdiction, for adjudication:
Provided further that the decision of the State Educational
Tribunal on the dispute shall be final and binding on all parties:
(6) Any academic institution may, if it thinks proper, lodge
academic award’s issued by it in any year, prior to the
commencement of this Act; and in such case, the National Academic
Depository shall inform, through its website, the general public of
the availability of information of such academic awards in respect
of such institution.
(7) Every academic institution shall appoint an officer to
co-ordinate with the National Academic Depository for the purpose
of lodging, from time to time, academic awards issued by it in the
national database and on matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto; and such officer shall be designated as the “Nodal Officer”.
(8) The National Academic Depository shall provide the
contact details of the Nodal Officers appointed by each academic
institution under sub-section ( 4) on its website.
(9) The National Academic Depository shall provide, subject
to such safeguards as may be prescribed, to every academic
institution, online secure access to the records in the national
database relating to the academic awards issued by such institution.
1 of 2011.

63
10. It shall be the duty of every academic institution to verify,
on a request made to it by the National Academic Depository, with
in a period of seven days from the date of receipt of such request,
any academic award purported to be, or have been, issued by it and
included or proposed to be included in the national database of
academic awards.
11. (1) Any person may request the National Academic
Depository, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, to
lodge the academic award received, prior to the commencement of
this Act, by such person from an academic institution.
(2) The National Academic Depository, on receipt of the
request under sub-section ( 1), shall, after verification and
authentication of such academic award from the academic institution
which has issued such award, lodge it in the national database.
12. (1) Any person, whose academic awards are maintained in
the national database or any other person authorised by him,
requiring verification and authentication of any specific academic
award in the national database, may apply to the National Academic
Depository or to any registered academic depository agent, in such
form and manner and on the payment of such fees as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the person making an application shall provide
such details as the National Academic Depository may require to
enable it to retrieve the record from the national database.
(2) The National Academic Depository or its registered
academic depository agent shall, within a period of three days from
the date of receipt of such application, verify and authenticate the
specific academic award, if lodged in the national database, or
inform the applicant of the non-availability of such academic award
with it:
Provided that where the National Academic Depository or its
academic depository agent; as the case may be, is unable to verify
and authenticate the specific academic award, inform the applicant
within the period specified in this sub-section or if the academic
award is not lodged in the depository, it shall, immediately but not
later than a further period of three days from the expiry of the
period specified, refund the charges paid by the applicant.
(3) The National Academic Depository or academic depository
agent registered with it, as the case may be, while informing the
applicant under sub-section ( 2), shall ensure that verification and
authentication is informed to the individual to whom such award
relates and who made the request therefor or to any other person
authorised by such individual and to no other person.
13. (1) The National Academic Depository shall, while
maintaining the national database of academic awards, have adequate
mechanisms for the purposes of reviewing, monitoring and
Certain
requirements of
National
Academic
Depository.
Duty of
academic
institutions
Lodging of
academic awards
by any person.
Process of
verification and
authentication.

64
evaluating its controls, systems, data recovery mechanisms,
procedures and safeguards.
(2) The National Academic Depository shall have appropriate
safekeeping measures to ensure that records in the national database
of academic awards held by it are protected from theft and man
made and natural hazard or any such foreseeable contingency.
(3) The National Academic Depository shall, in a secure and
authentic manner, maintain data back-up of all records of academic
awards comprised in the national database at location or locations
other than its main data centre.
(4) The National Academic Depository shall ensure that the
integrity of the automatic electronic data processing systems or the
computer network is maintained at all times.
(5) The National Academic Depository shall take all measures
necessary to ensure a secure online connectivity and inter-operability
with the database created and maintained by the National
Identification Authority of India for the purpose of creating and
maintaining an aadhaar number for each person.
(6) The National Academic Depository shall cause to be
inspected annually the mechanism referred to in sub-section (1), the
measures referred to in sub-section (2) and the security and
authenticity of back-up data referred to in sub-section (3), by an
expert from a panel prepared in the manner provided in sub-
section ( 7), and forward the inspection report, along with an
explanatory memorandum on the action taken thereon, to the Central
Government within three months from such inspection.
(7) The Central Government, in consultation with the National
Academic Depository, prepare a panel of independent experts having
such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed.
(8) The Central Government, on the basis of the inspection
report and the explanatory memorandum on the action taken thereon
referred to in sub-section ( 6), if required, direct the National
Academic Depository to take such further action, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, to promote the objectives of this Act; and the
National Academic Depository shall be bound by such directions.
14. ( 1) The National Academic Depository shall maintain
communication, through electronic mode on a regular basis, with all
academic institutions and other persons authorized under this Act or
the rules made thereunder.
(2) Every academic depository agent shall maintain
communication, through electronic mode on a regular basis, with
the National Academic Depository.
(3) Every academic institution shall maintain communication,
through electronic mode on a regular basis, with the National
Academic Depository and academic depository agent, where so
required.
Connectivity.

65
15. ( 1) The National Academic Depository shall maintain
proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual
statement of accounts, relating to its activities under this Act or
rules made thereunder, in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The accounts of the National Academic Depository shall
be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such
intervals as may be specified and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit sha1l be payable by the National
Academic Depository to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any
other person appointed by it in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the National Academic Depository shall have the same
rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as
the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection
with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have
the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the
offices of the National Academic Depository.
(4) The accounts of the National Academic Depository as
certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit
report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central
Government by the National Academic Depository and the Central
Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of
Parliament.
CHAPTER IV
O
FFENCES  AND PENALTIES
16. If any person without authorisation of the Central
Government or the National Academic Depository, the academic
depository agent, or the persons authorised by each academic
institution, in respect of any computer, computer system or
computer network concerned with the national database—
(a) accesses or secures access to such computer,
computer system or computer network;
(b) downloads, copies or extracts any data, computer
data base or information from such computer, computer
system or computer network including information or data
held or stored in any removable storage medium;
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced any computer
contaminant or computer virus into any computer, computer
system or computer network;
(d) damages or causes to be damaged any computer,
computer system or computer network, data, computer
Compensation
for damage to
computer,
computer
system, etc.
Accounts and
Audit of
National
Academic
Depository.

66
database or any other programme residing in such computer,
computer system or computer network;
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of any computer,
computer system or computer network;
(f) denies or causes the denial of access to any person
authorised to access any computer, computer system or
computer network by any means;
(g) provides any assistance to any person to facilitate
access to a computer, computer system or computer network
in contravention of the provisions of this Act or rules made
thereunder,
such person shall be liable to pay damages for each default by way
of compensation which may extend to one crore rupees to the
Central Government:
Provided that such part of the compensation as concerns the
damage caused to the computer, computer system, or data residing
in such computer system or computer network of the National
Academic Depository or its restoration thereof to the condition that
existed prior to such damage, shall be apportioned to the National
Academic Depository.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) “computer contaminant” means any set of computer
instructions that are designed—
(a) to modify, destroy, record, transmit data or
programme residing within a computer, computer
system or computer network; or
(b) by any means to usurp or disrupt the normal
operation of the computer, computer system, or
computer network;
(ii) “computer data base” means a representation of
information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions in
text, image, audio, video that are being prepared or have been
prepared in a formalised manner or have been produced by a
computer, computer system or computer network and are
intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer
network;
(iii) “computer virus” means any computer instruction,
information, data or programme that destroys, damages,
degrades or adversely affects the performance of a computer
resource or attaches itself to another computer resource and
operates when a programme, data or instruction is executed
or some other event takes place in that computer resource;
(iv) “damage” means to destroy, alter, delete, add,
modify or rearrange any computer resource by any means.

67
17. If the National Academic Depository or academic
depository agent registered by the National Academic Depository
fails to discharge the duties or fails to provide the services expected
of it under, or contravenes or abets the contravention of, any
provision of this Act or the rules made thereunder or contravenes
the directions issued by the Central Government under sub-
section ( 1) of section 28, then the National Academic Depository
shall, without prejudice to proceedings for prosecution under the
provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force,
be liable to a monetary penalty which may extend to fifty lakh
rupees for each failure or contravention.
18. Any academic institution which fails to discharge the
duties expected of it under this Act or rules made thereunder, or
contravenes any provision thereof, shall be liable to a monetary
penalty which may extend to five lakh rupees for each such
instance of failure or contravention.
19. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all matters
under sections 16, 17 and 18 shall be adjudicated by the National
Educational Tribunal established under the Educational Tribunals
Act, 2011.
(2) No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or
proceeding in respect of any matter referred to in sub-section (1),
and no injuction shall be granted by any court or other authority in
respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any
power conferred by or under this Act.
20. (1) Whoever knowingly or intentionally conceals, destroys
or alters or intentionally or knowingly causes another to conceal,
destroy or alter any record in the national database or any computer
source code used for a computer, computer programme, computer
system or computer network, of the National Academic Depository,
shall be proceeded against and punished under the provisions of
section 65 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
21. Whoever commits hacking shall be proceeded against and
punished under the provisions of section 66 of the Information
Technology Act, 2000.
22.  ( 1) If the National Academic Depository, on the
revocation of its appointment, fails to provide, in the form and
manner prescribed under sub-section ( 6) of section 6, the records
comprised in the national database, then the promoter, director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company appointed by the
National Academic Depository shall be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years or with fine which may extend to
ten crore rupees, or with both.
(2) If the National Academic Depository, on the revocation of
its appointment, fails to certify in the manner required under sub-
section ( 7) of section 6, then the promoter, director, manager,
1 of 2011.
21 of 2000.
Penalty for
contravention
by National
Academic
Depository or
Academic
depository
agent.
Penalty for
contravention
by academic
institution.
21 of 2000.
Adjudication of
penalties.
Offence of
tampering with
computer source
documents.
Offence of
hacking into
national
database.
Offence of not
providing data
on revocation of
appointment or
wrong
certification.

68
secretary or other officer of the company appointed by National
Academic Depository shall be punishable with imprisonment which
may extend to ten years or with fine which may extend to ten crore
rupees, or with both.
23. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by a company, every person who at the time the offence was
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this
Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the
part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes
a firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in
the firm.
24. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by a society or trust or agency or institution, every person who at
the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the society or trust or agency or institution for the
conduct of the business of the society or trust, as well as the
society or trust or agency or institution, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this
Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society
or trust or agency or institution and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable
Offences by
companies.
Offences by
societies, trusts,
etc.

69
to, any neglect on the part of any vice-chancel1or, directors,
committee, trustees, registrar or other officer, such directors,
committee, trustees, vice-chancellor, registrar or other officer 25
shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
25. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence
punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder, save on a
complaint made by the Central Government or a State Government,
or the National Academic Depository or any officer or person
authorised by the Central Government or a State Government or the
National Academic Depository.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall try any offence
punishable under this Act.
26. An sums realised by way of compensation or penalty
under this Act shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
27. The National Academic Depository shall furnish to the
Central Government such returns or other information at such
intervals, as may be specified by it, with respect to its policies or
performance of its functions and provision of services under this
Act as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.
28. ( 1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this
Act, the National Academic Depository shall, in exercise of its
powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be
bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the Centra1
Government may give in writing to it from time to time.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a
question is one of national policy or not shall be final.
29. ( 1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this
Act, the Central Government shall, at such interval, as it may deem
fit, by giving at least two days notice, cause an inspection of the
National Academic Depository or any academic depository agent to
be conducted by any authority or its officers for physical
verification of the provision of systems, safeguards, mechanisms
and facilities concerning the national database:
Provided that the National Academic Depository shall be
associated in case of inspection of the academic depository agent.
30. (1) The Central Government or any person authorised by
it in this behalf shall take up for investigation any contravention of
the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder by the National
Academic Depository or any academic depository agent.
Cognizance of
offences.
Crediting sums
realised by way
of compensation
or penalty or
fine to
Consolidated
Fund of India.
Returns and
information to
be provided by
National
Academic
Depository.
Power of
Central
Government to
give directions.
Power of
Central
Government to
inspect.
Power to
investigate
contraventions.

70
(2) The Central Government or any person authorised by it in
this behalf shall exercise like powers which are conferred under
Chapter XIII of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and shall exercise such
powers, subject to such limitations laid down under that Act.
(3) If, the Central Government on receipt of the report of
investigation, is of the opinion that National Academic Depository or
academic depository agent registered by it had failed to comply with
provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force,
it may, without prejudice to the proceedings for prosecution or
imposition of monetary penalty or liability of compensation under
this Act or any other law for the time being in force, revoke its
appointment.
31. ( 1) The Central Government or any person authorised by
it shall, if there is reasonable cause to suspect that any
contravention of the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder
has been committed, have access to any computer system, any
apparatus, data or any other material connected with such system,
of the National Academic Depository or any academic depository
agent, for the purpose of searching or causing a search to be made
for obtaining any information or data contained in or available to
such computer system.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government or any person authorised by it may, by order, direct,
the National Academic Depository or any academic depository agent
or any person in-charge of, or otherwise concerned with the
operation of, the computer system, data apparatus or material, to
provide him with such reasonable technical and other assistance as
may be considered necessary.
32. The provisions of this Ad shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being
in force.
33. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Central Government or its officers and employees or an
academic institution for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule made
thereunder.
34. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the terms and conditions of appointment of the
National Academic Depository under sub-section ( 1) of
section 4;
43 of 1961.
Access to
computers and
data.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Power of Central
Government to
make rules.

71
(b) the other terms and condition under clause(iii) of
sub-section ( 2) of section 4;
(c) the other requirements which may be necessary for
proper functioning of the National Academic Depository under
clause ( xi) of sub-section ( 4) of section 4;
(d) the other duties to be performed by the National
Academic Depository under clause ( k) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 5;
(e) other requirement under clause ( e) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 6;
(j) the form and manner in which the National
Academic Depository shall provide all the records and data
comprised in the national database to the Central Government
under sub-section ( 6) of section 6;
(g) the manner in which the Central Government shall
give public notice of the revocation of the appointment of the
National Academic Depository under sub-section ( 6) of
section 6;
(h) the qualifications, experience, criteria relating to
capital adequacy and other requirement and the terms and
conditions for registration of academic depository agent under
clause ( iv) of the proviso to sub-section ( 1) of section 8;
(i) the form and manner in which the National
Academic Depository shall enter into an agreement with the
academic depository agent under sub-section ( 3) of section 8;
(j) the form and manner in which academic institutions
shall lodge academic awards issued by it in the national
database under sub-section ( 1) of section 9;
(k) the safeguards for providing to the academic
institution online secure access to the records in the national
database relating to the academic awards issued by such
institution under sub-section ( 7) of section 9;
(l) the form and manner for lodging of academic
awards by any person in the national database under sub-
section ( 1) of section II;
(m) the qualifications and experience of the independent
experts under sub-section ( 6) of section 13;
(n) the form and manner in which the National
Academic Depository shall maintain its accounts and other
related documents, and prepare annual statement of accounts
relating to its activities, under sub-section ( 1) of section 15;
(o) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by rules or in respect of which provision is to
be made by rules.

72
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
35. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, amend from time to time, the Schedule to this Act.
(2) Every notification issued under this section shall, as soon
as may be after it is .issued, be laid before each House of
Parliament.
36. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the-
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions. not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after
the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of this
Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Power of Central
Government to
amend schedule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

73
THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2 and clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 3]
1. Andhra Pradesh Board of Secondary Education.
2. Assam Board of Secondary Education.
3. Assam Higher Secondary Education Council.
4. Bihar School Examination Board.
5. Board of Intermediate Education, Andhra Pradesh.
6. Council for the Indian School Certificate Examination.
7. Central Board of Secondary Education.
8. Chhattisgarh Board of Secondary Education.
9. Goa Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education.
10. Gujarat Secondary and Higher Secondary Education Board.
11. Haryana Board of School Education.
12. Himachal Pradesh Board of School Education.
13. Jammu and Kashmir Board of School Education.
14. Jharkhand Academic Council.
15. Karnataka Board of Higher Secondary Education.
16. Karnataka Secondary Education Board.
17. Kerala Board of Public Examination.
18. Madhya Pradesh Board of Secondary Education.
19. Madhya Pradesh State Open School.
20. Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary
Education.
21. Manipur Board of Secondary Education.
22. Manipur Higher Secondary Education Council.
23. Meghalaya Board of School Education.
24. Mizoram Board of School Education.
25. Nagaland Board of School Education.
26. National Institute of Open Schooling.
27. Orissa Board of Secondary Education.
28. Orissa Council of Higher Secondary Education.
29. Punjab School Education Board.
73

74
30. Rajasthan Board of Secondary Education.
31. Rajasthan State Open School.
32. Tamil Nadu State Board School Examinations.
33. Tripura Board of Secondary Education.
34. Uttar Pradesh Board of High School and Intermediate Education.
35. Uttarakhand Board of School Education.
36. West Bengal Board of Madrasah Education.
37. West Bengal Board of Secondary Education.
38. West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education.
39. West Bengal Council of Rabindra Open Schooling.

75
75
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Educational Institutions; such as universities, colleges and
polytechnics and Boards of School Education, issue academic awards
to students including degrees, diplomas and certificates along with
marks-sheets of the secondary, higher secondary and higher education
levels. Those who are entering into employment require a credible,
authentic and easily accessible mechanism for access to, and
verification of, academic awards granted by various universities,
colleges and polytechnics and Boards of School Education.
2. Keeping the academic awards in electronic depository
would provide benefits to educational institutions, students and
employers by enabling online access of academic awards which
shall eliminate the need for any person to approach educational
institutions for obtaining transcripts of such awards or marks-sheets
for verification. It would also eliminate fraudulent practices such as
forging of certificates and marks-sheets, by facilitating online
verification thereof. Therefore, a need has been felt for a simplified
mechanism to verify academic awards.
3. The proposed legislation provides for maintenance of a
national database of such academic awards in electronic format in a
depository to be known as the National Academic Depository and for
verification and authentication of such awards. The establishment of
National Academic Depository analogous to depositories in the financial
sector is a technology-based solution to ensure confidentiality,
authenticity and fidelity of academic records enabling online verification
and easy retrieval of details of academic awards. It would also reduce
the need for institutions to preserve physical records related to
academic performance of students over a long time.
4. The proposed National Academic Depository Bill, 2011,
inter alia ,—
(a) provides for maintenance of it national database of
academic awards in electronic format in a depository to be
known as the National Academic Depository, and
verification and authentication of such awards;
(b) makes it mandatory for academic institutions
including universities and other higher educational
institutions as well as the Central and State Boards of
Education, to lodge all academic awards issued by them
together with all relevant details such as marks-sheets, in
the National Academic Depository;
(c) requires the National Academic Depository to
establish adequate systems and safeguards for storage,

76
access and retrieval of records while ensuring its
confidentiality, fidelity and authenticity and provides for
maintenance of backup data at a location different from the
main data centre, in case of contingencies;
(d) confers power upon the Central Government to
revoke the appointment of a National Academic Depository
where it makes wilful or continuous default in any act of
commission or omission as required by the proposed
legislation or commits breach of any of the terms or
conditions of the appointment which render it liable to
revocation or the financial position of the National Academic
Depository is such that is unable fully and efficiently to
provide the services required of it or discharge the duties
and obligations imposed on it;
(e) requires the activities relating to its business as
National Academic Depository to be kept separate and
segregated from all other activities; and the accounts of
incomes and expenditures relating to the national database be
separate and distinct from accounts relating to other
activities or businesses carried on by it;
(f) makes a provision for verification and
authentication of academic awards of any specific academic
award in the national database, by the National Academic
Depository, within a period of three days from the date of
receipt of request from such person;
(g) makes a provision for compensation of damages
to computer and computer system, etc;
(h) provides for levy of monetary penalties in the
event of certain default or contravention by National
Academic Depository or academic depository agent;
(i) makes tampering with computer source documents
or hacking into national database as an offence Punishable
as provided under the Information Technology Act, 2000;
(j) confer powers upon the Central Government to
cause inspection or investigation of the National Academic
Depository or any academic depository agent, any
contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation
or rules made thereunder by such Depository or agent.
5. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various
provisions contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; KAPIL SIBAL.
The 22nd July, 2011.

77
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2.—This clause makes provision for application of
Act. It provides that the proposed legislation shall apply to all
academic institutions specified in the Schedule.
Clause 3.—This clause provides for definitions. It, inter-
alia, defines the expressions “academic depository agent”,
“academic awards”, “academic institution”, “college”, “computer
source code”, “data centre”, “degree”, “diploma”, “distance
education system”, “depository”, “higher educational institution”,
“institution deemed to be university”, “national database”.
It further provides that words and expressions used and
not defined in the proposed legislation but defined in the
Information Technology Act, 2000 or in the General Clauses
Act, 1897 which are not inconsistent with the proposed
legislation shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them
in the Information Technology Act, 2000 or in the General
Clauses Act, 1897.
Clause 4.—This clause provides for appointment of the
National Academic Depository. It provides that the Central
Government shall, by notification, appoint a depository to act as the
“National Academic Depository” on such terms and conditions as
may be prescribed for the purpose of establishing and maintaining
the national database of academic awards in electronic format.
It further provides that no depository shall be appointed as
the National Academic Depository unless ( i) it is a depository having
a certificate of registration as such under sub-section ( 1A) of
section 12 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992
or is a fully owned subsidiary of such depository; ( ii) it has, in its
memorandum of association, specified provision of depository
services for academic awards as one of its objects; and ( iii) it
fulfils such other terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
It also provides that the National Academic Depository
appointed under sub-c1ause ( 1) shall not commence its operations
unless it is so authorised, in writing, by the Central Government.
It also provides that the Central Government shall not authorise
commencement of operations unless it is satisfied that the National
Academic Depository fulfils the conditions laid down under sub-
clause ( 4) and before authorising for commencement of
operations, the Central Government may cause to be undertaken,
physical verification of the provision of systems, safeguards,
mechanisms, manual and facilities by the National Academic
Depository.
77

78
It also provides that the Central Government shall undertake the
review of the functioning of the National Academic Depository, on
expiry of a period often years from the date of notification under sub-
clause ( 1), and if ( i) it is satisfied with the functioning of the National
Academic Depository, may renew the appointment of such Depository
for a further period of ten years; or ( ii) it is not satisfied with the
functioning of the National Academic Depository, may revoke the
appointment of such Depository and the provisions of sub-clauses
(2), ( 3), ( 4), ( 5), ( 6) and ( 7) of c1ause 6 shall apply accordingly.
Clause 5.—This clause specifies the services to be provided
by the National Academic Depository. It provides that it shall be the
duty of the National Academic Depository, after it has been
authorised to commence operations, to provide or cause to be
provided all such services as may be necessary to ( a) register
academic institutions; ( b) provide access to the national database for
registered academic institutions; ( c) facilitate academic institutions to
efficiently lodge, in the national database, the academic awards of
such institutions; ( d) provide adequate training to academic
institutions in the process of lodging and retrieval of records of
academic awards from the national database; ( e) provide efficient
online verification of any specific academic award lodged in the
national database; (f)  verify and authenticate any specific academic
award in the national database when so requested by any person
whose academic awards are maintained in the national database or
any other person authorised by him; ( g) provide an authenticated
copy of any specific academic award in the national database when
so requested by any person where academic awards are maintained
in the national database to him or any other person authorised by
him; ( h) maintain the authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of the
national database; ( i) ensure that the national database is, at all
times, accessible online to authorised persons; ( j) ensure that
databases and software programmes are developed and designed in
such a way as to facilitate online interaction and exchange of
information with the Central Identities Data Repository created by
the National Identification Authority of India, under the National
Identification Authority of India Act, 2011, for persons whose
academic awards are maintained in the national database;
(k) perform, consistent with the provisions of this Act, such other
duties as may be prescribed.
It further provides that for the purposes of providing the
services under sub-clause ( 1), the National Academic Depository
shall establish such number of facilitation centres at such places as
it may deem fit.
Clause 6.—This clause provides for revocation of
appointment of the National Academic Depository. It provides that
the Central Government may, if it is satisfied after making such
inquiry as it deems fit, revoke the appointment of the National
Academic Depository on any or all of the following grounds,
namely:—

79
(a) where the National Academic Depository, in the
opinion of the Central Government makes wilful or continuous
default in any act of commission or omission as required by
or under the proposed legislation or the rules made
thereunder;
(b) where the National Academic Depository commits
breach of any of the terms or conditions of the appointment
which is expressly declared by such appointment to render it
liable to revocation;
(c) where the National Academic Depository fails,
within the period fixed in this behalf by its appointment, or
any longer period which the Central Government may have
granted therefor, to show, to the satisfaction of the Central
Government, that such depository is in a position fully and
efficiently to provide the services required of it and discharge
its duties and obligations imposed on it by its appointment;
(d) where in the opinion of the Central Government the
financial position of the National Academic Depository is such
that such depository is unable fully and efficiently to provide
the services required of it or discharge the duties and
obligations imposed on it, by its appointment;
(e) fails to comply with any other requirement, as may
be prescribed.
It further provides that appointment shall not be revoked
under sub-clause ( 1) unless the Central Government has given a
notice of not less than thirty days to the National Academic
Depository stating the grounds on which it is proposed to revoke
the appointment, and has considered any cause shown by it within
the period of that notice, against the proposed revocation.
It also provides that where the Central Government revokes
the appointment under this clause, it shall serve an order of
revocation upon the National Academic Depository and fix a date on
which the revocation shall take effect; and such revocation shall be
without prejudice to the action which may be taken against it under
the proposed legislation or any other law for the time being in force.
It also provides that the Central Government may, instead of
revoking appointment under sub-clause ( 1), permit such appointment
to remain in force subject to such further terms and conditions as
it thinks fit to impose, and any further terms or conditions so
imposed shall be binding upon and be observed by the National
Academic Depository and shall be of like force and effect as if they
were contained in the appointment under clause 4.
It also provides that where the Central Government revokes
the appointment under this section, the National Academic
Depository shall, not later than the date specified under sub-
clause ( 4) as the date on which the revocation shall take effect,

80
provide to the Central Government or to any other  authority, as it
may direct, all the records and data comprised in the national
database and the computer source code, in such form and manner
as may be prescribed.
It also provides that the Central Government shall publish the
revocation of the appointment of the National Academic Depository
in the Official Gazette, display on its website and also give public
notice in respect thereof in such manner as may be prescribed.
It also provides that the National Academic Depository shall,
while providing the national database under sub-clause ( 5), certify
that the national database and every record contained in such
database is authentic and in accordance with the record of academic
awards lodged with it by academic institutions; and no record, or
any part of record, has been changed or modified or altered.
Clause 7.—This clause provides for segregation of activities
and business. It provides that where the National Academic
Depository is carrying on, ( i) any activity or business besides that
of acting as depository for the national database, then the National
Academic Depository shall keep the activities relating to the business
of academic depository separate and segregated from all other
activities; and ( ii) its officers and employees (other than the officers
in its Governing Body or Board of Directors or by whatever other
equivalent name called) engaged in providing services under the
proposed legislation shall not be engaged in any other activity or
business carried on by it; and ( iii) the accounts of incomes and
expenditures relating to the national database shall be separate and
distinct from accounts relating to other activities or businesses
carried on by it.
Clause 8.—This clause provides for registration of academic
depository agent. It provides that the National Academic Depository
shall register one or more academic depository agents to assist in
the provision of services under the proposed legislation on behalf of
the National Academic Depository, in such manner and on the
payment of such charges as it may deem fit.
It further provides that no person shall be registered by the
National Academic Depository as an academic depository agent, if
he ( i) is a minor; or ( ii) is of unsound mind and stands so declared
by a court of competent jurisdiction; or ( iii) has been found guilty
of criminal misappropriation or criminal breach of trust or cheating
or forgery or an abetment or attempt to commit any such offence
by a court of competent jurisdiction; or ( iv) does not possess such
qualifications and experience or does not fulfil such criteria relating
to capital adequacy requirement and other requirements, terms and
conditions as may be prescribed.
It also provides that no person shall be registered, by the
National Academic Depository, as an academic depository agent, if
such person holds, directly or otherwise, any equity share capital or

81
any other interest in the National Academic Depository and any
person, being a promoter of the National Academic Depository, shall
not hold any equity share capital of an academic depository agent or
any other interest therein,
It also provides that the National Academic Depository shall
enter into an agreement with the academic depository agents
registered by it under  sub-clause ( 1) in such form and manner as
may be prescribed and the academic depository agent shall provide,
as the National Academic Depository may deem fit, one or more of
the services to be provided by the National Academic Depository
under clause 5 on its behalf.
It also provides that any thing done or omitted to be done by
a registered academic depository agent in the performance of duties
or provision of services by such agent shall be deemed to have been
done or omitted to be done with the knowledge and consent of the
National Academic Depository and the National Academic
Depository; shall also be liable as if the things had been done or
omitted to have been done by itself.
It also provides that every academic depository agent shall
follow such code of conduct specified by the National Academic
Depository with the prior approval of the Central Government, in
the provision of services or discharge of duties and obligations by
it.
It also provides that the National Academic Depository may,
without prejudice to any other proceedings under the proposed
legislation or any other law for the time being in force, revoke, for
default or deficiency in provision of services or in discharge of
duties and obligations, the registration of any academic depository
agent.
Clause 9.—This clause provides for mandatory lodging of
academic awards by academic institutions in depository. It provides
that every academic institution shall lodge with the National
Academic Depository all academic awards issued by it to all its
students after the commencement of the proposed legislation in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.
It further provides that every academic institution shall, within
three months of the appointment of the National Academic
Depository, nominate such number of its officers or employees as
it may deem fit for training in the procedure and process to be
provided by the National Academic Depository and thereafter such
nomination shall be made by such institution on a regular basis at
such intervals as such institution deems fit.
It also provides that the National Academic Depository shall,
immediately after the commencement of the proposed legislation,
provide adequate training in the procedure and processes involved in
lodging academic awards with the National Academic Depository, to

82
such number of persons, being in the employment of every
academic institution and as may be nominated by the academic
institution.
It also provides that without prejudice to any of the
provisions of the proposed legislation or duty imposed under any
law for the time being in force, it shall be the duty of every
academic institution to have in its employment at all times sufficient
number of its officers and employees trained under sub-clause ( 3).
It also provides that the National Academic Depository shall
be entitled to recover reasonable cost of training from each
academic institution and in case of any dispute about the
reasonableness of the cost of training between the National
Academic Depository or any academic institution, such dispute shall
be referred to the State Educational Tribunal established under the
Educational Tribunals Act, 2011, for adjudication and the decision of
the State Educational Tribunal on the dispute shall be final and
binding on all parties.
It also provides that any academic institution may, if it thinks
proper, lodge academic awards issued by it in any year, prior to the
commencement of the proposed legislation; and in such case, the
National Academic Depository shall inform, through its website, the
general public of the availability of information of such academic
awards in respect of such institution.
It also provides that every academic institution shall appoint
an officer to co-ordinate with the National Academic Depository for
the purpose of lodging, from time to time, academic awards issued
by it in the national database and on matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto; and such officer shall be designated as the “Nodal
Officer” and the National Academic Depository shall provide the
contact details of the Nodal Officers appointed by each academic
institution on its website.
It provides that the National Academic Depository shall,
subject to such safeguards as may be prescribed, provide to every
academic institution online secure access to the records in the
national database relating to the academic awards issued by such
institution.
Clause 10.—This clause provides for the duty of academic
institutions. It provides that it shall be the duty of every academic
institution to verify any academic award purported to be, or have
been, issued by it and included or proposed to be included in the
national database of academic awards on a request made to it by the
National Academic Depository within a period of seven days from
the date of receipt of such request.
Clause 11.—This clause provides for lodging of academic
awards by any person. It provides that any person may request the
National Academic Depository to lodge the academic award received

83
by such person from an academic institution, prior to the
commencement of the proposed legislation, in such form and
manner as may be prescribed.
It further provides that the National Academic Depository, on
receipt of the request, shall, after verification and authentication of
such academic award from the academic institution which has
issued such award, lodge it in the national database.
Clause 12.—This clause makes provision for process of
verification and authentication. It provides that any person, whose
academic awards are maintained in the national database or any
other person authorised by him, requiring verification and
authentication of any specific academic award in the national
database, may apply to the National Academic Depository or to any
registered academic depository agent, in such form and manner and
on the payment of such fees as may be prescribed and the person
making an application shall also provide such details as the National
Academic Depository may require to enable it to retrieve the record
from the national database.
It further provides that the National Academic Depository or
its registered academic depository agent shall verify and authenticate
the specific academic award if lodged in the national database within
a period of three days from the date of receipt of such application,
or inform the applicant of the non-availability of such academic
award with it.
It also provides that where the National Academic Depository
or its academic depository agent, as the case may be, is unable to
verify and authenticate the specific academic award, inform the
applicant within the period specified in this sub-section or if the
academic award is not lodged in the depository, it shall, immediately
but not later than a further period of three days from the expiry of
the period specified, refund the charges paid by the applicant.
It also provides that the National Academic Depository or
academic depository agent registered with it, as the case may be,
while informing the applicant under sub-clause ( 2), shall ensure that
verification and authentication is informed to the individual to whom
such award relates and who made the request therefor or to
any other person authorised by such individual and to no other
person.
Clause 13.—This clause provides for certain requirements of
the National Academic Depository. It provides that the National
Academic Depository shall have adequate mechanisms for the
purposes of reviewing, monitoring and evaluating its controls,
systems, data recovery mechanisms, procedures and safeguards,
while maintaining the national database of academic awards.
It further provides that the National Academic Depository
shal1 have appropriate safekeeping measures to ensure that records

84
in the national database of academic awards held by it are protected
from theft and natural hazard or any such foreseeable contingency.
It also provides that the National Academic Depository shall
maintain data backup of al1 records of academic awards comprised
in the national database at location or locations other than its main
data centre in a secure and authentic manner and it shall ensure that
the integrity of the automatic electronic data processing systems or
the computer network is maintained at all times.
It also provides that the National Academic Depository shall
take all measures necessary to ensure a secure online connectivity
and inter-operability with the database created and maintained by the
National Identification Authority of India for the purpose of creating
and maintaining an aadhaar number for each person.
It also provides that the National Academic Depository shall
cause to be inspected annually the mechanism referred to in sub-
clause ( 1), the measures referred to in sub-clause ( 2) and the
security and authenticity of backup data referred to in sub-clause
(3), by an expert from a panel prepared in the manner provided in
sub-clause ( 7), and forward the inspection report, along with an
explanatory memorandum on the action taken thereon, to the Central
Government within three months from such inspection.
It also provides that the Central Government, in consultation
with the National Academic Depository, prepare a panel of
independent experts having such qualifications and experience as
may be prescribed.
It also provides that the Central Government, on the basis of
the inspection report and the explanatory memorandum on the
action taken thereon, if required, direct the National Academic
Depository to take such further action, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, to promote the objectives of the proposed legislation;
and the National Academic Depository shall be bound by such
directions.
Clause 14.—This clause makes provision for connectivity
through electronic mode on a regular basis. It provides that the
National Academic Depository shall maintain communication with all
academic institutions and other persons authorised under the
proposed legislation or the rules made thereunder, and every
academic depository agent shall maintain communication with the
National Academic Depository, and every academic institution shall
maintain communication with the National Academic Depository and
academic depository agent, where so required, through electronic
mode on a regular basis.
Clause 15.—This clause provides for accounts and Audit of
National Academic Depository. It provides that the National
Academic Depository shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts,

85
relating to its activities under the proposed legislation or rules made
thereunder, in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
It further provides that the accounts of the National Academic
Depository shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditory-General
of India at such intervals as may be specified and any expenditure
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the
National Academic Depository to the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
It also provides that the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India and any other person appointed by in connection with the
audit of the accounts of the National Academic Depository shall
have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with
such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books,
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and
to inspect any of the office of the National Academic Depository.
It also provides that the accounts  of the National Academic
Depository as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together
with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the
Central Government by the National Academic Depository and the
Central Government shal1 cause the same to be laid before each
House of Parliament.
Clause 16.—This clause provides for compensation for
damage to computer, computer system, etc. It provides that if any
person without authorisation of the Central Government or the
National Academic Depository, the academic depository agent, or the
persons authorised by each academic institution, in respect of any
computer, computer system or computer network concerned with
the national database ( a) accesses or secures access to such
computer, computer system or computer network; ( b) downloads,
copies or extracts any data, computer database or information from
such computer, computer system or computer network including
information or data held or stored in any removable storage medium;
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced any computer contaminant
or computer virus into any computer, computer system or computer
network; ( d) damages or causes to be damaged any computer,
computer system or computer network, data, computer database or
any other programmes residing in such computer, computer system
or computer network; ( e) disrupts or causes disruption of any
computer, computer system or computer network; ( f) denies or
causes the denial of access to any person authorised to access any
computer, computer system or computer network by any means;
(g) provides any assistance to any person to facilitate access to a
computer, computer system or computer network in contravention
of the provisions of the proposed legislation or rules made
thereunder, such person shall be liable to pay damages for each

86
default by way of compensation which may extend to one crore
rupees to the Central Government.
It further provides that such part of the compensation as
concerns the damage caused to the computer, computer system, or
data residing in such computer system or computer network of the
National Academic Depository or its restoration thereof to the
condition that existed prior to such damage, shall be apportioned to
the National Academic Depository.
Clause 17.—This clause provides for penalty for
contravention by the National Academic Depository or academic
depository agent. It provides that if the National Academic
Depository or academic depository agent registered by the National
Academic Depository fails to discharge the duties or provide the
services expected of it under, or contravenes or abets the
contravention of, any provision of the proposed legislation or the
rules made thereunder or contravenes the directions issued by the
Central Government under sub-clause ( 1) of clause 28, then the
National Academic Depository shall, without prejudice to
proceedings for prosecution under the provisions of the proposed
legislation or any other law for the time being in force, be liable to
a monetary penalty which may extend to fifty lakh rupees for each
failure or contravention.
Clause 18.—This clause provides for penalty for
contravention by academic institution. It provides that any academic
institution which fails to discharge the duties expected of it under
the proposed legislation or rules made thereunder, or contravenes
any provision thereof, shall be liable to a monetary penaly which
may extend to five lakh rupees for each such instance of failure or
contravention.
Clause 19.—This clause makes provision for adjudication of
penalties. It provides that save as otherwise provided in the
proposed legislation, all matters under clauses 16, 17 and 18 shall
be adjudicated by the National Educational Tribunal Established
under the Educational Tribunals Act, 2011.
Clause 20.—This clause provides for offence of tampering
with computer source documents. It provided that whoever
knowingly or intentional1y conceals, destroys or alters or
intentionally or knowingly causes another to conceal, destroy or
alter any record in the national database or any computer source
code used for a computer, computer programme, computer system
or computer network: of the National Academic Depository, shall be
proceeded against and punished under the provisions of section 65
of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
Clause 21.—This clause provides for offence of hacking into
national database. It provides that whoever commits hacking shall be
proceeded against and punished under the provisions of section 66
of the Information Technology Act, 2000.

87
Clause 22.—This clause provides for offence of not providing
data on revocation of appointment or wrong certification. It
provides that if the National Academic Depository, on the revocation
of its appointment, fails to provide, in the form and manner
prescribed under sub-clause ( 6) of clause 6, the records comprised
in the national database, then the promoter, director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company appointed as the National
Academic Depository shall be punishable with imprisonment which
may extend to ten years or with fine which may extend to ten crore
rupees, or with both.
It further provides that if the National Academic Depository,
on the revocation of its appointment, fails to certify in the manner
required under sub-clause ( 7) of clause 6, then the promoter,
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company
appointed as National Academic Depository shall be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to ten years or with fine which
may extend to ten crore rupees, or with both.
Clause 23.—This clause provides for offences by companies.
It provides that where an offence under the proposed legislation has
been committed by a company, every person who at the time the
offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as
well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
It further provides that nothing contained in this sub-clause
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in
the proposed legislation, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he has exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
It also provides that notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-clause ( 1), where an offence under the proposed legislation has
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable
to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
It also clarifies for the purposes of this clause that the
expressions “company” means any body corporate and includes a
firm or other association of individuals; and ( b) “director”, in
relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
Clause 24.—This clause provides for offences by societies,
trusts, etc. It provides that where an offence under the proposed
legislation has been committed by a society or trust or agency or
institution, every person who at the time the offence was committed
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the society or trust or
agency or institution for the conduct of the business of the society

88
or trust, as well as the society or trust or agency or institution, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
It further provides that nothing contained in this sub-clause
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in
the proposed legislation, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he has exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
It also provides that notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-clause ( 1), where an offence under the proposed legislation has
been committed by a society or trust or agency or institution and
it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent
or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of
any governors, vice-chancellor, directors, committee, trustees,
registrar or other officer, such governors, directors, committee,
trustees, vice-chancellor, registrar or other officer shall also be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Clause 25.—This clause provides for cognizance of offences.
It provides that no court shall take cognizance of any offence
punishable under the proposed legislation or the rules made
thereunder, save on a complaint made by the Central Government or
a State Government, or the National Academic Depository or any
officer or person authorised by the Central Government or a State
Government or the National Academic Depository.
It further provides that no court inferior to that of a Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall try any
offence punishable under the proposed legislation.
Clause 26.—This clause provides for crediting sums realised
by way of compensation or penalty or fine to the Consolidated Fund
of India. It provides that all sums realised by way of compensation
or penalty under the proposed legislation shall be credited to the
Consolidated Fund of India.
Clause 27.—This clause provides for returns and information
to be provided by National Academic Depository. It provides that the
National Academic Depository shall furnish to the Central
Government such returns or other information at such intervals, as
may be specified by it, with respect to its policies or performance
of its functions and provision of services under the proposed
legislation as the Central Government may, from time to time,
require.
Clause 28.—This clause provides for power of Central
Government to give directions. It provides that without prejudice to
the foregoing provisions of the proposed legislation, the National
Academic Depository shall, in exercise of its powers or the
performance of its functions under the proposed legislation, be

89
bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the Central
Government may give in writing to it from time to time.
It further provides that the decision of the Central
Government whether a question is one of national policy or not shall
be final.
Clause 29.—This clause provides for power of Central
Government to inspect. It provides that without prejudice to the
foregoing provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central
Government shall, at such interval, as it may deem fit, by giving at
least two days notice, cause an inspection of the National Academic
Depository or any academic depository agency to be conducted by
any authority or its officers for physical verification of the provision
of systems, safeguards, mechanisms and facilities concerning the
national database.
It further provides that the National Academic Depository
shall be associated in case of inspection of the academic depository
agent.
Clause 30.—This clause provides for power to investigate
contraventions. It provides that the Central Government or any
person authorised by it in this behalf shall take up for investigation
any contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation or
rules made thereunder by the National Academic Depository or any
academic depository agent.
It further provides that the Central Government or any person
authorised by it in this behalf shall exercise like powers which are
conferred under Chapter XIII of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and shall
exercise such powers, subject to such limitations laid down under
that Act.
It also provides that if the Central Government on receipt of
the report of investigation, is of the opinion that National Academic
Depository or academic depository agent registered by it had failed
to comply with provisions of the proposed legislation or any other
law for the time being in force, it may, without prejudice to the
proceedings for prosecution or imposition of monetary penalty or
liability of compensation under the proposed legislation or any other
law for the time being in force, revoke its appointment.
Clause 31.—This clause makes provision for access to
computers and data. It provides that the Central Government or any
person authorised by it shall, if there is reasonable cause to suspect
that any contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation
or rules made thereunder has been committed, have access to any
computer system, any apparatus, data or any other material
connected with such system, of the National Academic Depository
or any academic depository agent, for the purpose of searching or
causing a search to be made for obtaining any information or data
contained in or available to such computer system.

90
It further provides that for the purposes of this clause, the
Central Government or any person authorised by it may, by order,
direct, the National Academic Depository or any academic
depository agent or any person in-charge of, or otherwise
concerned with the operation of, the computer system, data
apparatus or material, to provide him with such reasonable technical
and other assistance as may be considered necessary.
Clause 32.—This clause provides that the provisions of the
proposed legislation shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of,
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 33.—This clause provides for protection of action
taken in good faith. It provides that no suit, prosecution or other
legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or its
officers and employees or an academic institution for anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of
the proposed legislation or any rule made thereunder.
Clause 34.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
make rules. It provides that the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the proposed legislation.
It also provides that every rule made under this clause shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament.
Clause 35.—This clause provides for power of Central
Government to amend Schedule. It provides that the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend,
from time to time, the Schedule to the proposed legislation.
It further provides that every notification issued under this
clause shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, be laid before each
House of Parliament.
Clause 36.—This clause provides for power to remove
difficulties. It provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central Government
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed
legislation as appear to it to be necessary or expedite for removing
the difficulty.
It further provides that no order shall be made under this
clause after the expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of the proposed legislation.
It also provides that every order made under this section
shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House
of Parliament.

91
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 34 empowers the Central Government
to make, by notification, rules for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause ( 2) specifies the
matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters,
inter alia, are ( a) the terms and conditions of appointment of the
National Academic Depository under sub-clause ( 1) of clause 4; ( b) the
other terms and conditions under clause ( iii) of sub-clause ( 2) of
clause 4; ( c) the other requirements which may be necessary for
proper functioning of the National Academic Depository under items
(xi) of sub-clause ( 4) of clause 4; ( d) the other duties to be performed
by the National Academic Depository under item ( k) of sub-clause ( 1)
of clause 5; ( e) other requirement under clause ( e) of sub-clause ( 1)
of clause 6; ( f) the form and manner in which the National Academic
Depository shall provide all the records and data comprised in the
national database to the Central Government under sub-clause ( 6) of
clause 6; ( g) the manner in which the Central Government shall give
public notice of the revocation of the appointment of the National
Academic Depository under sub-clause ( 6) of clause 6; ( h) the
qualifications, experience, criteria relating to capital adequacy and other
requirement and the terms and conditions for registration of academic
depository agent under item ( iv) of the proviso to sub-clause ( 1) of
clause 8; ( i) the form and manner in which the National Academic
Depository shall enter into an agreement with the academic depository
agent under sub-clause ( 3) of clause 8; ( j) the form and manner in
which academic institutions shall lodge academic awards issued by it in
the national database under sub-clause ( 1
) of clause 9; ( k) the
safeguards for providing to the academic institution online secure
access to the records in the national database relating to the academic
awards issued by such institution under sub-clause ( 7) of clause 9; ( l)
the form and manner for lodging of academic awards by any person
in the national database under sub-clause ( 1) of clause 11; ( m) the
qualifications and experience of the independent experts under sub-
clause (6) of clause 13; ( n) the form and manner in which the National
Academic Depository shall maintain its accounts and other related
documents, and prepare annual statement of accounts relating to its
activities, under sub-clause ( 1) of clause 15; ( o) any other matter
which is required to be, or may be, specified by rules or in respect of
which provision is to be made by rules.
2. The rules made under this clause are required to be laid
before each House of Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made relate
to matters of procedure or administrative details and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
91

92
92
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for maintenance of national database of academic awards in electronic format
in a depository to be known as the National Academic Depository and for verification
and authentication of such awards and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.