PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SEVENTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF NATIONAL LIBRARY, CALCUTTA

(Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 52nd Report of the Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development)

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH DEC., 1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8TH DEC., 1998)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

SEPTEMBER, 1998/ASVINA, 1920 (SAKA)


:
:
3
.
&



CONTENTS

Paces
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMPMMEB:: .:25.5-scc-asds<savesssscooserssossersneutdescusucacerseusnncesty (i)\—(iii)
PREFACE (vy)
CHAPTER 1... (Reporteteca Md eeie 775, मल मनी आज लक जी कमी dae 1—13

Cuapter IL Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the
GOVERGMION a aie ip 61 ves seosst set OMe saaevansessto leek हर seston es 14

Cuaprer वा. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ....................- 15-16

Cuarter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 17

CHAPTER ५ Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government
HAS NOU PIVENVENV IDI YF cs setss esses ccsactsssiersvacreusseardevletaahe जिक eon 18
MinuTEs 19—23


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1998-99)

1. Shri S.B. Chavan ___ Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

. Shri Balkavi Bairagi

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shsi 0. Rajagopal

- Shri Dina Nath Mishra

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

10. Shyi Nagendra Nath Ojha

11. Shri M.P.A, Samad Samadani

12. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
13. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
14. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

15. Dr. Akhtar Hasan Rizvi

LOK SABHA

16. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
17. Shri Sartaj Singh

18. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
19. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
20. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
21. Dr. Sanjay Singh

22. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

23. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

24. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
25. Shri Ashok Singh

26. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
27. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
28. Shri Ashok Gehlot

29. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
30. Shri Ajit Jogi

31. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

32. Shri Laxman Singh

33. Shri Shankar Pannu

34. Shri Abdul Hamid

35. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
36. Shri Samik Lahiri

37. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

38. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja
39. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

40. Shri. H.P. Singh

१७ 9: ५३ 9५ ७ #> ० ३०

4737/RS/F—2-A @


(ii)

. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

. Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

4737/RS/F—2-B


~

9०:३9 ७ २ ० ७

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(1997-98)

. Shri S.B. Chavan —— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo

Dr. B.B. Dutta
Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik
Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar

. Shri Raj Nath. Singh

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Port. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Dr. Mohan Babu

. Shri M. P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
५ Shri Sattaj Singh

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Shri Jai Prakash (Hardoi)

. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

. Maharani Divya Singh

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

. Dr. ९. Silvera

. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda

. Shri Dutta Meghe

. Shri 1.6, Sanadi

. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy

. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

. Shri Pawan Diwan

. Shri Krishna

. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi

. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

+ Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri S.K. Kaarvendhan

. Shri Mukhtar Anis

. Dr. M. Jagannath

. Dr. Bali Ram

. Shri Ranen Barman

. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

(iii)


aig aes



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Seventy-Sixth Report of the Committee on
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its 52nd Report on
the functioning of National Library, Calcutta.

2. The Fifty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Commit-
tee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 19th December,
1996 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 1996. Replies of the
Government on the recommendations contained in the report, received from the Depart-
ment of Culture were considered by the Committee and this report was adopted at its sitting
held on 24th September, 1998. The Committee at its meeting held on 19th November, 1998
decided to present the Report in the House during the Winter Session of Parliament.

New DEH; S.B. CHAVAN
24th September, 1998 Chairman,
PE a oP FOE Department-Related Parliamentary
Asvina, 2, 1920 (Saka) Standing Committee on Human

Resource Development.

4731/RS/F—3-A (v)


CHAPTER-I
REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Fifty Second Report on the functioning of National
Library, Calcutta, which was presented to Rajya Sabha on 19.12.96 and laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.96.
.2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
Sil, 5.2, 53

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 2, 3(a), 4.1.

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 3(b), 3{c), 3(d), 3.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4,.4.5, 4.6,
4.7, 5.4 & 5.5

(५) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have

not been received—nil.

3. The Committee will now deal with some of its recommendations on which the Action
Taken Notes of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:

Para Recommendation Reply
No.
(1) (2) (3)

3(b) Reader’s Service (including Bibliographic
Services) Programme

The National Library renders services The Committee’s observations

to its readers from different parts of India
and abroad on 362 days in a year. It is
closed on 3 national holidays (26th January,
15 August and 2nd October). Throughout
the year the service sections remain open
from 9.00 a.m. to 8.00 p.m. on working
days and from 9.30 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. on
holidays. On an average, 1000 readers are
served everyday. The Library acts as the
main bibliographic centre of India.

The Indian National Bibliography is
published on the basis of the receipts under
the Delivery of Books Act. The Library

regarding the referral centre (which is
a part of the bibliographic services)
not being sufficiently equipped with
retrieval services, such as subject index
of articles published in journals,
subject search and __ bibliographic
assistance etc. have been noted.

The National Library has planned
to develop better bibliographic services
with the help of modern information
technology during the 9th Plan.

3


(1)

(2)

(3)

also shoulders responsibility of current and
retrospective bibliography on Indology and
other subjects. The Committee observes
that the referral centre which is a part of
the bibliographic services is not sufficiently
equipped with the retrieval services such as
subject index of articles published in
journals,; subject search and bibliographic
assistance etc, and necessary steps are
required to be taken in this regard.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is constrained to note that
no action seems to have been taken on its
earlier observation with regard to steps to
be taken for improvement in referral centre
which is part of the bibliographic services of
the National Library. The Department has
informed that the National Library has
planned to develop better bibliographic
services with the help of modern
information technology during the 9th Plan.
However, the Committee finds nothing
concrete has emerged so far although we
are in the 2nd Year of 9th Plan. The

Committee would, therefore, emph
that the Department should ate
necessary action without delay in the

matter.

3(C) Conservation of Library Materials Programme

In order to conserve library material, a
small repair unit was started in 1957 which
has Preservation Division, Laboratory
Division and Reprography Division. The
Committee is of the view that this is
inadequate and needs to be fruther
strengthened.

National Library has taken steps to
strengthen this Unit with modern
equipment during the 9th Plan period.
Steps have been taken to procure the
Reader Printer and incapsulation of
physical and photographic
conservation, in case of Electronic
Conservation, a pilot project for
scanning rare and brittle books and
store them on CD through Document
Management system has _ been
undertaken.



(1)

(2)

(3)

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is happy to note that
some steps have been taken by the National
Library for strengthening the repair unit for
conservation of Library material. However,
the Committee is of the view that concerted
efforts are required to be made for
equipping the Repair Unit with all the
latest. techniques so as to preserve the
library material of the national library
which is the largest repository of books etc.
including rare volumes in the country. The
Committee therefore, recommends that
sufficient funds should be made available
for the purpose.

3 (d) Modernisation

In order to implement the automation
programme, the Library introduced Anglo
American Cataloging Rules, 2 (AACR 2)
as the first step towards modernisation of
its operations. This rule is a cataloging code
which is a standardised cataloging format
and is internationally accpeted _ for
automated systems. It has taken up the
standardisation of diacritical marks (special
marks atfached to alphabets (Roman script)
for transliteration from Indian Scripts) for
romanisation of Perso-Arabic _ scripts
through automation system and has also

developed a standardisation chart of
diacritical marks for automated
bibliographic — services in _—_— different

languages. The Committee feels that the
Library should complete the computer
cataloging of books and manuscripts
without further delay.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee notes that action has
already been initiated by the National
Library to computerise the cataloging
process of books and manuscripts. It
however, needs to be done at a greater

The Committee’s observations
regarding computerised cataloging of
books and manuscripts have been
noted. The National Library have
already initiated action to computerise
the cataloging process during the 8th
Plan itself. The retrospective
conversion of two million documents
will be taken up during the 9th Plan.

4737/RS/F—+-A


(1)

(2)

(3)

Sk

pace. The Committee, however, finds that
work on retrospective conservation of two
million documents to be taken up during
the 9th Plan has not yet started. The
Committee, therefore, urges upon the
Department to initiate immediate action in
this direction.

Modernisation

The Committee feels that in view of the
latest developments in technology brought
out in the Library systems all over the
world, the National Library, Calcutta
should also adapt itself with the changing
needs in order to perform its functions
properly and expeditiously. Hence it should
acquire the modern software and
communication technology available in
these fields and it should establish a site on
INTERNET and it may be connected
through INTERNET service with all the
leading libraries, educational centres and
research-oriented institutes of the world for
a speedy and effective exchange
programme. The Committee is of the view
that the Library may also examine a
proposal to provide this facility free to the
schools and educational institutions which
have received the Bibliographic Data Base
Project under MPLADS.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not satisfied with the
reply given by the Department. The
Committee is constrained to note that the
Department is still in the process of
formulating a scheme for computerising and
internetting the major Libraries. The
Committee recommends that this Scheme
should be finalised as early as possible so as
to facilitate the computerisation and
internetting of the National library with all
the major Libraries, educational centres
and research-oriented institutions of the
world. The Committee would also like to

The Committee’s observation that
the National Library should acquire
modern software and communication
technology available बात... should
establish a site on INTERNET so as to
communicate with leading libraries,
educational centres and research
oriented institutes has been noted.

The Department is in the process of
formulating a scheme for
computerising and internetting the
major libraries in the 9th Five Year
Plan.

4737/RS/F—4+-B


()

(2)

(3)

reiterate its earlier observation that the
Library may also examine a proposal to
provide this facility free to the Schools and
Educational Institutions = which have
received the Bibliographic Data Base
Project under MPLADS.

The foundation stone of “Bhasa Bhawan”
was laid on the 7th April, 1989 by late Shri

ajiv Gandhi, the then Prime Minister of
India. Originally the estimated cost of the
project in February, 1989 was Rs. 35.34
crores. The Administrative approval and
expenditure sanction for Rs. 41.57 crores
was issued by the Department of Culture
only in January, 1993 after a gap of four
years. The Department has taken unduly
Jong to accord administrative approval and
sanction for the expenditure. This
inordinate delay must have resulted in cost
escalation for which the Department of
Culture owes an explanation. The Secretary
and the Joint Secretary, Department of
Culture were summoned by the Chairman,
HRD on 16th December, 1996 to clarify
the reasons for delay in according the
administrative approval for this
expenditure. Even they were not in a
position to clarify the precise reasons for
this delay. The Committee takes a serious
note of this delay and recommends that the
Department should look into the matter
and fix responsibility not only for causing
delays but also for cost escalation. The
Department should also look into as to
whether the tender documents contained a
clause for providing escalation of the
estimate which is very relevant for fixing
the responsibility on the previous
contractor. The Committee feels that
barring some additional items in the second
tender, if any, rest of the increase in the
cost should be borne by the previous
contractor.

The preliminary estimates furnished by
CPWD were got examined by
Government in various divisions and a
master plan and landscaping of the

a Campus were to be drawn by CPWD.

A SERIES OF MEETING OF
Building Committee were held for
approval of the construction of
Building.

The delay occurred for want of
approval for revised estimates by EFC
for the project which was received in
December, 92.

Date-wise position is as under:—
Date Foundation stone for Bhasha
7.4.89 Bhavan laid.



(1)

(2

(3)

19.12.89

Dec. 90

March’ 91

Nov’ 91

Jan’ 92

3.7.92

22.992

1.12.92

14.1.93

Oct’ 93

Aug’ 94

Preliminary estimates for Rs. 35.34
crores were received from CPWD.
Estimates were found to be
incomplete, as they did not indicate
year-wise physical and _ financial
targets, nor a time schedule for
completion. Returned to CPWD for
rectification.

Compiete information was made
available by the CPWD after several
round of discussions.

The EFC Memo containing the
Secretary’s approval was sent to the
Planning Commission.

Comments of the Planning
Commission were received after a 8
months gap.

The revised EFC Memo was approved
by the Secretary (Culture) and
circulated to the Ministry of Urban
Development and Department of
Expenditure for comments.

An EFC meeting was held, in which a
decision was taken to up-date the
estimates.

A revised EFC Memo was submitted
with comments of Planning
Commission, Ministry of Finance and
Ministry of Urban Development for
approval of HRM.

Approval of Ministry of Finance
obtained.

Administrative approval for revised
estimates of Rs. 41.50 crores
sanctioned.

Tenders were invited by the CPWD,
but an injunction was imposed by the
Calcutta High Court restraining the
Department from processing them.

The Stay Order was vacated.



4.3

(2

(3)

Nov’ 94,

Action to

Fresh tenders re-invited immediately.
Work is in progress. As stated by the
CPWD, the increase in cost is on
account of the following reasons;

A. Increase of cost index to the extent
of 29% i.e Rs. 12.06 crores.

B. Increase due to extra depth for pile
foundation as per actual requirement
for soil strata Rs. 1.88 crores.

C. Increase due to superior
specification of doors and windows and
exterior wall finish Rs. 0.89 crore.

D. Increase due to additional
provision for electrical bulk services
such as transformer, service
connection, D.G. set, fire fighting
system, fire alarm system, lift, water
supply and additional lighting etc.
Rs. 4.00 crores.

increase the quantum of

allocation for Bhasha Bhavan in the 9th
Five Year Plan has been taken up with the
Planning Commission.

The Committee has been informed that
the entire project is now expected to
complete by December 2000 A.D. at a
revised cost of Rs. 60.46 crores. The tender
for the building could be invited by
October 1993 but due to stay order issued
by the Hon’ble High Court, Calcutta in
November, 1993 on a petition given by a
Construction Agency, the processing of the
tender was further delayed. The stay order
was got vacated in the month of August,
1994. The tenders were re-invited in
September, 1994 and the work of pile
foundation was started in February, 1995.
The text pile was started in March, 1995
and actual working piles were started after
clearance from the Central Design
Organisation with effect from May, 1995
only. It is expected that the raft alongwith
basement under the present contract would
be completed by June, 1997.

4731/ RS/E—-S-A


(1)

(2)

(3)

4.4

The Committee was informed that due to
this inordinate delay in starting the con-
struction work, the estimated escalation in
the cost of the project may go upto 50%
before completion of the project. Till
March, 1996, Rs. 6.12 crores have already
been spent. The details of the allocation
made and expenditure incurred is as
under:—

4.5

Year Allocation Actual
Made Expenditure
(Rs. in (Rs. in
Lakhs) Lakhs)

1994-95 100.00 100.00
1995-96 500.00 512.00

Total 600.00 612.00

The requirement of funds made by
CPWD for 1996-97 is Rs. 700 Lakhs. The
CPWD has already spent Rs. 212 lakhs out
of which only Rs. 100 lakhs has been
released by the Department. The remaining
amount of Rs. 112 lakhs have been spent
by CPWD by diverting the funds from
other sources. The Committee was also
informed that the CPWD has made demand
for the remaining amount i.e Rs. 488 lakhs.
The Committee desires that the
Department may approach the Planning
Commission for release of this amount
expeditiously.

The following table shows a year-wise
release of funds in respect of Bhasha
Bhavan:—

(Rupees in lakhs)

Year Allocation = Amount
Demanded __ released

1994-95 100.00 100.00
1995-96 500.00 500.00
1996-97 700.00 250.00
1997-98 600.00 580.00

Although initially only Rs. 1.00
crore was given for Bhasha Bhavan in
1996-97, a further sum of Rs. 1.50
crores was diverted from the budget
earmarked for Anthropological Survey
of India to Bhasha Bhavan, with the
approval of the Urban Development
Ministry and the Ministry of Finance.



(1)

(2

(3)

4.6

4.7

The funds requirement, as made out by
the CPWD, for completion of the project
from next year onwards is as under:—

Year Requirement of funds
(in lakhs)
1997-98 1200.00
1998-99 1800.00
1999-2000 1200.00
2000-2001 534,00
Total: 4734.00

The Committee feels that the inadequacy of
funds may further delay the pace of con-
struction which is already very slow. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department of Culture may work out their
requirement properly and project the same
before the Planning Commission and Minis-
try of finance from next financial year
onwards and arrange for providing adequ-
ate funds well in time to ensure that the
construction work: does not suffer any more
and its schedule is regularly maintained to
ensure timely completion of the building.

The CPWD has been provided Rs.
5.80 crores during 1997-98, which the
CPWD stated to be sufficient from
them during that financial year. Addi-
tional Fund of Rs. 2.00 crores offered
by this Department could not be ac-
cepted by CPWD.

A budget of Rs. 6.00 crores has been
made during 1998-99 which is consi-
dered sufficient.

In 1997-98 6 crores have been allo-
cated by the Planning Commission.
The work could not progress beyond
the basement, because the CMC HAD
not given the clearance of construction
of the super structure of Bhasha Bha-
van. Hence the issue was taken up at
the highest level and the CMC have
recently given provisional clearnace.

Inadequacy of funds is not the reason
for slow pace of work. The project is
delayed because of want of clearnaces
from authorities like Calcutta Munici-
pal Corporation.



10

The Committee was earlier informed that although the foundation stone of Bhasa
Bhavan was laid as early as on 7th April, 1989, the actual construction work could be started
only in February, 1995. Originally, the estimated cost of the Project in February, 1989 was
Rs. 35.34 crores. However, the entire Project was expected to be completed by December,
2000 A.D. at a revised cost of Rs. 60.46 crores. As per the latest Action Taken Report
furnished by the Department, the Project has been delayed because of want of clearances
from authorities like Calcutta Municipal Corporation. The Committee found that from 1994-
95 onwards till 1998-99, Rs. 20.30 crores have been released by the Department. However,
till 1997-98 the work could not progress beyond the basement because the Calcutta
Municipal Corporation has not given the clearance for the construction of the super structure
of Bhasa Bhavan.

At its meeting held on the 24th September, 1998. the Committee sought clarifications
from the Secretary, Department of Culture in the matter. Subsequently, the Department has
submitted a status note on the construction of Bhasa Bhavan, National Library, Calcutta
which reads as follows:—

“Construction of Bhasa Bhavan for National Library, Calcutta has been undertaken to
accommodate collection of books in Indian Languages and major languages of the
World. The foundation stone for this building was laid in April, 1989 and the final
administrative and financial approval for the work was issued in January, 1993. The
budget allocations for construction of building was made through the budget of Ministry
of Urban Affairs and Employment as the work was entrusted to the CPWD. The
desired progress could not be made on the project as the necessary clearnaces for
superstructure from Calcutta Municipal Corporation could not be received. On
intervention by the Department, the Calcutta Municipal Corporation has issued a
provisional building permit in June, 1998 to Director, National Library, Calcutta,
stipulating certain conditions such as submission of architectural plans after making the
necessary corrections along with the structural plans. National Library, Calcutta has
been directed to expedite the clearance from the Calcutta Municipal Corporation.
Meanwhile, the preliminary works were started by CPWD and upto now around Rs. 17
crores approximately has been spent on the project and the basement work has almost
been completed. The original cost of the project was estimated to be Rs. 35 crores
(estimated in 1989). The latest estimates suggest the project cost to be around Rs. 72
crores. For 1998-99 Rs. 6 crores has been allocated in the Budget of Ministry of Urban
Affairs for this Project. All possible efforts are being made to persuade the CPWD to
spend the entire amount during the year. Further, we propose to get enhanced outlay
for the project in the following years. The latest assessment made by the Department
and the discussions held with concerned authorities in CPWD indicate that the project
would be completed by 2002. The mutter has already been taken up by the Secretary,
Department of Culture with his counterparts in Ministry of Urban Affairs and, if felt
necessary, a joint team from Department of Culture and Ministry of Urban Affairs
would be deputed to the site for monitoring the progress. In case the Department does
not receive adequate response from the Minisitry of Urban Affairs shortly, Secretary
(Culture), propose to hold a meeting with his counterpart. Thus. the matter is receiving
highest priority. However, it may be submitted that eventually, the work is to be
done by CPWD which is under the administrative contro! of Ministry of Urban
Affairs.”



il

Comments of the Committee

The Committee express its serious concern over the tardy progress made in the
‘construction of Bhasa Bhavan. The Committee finds that even now only a provisional
building permit has been issued by the Calcutta Muncipal Corporation. The Committee
strongly recommends that concerted effort should be made by all concerned so that all the
conditions put forth by the Calcutta Municipal Corporation are fulfilled at the earliest.

The Committee is constrained to note that the original estimated cost of Rs. 35.34
crores of the ‘Bhasa Bhavan’ Project in February, 1989 was revised to Rs. 60.46 crores and
the Project was expected to be complete by December, 2002 AD. The Committee finds that
the latest estimates suggest the Project cost to be around Rs. 72 crores and the target date
for completion of the Project is now 2002. The Committee expresses its strong reservations
over this state of affairs. The Committee apprehends that in view of the prevailing situation,
the target date is likely to be revised yet again. The Committee feels that the Department
cannot escape from its responsibility by intimating that the responsibility for timely
completion of Bhasa Bhavan Project lies with the CPWD which is under the administrative
control of Ministry of Urban Affairs. The Committee, therefor, strongly recommends that
the Department should make concerted efforts so as to effectively resolve all the disputed
issues for completion of Bhasa Bhavan within the targeted time limit.

Para Recommendation Reply
No.
(1) (2) (3)
5.4. The Committee also found that most of The details of staff employed by the

the work charged employees are being paid
their wages from the non-plan budgetary
allocation meant for National Library and
that too without performing any job. The
Committee further learnt that this practice
has been going on for the last twenty years
without any check from the Department of
Culture. This appears to be irregular. The
payment of wages to the work charged
employees should have been made from the
budgetary allocation of C.P.W.D. given by
the Ministry of Urban Affairs and
Employment. The Secretary and the Joint
Secretary, Department of Culture informed
the Chairman, HRD on 16th Dec., 1996
that this practice has been going on for the
last twenty years. The Committee takes a
serious note of this lapse and recommends
that the responsibility should be fixed on
the lapse of such an irregular practice.
Since this irregularity was discovered by the
Committee, the Department if Culture may
apprise the Committee within two months
about the action taken thereon.

various wings of the CPWD on
account of maintenance of the
National Library have been
obtained. Payment of wages to the
work charged employees of the
CPWD out of the maintenance
grant of National Library has been
taken up with the Ministry of Urban
Development. The Committee’s
observation with regard to a
mismatch betwen Plan and Non-
Plan allocations has been noted. An
attempt to correct this imbalance in
the 9th Plan has been made. A
master Plan for National Library’s .
renovation is also under
preparation.



12
(1) (2) (3)

aS The Committee, therefor, feels that the
budgetary allocation meant for National
Library should not be used for the payment
of wages to the work charged employees
engaged by C.P.W.D. This is particularly
so as the library is already starved of funds.
The Committee, also recommends that the
due of CPWD should be settled immediate-
ly. Since the Library is badly in need of
maintenance and special repairs in view of
its historical and architectural design, the
Department should properly work out its
requirment of funds and project it before
the Ministry of Finance and the Planning
Commission so as to ensure adequate and
timely availability of funds. The Committee
observes with concern that, at present there
is a mismatch between Plan and Non-Plan
expenditure which needs to be rectified.
The Committee also observed that appa-
rently there is a lack of total perspective
planning and the planning appears to be
piecemeal. The Committee, therefore re-
commends that a comprehensive plan may
be prepared with project work alongwith
the detailed budgetary needs for meeting
the requirements of National Library. The
Committee also desires that the C.P.W.D.
may examine the problems of absorption of
the work charged employees and consider
their demands sympathetically.

The Committee in its 52nd Report had taken serious exception to the irregular ‘practice
of making payment of wages to the work charge employees of CPWD from the Non-Plan
budgetary allocation meant for the National library instead of from the budgetary allocation
of CPWD. The Committee had, accordingly, recommended that this anomaly should be
removed without delay. In response to the queries about the progress made in the matter,
the Department has submitted as under:—

“The Department recognises the financial anomaly wherein the work-charge employees
of CPWD are being paid their wages from the non-plan budgetary allocations meant for
National Library, Calcutta. The Department is ascertaining all the facts from the Institution
as to how and under what circumstances the work-charge employees were paid wages from
non-plan funds. The preliminary inquiries reveal that this is a normal practice being followed
by Central organisations in Calcutta, where CPWD has taken up construction related
activities. The Department has also taken up the matter with Ministry of Urban Affairs in
February, 1997 and has been following it with them. The matter has been taken up by
Secretary (Culture) on September 26, 1998 with his counterpart in Ministry of Urban Affairs
to stop this practice. We have requested the Ministry of Urban Affairs to provide Action
Taken Report on the recommendation of the Standing Committee of Parliament and also
suggested that the werk-charge employees should be made the payments out of the
budgetary allocations to CPWD”.


13

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is constrained to note that although considerable time has elapsed since
the presentation of its 52nd Report on National Library, Calcutta on 19th December, 1996,
no progress seems to have been made in the matter. The Department is still in the process
of ascertaining all the facts as to how and under what circumstances the work-charge
employees of CPWD were paid wages from non-plan funds" méant for National Library,
Calcutta. The Committee views with serious concern the Department’s statement that this is
u normal practice being followed by Central organisations in Calcutta, where CPWD has
taken up construction-related activities. The Committee fails to understand why appropriate
action is not being initiated by the Department to put an end to this improper procedure.
The Committee feels that merely requesting the Ministry of Urban Affairs to discontinue
this practice would not result in any change. Apparently, the Ministry of Urban Affairs does
not seem to be inclined to the proposed change. In this regard, the Department of Culture
could have approached the Ministry of Finance, the nodal Ministry in all the financial
matters.

The Committee takes note of the fact that a Master Plan for renovation of National
Library is at present under preparation. The Committee hopes that this exercise would be
completed timely so as to effectively carry out the badly needed repair and maintenance
work of National Library within a prescribed time frame.


CHAPTER-II

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Para Recommendation Reply
No.

5.1 Maintenance of the existing buildings .
& Budgetary Constraints: 2

Sot The Committee noticed that the existing INTACH submitted a proposal
buildings of the library are in a very bad shape. only for consultancy and design of
There are complaints of water seepage and electrical fire-fighting facility for
leakage of roofs. In view of its historical National Library, Calcutta; and not
importance, the buildings require special for renovation.
repairs and civil maintenance. The Committee As far as repair and other mainte-
was also informed that proper maintenance of nance work are concerned Ministry
electric installations, pumps, lifts etc. could not of Urban Development has _in-
be done for the last three years due to paucity formed in this regard. The CPWD
of funds. The Committee is constrained to note allocated sufficient funds and have
that the C.P.W.D. has failed to discharge its started the repair work.
responsibilities of proper upkeep and mainte-
nance of the buildings and thus owe an expla-
nation in this regard. The Committee, there-
fore, feels that the Department of Culture
should impress upon the Ministry of Urban
Affairs and Employment to direct the
C.P.W.D. to carry out the necessary repairs
and other maintenance works at regular; inter-
vals to avoid further decay of this historical

building.
ey The budgetary provisions for the Library The year-wise budgetary alloca-
during the last three years are as under: tions made in respect of the Na-
tional Library during the 8th Five
Year Plan is as tabled;
(Rupees in lakhs)
PLAN NON-PLAN
1994-95 1995-96 1995-96 1996-97 B.E. R.E. BE. R.E.
RE. B.E. R.E. B.E.
Plan 120.00 150.00 150.00 150.00 1992-93 185.00 175.00 261.25 295.00

Non-Plan 310.00 328.00 386.00 392.00 1993-94 100.00 100.00 304.00 304.00
1994-95 120.00 120.00 310.00 310.00
1995-96 150.00 150.00 328.00 328.00
1996-97 150.00 150.00 392.00 392.00
1997-98 200.00 207.00 410.00 608.00

53 The Committee feels that the funds made (These figures exclude Capital allo-
available to the National Library on the plan cation)
side are inadequate which need to be suffi- Noted.
ciently enhanced keeping in view the problems
confronted by the Library.

14


RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES

Para
No.

ar.

1.1

1.2

CHAPTER-III

NOT

Recommendation

Reply

(2)

(3)

The origin of the National Library, Calcutta can be Matter of record. No com-

traced back to March, 1836 when the Calcutta Public ments.

Library was opened to the Public at 30, Esplanade,
Row, Calcutta. Subsequently the Calcutta Public
Library was merged with the Imperial Library and
offered to the Public in January, 1903. The National
Library came into being in 1948 with the passing of
the Imperial Library (Change of Name) Act, 1948.

The National Library, Calcutta is the biggest library
in the country with the collection of about 2.4 million
volumes, besides journals, periodicals and palm-leafs
etc. It was declared as an Institution of national
importance as enshrined in Article 62 of the 7th
Schedule of the Union List of the Constitution of
India. At present the National Library is housed in
three separate buildings with a separate preservation
laboratory, spread over 30 acres of land in the
compound namely “Belvedere”, a French name

- meaning beautiful garden within the heart of Calcutta

City.

The National Library serves as the permanent
repository of all reading and information material
produced in India as well as all printed material
written by Indians and concerning India written by
foreigners, wherever published and in whichever
language. The National Library is the recipient of all
material published in India, under the Delivery of
Books Act, 1954 as amended in 1956. The Library
has an Exchange Programme with 225 institutions in
95 countries under the Cultural Exchange Programme
of the Government of India.

15


16

1 Ze

2. Aims and Objectives
The following are the basic aims and objectives of the
National Library:—

(i) Acquisition and conservation of all significant
printed material produced in the country to
the exclusion of ephemera;

(ii) Collection of printed material concerning the
country wherever it is published and also
acquisition of a photographic record of such
material that is not available within the
country;

(iii) Acquisition and conservation of manuscripts
of national importance;

(iv) Planned acquisition of foreign material
required by the country

(v) Rendering of bibliographical and documenta-
tion services of retrospective material, both
general and specialised

(vi) Acting as a referral centre purveying full and
accurate knowledge of all sources and bibliog-
raphical information and participation in inter-
national bibliographical activities;

(vii) Provision of photocopying and reprographic
services; and

(viii) Acting as the centre for international book
exchange and international loan.

के Activities of the National Library
(a) Collection building and collection organisation
programme:

This is a major programme which is looked after by
the Acquisition and Processing Divisions of the Lib-
rary. In order to manage different activities, there are
separate divisions like, Book Selection Division for
purchase and receipt of English books, English
Serials Division, Indian language Division etc.

4. Bhasa Bhawan

41 The present accommodation available in the National
Library is not able to cope with the various activities
of the library including preservation of age old books,
other valuable articles and documentation of various
new collections etc. The shortage of space has
adversely affected the functioning of the library. In
order to overcome this problem, a Master Plan has
been sanctioned which includes construction of a
massive building called “Bhasa Bhawan” with most
modern facilities matching international standards. It
would be equipped with latest software and com-
munication technology including Closed Circuit Tele-
vision (CCTV).

Matter of record. No com-
ments.

Matter of record. No com-
ments.

For record. No comments.



CHAPTER-IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Please see Chapter-I (Para 3)

3(b), 3(c), 3(d), 3.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 5.4, 5.5,

17


CHAPTER-V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED

Nil



MINUTES


*xI
ELEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 24th September, 1998 in Room
No. 139, First Floor. Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS
&. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
» Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
. Shri O. Rajagopal
. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
Shri Dina Nath Mishra
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
LOK SABHA
W. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
11. Shri Sartaj Singh
12. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
13. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
14. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
15. Shri Indrajeet_ Mishra
16. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
17. Shri Mallanagouda Basangouda Patil
18. Shri Shankar Pannu
19. Shri Abdul Hamid
20. Shri Samik Lahiri
21. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
23. Shri. H.P. Singh
24. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
25. Shrimati Krishna Bose
26. Shri S. Arumugham
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Culture

Dr. R.V.V. Ayyar, Secretary
. Ms. Hunera Ahmed, Director
. Shri K.R. Lakhanpal, Director

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

Se 39 फ क ७०

wWNe

*Minutes of the Ist to Xth meetings of the Committee relate to other’ matters.

21


2. The Committee heard the above mentioned witnesses on the Action "| \ken Note on
the Indian Museum and the National Library, Calcutta.

A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Report
on Indian Museum and National Library, Calcutta and adopted the same with some
modifications.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m. to meet again on 9th October, 1998 to
hear the Secretary, Department of Education on Technical Education.


*XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 19th November, 1998 in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri $.B. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
3..Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
4. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
5. Shri’ Dina Nath Mishra
6. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
7. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
8. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
10. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
11. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
12. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
13. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
14. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
15. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
16. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
17. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
18. Shri V.M. Sudheeran
19. Shri Abdul Hamid
20. Shri Samik Lahiri
21. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
22. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja
23. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
24. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
25. Shrimati Krishna Bose
26. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
27. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES
*

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
£
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate requisite number of Members
for presentation of some Reports of the Committee to the Rajya Sabha and lay the same in
the Lok Sabha during the ensuing session of Parliament.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 p.m.

* *

* Minutes of the XII to XIII meetings of the Committee relate to other matters.
.*** Relate to other matters.

23