PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF INDIAN MUSEUM, CALCUTTA

(Action taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations
contained in the 49th Report of the Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development)

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH DEC., 1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8TH DEC., 1998)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

SEPTEMBER, 1998/ASVINA, 1920 (SAKA)


¥

ComPosiTION OF THE COMMITTEE .

CuapTer I
Cuarter II

Cuarter वा

CxapTer IV

CHAPTER V

MINUTES.

CONTENTS

by the Government
RecommendationsObservations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
teplies .
Recommendation: (५
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Gomme eh «3s. 1i-2-Snnee. soncoasnnnnsteceicaeaceaentchoresthereemty
RecommendationsObservations in respect of which
Government has not given any reply |

10

i
13—17


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1998-99)

1. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

3. Shri Balkavi Bairagi

4. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

5. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

6. Shri O. Rajagopal

7. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

8. Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

9. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

10. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

11, Shri M. P. A. Samad Samadani
12. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
13. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
14. Dr. C. ‘Narayana Reddy

15. Dr. Akhtar Hasan Rizvi

LOK SABHA

16. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
17. Shri Sartaj Singh,

18. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan

19. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
20. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
21. Dr. Sanjay Singh

22. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

23. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

24. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
25. Shri Ashok Singh

26. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
27. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
28. Shri Ashok Gehlot

29. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
30. Shri Ajit Jogi

31. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

32. Shri Laxman Singh

33. Shri Shankar Pannu

34, Shri Abdul Hamid

35. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
36. Shri Samik Lahiri

37. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
38. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja

39. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
40. Shri H.P. Singh

4663/RS/F—2-4, 6)


41.
42.
43.
44.

(ii)

Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
Shrimati Krishna Bose

Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

4663 / RS / F—2-B


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1997-98)

- Shri S.B. Chavan——Chairman

RAJYA SABHA =!

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo

Dr. B.B. Dutta

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar

. Shri Raj Nath Singh
. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Dr.. Mohan Babu

. Shri‘M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
. Shyi Sartaj Singh

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Shri Jai Prakash (Hardoi)

. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

. Maharani Divya Singh

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

. Dr. ९. Silvera

. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
. Shri Dutta Meghe

. Shri 1.0, Sanadi

. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

. Shri Pawan Diwan

. Shri Krishna

. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri 5.16. Kaarvendhan

. Shri Mukhtar Anis

. Dr. M. Jagannath

(iii)


41.
42.
43.
44.

Dr. Bali Ram

Shri Ranen Barman

Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

(iv)


PREFACE

1, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Seventy-Fifth Report of the Committee on
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its 49th Report on
the functioning of Indian Museum, Calcutta.

2. The Forty-Ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 3rd
December, 1996 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd December, 1996. Replies of the
Government on the recommendations contained in the report, received from the
Department of Culture were considered by the Committee and this report was adopted at its
sitting held on 24th September, 1998. The Committee at its meeting held on 19th November,
1998 decided to present the Report in the House during the Winter Session of Parliament.

New Devni; S.B. CHAVAN
24th September, 1998 Chairman,
SS ae Department-Related Parliamentary
Asvina, 2, 1920 (SAKA) Standing Committee on Human

Resource Development.

4663/RS/ F3-4, (v)


50. Sain ae

si Swede ol 333
ro Sutin? ot
te -%प% Hee ate

gadis 10 hetagad

VARGAS 1%
suse ‘
एक 5० pect
MORE ८० कक:

"मजाशए1४१5६



CHAPTER-I
REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its FORTY-NINTH Report on the functioning of Indian
Museum, Calcutta which was presented to Rajya Sabha on 3.12.96 and laid on the Table of

Lok Sabha on 3.12.96.

2. Action Taken Nates have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:

1.6, 3c. 5,

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 4.1 & 4.2.

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: 2,1 & 2.2. °

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government

have not been. received—nil.

3. The Committee will now deal with. some of jts recommendations on the Action Taken

Notes of the Government.

Para Recommendations Reply
No.
1 2 3

Exhibitions of Art Objects in Rotation

2.1 During the visit of the Museum the
Committee was informed that only 10
per cent of the vast treasures of the
antiquities and art objects have been
exhibited presently due .to lack of
space. As per norms 40 per cent
antiquities and art objects are required
10 be exhibited. The Committee, was
however, given to understand that
there are large number of art objects
which are unique and rare lying in the
godowns of the Museum located in the
basement for want of space. The
Committee feels that unless these rare
pieces-of collection are properly taken
care of and preserved, they may wear
out with the passage of time.

.Moreover,

Preventive conservation of Museum objects
is undertaken in different sections as well as
in the galleries either by spraying
insecticides or placing _—fumigrants,
dehydrating agents at regular intervals.
the ‘conserved objects are
cevered with preventive barrier like
Malinex paper/acid free tissue paper and in
some cases polythene sheet too.

More than half of the total Museum
holdings are coins, gems and jewelleries
(52134 out of 101637) and these are kept in
the vaults one of which has been air-
conditioned. The heavy archaeological
stone sculptures are lodged in the Cellar
godown of the Museum building which are



3

22,

The Committee, therefore, recom-
mends that these objects should be
properly preserved and exhibited in
the Museum by rotation so that the
life span of these valuable antiquities
and art objects should be enhanced.
The Committee also recommends that
the space occupied by the Zoological
Survey of India, Botanical Survey of
India, and Anthropological Survey of
India in the building of the Museum
should be got vacated, so that the
space meant for Museum could be
attilised for the exhibition of the anti-
quities and art objects acquired over a
jong span of time. Even after the
vacation of the space by these Depart-
thents if the space is not found to be
adequate to display at least 40 per cent
of the collections, then the Govern-
ment should consider construction of a
new building so as to accommodate
the display of at least 40 per cent of
the collections available with the
Museum. For the vacating Depart-
ments, i.e. Zoological Survey of India,

regularly attended to and are in a good
condition. The godown space in the
Museum House measuring about 3000 Sq.
ft. has been thoroughly renovated and re-
furbished and as many as 2172 items of
stone, metal etc. scientifically stored in
heavy duty storage racks being fabricated
and supplied by a reputed firm. For storing
of pre-historic materials and minor art anti-
quities, sliding: door cabinets are being in-
troduced replacing age-old unwieldly island
cases. Besides, anthropological specimens
and art objects have been brought under
visual storage system.

The Museum is fully aware of the import-
ance of conserving the huge number of a
variety of antiquities and art objects which
the Museum possesses and rightly stresses
the need for preservation of the rare and
invaluable artifacts in the best possible
manner.

Most of the galleries have been arranged to
projects thematic presentation or
chronological development. The Musical In-
struments Gallery, for instance, exhibits
various categories of string, blow or drum
instruments. Under each category the reg-
ional variations as well as their gradual
development have been highlighted. The
Archaeological galleries on the other hand
have been arranged in a sequential manner.
frem the pre-historic period to the later
ages viz. Pre-photo History, Maurya, Sun-
ga, Gandhara, Kushana, Gupta, Pala Sena
etc. in a chronological order. More number
of objects have recently been inducted in
the galleries.

Since the visit of the Parliamentary Stand-
ing Committee efforts have been made to
arrange every month a temporary exhibi-
tion of various themes, bringing out anti-
quities, art objects, anthropological speci-
mens from the Reserve Collection. About
18 temporary exhibitions have been held
after the visit of the Parliamentary
Committee which included on an average



1. 2

3

Botanical Survey of India and An-
thropological Survey of India some
building will have to be constructed to
accommodate them according to their
requirement.

4663 /RS/F—4-A,

more than 150 specimens for each event. In
addition a number of architectural frag-
ments stored in the reserve of the Ar-
chaeology Section were brought to set up
an open air architectural garden. The
Corridor galleries on the first floor have
been decorated with sculptures hitherto
kept in the reserve. Besides, under the
exhibit of the month feature of the
Museum, many outstanding rare and newly
collected objects have also been displayed
exhibited.

The Indian Museum as ‘Nodal Agency’ is
also participating in the exhibition “Yogi
and the Buddha: Glimpses of the Indus
Civilisation and life of the Buddha”, being
held in South Korea in September, 1998.
The matter was taken up with the Geologi-
cal, Botanical and Zoological Surveys of
India, for vacating 1780 sq. metres, 3261
sq..metres and 1582 sq. metres respectively.
The Anthropological Survey of India was
also requested for vacating 410 sq. metres
held by them. It has, however, been
pointed out by the Geological Survey of
India that the Hon’ble Committee had not
recommended that the space occupied’ by
them should be got vacated. To that extent
the entry about Geological Survey of India
in the original ATN needs to ‘be deleted.

As regards the Zoological Survey of India
and the Botanical Survey of India, the
matter had been taken up with the Ad-
ministrative Ministry controlling these Sur-
veys viz. the Ministry of Environment and
Forest. That Ministry has informed that
these Surveys need some buildings to ac-
commodate very precious collections. These
collections are priceless and their loss, if
any, cannot be recompensed. The Botanical
Survey of India and Zoological Survey of
India may have to construct new buildings
to house their collections. This will necessi-
tate acquiring or purchase of land and
construction of suitable modern buildings
with specialised _ galleries, __lightings
and display arrangement, etc. The Adminis-


1 2 5)

trative Ministry has further informed that
they are examining the financial and ad-
ministrative implications of the shifting
proposal accordingly.

The space available with the Museum
being inadquate to display the prescribed
level of Museum collections the matter
regarding construction of the new annexe
building is under active consideration. The
Department is’ examining the proposal for
taking up the matter before the Expendi-
ture Finance Committee taking cognizance
of the revised estimates submitted by the
CPWD for these construction works. The
estimated area which would be raised by
the proposed annexe building when com-
pleted is tentatively at approximately 8165
sq. metres.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee notes that adequate measures have been taken by the Museum
authorities for scientific conservation of rare and invaluable artifacts in the possession of
Indian Museum.

The Committee is happy to note that attempts have been made by the Indian Museum
for arranging exhibition of a number of art objects by rotation. Thus, quite a few antiquities,
art objects, anthropological specimens lying in godowns till now could be displayed in
temporary exhibitions. The Committee also finds that permanent arrangements have been
made for display of a number of architectural fragments/sculptures hitherto kept in the
reserve.

’ The Committee is however, constrained to note that these measures alone are not
sufficient enough. The Committee finds that acute shortage of space in the Indian Museum
has acted as a barrier on the display of even 40 per cent of its entire collections. The
Committee has been informed that purchase of land and construction of suitable modern
buildings with specialised galleries, lightings and display arrangements are required for
housing the precious collection of Zoological and Botanical Surveys. Both the Surveys are
thus not in a position to vacate the space occupied by them in the Indian Museum Building.

During the course of evidence of Secretary, Department of Culture on the 24th
September, 1998, thé Committee had expressed its serious concern about the acute space
constraint prevailing in the Indian Museum, Calcutta and enquired about steps taken in this
regard. The Department in a subsequent note has explained the current position about the
construction of the New Annexe Building of Indian Museum as under:—

“The Department has been frequently, emphasising that Museums, including
Indian Museum, should improve their Galleries and displays by incorporating the
latest techniques and practices followed elsewhere in the world. The Indian
Museum has been facing the space shortage for display of its artefacts and
curiosities for quite some time. Initially, it was proposed that an Annexe Building


a

in the existing premises be constructed to overcome the space shortage. However,
this could not be pursued as it required filling up of existing pond and the
municipal permission may be difficult to obtain. The Department has accordingly
proposed a two proned strategy to improve the utilisation of existing space. One,
the Department would prevail upon other organisations occupying the space in the
indian Museum building to vacate the area and second, utilise the existing gallery
space more effectively. We expect the second strategy to yield results in the short
term. The Department has already written to the Indian Museum to prepare plans
atid blueprints by seeking the expertise, if need be from professionals in a time
bound manner.”

The Committee is perturbed to note that the proposed Project for construction of an,
Annexe Building has been shelved as it required filling up of existing pond and the
municipal permission may be difficult to obtain. The Committee would like to draw the
attention of the Department to its Action Taken Reply which states as under:

The Department is examining the proposal for taking up the matter before the
Expenditure Finance Committee taking cognizance of the revised estimate submit-
ted by the CPWD for these construction works. The estimated area which would
be raised by the proposed Annexe building when completed is tentatively at
approximately 8165 sq. metres.”

‘The Committee finds it very surprising and against all the norms that without going into
the feasibility of proposed site for Annexe building, the whole exercise as mentioned above
‘has been undertaken by the Department. The Committee takes note of the two pronged
slyategy proposed by the Department for improvement in utilisation of existing space. The
Committee is of the opinion that if concerted effosts are made, other organisations
occupying the space in the Indian Museum Building can be prevailed upon to vacate the
premises to some extent. There should be no difficulty in getting some space vacated by the
Aathropological Survey of India, which is under the administrative control of the
Department of Culture.


CHAPTER: |

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE

GOVERNMENT:
Para Recommendations Reply
No. ;
1 2 3
1.6 The Museum Directorate has eight co- Necessary. action for implementing the

ordinating service units such as
Education, Preservation, Publication,
Presentation, Photography, Medical
Modelling and Library. These
Programmes should be intensified and
expanded and adequate budget
provisions must be made for this
purpose.

instructions of the,Committee has already
been, 180९0 and.a, detailed plan in this
regard i also been incorporated in the
proposal for providing adequate funds in
the IXth Five Year Plan. However, actual
implement: ation of these programmes would
be contingent,.to funds finally approved by
the Planning’ Commission

गा, Strengthening of Security Arrangement

EE During Committee’s visit to the
Museum, the Committee was informed
that the security system of the
Museum was periodically examined
and updated with the introduction of
some new measures and revamping of
the old systems. On the
recommendation of a high power
security committee and _ intelligence
department the entry and exit points
of the galleries were minimised.

4. Vehicular traffic was restricted within
the campus and loopholes at all
vulnerable points were plugged.
Further, the Museum has of late,
introduced walkie-talkive system and
effective illumination of peripheral
areas of the museum complex as well
as replacement of fire extinguishing
apparatus in order to strengthen the
security and safety of exhibits.
However, the committee feels that the
security arrangements at the Museum
should be reviewed from time to time
and adequate number of fire

The security arrangements in the Indian
Museum are subject to periodical review.
Already adequate number of fire
extinguishers have been installed and
installation of wireless close circuit T.V.
electric surveillance system infra-red
cordoning etc. is also in progress with the
available funds already sanctioned. In the
meantime revamping of fire extinguishing
system is being taken care of in
consultation with experts.



extinguishers may also be provided to
take care of any untowards incidents.
The Government should consider
installation of close circuit T.Vs. at the
appropriate places inside the premises
of the Museum keeping in view the
importance of the valuable arf objects
displayed in the Museum.

V. Installation of Audio Visual Aides

5. The Committee notes that in many The digital voice recording system has been
Museums the world over, particularly installed in different galleries of the
in the advance countries, there is a Museum with the limited funds available.
system of providing Audio and Visual
programmes in each section of the
Museum explaining about the art
objects kept in that Section. The
Committee desires that the Govt. may
examine the feasibility of introducing
the similar system in the Indian
Museum also.



CHAPTER III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PERSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES

Para Recommendations Reply
No.
i 2 é
introduction
1d vThe Museum the oldest institution of its kind in Asia was VNo comments

founded in 1814. At present, it comprises six sections such
as Art, Archaeology, Anthropology, Geology, Zoology
and Economic Botany with a number of galleries under
each Section. Many rare and unique specimens both
Indian and Trans-Indian relating to Humanities and
Natural Sciences are preserved and displayed in the
galleries of these sections.

py Whe Parliamentary Standing Committee was shown round No comments
the Museum many rare objects of art collection made over
the years. The rich repository of cultural and natural
heritage make the museum responsible to the society to
exhibit its wealth from time to time through various
exhibitions for the enjoyment and dissemination of know-
ledge to the people.

1.3 The Parliamentary Committee was also taken to visit the No comments
galleries of the Museum of its select treasures of anti-
quities and art objects acquired over a long span of years
between 1836 and 1993. The relic containers of the Lord
Buddha carved in stone and crystal unearthed at the
ancient site belonging to the Mughal emperors; gold coins
issued by Kanishka, Samudragupta, Kumaragupta-I,
Akbar and Jahangir — the great emperors of India; the
delicate Mughal miniature; illustrated leaves from
Shahnama, the miniatures from Kangra Valley, and the
paintings by the great masters of the Bengal School, viz.
Abanindranath Tagore, Nandalal Bose and Jamini Roy
were on the show there.

1.4 Of the decorative art objects a Chinese cup carved in No comments
rhino horn, ‘Burmese silver bowl, Japanese musical instru-
ment, Napalese lamp-stands and a copper gift umbrella
donated by a ‘Burmese monk to the temple of Bodhgaya’
are added attractions of this Museum. Besides, a valuable
socio-economic document, inscribed on a small piece of



she)

4.1

4.2

stone from Mahasthangarh, Bangladesh, supposed to be
the royal communique of a benevolent ruler a hubble-
bubble in silver filigree-a Orissan craftsmanship, a Tibetan
eleven headed and thousand armed icon of Avalokitesvara
as well as the decorative ceramic posts from Bombay,
Jaipur, Multan and Madras adorn this Museum.

Assembled together from the vast treasures of its Art,
Archaeology and Anthropology Section the Exhibits-a
visual feast to the eyes of the art-lovers and connoisseurs,
offer a rare glimpse of the Museum’s exquisite collection
acquired through sustained efforts over the past one
hundred and eighty years.

IV. International Exhibition

The Committee was also informed that the Museum
participates in International Exhibition from time to time.
Recently the Museum participated in two international
exhibitions in the U.S.A. and Japan. The Exhibits were
taken from the collection of the Museum. Two Jain
images carved in stone and bronze were sent to Los
Angels in connection with the exhibition.

The Committee is happy to note that such International
exhibitions serve as vehicles for disseminating Indian
Culture abroad. However, the Committee is of the opin-
ion that the various invaluable exhibits of bronze and
silver idols which are taken abroad for exhibitions in their
original form invite security and safety risks. This practice
should be discouraged keeping in view the security and
safety hazards involved in their transit and transportation.
The Committee feels that only the replicas of such idols
should be allowed to be carried out abroad for exhibition.

No comments

No comments

Noted for compliance


CHAPTER-IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Please see Chapter I (Para-3)

2.1, 2.2

10


CHAPTER-V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED

NIL

11


MINUTES



|
oid
ae

5!
be
|
x
S न
fool
के

t



*XI
ELEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 24th September, 1998 in Room No.
139, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.B. Chavan___ Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi
Shri O. Rajagopal
Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
Shri Dina Nath Mishra
Prof. Shrimatt Bharati Ray
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
LOK SABHA
1U. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
41. Shri Sartaj Singh
12. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
13. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
14. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
‘15. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
16. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
17. Shri Mallanagouda Basangouda Patil
18. Shri Shankar Pannu
19. Shri Abdul Hamid

SeNanawn

20. Shri Samik Lahiri
21. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
23. Shri H.P. Singh
24. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
25. Smt. Krishna Bose
26. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES

Representatives of

1. Dr. R.V.V. Ayyar, Secretary
2. Ms. Hunera Ahmed, Director
3. Shri K.R. Lakhanpal, Director

SECRETARIAT

Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M:K. Khan, Under Secretary
Smt. Manjeet, Committee Officer

Ministry of Culture

“Minutes of Ist to Xth meetings of the committee relates to other matters.

15


16

2. The Committee heard the above mentioned witnesses on the Action Taken Note on
the Indian Museum and the National Library, Calcutta.

A Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Report
on Indian Museum and National Labrary, Calcutta and adopted the same with some
modifications.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m. to meet again on 9th October, 1998 to
hear the Secretary, Department of Education on Technical Education.


*XxIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee Met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 19th November, 1998 in Committee

Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri $.B. Chavan___ Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri Dina Nath Mishra

Prof. Shrimati Bharati Ray

Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy

Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

9. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam

10. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

11. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

12. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

13. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

14. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

15. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

16. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
17. Shri Shmanur Shiv Shankarappa

18. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

19. Shri Abdul Hamid

20. Shri Samik Lahiri

21. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

22. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja

23. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

24. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy

25. Smt. Krishna Bose
26.
27

9० :२ 90 ६० $» ७० ६७

. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES
* * *
SECRETARIAT

Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary

* * *

3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate requisite number of Members
for presentation of some Reports of the Committee to the Rajya Sabha and lay the same in
the Lok Sabha during the ensuing session of Parliament.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 p.m.

“Minutes of XIIIth meeting of the Committee relates to other matters.
***Relates to other matters.

17


77K
; SSTTESH चाउउजाअपतूप
sm mt MOOT ,135159%0श 7४2६ rebemeT fo. A OO.) fe tok Pinos +!
है 1. AML walt आए 9०४7-97 - मान gar te