 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA       229 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
ON 
THE ARCHITECTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 24 
TH  JANUARY, 2011) 
(FORWARDED TO HON'BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 24 TH  JANUARY, 2011) 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 TH  FEBRUARY, 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 25 TH  FEBRUARY, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932  (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
ON 
THE ARCHITECTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 24 
TH  JANUARY, 2011) 
(FORWARDED TO HON'BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 24 TH  JANUARY, 2011) 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 TH  FEBRUARY, 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 25 TH  FEBRUARY, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI  
FEBRUARY, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932  (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. P REFACE ......................................................................................................................... (iii) 
3. R EPORT ........................................................................................................................... 1-17 
4. O BSERVATIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE   ––    AT A GLANCE ................................. 18-23 
5. M INUTES ......................................................................................................................... 25-34 
6. A NNEXURE ....................................................................................................................... 35-42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON HRD  
(2010-11)  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes   ––   Chairman  
 2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai  
 3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
 4. Shri Prakash Javadekar  
 5. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 6. Shri Pramod Kureel 
 7. Shri N.K. Singh  
 8. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
 9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare  
 10. Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK SABHA  
 11. Shri Kirti Azad 
 12. Shri P. K. Biju 
 13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela  
 14. Shri Angadi Suresh Chanabasappa  
 15. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 16. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 17. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 18. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
 19. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhao  
 20. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
 21. Shri P. Kumar 
 22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 23. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 24. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola 
 25. Shri Tapas Paul 
 26. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
 27. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 28. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 29. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’  
 30. Shri P. Viswanathan 
 31. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri N.S. Walia, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 

 
PREFACE  
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliam entary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and Twenty-ninth Report of the Committee on  the Architects 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010*. 
2. The Architects (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was introd uced in the Rajya Sabha on 31 August, 2010. In pursuance of Rule 270 
relating to Department-related Parliamentary Standi ng Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred**  the Bill to the 
Committee on 13 September, 2010 for examination and report within two months. 
3. The Committee considered the Bill in four sittin gs held on 9,18 November and 21 December, 2010 and 17 January, 2011. 
4. The Committee heard the Secretary, Department of  Higher Education on 9 November, representatives of  the Council of 
Architecture on 18 November and the All India Counc il Technical Education on 21 December, 2010 on vari ous provisions of 
the Bill. 
5. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied  on the following : 
(i) Background Note on the Bill and Note on clauses  of the Bill received from the Department of Higher Education; 
(ii) Presentation made and clarifications given by the Secretary, Department of Higher Education; 
(iii) Feedback received from the Department on the questionnaire and the issues raised by the Members during the 
course of the oral evidence of the Secretary;  
(iv) Oral evidence of the Council of Architecture a nd replies of the Council to the questionnaire; and. 
(v) Oral evidence of the All India Council for Tech nical Education and feedback received from them on the 
questionnaire. 
6. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the  Bill and adopted the same in its meeting held on  
17 January, 2011. 
7. For facility of reference, observations and reco mmendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end 
of the Report. 
OSCAR FERNANDES 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman, 
January  17, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary  
Pausa  4, 1932 ( Saka ) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
REPORT 
 
I. Introduction  
1.1  The Architects (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was intr oduced in the Rajya Sabha on 31 August, 2010 and re ferred to the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee  on Human Resource Development on 13 September, 201 0 for 
examination and report thereon. 
1.2 The Architects (Amendment) Bill, 2010 seeks to amend the Architects Act, 1972 which was enacted to  provide for the 
registration of Architects and for matters connecte d therewith. Exercise of certain administrative and  financial functions by the 
Council of Architecture beyond those stipulated in the Architects Act, 1972 and non-adherence to the a dvice of the Central 
Government in certain cases have been cited as the main factors responsible for the proposed legislati on in its Statement of 
Objects and Reasons. The Bill, accordingly, propose s to omit the words “or until his successor has bee n duly elected- or 
nominated, whichever is later” in sub-section (1) of Section 6 so that the office bearers do not continue to remain in the Council 
beyond the stipulated period of three years on the ground that the successor has not been duly elected  or nominated. It further 
proposes to insert new sections 10A and 10B conferring power upon the Central Government to – 
(a)  issue, in the public interest for reasons to b e recorded in writing, directions to the Council as  it thinks fit which 
inter-alia , include directing the Council of Architecture to make or amend regulations within the periods specif ied 
by the Central Government; and 
(b)  supersede the Council of Architecture for peri od not exceeding two years in case the Council is u nable to perform, 
or has persistently made default in the performance  of the duty imposed on it by or under the Architec ts Act, 1972 
or has exceeded or abused its powers, or has willfu lly or without sufficient cause failed to comply wi th any 
direction issued by the Central Government. 
II. Background of the Bill  
2.1 Background Note submitted by the Department of Higher Education dwelt upon the developments necessitating the three 
but very significant Modifications in the Act. The Committee was given to understand that after the ye ar 2000, certain 
disturbing trends started being noticed in the func tioning of the Council of Architecture. Encroachmen ts upon the functions of 
AICTE and upon the areas of other bodies/authoritie s, exceeding of its powers and belittling the roles  of Central Government 
and State Governments, complaint by the Indian Inst itute of Architects (IIA) and increasing number of court cases have been 
quoted in support thereof. 
2.2  The Committee had the opportunity to interact with the Secretary, Department of Higher Education on the Bill on 9 
November, 2010. In this meeting, besides the repres entatives of the Department, experts, both former a nd presently associated 
with the Council and also representatives of the In dian Institute of Architecture and Jamia Milia Isla mia University were 
present. Interaction with these witnesses enabled t he Committee to make an assessment about the ground  realities behind the 
proposed legislation. 
2.3  The Committee was informed that over the years , very visible gaps in the principal Act leading to  degradation of its 
objectives were being noticed. Accordingly, provisi on regarding issuing of directions by the Central G overnment was being 
proposed. In the event of such directions not being complied with, enabling provision for supersession of the Council was being 
incorporated. Fixed term of three years for the members of the Council, not only to check their continuance indefinitely but also 
to ensure transparency was the other amendment prop osed to be brought in. The Committee was given to u nderstand that the 
proposed amendments were in line with similar provi sions enshrined in Acts governing similar statutory  bodies like UGC and 
AICTE. 
2.4 Certain very pertinent queries touching upon th e circumstances/development leading to the proposed  legislation were 
raised by the Members. Consultation with the Counci l; Architects Act, 1972, vis-a-vis AICTE Act, 1987; MoU between COA 
and AICTE; efficacy of the proposed amendments; the ir adverse impact on the autonomy of a professional  body; level of 

coordination between engineering and architectural framework in advanced economies like Germany, England, China; role and 
responsibility of the Council and Central Governmen t and Report of the Expert Group were the main issu es raised by the 
Members. Attention of the Secretary was also drawn to the futility of this exercise in the light of th e proposed Umbrella 
Legislation relating to higher education whereunder all the professional councils were proposed to be subsumed. 
2.5 In response, while emphasizing the hands-off ap proach of the Department in all the proposed legisl ations on higher 
education, the Secretary drew the attention of the Committee to the fact that inherent drawbacks being noticed in the functioning 
of the Council necessitated somewhat different hand ling of the present Legislation. Broadly outlining the history of the 
Architects Act since 1972, attention of the Committ ee was drawn to the signing of MoU between COA and AICTE on the 
initiative of the then Chairman of AICTE and workin g of both the Councils in a co-ordinated manner. Th e Committee was 
given to understand that the MoU had to be called o ff in 2003 primarily due to COA going beyond its ma ndate. It was also 
indicated that majority of the professionals were n ot happy with the functioning of the Council. Also there was a need for 
bringing in comprehensive changes in the principal Act which had been there for more than thirty years . The Committee was 
given to understand that substantive amendments req uired to be made in the Act would be taken care of under the proposed 
legislation relating to the over-arching National C ommission for Higher Education. The proposed amendm ents before the 
Committee were meant for streamlining the day-to-da y functioning of the Council, with no increase of e lement of 
bureaucratization. 
2.6 On a specific query about the problems being fa ced in the holding of elections, representative of the Indian Institute of 
Architects apprised the Committee that under sectio n 3 (a) of the Act, elections were conducted in 200 7 for electing five 
architects as members of the Council by IIA and the  names of the elected members were sent to the Coun cil for notifying the 
same in the Official Gazette. However, the procedure of election by IIA was challenged in the Chennai High Court which ruled 
in favour of IIA, upheld by the Division Bench subsequently. Ruling of the High Court could not be effected due to COA filing 
SLP before the Supreme Court. Not only this, nomina tions made to the Council by eleven State Governmen ts remained 
unaccepted by the Council. It was impressed upon th e Committee that names of all members elected/nomin ated to the Council 
needed to be notified without any further delay. 
2.7 The Committee was also given to understand that  due to the Council’s undue interference in archite ctural education 
beyond its mandate, autonomy of educational institu tions/Universities was being encroached upon. Manda tory condition of 
qualifying National Aptitude Test of Architecture for admission, training of teachers by National Inst itute of Advanced Studies 
in Architecture (NIASA), non-auditing of accounts relating to funds generated by COA were some of the uncalled for activities 
undertaken by it. It was finally impressed upon the Committee that the proposed amendments would lead to streamlining of the 
functioning of COA by having a higher authority taking corrective measures, whenever required. 
2.8 With a view to have an objective assessment of the circumstances/alleged deviations by COA compelling the Government 
to bring in the amendments to the Act, the Committee held extensive deliberations with the representatives of the Council on 18 
November, 2010. Drawing the attention of the Commit tee to the composition of the Council, its Presiden t dwelt upon the 
functioning of the Council since its inception. The Committee was informed that like other professional bodies, the Council had 
been regulating both the architecture profession an d education from 1972. Situation changed with the c oming into force of 
AICTE Act in 1987. With the incorporation of the wo rd ‘architecture’ under the definition of the term ‘technical education’ in 
the AICTE Act, both the Councils were entrusted the  same task of regulating architectural education. I n order to remove any 
over-lapping in the functioning of the Councils, an  MoU was signed by both of them. Broadly speaking, it provided that COA 
would continue regulating architectural education, i.e. , visiting institutions periodically, specifying en try-level qualifications, 
duration, qualification/standards of teachers/staff, infrastructure and equipment, carrying out inspec tions conducted by experts 
appointed by Council, forwarding the inspection rep orts as cleared by the Executive Committee to AICTE . AICTE was 
assigned the responsibility of issuing the final le tter of approval or continuation to institutions. T ill 2002, both the Councils 
continued to function smoothly as per the MoU. Howe ver, thereafter, MoU was unilaterally withdrawn by AICTE. Attorney 
General was then approached by COA for his advice i n the matter. His opinion was that even though AICT E Act was a later 
Act, Architects Act was a special Act dealing with architectural education as well as regulation of pr ofession. Committee’s 
attention was also drawn to complications arising d ue to both the Councils handling the same subject a nd a number of cases 

filed by different entities in various High Courts and the Supreme Court. It was also emphasized that there was no change in the 
functioning of COA even after the termination of MoU, with AICTE. 
2.9   Another pertinent issue raised by the Preside nt of COA pertained to conduct of elections. It was  pointed out that the 
responsibility of conducting elections did not lie with COA but with the Returning Officer appointed b y the Central 
Government. The Committee was given to understand that six months prior to the term of members elected in 2004 getting over 
in 2007, Central Government was duly apprised by CO A about the anticipated vacancies. However, no Retu rning Officer was 
appointed by it. It was only on a representation ma de to the then Minister of HRD by some Architect Gr oups, COA was 
approached by the Ministry in this regard. It was also pointed out that no case relating to elections had been filed by COA so far 
and they were only respondents in a few cases. Clar ification regarding continuance of the present Pres ident of COA was also 
given to the Committee. 
2.10 It was emphasized that the proposed amendments  to the Act were going to directly impact the independent functioning of 
the Council, with increasing bureaucratic intervention. Another anomaly pointed out was that against the total valid membership 
of 9,000 in IIA, there were 50,000 registered archi tects in the country, who were not having any say i n matters relating to 
architectural education. Not only this, no consultations had been undertaken with both COA and 170 Schools of Architecture in 
the country before bringing in the present legislat ion. Attention of the COA was then drawn by the Com mittee to nominations 
made by eleven States/UTs not being accepted by it.  Response of the Council was that nominations were not received from 
majority of States and if received were having some technical shortcomings. 
2.11 On being asked about the basis for increasing the retirement age of Registrar of the Council, the Committee was informed 
that the decision for increasing the age-limit of a ll the employees was taken by the whole Council. Ju stification given was that 
as per the rules approved by the Central Government , service conditions of employees were to be fixed by the Executive 
Committee of COA. Specific reference to section 12 (c) laying down previous sanction of the Central Go vernment as a 
mandatory condition for fixing the conditions of service of COA employees elicited no response from the President of the COA. 
2.12  With regard to the proposed amendments in the  Act regarding the term of the members, it was sugg ested that some grace 
period for the changeover needed to be provided. Th e two other proposed amendments regarding power of the Central 
Government to give directions and the supersession of the Council were not found acceptable. It was po inted out that the 
Council being a perpetual body can continue to func tion with State/Central Government nominees even in  the absence of 
elected members. Finally, it was emphasized that there was an urgent need for making comprehensive changes in the Architects 
Act which had been in operation for about forty years. 
2.13  While interacting with the Department as well as COA, the Committee was given to understand that the functioning of All 
India Council for Technical Education, particularly  in its dealings with COA has proved to be the majo r factor responsible for 
bringing in the proposed legislation. The Committee , therefore, felt that it would be appropriate to h ave an idea about their 
assessment about the background leading to the pres ent development. The Committee had the opportunity to interact with the 
Chairman of AICTE on 21 December, 2010. 
2.14 The Chairman of AICTE drew the attention of th e Committee towards three significant aspects justi fying the proposed 
amendments to the Architects Act, 1972. Firstly, AI CTE Act came into force in 1987, while Architects A ct was enacted in 
1972. Thus, in view of Parliament consciously vesti ng architecture as a discipline of technical educat ion, COA could not 
possibly control architectural education. Secondly,  both UGC and AICTE Acts empowered the Central Gove rnment to give 
directions to the respective Councils so as to ensure prevention of disparities and also to harmonise and coordinate the standards 
of education in the respective fields at the nation al level. Lastly, power to supersede COA was requir ed to be given to the 
Central Government as given in the case of AICTE fo r functioning as mandated. Committee’s attention wa s also drawn to 
element of over-lapping in the functioning of both the Councils. It was also mentioned that bringing o f architectural education 
under technical education was called for due to inherent similarities. It was impressed upon the Committee that AICTE was the 
proper authority for grant of approvals to institut ions as well as for coordinated development and pla nning of architectural 
education. Role of COA should be restricted to registration of architects only. 
2.15 On a specific query about the background for t ermination of MoU between the two Councils, the Com mittee was 
informed that constant difference of opinion in the ir functioning was responsible for this development . However, Committee’s 

pointed query about there being court cases and dir ectives given about the mandate given to either Cou ncil for governing 
architectural education, Chairman of AICTE pleaded ignorance. The Committee was also given to understa nd that AICTE was 
not a party to any court case on this issue. It was  also categorically mentioned that AICTE had twice approached COA for 
having the details of court cases but no response h ad been received so far. Committee’s repeated attem pts drawing attention to 
various court cases elicited no affirmation from the Chairman of AICTE. 
2.16  Lastly, Committee made an attempt to understa nd the justification for AICTE being considered the  appropriate body to 
handle architectural education. In response, Commit tee’s attention was drawn to initiatives like e-gov ernance for bringing 
complete transparency in the approval process taken  by AICTE thereby making it better equipped for mon itoring setting up of 
technical institutions and regulating their functioning. 
2.17 It was pointed out by the Committee that archi tectural education cannot be equated with technical  education, it being a 
very different complex stream and accordingly being  managed by architects. Response of the Chairman of  AICTE was that an 
exclusive Board  i.e. , Architecture Board consistent of eminent Architects was assigned architectural education. 
2.18 Since some of the specific issues raised by th e Committee could not be addressed properly by the Chairman, AICTE, a 
detailed questionnaire was forwarded to AICTE for written response. Response of AICTE was forwarded to the Committee on 7 
January, 2011. A perusal of this feedback indicates that some of the pertinent issues raised by the Co mmittee have elicited very 
vague and evasive replies. 
2.19 On the issue of over-lapping in the functionin g of COA and AICTE, contention of AICTE is that wit h the enactment of 
AICTE Act in 1987, technical education involving architecture and town planning must rest with AICTE only, thus eliminating 
overlapping, if any. However, attention of the Comm ittee has also been drawn to the fact that the matt er is presently pending 
before the Supreme Court on an appeal filed by AICTE in the light of Bombay and Delhi High Court Judgements. 
2.20 Specific query about honouring of terms and co nditions of MoU by both the Councils from 1991 onwa rds has elicited a 
very vague response from AICTE. It has been mention ed that it seems that despite the signing of MoU, C OA continued to 
exercise its powers in respect of architectural edu cation to the exclusion of AICTE. Similarly, it has  been pointed out that the 
information about AICTE ever approaching the Central Government on violation of MoU by COA or not, is not available with 
AICTE. 
2.21 AICTE has also not been forthcoming on the rea sons necessitating the termination of MoU by it in November, 2003. It 
has been simply mentioned that COA was not honouring the terms of MoU and was exercising its power regarding architectural 
education to the exclusion of AICTE. 
2.22 Regarding the court cases, mention has been ma de only about Writ Petition No.5942/2004 decided by  the Bombay High 
Court on which SLP has been filed by AICTE before t he Supreme Court, WP No.2669/2005 decided by Delhi High court and 
two Writ Petitions, i.e.  W.P.No.11774/2003 and W.P.No.14245/2004 decided by  Andhra Pradesh High Court, particulars of 
which are being verified by AICTE. 
2.23  Finally, it has been reiterated that proposed  amendment empowering the Central Government to iss ue directions to COA 
on the pattern of UGC and AICTE Act is required not only to prevent disparity but also to harmonise and co-ordinate standards 
of architectural education. Similarly, proposed pow er to supersede COA has also been justified for mee ting extreme situations 
in the context of its improper functioning. 
2.24 In order to comprehend the very apparent compl ications, problem areas and uncalled for controvers ies noticed in the 
implementation of the Architects Act, 1972 and visi ble lack of co-ordination between COA and the Depar tment and also over-
lapping in the functioning of COA and AICTE, the Co mmittee sent a detailed Questionnaire to both the D epartment and COA. 
Feedback received by the Committee has proved to be of immense help in formulating its views on the amendments proposed in 
the Act. 
2.25 The Committee takes note of a large number of objec tions/reservations raised by the Department with re gard to 
the functioning of COA which have necessitated the proposed legislation. Reservations have also been expressed by COA 
on the approach of the Department. Analysis of all the documents brought before it as well as its inte raction with the 

Department and stakeholders makes it very clear to the Committee that situation is far from satisfactory. Indicators like 
the regulatory body feeling victimized and the nodal Department conveying a sense of helplessness cannot be considered 
an ideal position.  
2.26 The Committee finds that COA has categorically  denied some of the deviations from its mandated tasks as pointed out by 
the Department. With regard to qualifications other  than those notified by the Central Government bein g used by COA for 
registration of architects, response of COA is that  no person has been registered by it on the basis o f qualification other than 
notified by the Central Government in the Schedule of Qualifications or notified under section 15 of t he Act. Similarly, COA 
has not accepted the contention of the Department t hat recognition has been given by it for other degr ees apart from the degree 
in architecture. It has been clarified that only re commendations are made by COA for according recogni tion to an architectural 
qualification granted by Indian/Foreign authority to the Central Government under sections 14 and 15 of the Act. 
2.27  To the contention of the Department about COA  approving courses like B.Arch. (Interior Design), B.Arch. (Landscape 
Architecture), B.Arch.(Town Planning), B.Arch.(Building Engineering Management) for which other undergraduate courses are 
available, COA has pointed out that permission to r un specialized B.Arch (Interior Design), B.Arch.(Construction Technology) 
etc. have been given jointly by COA and AICTE since  2001 when working under MoU. It has also been clar ified that such 
specialized B.Arch. courses are only horizontal spe cializations in architecture and not separate degre e courses unrelated to 
architecture and have been introduced in keeping with the current requirements and international trends. 
2.28 Another shortcoming pointed out by the Departm ent is regarding approval for Masters Programme and  Doctoral 
Programmes being given by COA, inspite of it not be ing professionally equipped therefor. Response of C OA is that 
Masters/Doctoral Programmes in Architecture are als o recognised qualifications for the purposes of the  Architects Act being 
prescribed as essential qualifications for faculty members of Architectural Institutions. It has been clarified further that only 
minimum standards have been prescribed in respect o f such courses and neither such courses are being r un by COA nor 
admissions to such courses being made by it. 
2.29 Reported encroachment upon the autonomy of edu cational institutions/universities has been categorically denied by COA. 
It has been pointed out that prescription of minimu m standards of architectural education required for  granting recognized 
qualifications by institutions under the Act cannot be considered interference with autonomy of any institution/university. 
2.30 Accounts of the Council not being audited by C AG was another lapse brought to the notice of the Committee. However, it 
has been clarified that annual accounts of the Coun cil are being audited by an auditor duly appointed by the Council as per 
section 13 of the Act. Annual Report and Accounts o f the Council are being published in the Gazette of  India and also sent to 
tbe Central Government. 
2.31 The Committee feels that with regard to the shortco mings on the part of COA as reported in the precedi ng 
paragraphs, clarifications given by COA seem to be more or less satisfactory and convincing. However, in respect of 
some other deviations pointed out by the Department, action taken by COA does not seem to be justified.  
2.32 Committee’s attention has been drawn to freezi ng of admission of institutions by COA on receipt o f adverse inspection 
report and even before the same being put before it s Executive Committee. Response of COA is that whil e under sections 21 
and 45 of the Act, it has the power to prescribe th e minimum standards of architectural education, it is undertaking inspections 
of institutions to oversee the maintenance of their  standards and accordingly, sanctioning their intake. COA has taken the stand 
that some institutions have been placed under the ‘ No Admission’ category or their intake frozen in th e past so as to ensure 
maintenance of standards of architecture education. 
2.33  Introduction of National Aptitude Test for Ar chitecture (NATA) and making it compulsory for all institutions including 
IITs, NITs and Central Universities is another inst ance of COA exceeding its mandate cited by the Depa rtment. COA has 
pointed out that Regulation 4(3) of the Council of Architecture (Minimum Standards of Architectural Ed ucation) Regulations, 
1983 provides that the institutions may subject the  candidates to aptitude tests. Further, introductio n of NATA at national level 
as a single window admission test was done in the l ight of Supreme Court directive in P.A. Inamdar and  others Vs. State of 
Maharashtra & others case. It has also been, informed by COA that the issue whether NATA conducted by it can be mandatory 
or not and whether different admission authorities can conduct their own aptitude tests is sub-judice. 

2.34 Reservations have been expressed by the Depart ment on the establishment of the National Institute  of Advanced Studies 
in Architecture (NIASA) by the Council. Clarificati on given by COA is that the Institute has no separa te entity and is 
functioning as an academic unit of the Council. Tra ining Programmes for teachers/professional Architects are being conducted 
by the Institute on voluntary basis. 
2.35  Another serious deviation reported by the Dep artment relates to issuing of guidelines by the Cou ncil and then enforcing 
these as Regulations without following the procedure prescribed under section 45 of the Act. Clarification given by COA is that 
under section 21 of the Act, it can prescribe minim um standards of architectural education. Accordingly, guidelines on various 
aspects of architectural education have been issued to give effect to the provisions of the Act and Re gulations made thereunder. 
Various guidelines/standards prescribed by COA from time to time were consolidated in 2008 as addition al and supplementary 
standards to the Council of Architecture (Minimum S tandards of Architectural Education) Regulations, 1 983. These 
consolidated guidelines were never enforced as regulations. 
2.36  Objections have also been raised on raising t he retirement age of Registrar and other employees from 60 to 65 years by 
COA without the previous sanction of the Central Go vernment. It has been clarified by COA that retirem ent age of all 
employees was revised by the Executive Committee, i t being competent to prescribe service conditions u nder the Council of 
Architecture Regulations, 1982 which were duly approved by the Central Government before the same was implemented. Also, 
the revision of the retirement age was approved by the Executive Committee and also approved and subsequently ratified by the 
full Council where the nominee of the Central Government was also present. 
2.37 The Committee is not convinced by the arguments put  forth by COA for taking pro-active action beyond i ts 
mandate against the architecture institutions. Equa lly disturbing is issuance of guidelines when only regulations can be 
notified by it, that too with the approval of the C entral Government. The kind of justification given by COA for 
increasing the age of retirement of its employees i s far from satisfactory as it is in direct contrave ntion of specific 
provision, i.e. section 12 (c) of the Act. Similarly, establishment of NIASA can also be not considered an advisable action.  
2.38 The Committee is constrained to observe that genera lly when amendments in legislation are proposed to be made, 
specially after a long gap, the main objective is to carry out modifications in line with the changing requirements as also 
international trends. Problem areas faced in the implementation of such Acts are also targetted to be removed in such an 
exercise. However, in the present case, analysis of  the elaborate feedback received both from the Depa rtment and COA 
has compelled the Committee to conclude that sheer lack of coordination between COA and the Department  and also 
between COA and AICTE aggravated by the somewhat biased and self-centered handling of the ground realities by both 
the authorities has led to a very disturbing situation. The Committee can only express its sense of dismay.  
2.39 Committee’s concern has been further increased  after the analysis of another set of development t aking place over the 
years. The Committee notes with grave concern that from the year 2000 onwards, conflict was there betw een the Council and 
AICTE, yet no effective steps could be taken for ad dressing the problem areas. The Committee observes that the AICTE was 
established in 1987 under the AICTE Act, 1987 where as the Council of Architecture was already function ing since 1972 under 
the Architects Act, 1972. The AICTE being a regulat ory body for technical education in the country and  due to architectural 
education being included under technical education, AICTE came to play some role in architectural education as well. 
2.40 The Committee has been informed that on this i ssue being raised by COA with the then Minister of HRD, it was mutually 
agreed upon that both the statutory bodies should enter into an MoU to jointly regulate the architectural education. Accordingly, 
COA and AICTE entered into an MoU in 1991 under whi ch AICTE was to receive all proposals for granting recognition from 
institutions and forward them to COA which in turn would examine the proposals and send its expert committees to institutions 
to verify the maintenance of standards as prescribe d by COA. Based on the recommendations of COA, AICT E was to issue 
appropriate approval. Both the Councils were honour ing all their commitments and there was no violatio n of MoU on either 
part. The last such MoU signed was on 5 July, 2001 for three years. However, on a review of this MoU b y the Executive 
Committee of AICTE at its meeting held on 24 November, 2003, the same was terminated with immediate effect in accordance 
with Clause 8 of MoU. This fact was duly conveyed b y AICTE to COA on 27 November, 2003. Thereafter, le gal opinion of 
Additional Solicitor General of India and Attorney General of India with regard to status of COA vis-a-vis  AICTE was sought 
by COA. 

2.41 The Committee takes note of the following opin ion given by the Attorney General of India on  
24 December, 2003, endorsing the similar opinion given by the Additional Solicitor General of India:- 
– Between the provisions of Central Acts, i.e. Arch itects Act, 1972 and AICTE Act, 1987, Architects Ac t shall 
govern the standards of architectural education and matters connected therewith. 
– AICTE cannot take any decision which is contrary to or which marks a departure from the provisions o f the 
Architects Act with regard to grant of recognition to an institution, in carrying out inspections, ext ension of 
approval, increase/reduction in intake etc. 
– Architects Act, 1972 which is a Special Act will hold the field and will be fully operative notwiths tanding the later 
provisions of AICTE Act, 1987 which are inconsistent with or make a departure from the 1972 Act. 
2.42 The Committee has been informed by the Departm ent that the opinion of the Attorney General was ta ken by COA on 
their own without making any reference to the Centr al Government. AICTE as well as Central Government were not heard in 
the matter. The Committee also finds that efforts w ere made by the Department in August, 2005 for havi ng another MoU 
broadly based on the earlier MoU of 2001 between CO A and AICTE. However, COA did not find it feasible to enter into any 
MoU with AICTE. Since then, both the Councils have been functioning independently. 
2.43 Committee’s attention has also been drawn to a  very large number of court cases going on in diffe rent courts of the 
country. On a specific query in this regard, COA ha s informed that presently around 72 court cases are  pending in which either 
the Council is petitioner or one of the respondents. These cases relate to different matters pertaining to functioning and mandate 
of COA. In quite a few cases, Central Government is  also a party. The Committee also observes that the  cases between AICTE 
and COA have been clubbed by the Supreme Court with  the direction that proceedings in different High C ourts in the 
concerned cases, if not already disposed of, shall remain stayed till the disposal of Civil Appeal No. 364 of 2005 and SLP ( c) 
No.3964 of 2008. While Civil Appeal No.364 of 2005 is on the issue whether AICTE or COA will regulate the architectural 
education-challenging Bombay High Court Order, SLP (C) No.3964 of 2008 relates to conduct of NATA by COA. 
2.44 The Committee also notes that as per the detai ls furnished by the Department, the legal expenses of the Council incurred 
due to litigation from the period 1 April, 2007 to 18 September, 2008 are to the tune of  
Rs. 1,14,03,923/-. The Committee feels that this am ount might have increased manifold from 2008 onward s. The very fact that 
a statutory body created by an Act of Parliament is involved in such a large number of court cases involving huge expenditure is 
a sad commentary on the state of affairs and is a cause of serious concern for the Committee. 
2.45  The Committee notes that an Expert Group unde r the Chairmanship of Charles Correa was set up by the Government in 
November, 2008 which submitted its report in January, 2009. The Expert Group made the following recommendations:  
- Government should invoke the powers given for the  first two years under section 43 of the Act to iss ue order or 
advisory to the Council for taking remedial action to ensure that the rules and procedures laid down i n the Act are 
being followed by the Council. It was, accordingly,  suggested that proviso under section 43(1) of the Act be 
deleted. 
-  A Provision for setting up a Commission of Inqui ry to look into allegations against the office-bearers and violations 
of the provisions of the Act and Rules/ Regulations  framed thereunder be incorporated in the Architect s Act, 1972 
on the lines of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and the Dentists Act, 1942. 
-  An autonomous Board of Architectural Education c onsisting of representatives from the Schools of Ar chitecture, 
architectural profession, AICTE and the Council of Architecture be set up. All decisions taken by Boar d should be 
final, not reversible by the AICTE or Council of Architecture. 
2.46 On being asked about the reasons for non-incor poration of recommendations of the Expert Group in the proposed Bill, the 
Committee was informed by the Department that power  to remove difficulties as enshrined in section 43 gives more powers to 
the Central Government than the proposed power to issue directions. Unlike section 43, the present amendment does not include 
issue of directions which can vary the provisions of the Act by clarifying it. With regard to the recommendation for setting up a 
Board of Architectural Education, the Committee was  given to understand that a decision has been taken  to have an over-

arching authority, i.e., National Commission for Hi gher Education and Research which will ultimately r edefine the role of all 
Councils including COA. No response has been receiv ed with regard to having a provision for setting up  of a Commission of 
Inquiry in the Act. 
2.47  On a specific query about the assessment of C OA on the aforesaid recommendations of the Expert G roup, COA, while 
showing its reservations about the recommendations relating to power to remove difficulties and settin g up a Board, has found 
merit in the provision for setting up a Commission of Inquiry. 
2.48 The Committee is not very happy about the response of the Department to the specific recommendations made by 
the Expert Group. The Committee would like to point  out that a plain reading of section 43 clearly ind icates that the 
Central Government has been given the power, with a  view to removing any difficulty, to make provision s, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of the Act. The qu estion of varying the provisions of the Act therefo re, does not arise. 
Secondly, the Committee fails to understand the rat ionale for bringing in such amendments on one hand and not 
accepting the recommendation of the Expert Group for setting up a Board of Architectural Education, on the plea that a 
decision to have an over-arching body of higher edu cation has already been taken. The Committee expres ses its serious 
concern on this somewhat contradictory approach of the Department.  
2.49 The Committee was informed by the Department that t he provision of issue of directions is available in  section 20 
of the UGC Act, section 20 of AICTE Act and in the new amendment introducing section 3 (c) of the Indi an Medical 
Council Act, 1956 and section 30 (A) of the Chartered Accountant Act, 1949. Provision for supersession of the Council is 
available in section 21 of AICTE Act and section 3 (A) of IMC Act, 1956. On a comparative analysis of Acts governing 
professional bodies, the Committee feels that propo sed amendments in the Architects Act, 1972 cannot b e considered 
similar. While UGC Act, 1956 (section 20), AICTE Act, 1987 (section 20), NCTE Act, 1993 (section 9) do have the power 
to give directions but they are restricted to only questions of policy. The Committee would like to dr aw the attention of 
the Department to section 20 of UGC Act, 1956:  
“................the Commission shall be guided by such directions on questions of policy relating to national purposes as may 
be given by the Central Government.” 
2.50 The Committee observes that power to supersede a st atutory body has been provided to the Central Gover nment 
in respect of AICTE and NCTE and recently in the ca se of MCI. The Committee would like to point out th at period of 
supersession in respect of these bodies is only one year, unlike two years proposed in respect of COA. 
III.  Committee’s observations/recommendations on variou s clauses of the Bill are given in the succeeding paragraphs:- 
Clause 2: Section 6 : Terms of Office and casual vacancies  
3.1  Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to drop the words “ or until his successor has been duly elected or nom inated, whichever is 
later” from sub-section (1) of the section. It further seeks to insert sub-section (6) in the section as indicated below: 
“the name and address of each member of the Council  elected or nominated under the provisions of sub-s ection (3) of 
section 3 and sub-section (4) of this section shall be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette.” 
 Section 6 of the Act which relates to terms of off ice and casual vacancies in the Council of Architec ture provides that an 
elected or nominated member of the Council shall ho ld office for a term of three years or until his su ccessor has been duly 
elected or nominated, whichever is later. 
3.2 The Committee notes that the Central Government  constitutes the Council of Architecture under sub-section (1) of section 
3 of the Act. Subsection (3) of the section enumera tes the composition of the Council which inter-alia  includes five architects 
possessing recognized qualifications elected by the  Indian Institute of Architects from among its memb ers (a) two persons 
nominated by the All India Council for Technical Ed ucation; (b) five persons elected from among themse lves by heads of 
architectural institutions in India imparting full time instruction for recognized qualifications; (c)  the Chief Architects in the 
Ministries of Central Government to which the Gover nment business relating to defence and railways has  been allotted and the 
head of the Architectural Organization in the Centr al Public Works Department, ex-officio; (d) one per son nominated by the 
Central Government; (e) an architect from each State nominated by the Government of that State; (f) two persons nominated by 

the Institution of Engineers (India) from among its members and one person nominated by the Institutions of Surveyors of India 
from among its members. Section 4 provides that the  President and the Vice-President of the Council ar e to be elected by the 
members of the Council from among themselves. The e lected President and the Vice President hold office  for a term of three 
years or till they cease to be member of the Council, whichever is earlier. 
3.3. From the information made available by COA as well as the Department about the composition of the  present Council 
along with the tenure of each member, the Committee could gather that the present Council has five members elected by Indian 
Institute of Architects, their membership effective  from 14 June, 2004 and four members elected by Hea ds of Architectural 
Institutions in India, their membership effective f rom  
9 August, 2004 with one vacancy in this category. U nder the nominated category, there are members repr esenting Ministry of 
Defence and CPWD and a nominee of the Central Gover nment. Ministry of Railways has remained unrepresen ted since 30 
June, 1987. 21 State Governments were also being re presented in the Council along with two nominees fr om the Institution of 
Engineers (India) and one nominee from the Institut ion of Surveyors of India. The Committee also noted  that two nominees 
from the AICTE had not been accepted by the Council as per the legal advice. The Committee was also given to understand that 
there were no valid nominations in the Council from eleven State Governments. 
3.4 On a specific query about eleven States/UTs rem aining unrepresented, the Committee was informed by  COA that 
nominations from States of Gujarat, Uttarakhand, NC T of Delhi, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh,  
J& K, UT of Daman & Diu, UT of Dadra and Nagar Have li have not been received. With regard to nominatio ns received from 
Tamil Nadu and Bihar, clarifications have been sought from the State Governments by COA. 
3.5 The Committee also notes that the matter of nominat ion of two persons by AICTE is at present sub-judic e before 
Delhi High Court for the last three years. Basis of  this court case is nomination made by AICTE under section 3(3) (b) 
not being accepted by COA. The Committee is surpris ed to note that a very technical objection relating  to status of 
AICTE as a statutory body not being updated in this  section has been raised by COA. What is more surpr ising, is that 
this fact drew the attention of COA after a gap of about twenty years. AICTE became a statutory body u nder AICTE 
Act, 1987. Prior to that, it was a body established  by a Government Resolution dated 30 November, 1945 . The 
Committee is constrained to observe that the rightf ul course of action was initiated neither by the AI CTE nor by the 
Department. This technical amendment continues to b e missing from proposed legislation also. The Commi ttee, 
therefore, recommends that necessary amendments may be carried out in this regard.  
3.6 The Committee notes that as per the provisions of section 6(1) of the Act, an elected or nominated  member is to hold 
office for a term of three years and according to t he provisions of section 4(2), an elected President  or Vice-President of the 
Council shall also hold office for a term of three years. The Department has proposed the amendment in  section 6 because the 
elected members and office bearers of the Council have been continuing to occupy the position since 2004, taking advantage of 
the words “until his successor has been duly elected or nominated which ever is later” in section 6. The Department’s argument 
in favour of the proposed amendment is that the ame ndment will ensure that the elected or nominated me mbers and the office 
bearers of the Council do not continue beyond three years and that before the expiry of three years, the nomination and election 
procedure is completed and the new Council is in office. 
3.7 Committee’s attempt to understand the factors r esponsible for elections for members under Section 3 (a) and 3(c) and for 
President and Vice-President under section 4 (1) being unduly delayed revealed very disturbing facts. 
3.8  President of the Council during his deposition  before the Committee denied vehemently that electe d members have been 
continuing as members beyond their three year term deliberately. It was contended that the existing members elected as per the 
provisions of section 3(3) (a) and 3(3) (c) of the Act, were made to continue upon completion of three  year term in accordance 
with section 6(1) of the Act as their successors have not been elected. As for the elections of the members and also for the posts 
of President and Vice-President of the Council, it was stated that the procedure for election was to b e initiated by the Returning 
Officer appointed by the Central Government. It was the duty of the Returning Officer to conduct elections and the Council was 
not directly connected with the conduct of election s. Committee’s attention was also drawn to repeated  requests made by COA 
from 2006 onwards to the Department for conducting elections expeditiously. Last such request was made by the Council on 22 
March, 2010. Reference was also made about issue of  conduct of election of members under section 3 (3)  (a) by the Indian 

Institute of Architects being sub-judice . Objections were also raised on the amendments car ried out in the Council of 
Architecture Rules, 1973 by the Department in June, 2009 taking over all the powers to conduct elections. 
3.9 Details furnished by the Department have reveal ed an entirely different position. Committee was in formed that elections 
under section 3 (3) (a) were duly held by the Secre tary, Indian Institute of Architects as per Rules 3  and 4 of the Council of 
Architecture Rules, 1973. The procedure followed wa s identical to the one followed since the very ince ption of the COA. 
However, one person from Tamil Nadu Chapter of IIA filed a Writ Petition before the Single Judge Bench  in the Madras High 
Court where it was said that the Returning Officer for this election should also be appointed by the C entral Government. Single 
Bench Judge ruled in their favour. COA also had tak en up the same position. However, Division Bench of  the Madras High 
Court set aside the judgement. Thereafter, an SLP w as filed by the Tamil Nadu Chapter of IIA in the Su preme Court. Another 
SLP was filed by COA challenging the judgement of t he Division Bench of Madras High Court. Central Government has taken 
the position that the elections have been conducted in accordance with Rules 3 and 4 of the Council of Architecture Rules, 1973 
and is filing affidavit in this regard. Committee w as further informed that so far as election under s ection 3 (3) (c) of the Act is 
concerned, the two Returning Officers appointed by the Department were told by the COA that the action  of the Returning 
Officers to find out the names of the voters was not acceptable and such elections would not be acceptable. Committee also took 
note of the fact that a writ petition has been filed against the amendments carried out in the Council of Architecture Rules, 1973 
on 1 July, 2009 by a member of COA in Delhi High Co urt and Parliamentary Committee on Subordinate legi slation has also 
been approached in this regard. 
3.10 The Committee notes that a total number of ten elec ted members are required to be there in the Council  in terms 
of section 3(3) (a) and 3 (3) (c) of the Act and th at rest of the members of the Council are nominated  members. It is 
factually correct to say that elections for elected  members were last held in 2004. Further, both the Department and the 
Council have been taking conflicting stands for the conduct of elections holding the other party responsible.  
3.11 The Committee would like to point out that there are very specific provisions regarding conduct of elections under 
Rules 3 and 6 of the Council of Architecture Rules 1973. Rule 3.1 dealing with ‘Representatives of the Indian Institute of 
Architects’ says that 
“the President shall, not later than sixty days before the date of occurrence of vacancy by the expiry of the term of 
office of a member, send intimation thereof to Central Government who shall, not later than forty five days before 
the date of occurrence of the vacancy, forward a notice by registered post to the Secretary of the Indian Institute of 
Architects requesting him to hold an election by a date not later than the date specified in the notice.” 
 Similar provisions are there in case of vacancies under section 4 (1) and (2) of the Act. From the ab ove, it is clear 
that both the President of the Council and the Cent ral Government are jointly responsible for conducti ng the elections. 
Further, so far as elections under section 3(3)(c) are concerned, Rule 6 stipulates that :- 
“The Returning Officer shall call upon the head of architectural institutions in India to elect such n umber of 
members as are referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 3 and in the case of first election, five members 
shall be elected.” 
 It is also very clear from the Rules that the Retu rning Officer is to be appointed by the Central Government.  
3.12  The Committee further takes note of the fact that t hese rules were amended by the Central Government i n 2009. 
The amended rules provided for conduct of elections by the Central Government where the President fails to inform the 
Central Government regarding occurrence of a vacancy or if the Central Government is of the opinion th at the vacancy 
has occurred. The amended rules further provided for filling up of the vacancies under section 3(3) (c ) of the Act by the 
Central Government by notifying the vacancies in th e Official Gazette and requesting the Returning Off icer to hold 
elections by the date specified in the notice. The Committee fails to understand as to why inspite of having all the powers 
the Central Government failed to conduct the elections for the ten elected members, and notify the same.  
3.13 It is ironical that inspite of the clear provisions  under the Act and Rules, the well-established proc edure for 
conduct of elections could not be adhered to, due to a number of undesirable and somewhat pre meditated developments 
by all the concerned authorities. Every small issue  related to elections being dragged to Courts on te chnical grounds 

depicts a very disturbing state of affairs. Feeling  of helplessness on the part of the Department insp ite of having all the 
authority for conducting elections under the Act an d the Rules framed by it indicates a very unsatisfa ctory level of 
handling the uncalled for developments by the Department. The Committee finds it very surprising that nobody took the 
initiative to take the benefit of section 5 (2) whe reunder in case of any dispute regarding election a rising, the matter has 
to be referred by the Council to a Tribunal appoint ed by the Central Government and decision of the Tr ibunal shall be 
final. Had this provision been enforced, need for approaching the Courts would not have arisen.  
3.14 The Committee also strongly feels that instead of t here being an element of co-ordination and positive  approach, 
under current of one-manupship has been very domina nt in the recent years in their dealing with each o ther, both by 
COA and the Department. The Committee finds it diff icult to agree to the Department’s contention that the present 
Council did not allow the Returning Officer to conduct elections as it feels that under the Rules, the Returning Officer is 
endowed with sufficient powers so much so that it i s the Returning Officer who decides as to whether a  person is or is 
not entitled to vote or to stand for election.  
3.15 The Committee would like to place on record that it agrees with the basic intent of the legislation that there should 
be timely elections/nominations in the Council. The  Committee would rather appreciate if a free and fa ir process of 
election or nomination of the Members of the Counci l is ensured. However, it apprehends whether the pr oposed 
amendment in section 6(1) only would achieve this. Further, the Committee feels that it may lead to a vaccum in the 
Council of Architecture if elections/nominations are not held due to some reasons as with the proposed  amendment, the 
present incumbent would be required to go out immed iately after the expiry of three years whereas the Council of 
Architecture is supposed to be a permanent body. Se condly this would be inconsistent with the proposed  sub-section (6) 
which provides that unless the names and addresses of the elected/nominated members of the Council are notified by the 
Central Government, a person would not become a mem ber of the Council. The Committee feels that the pr oposed 
changes in sub-section (1) and new proposed sub-sec tion (6) are needed to be made consistent and there  should be clear 
provision obligatory on the Central Government to notify the names within the stipulated time frame of 15 days.  
3.16 The Committee would also like to point out tha t there is one more provision in the Architects Act  which may still allow 
the President and VicePresident of the Council to c ontinue in the office beyond the period of three ye ars which has been 
overlooked by the Department. Section 4(2) (b) relating to ‘President and Vice-President of Council’ of the Act provides that: 
4 (2) (b)  “the President or the Vice President sha ll, notwithstanding the expiry of this term of thre e years, continue to hold 
office until his successor enters upon office.” 
 The Committee is of the view that along with secti on 6, the above provision also needs to be suitably  amended to make 
the provisions consistent and also to ensure the continuity in the Office of the President and Vice-President of COA. 
IV. Clause 3 : Section 10 A : Directions by Central  Government  
4.1 Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert new sectio n 10 A in the Act providing for issuing of Directio ns by the Central 
Government to the Council of Architecture in public  interest. The section further stipulates that such  directions may include 
requiring the Council 
(a) to make or amend any regulation within such period as may be specified in the direction: 
Provided that if the Council fails or neglects to c omply with such direction within the period specified therein the Central 
Government may make the regulations or amend or revoke the regulations made by the Council as the case may be, either 
in the form specified in the order or with such modification thereof as the Central Government thinks fit and 
(b) to give priority to the work undertaken or to b e undertaken by the Council in such manner as the C entral Government 
may think fit to specify in this behalf. 
4.2 According to the Department, the main objective  of the proposed amendment is to issue directions t o the Council of 
Architecture to make amendment in regulations, if any required, within such period as may be specified in the directions. It was 
clarified by the Department that for other works, t he power to issue directions is limited to giving p riority for the work to be 
undertaken by the Council and that it is not meant for interfering in day to day functioning of the Co uncil. The Department 

stated that safeguards are there in the provision i tself as the Central Government is required to give  reasons for such directions 
and communicate the same to the Council. 
4.3 On being enquired from the Department if the di rections to make or amend regulations in the propos ed provisions are 
contrary to section 45 of the Act which empower the  Council to make regulation with the prior approval  of the Central 
Government, the Department replied that the provisi on is not contrary to section 45. It was clarified that the Central 
Government while amending or modifying the regulations made under section 45 would follow the prescrib ed procedure in the 
section. 
4.4 The Committee notes that the Council of Architectur e had serious reservations on the proposed amendmen ts. 
According to the Council, it has no objection in re ceiving any directions from the Central Government on any policy 
matter. The purpose of directions given by Central Government can prove beneficial only if they are po licy matters but 
of directions are intended to interfere in day to d ay functioning of a statutory body, then such direc tions could prove 
counter productive. The Council strongly contended that the proposed power to be given to the Central Government to 
direct a statutory body to make or amend its Regula tions or to make, amend or revoke any regulation fr amed by that 
statutory body can only be considered an extra-ordi nary, arbitrary, unguided and uncontrolled executiv e power 
adversely impacting the autonomy and day to day fun ctioning of the Council. Similarly, the power to is sue direction to 
give priority of work is also likely to go against the autonomy of a statutory body.  
4.5 The Committee finds substance in the contention of the Council. The Committee also takes note of the f act that in 
other statutory bodies like UGC, MCI, Dental Counci l, Indian Nursing Council, Central Government has b een vested 
with the power to issue direction only on policy is sues or to resolve disputes in election. The Commit tee would also like 
to point out that the proposed provision under sect ion 10A is in contravention of regulation making po wer given to the 
Council under section 45. Not only this, these Regu lations are to be made by the Council only in consu ltation with 
Central Government and to be laid in Parliament the reby ensuring their scrutiny by Parliament. The Com mittee is of 
the opinion that the proposed provision under secti on 10 A is uncalled for and liable to raise complic ation in future in 
view of section 45. The Committee, therefore, recom mends that this provision may be suitably revised s o as to give 
powers to the Central Government to give directions only on policy matters.  
V. Clause 3: Section 10 B: Power to supersede Counc il  
5.1 Proposed section 10B gives the power to the Cen tral Government to supersede the Council of Archite cture for a period 
not exceeding two years in case the Council is unable to perform or has persistently made default in the performance of the duty 
imposed on its by or under Architects Act, 1972 or has exceeded or abused its powers or has wilfully or without sufficient cause 
failed to comply with any direction issued by the Central Government. 
5.2 This amendment was discussed in depth by the Co mmittee. The Committee drew the attention of the Department towards 
a number of basic drawbacks inherent in the power t o supersede a statutory body. It was pointed out th at grounds cited for 
superseding the COA being very sweeping, general an d vague in nature, every possibility was there when  invoking of such 
powers may not be justified or liable to be misused . Secondly, superseding of a professional body havi ng State representatives 
and experts nominated/elected by professional institutions and Ministries, cannot be considered a democratic move, that too for 
a period extending to two years. Lastly, replacement of such a body by person or persons as directed by the Central Government 
was also not found acceptable. 
5.3 On these apprehensions being taken up with the Department, attention of the Committee was drawn to  similar provisions 
provided for other statutory bodies like AICTE and MCI. It was also emphasized that the Central Govern ment was well aware 
that such notification of supersession would not on ly be subject to judicial review but reasonable tim e would be given to COA 
to show cause as to why it should not be superseded. 
5.4 The Committee is not inclined to accept the justifi cation given by the Department. The fact that simil ar provision 
already exists in respect of other similar professional bodies also does not seem to be a well-placed argument. It is a well 
known fact that inspite of Councils like NCTE and A ICTE having a similar provision, such a provision h as not acted as 
a deterrent to misuse of powers by these bodies.  

5.5 The Committee is of the firm opinion that with the proposed powers to be given under section 10 A and 10 B, 
situation is not likely to improve so far as COA is concerned. Against the backdrop of such a large number of court cases 
going on at present, existing very apparent element  of confrontation is undoubtedly going to aggravate  further. The 
Committee strongly feels that instead of such an am endment, provision relating to power to refer to a Commission of 
Inquiry on the failure of COA to comply with the pr ovisions of the Act can be incorporated in the Act.  This 
recommendation has already been made by the Expert Group set up by the Government. The Committee fails  to 
understand the reservation of the Department in accepting such a recommendation made by the Expert Group.  
5.6 The Committee would like to point out that with the  proposed amendments relating to term of three year s for the 
members of the Council, with no chance of further e xtension, functioning of COA is definitely going to  be streamlined. 
The Committee also observes that the role of the Ce ntral Government is well crafted in the Architects Act, 1972. Right 
from constitution of COA (section 3.1), it is refle cted in appointment of Tribunal Section 5 (2), fixa tion of pay and 
allowances and other conditions of service of emplo yees [section 12 (1) (5)], investment of funds [sec tion 13 (2)], 
recognition of qualification granted by authorities  in India (section 14), recognition of architectura l qualifications 
granted by authorities in foreign countries (section 15), power to amend Schedule (section 16), withdrawal of recognition 
(section 20), renewal of fees (section 27), restoration of Register (section 32), Information to be fu rnished by the Council 
(section 40), power to remove difficulties (section 43), power to make rules (section 44) and approval to make regulations 
to be framed by the Council (Section 45). Contentio n of the Department that in the absence of power to  issue directions 
to the Council, the aforesaid manifold functions an d powers assigned to the Central Government could n ot be carried 
out as the advisories given to the Council were not  acceded to by the COA is simply not acceptable to the Committee. 
The Committee can only conclude that inspite of wel l-enshrined and well-established powers and functio ns of both the 
Council and the Department in the Act as well as th e regulations and rules made thereunder, somewhere in the 
atmosphere of confrontation, the spirit behind the Act of 1972, i.e. , propagation of professional education in the fiel d of 
architecture was simply side-lined by all concerned.  
5.7 The Committee has also taken note of the fact that there is an urgent need for bringing in comprehensi ve 
amendments in the Architects Act, 1972 in line with  the advancements made specially during the recent years. Both the 
Council and the Department are in favour of such a move. Not only this, the Committee is also aware of  the fact that a 
legislation for having an over-arching Commission f or Higher Education and Research whereunder all the  statutory 
bodies like Council of Architecture are likely to b e subsumed is going to be brought very soon by the Government. 
Lastly, there are a number of issues like role of C ouncil vis-a-vis  AICTE, conduct of elections to the Council, variou s 
actions taken by COA which are at present sub-judice . In such a scenario, the Committee is constrained to observe that 
the proposed legislation which can only be consider ed a short-term measure is not an advisable move on  the part of the 
Department.  
5.8 The Committee observes that architecture education and profession being very specialized, there is a n eed for 
giving protection to architects from legal and prof essional liabilities. Secondly, in view of increasi ng number of foreign 
architects practising in the country, a mechanism c an be evolved for having mutual exchange of Indian architects with 
foreign architects. Lastly, a healthy atmosphere of  coordination between architecture education and pr ofession is 
required to be built up. The Committee would apprec iate if all these aspects are taken care of wheneve r a new 
comprehensive legislation is brought forward.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  ––  AT A GLANCE  
II. Background of the Bill 
 The Committee takes note of a large number of obje ctions/reservations raised by the Department with r egard to 
the functioning of COA which have necessitated the proposed legislation. Reservations have also been expressed by COA 
on the approach of the Department. Analysis of all the documents brought before it as well as its inte raction with the 
Department and stakeholders makes it very clear to the Committee that situation is far from satisfactory. Indicators like 
the regulatory body feeling victimized and the nodal Department conveying a sense of helplessness cannot be considered 
an ideal position. (Para 2.25)  
 The Committee feels that with regard to the shortc omings on the part of COA as reported in the preced ing 
paragraphs, clarifications given by COA seem to be more or less satisfactory and convincing. However, in respect of 
some other deviations pointed out by the Department, action taken by COA does not seem to be justified.   (Para 2.31)  
 The Committee is not convinced by the arguments pu t forth by COA for taking pro-active action beyond its 
mandate against the architecture institutions. Equa lly disturbing is issuance of guidelines when only regulations can be 
notified by it, that too with the approval of the C entral Government. The kind of justification given by COA for 
increasing the age of retirement of its employees i s far from satisfactory as it is in direct contrave ntion of specific 
provision, i.e . section 12 (c) of the Act. Similarly, establishment of NIASA can also be not considered an advisable action. 
    (Para 2.37)  
 The Committee is constrained to observe that gener ally when amendments in legislation are proposed to  be made, 
specially after a long gap, the main objective is to carry out modifications in line with the changing requirements as also 
international trends. Problem areas faced in the implementation of such Acts are also targetted to be removed in such an 
exercise. However, in the present case, analysis of  the elaborate feedback received both from the Depa rtment and COA 
has compelled the Committee to conclude that sheer lack of coordination between COA and the Department  and also 
between COA and AICTE aggravated by the somewhat biased and self-centered handling of the ground realities by both 
the authorities has led to a very disturbing situation. The Committee can only express its sense of dismay. (Para 2.38)  
 The Committee is not very happy about the response  of the Department to the specific recommendations made by 
the Expert Group. The Committee would like to point  out that a plain reading of section 43 clearly ind icates that the 
Central Government has been given the power, with a  view to removing any difficulty, to make provision s, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of the Act. The qu estion of varying the provisions of the Act therefo re, does not arise. 
Secondly, the Committee fails to understand the rat ionale for bringing in such amendments on one hand and not 
accepting the recommendation of the Expert Group for setting up a Board of Architectural Education, on the plea that a 
decision to have an over-arching body of higher edu cation has already been taken. The Committee expres ses its serious 
concern on this somewhat contradictory approach of the Department.   (Para 2.48)  
 The Committee was informed by the Department that the provision of issue of directions is available i n section 20 
of the UGC Act, section 20 of AICTE Act and in the new amendment introducing section 3 (c) of the Indi an Medical 
Council Act, 1956 and section 30 (A) of the Chartered Accountant Act, 1949. Provision for supersession of the Council is 
available in section 21 of AICTE Act and section 3 (A) of IMC Act, 1956. On a comparative analysis of Acts governing 
professional bodies, the Committee feels that propo sed amendments in the Architects Act, 1972 cannot b e considered 
similar. While UGC Act, 1956 (section 20), AICTE Act, 1987 (section 20), NCTE Act, 1993 (section 9) do have the power 
to give directions but they are restricted to only questions of policy. The Committee would like to dr aw the attention of 
the Department to section 20 of UGC Act, 1956: 
“...the Commission shall be guided by such directio ns on questions of policy relating to national purp oses as may 
be given by the Central Government.”  (Para 2.49)  

 The Committee observes that power to supersede a s tatutory body has been provided to the Central Gove rnment 
in respect of AICTE and NCTE and recently in the ca se of MCI. The Committee would like to point out th at period of 
supersession in respect of these bodies is only one year, unlike two years proposed in respect of COA.(Para 2.50)  
III. Clause 2: Section 6 : Terms of Office and casu al vacancies 
 The Committee also notes that the matter of nomina tion of two persons by AICTE is at present sub-judice  before 
Delhi High Court for the last three years. Basis of  this court case is nomination made by AICTE under section 3(3) (b) 
not being accepted by COA. The Committee is surpris ed to note that a very technical objection relating  to status of 
AICTE as a statutory body not being updated in this  section has been raised by COA. What is more surpr ising, is that 
this fact drew the attention of COA after a gap of about twenty years. AICTE became a statutory body u nder AICTE 
Act, 1987. Prior to that, it was a body established  by a Government Resolution dated 30 November, 1945 . The 
Committee is constrained to observe that the rightf ul course of action was initiated neither by the AI CTE nor by the 
Department. This technical amendment continues to b e missing from proposed legislation also. The Commi ttee, 
therefore, recommends that necessary amendments may be carried out in this regard. (Para 3.5)  
 The Committee notes that a total number of ten ele cted members are required to be there in the Counci l in terms 
of section 3(3) (a) and 3 (3) (c) of the Act and th at rest of the members of the Council are nominated  members. It is 
factually correct to say that elections for elected  members were last held in 2004. Further, both the Department and the 
Council have been taking conflicting stands for the conduct of elections holding the other party responsible. (Para 
3.10)  
 The Committee would like to point out that there a re very specific provisions regarding conduct of elections under 
Rules 3 and 6 of the Council of Architecture Rules 1973. Rule 3.1 dealing with ‘Representatives of the Indian Institute of 
Architects’ says that: 
“the President shall, not later than sixty days before the date of occurrence of vacancy by the expiry of the term of 
office of a member, send intimation thereof to Central Government who shall, not later than forty five days before 
the date of occurrence of the vacancy, forward a notice by registered post to the Secretary of the Indian Institute of 
Architects requesting him to hold an election by a date not later than the date specified in the notice.” 
 Similar provisions are there in case of vacancies under section 4 (1) and (2) of the Act. From the ab ove, it is clear 
that both the President of the Council and the Cent ral Government are jointly responsible for conducti ng the elections. 
Further, so far as elections under section 3(3)(c) are concerned, Rule 6 stipulates that :– 
“The Returning Officer shall call upon the head of architectural institutions in India to elect such n umber of 
members as are referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 3 and in the case of first election, five members 
shall be elected.” 
 It is also very clear from the Rules that the Retu rning Officer is to be appointed by the Central Gov ernment. 
 (Para 3.11)  
 The Committee further takes note of the fact that these rules were amended by the Central Government in 2009. 
The amended rules provided for conduct of elections by the Central Government where the President fails to inform the 
Central Government regarding occurrence of a vacancy or if the Central Government is of the opinion th at the vacancy 
has occurred. The amended rules further provided for filling up of the vacancies under section 3(3) (c ) of the Act by the 
Central Government by notifying the vacancies in th e Official Gazette and requesting the Returning Off icer to hold 
elections by the date specified in the notice. The Committee fails to understand as to why inspite of having all the powers 
the Central Government failed to conduct the elections for the ten elected members, and notify the same.  (Para 
3.12)  
 It is ironical that inspite of the clear provision s under the Act and Rules, the well-established pro cedure for 
conduct of elections could not be adhered to, due t o a number of undesirable and somewhat premeditated developments 
by all the concerned authorities. Every small issue  related to elections being dragged to Courts on te chnical grounds 

depicts a very disturbing state of affairs. Feeling  of helplessness on the part of the Department insp ite of having all the 
authority for conducting elections under the Act an d the Rules framed by it indicates a very unsatisfa ctory level of 
handling the uncalled for developments by the Department. The Committee finds it very surprising that nobody took the 
initiative to take the benefit of section 5 (2) whe reunder in case of any dispute regarding election a rising, the matter has 
to be referred by the Council to a Tribunal appoint ed by the Central Government and decision of the Tr ibunal shall be 
final. Had this provision been enforced, need for approaching the Courts would not have arisen.  (Para 3.13)  
 The Committee also strongly feels that instead of there being an element of co-ordination and positiv e approach, 
under current of one-manupship has been very domina nt in the recent years in their dealing with each o ther, both by 
COA and the Department. The Committee finds it diff icult to agree to the Department’s contention that the present 
Council did not allow the Returning Officer to conduct elections as it feels that under the Rules, the Returning Officer is 
endowed with sufficient powers so much so that it i s the Returning Officer who decides as to whether a  person is or is 
not entitled to vote or to stand for election.  (Para 3.14)  
 The Committee would like to place on record that i t agrees with the basic intent of the legislation that there should 
be timely elections/nominations in the Council. The  Committee would rather appreciate if a free and fa ir process of 
election or nomination of the Members of the Counci l is ensured. However, it apprehends whether the pr oposed 
amendment in section 6(1) only would achieve this. Further, the Committee feels that it may lead to a vaccum in the 
Council of Architecture if elections/nominations are not held due to some reasons as with the proposed  amendment, the 
present incumbent would be required to go out immed iately after the expiry of three years whereas the Council of 
Architecture is supposed to be a permanent body. Se condly this would be inconsistent with the proposed  sub-section (6) 
which provides that unless the names and addresses of the elected/nominated members of the Council are notified by the 
Central Government, a person would not become a mem ber of the Council. The Committee feels that the pr oposed 
changes in sub-section (1) and new proposed sub-sec tion (6) are needed to be made consistent and there  should be clear 
provision obligatory on the Central Government to notify the names within the stipulated time-frame of 15 days.  
    (Para 3.15)  
IV. Clause 3: Section 10 A: Directions by Central G overnment 
 The Committee notes that the Council of Architectu re had serious reservations on the proposed amendme nts. 
According to the Council, it has no objection in re ceiving any directions from the Central Government on any policy 
matter. The purpose of directions given by Central Government can prove beneficial only if they are po licy matters but 
if directions are intended to interfere in day to d ay functioning of a statutory body, then such direc tions could prove 
counter productive. The Council strongly contended that the proposed power to be given to the Central Government to 
direct a statutory body to make or amend its Regula tions or to make, amend or revoke any regulation fr amed by that 
statutory body can only be considered an extra-ordi nary, arbitrary, unguided and uncontrolled executiv e power 
adversely impacting the autonomy and day to day fun ctioning of the Council. Similarly, the power to is sue direction to 
give priority of work is also likely to go against the autonomy of a statutory body.  (Para 4.1)  
 The Committee finds substance in the contention of  the Council. The Committee also takes note of the fact that in 
other statutory bodies like UGC, MCI, Dental Counci l, Indian Nursing Council, Central Government has b een vested 
with the power to issue direction only on policy is sues or to resolve disputes in election. The Commit tee would also like 
to point out that the proposed provision under sect ion 10A is in contravention of regulation making po wer given to the 
Council under section 45. Not only this, these Regu lations are to be made by the Council only in consu ltation with 
Central Government and to be laid in Parliament the reby ensuring their scrutiny by Parliament. The Com mittee is of 
the opinion that the proposed provision under secti on 10 A is uncalled for and liable to raise complic ation in future in 
view of section 45. The Committee, therefore, recom mends that this provision may be suitably revised s o as to give 
powers to the Central Government to give directions only on policy matters.  (Para 4.2)  
V. Clause 3: Section 10 B: Power to supersede Counc il 
 The Committee is not inclined to accept the justif ication given by the Department. The fact that simi lar provision 
already exists in respect of other similar professional bodies also does not seem to be a well-placed argument. It is a well 

known fact that inspite of Councils like NCTE and A ICTE having a similar provision, such a provision h as not acted as 
a deterrent to misuse of powers by these bodies.  (Para 5.4)  
 The Committee is of the firm opinion that with the  proposed powers to be given under section 10 A and  10 B, 
situation is not likely to improve so far as COA is concerned. Against the backdrop of such a large number of court cases 
going on at present, existing very apparent element  of confrontation is undoubtedly going to aggravate  further. The 
Committee strongly feels that instead of such an am endment, provision relating to power to refer to a Commission of 
Inquiry on the failure of COA to comply with the pr ovisions of the Act can be incorporated in the Act.  This 
recommendation has already been made by the Expert Group set up by the Government. The Committee fails  to 
understand the reservation of the Department in accepting such a recommendation made by the Expert Group.  
    (Para 5.5)  
 The Committee would like to point out that with th e proposed amendments relating to term of three yea rs for the 
members of the Council, with no chance of further e xtension, functioning of COA is definitely going to  be streamlined. 
The Committee also observes that the role of the Ce ntral Government is well crafted in the Architects Act, 1972. Right 
from constitution of COA (section 3.1), it is refle cted in appointment of Tribunal [Section 5 (2)], fi xation of pay and 
allowances and other conditions of service of emplo yees [section 12 (1) (5)], investment of funds [sec tion 13 (2)], 
recognition of qualification granted by authorities  in India (section 14), recognition of architectura l qualifications 
granted by authorities in foreign countries (section 15), power to amend Schedule (section 16), withdrawal of recognition 
(section 20), renewal of fees (section 27), restora tion of Register (section 32), information to be fu rnished by the Council 
(section 40), power to remove difficulties (section 43), power to make rules (section 44) and approval to make regulations 
to be framed by the Council (Section 45). Contentio n of the Department that in the absence of power to  issue directions 
to the Council, the aforesaid manifold functions an d powers assigned to the Central Government could n ot be carried 
out as the advisories given to the Council were not  acceded to by the COA is simply not acceptable to the Committee. 
The Committee can only conclude that inspite of wel l-enshrined and well-established powers and functio ns of both the 
Council and the Department in the Act as well as th e regulations and rules made thereunder, somewhere in the 
atmosphere of confrontation, the spirit behind the Act of 1972, i.e., propagation of professional educ ation in the field of 
architecture was simply side-lined by all concerned.  (Para 5.6)  
 The Committee has also taken note of the fact that  there is an urgent need for bringing in comprehens ive 
amendments in the Architects Act, 1972 in line with  the advancements made specially during the recent years. Both the 
Council and the Department are in favour of such a move. Not only this, the Committee is also aware of  the fact that a 
legislation for having an over-arching Commission f or Higher Education and Research whereunder all the  statutory 
bodies like Council of Architecture are likely to b e subsumed is going to be brought very soon by the Government. 
Lastly, there are a number of issues like role of C ouncil vis-a-vis  AICTE, conduct of elections to the Council, variou s 
actions taken by COA which are at present sub-judice . In such a scenario, the Committee is constrained to observe that 
the proposed legislation which can only be consider ed a short-term measure is not an advisable move on  the part of the 
Department.  (Para 5.7)  
 The Committee observes that architecture education  and profession being very specialized, there is a need for 
giving protection to architects from legal and prof essional liabilities. Secondly, in view of increasi ng number of foreign 
architects practising in the country, a mechanism c an be evolved for having mutual exchange of Indian architects with 
foreign architects. Lastly, a healthy atmosphere of  co-ordination between architecture education and p rofession is 
required to be built up. The Committee would apprec iate if all these aspects are taken care of wheneve r a new 
comprehensive legislation is brought forward.        (Para 5.8)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
VII  
SEVENTH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 9th November, 2010 in Room No. 
‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1.  Shri Oscar Fernandes  –– Chairman  
 2.  Shri Prakash Javadekar  
 3.  Shri M. Rama Jois 
 4.  Shri Pramod Kureel 
 5.  Shri N. K. Singh  
 6.  Shrimati Kanimozhi 
 7.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare  
 8.  Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK  SABHA  
 9. Shri Kirti Azad 
 10. Shri P.K.Biju 
 11.  Shri Jeetendrasingh Bundela  
 12.  Shrimati J. Helen Davidson  
 13.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 14.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
 15.  Shri P.Kumar 
 16.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 17.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
 18.  Shri P. Vishwanathan 
  LIST OF WITNESSES 
  DEP ARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION  
 1. Smt. Vibha Puri Das, Secretary Higher Education ; 
 2. Sh. N.K. Sinha, Additional Secretary, Ministry of HRD; 
 3. Sh. N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary, Leg islative Deptt.;  
 4. Sh. Amit Khare, Joint Secretary, Deptt. Of High er Education; 
 5. Prof. E.F.N. Ribeiro, Chairman School of Planni ng & Architecture, Bhopal; 
 6. Dr. Shovan K. Saha, Director, School of Plannin g & Architecture, Vijayawada; 
 7. Ar. J.R. Bhalla, Former President of Council of  Architecture; 
 8. Ar. K. Rajagopalan, Eminent Architect and Membe r of Council of Architect; 
 9.  Ar. Vijay Garg, Jt. Hony, Secretary, Indian In stitute of Architecture; 
 10.  Prof. S. M. Akhtar, Dean, Faculty of Architec ture, Jamia Milia Islamia University; 
 11.  Prof. N.S. Gopalkrishnan, MHRD IPR Chair, CUS AT, Cochin; 
 12.  Dr. Harvinder Singh, Director, Ministry of HR D; 
 13.  Sh. G.R. Raghavender, Director, Deptt. of Hig her Education;  
 14.  Sh. B.K. Bhadri, Assistant Educational Adviso r, MHRD; and  

 15.  Sh. K.K. Mishra, Consultant, MHRD. 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Member s to the meeting of the Committee which was convene d to hear the 
views of the Secretary, Department of Higher Education on the Architects (Amendment) Bill, 2010. ***  ***  ***. 
3. *** *** *** 
4.  Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of th e Secretary, Department of Higher Education alongwi th other 
experts/academicians from the field of architecture  on the Architects (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Chai rman and members 
sought clarifications to which the Secretary replie d to. The Committee decided to send and questionnai re to the Department of 
Higher Education for detailed response. 
5.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
6.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
VIII  
EIGHTH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 18th November, 2010 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
 3. Shri Prakash Javadekar  
 4.  Shri M. Rama Jois 
 5.  Shri Pramod Kureel  
 6. Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7.  Shri P .K.Biju 
 8.  Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi  
 9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 10.  Shri Joseph Toppo 
 11. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
  LIST OF WITNESSES 
  REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COUNCIL OF ARCHITECTURE  
 1. Prof. Vijay Shrikrishna Sohoni, President, Coun cil of Architecture  
 2. Prof. Uday Chandrakant Gadkari, Member, Council  of Architecture  
 3. Prof. Inderjit Singh Bakshi, Member, Council of  Architecture 
 4. Shri Prakash Deshmukh, Member, Council of Archi tecture 
 5. Mr. Bharat Thakordas Sheth, Member, Council of Architecture 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s to the meeting of the Committee convened for hear ing the views of 
the representatives of the Council of Architecture on various provisions of the Architects (Amendment)  Bill, 2010. ***  ***  
***. 
3. *** *** *** 
4.  The Committee, then, heard the views of the rep resentatives of the Council of Architecture on the various provisions of 
the Architects (Amendment) Bill, 2010, problem area s in the functioning of the Council and the compreh ensive changes 
required in the Architects Act, 1972 and other alli ed issues. The Chairman and members raised certain queries which the 
President of the Council replied to. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire to the Council for their detailed replies 
within three days. 

  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
5. *** *** *** 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M. to meet again on Thursday, the 25th November, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21st December, 2010 in Room No. 
‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2.  Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
 3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
 4.  Shri Prakash Javadekar  
 5.  Shri M. Rama Jois 
 6.  Shri Pramod Kureel 
 7.  Shri N.K. Singh 
 8.  Shrimati Kanimozhi 
  LOK SABHA  
 9.  Shrimati J. Helen Davidson  
 10.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
 11.  Shri P. Kumar 
 12.  Shri Sheesh Ram Ola 
 13.  Shri Joseph Toppo 
 14.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
 I.  LIST OF WITNESSES ON THE ARCHITECTS (AMENDMENT) BI LL, 2010  
  REPRESENTATIVES OF ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICA L EDUCATION  
(i) Professor S.S. Mantha, Chairman, AICTE 
(ii) Dr. (CoI.) M.K. Hada, Member-Secretary, AICTE 
 II. * * * 
 A.  * * * 
 B.  * * * 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri N.S. Walia, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s to the meeting of the Committee convened to hear the Chairman, 
AICTE on the Architects (Amendment) Bill, 2010 ***  ***  ***. 
3.  The Committee, then, heard the views of the Cha irman, AICTE on the Architects (Amendment) Bill, 20 10 with special 
reference to encroachment by the Council of Archite cture upon the functions of other statutory bodies including that of the 
AICTE, problem areas encountered by AICTE with the Council and overall assessment of the functions of the Council. The 
Chairman and members raised certain queries which w ere replied to by the Chairman, AICTE. The Committe e decided to send 
a questionnaire to the Council for its written replies. 

  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
4. *** *** *** 
5.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
6.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.35 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 11 A.M. on Monday, the 17th January, 2011 in Committee 
Room. ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
 3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao  
 4. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
  LOK  SABHA  
 5.  Shri P. K Biju 
 6.  Shri Jeetendrasingh Bundela 
 7.  Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi  
 8.  Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 10.  Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 11.  Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav  
 12.  Shri P. Kumar 
 13.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 14.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 15.  Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 16.  Shri Sheesh Ram Ola 
 17.  Shri Joseph Toppo 
 18.  Shri Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’  
 19.  Shri P. Vishwanathan 
 20.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri N.S. Walia, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s to the meeting of the Committee convened for cons ideration and 
adoption of  ***  ***  ***. the Report on the Archi tects (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Chairman, then, i nformed the members 
that another Bill, namely the ‘Protection of Women from Sexual Harassment at Work Place Bill, 2010’ ha s been referred to the 
Committee for examination and report within two months. 
3. ***  ***  ***  
4.  The Committee, then, considered and adopted dra ft 229th, ***  ***  *** Reports pertaining to the A rchitects 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 and the ***  ***  ***. Keepi ng in view the extension of time till 31st January,  2011 given by the 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for presentation of t he Report on the Architects (Amendment) Bill, 2010,  the Committee 
authorized the Chairman to present the Report to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha. 

5. ***  ***  ***  
6.  The Committee then adjourned at 12.05 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
ON THE 31st AUGUST , 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. LXIV of 2010 
 
THE ARCHITECTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Architects Act, 1972. 
 
 
 
 
Short title and commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of  
section 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-first Ye ar of the 
Republic of India as follows:– 
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Architects (Amendment) Act, 
2010. 
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Cent ral 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
2.   In the Architects Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred  to as the 
principal Act), in section 6,- . 
 ( a) in sub-section ( 1), the words "or until his successor has 
been duly elected or nominated, whichever is 1ater”  shall be 
omitted; . 
 ( b) after sub-section ( 5). the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:– 
 “( 6) The name and address of each member of the Counci l 
elected or nominated under the provisions of sub-se ction ( 3) of 
section 3 and sub-section ( 4) of this section shall be notified by 
the Central Government in the Official Gazette.”. 
 

Insertion of new sections 10A and 
10B, 
 
Directions by Central 
Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to supersede Council. 
 
 
 
 
3.   After section 10 of the principal Act, the follow ing Sections 
sha1l be inserted, namely:– 
 “10A. ( 1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that 
it is necessary so to do in the public interest, is sue, for reasons to 
be recorded and communicated to the Council, such d irections as 
it thinks fit 
 ( 2) Without prejudice to the forgoing powers, such 
directions may include direction requiring the Council – 
 ( a) to make or amend any regulation within such perio d as 
may be specified in the direction: 
 Provided that if the Council fails or neglects to comply with 
such direction within the period specified therein,  the Central 
Government may make the regulations or amend or rev oke the 
regulations made by the Council, as the case may be, either in the 
form specified in the order or with such modificati on thereof as 
the Central Government thinks fit; and 
 ( b) to give priority to the work undertaken or to be 
undertaken by the Council in such manner as the Cen tral 
Government may think fit to specify in this behalf. 
 10B. ( 1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that the 
Council is unable to perform, or has persistently m ade default in 
the performance of the duty imposed on it by or under this Act or 
has exceeded or abused its powers, or has wilfully or without 
sufficient cause, failed to comply with any direction issued by the 
Central Government under section 10A, the Central G overnment 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, super sede the 
Council for such period not exceeding two years as may be 
specified in the notification: 
 Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-
section, the Central Government shall give reasonable time to the 
Council to show cause why it should not be supersed ed and shall 
consider the explanation and objections, if any, of the Council. 
 ( 2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub- section 
(1) superseding the Counci1,– 
 ( a) all the members of the Council shall, notwithstan ding 
that their term of office has not expired as from t he date of 
supersession, vacate their offices as such members; 
 ( b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the 
provisions of this Act, be exercised or performed b y or on behalf 
of the Council shall, during the period of superses sion, be 
exercised and performed by such person or persons as the Central 
Government may direct; . 
 ( c) all property vested in the Council shall, during the period 

of supersession, vest in the Central Government. 
 ( 3) On the expiration of the period of supersession s pecified 
in the notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the Central 
Government may – 
 ( a) extend the period of supersession for such furthe r period 
as it may consider necessary:  
 Provided that the total period of supersession und er this 
section shall not exceed two years; or 
 ( b) reconstitute the Council in the manner provided i n 
section 3.”.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
 The Architects Act, 1972 was enacted to provide fo r the registration of Architects and for matters connected therewith.  
2.  The existing provision contained in the sub-sec tion (1) of section 6 of the Architects Act, 1972 provides that an elected or 
nominated member shall hold office for a term of th ree years from the date of his election or nominati on or until his successor 
has been duly elected or nominated, whichever is la ter. The office bearers of the Council of Architect ure have also been 
continuing beyond three years terms specified in th e aforesaid Act by taking advantage of this lacuna in the Act. It is proposed 
to omit the words “or until his successor has been duly elected or nominated, whichever is later” in s aid sub-section (1) so that 
the office bearers of the Council of Architecture d o not continue to hold the office beyond the period  of three years on the 
ground that the successor has not been duly elected or nominated. 
3.  It has come to notice that the Council of Archi tecture constituted under the Architects Act, 1972 has exerecised certain 
administrative and financial functions beyond those  stipulated in the said Act and also did not adhere  to the advice of the 
Central Government in certain cases. In view of this, it is proposed to confer power upon the Central Government to,– 
 (a) issue, in the public interest for reasons to b e recorded in writing, directions to the Council as  it thinks fit which, 
inter alia , include directing the Council of Architecture to make or amend regulations within the periods specif ied by the 
Central Government; and 
 (b) supersede the Council of Architecture for peri od not exceeding two years in case the Council is u nable to 
perform, or has persistently made default in the pe rformance of the duty imposed on it by or under the  Architects Act, 
1972, or has exceeded or abused its powers, or has wilfully or without sufficient cause failed to comply with any direction 
issued by the Central Government. 
4.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.  
 
 
N
EW  D ELHI ; 
The  25 th  August , 2010.  KAPIL SIBAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE  
EXTRACT FROM THE ARCHITECTS ACT , 1972 
(20 OF  1972)  
CHAPTER II 
COUNCIL OF ARCHITRECTURE  
 
 
 
Terms of office and casual 
vacancies. 
 
 
* * * * *  
6.  ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this section, an ele cted or 
nominated member shall hold office for a term of th ree years from 
the date of his election or nomination or until his  successor has been 
duly elected or nominated, whichever is later. 
* * * * *
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
–––––––– 
 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Architects Act, 1972. 
 
 
–––––––– 
 
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development)  
 
 
 