PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SIXTIETH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1997-98 (DEMAND NO. 40) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd April, 1997)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd April, 1997)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 1997/Chaitra, 1919 (Saka)

1571/RS F—1-A


0} bate wy fa
9 76 bind),



CONTENTS

PAGES
Composition Or THe ComMITTEE (i)-(ii)
PREFACE (iii)
REPORT 1—15

Minutes 17—21


TT परे sormeogeD

Boanae4



CPC 9०:७३ 9७ ४७ #+ WD

बे पे ee ४5
७छ +# 0०0 (७४७७5

16.
शः
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
2:
26.
21.
28.
29.
30.

1571

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1996-97)

. Shri $.B. Chavan— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
. Dr. 8.8. Dutta

Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Shri Raj Nath Singh

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
. Shri R. Margabandu
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
. Dr. Mohan Babu
. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
LOK SABHA
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
Shri Sartaj Singh
Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
Shri Jai Prakash
Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
Shrimati Divya Singh
Shri Mahant Abedyanath
Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
Chaudhary Paragi Lal
Dr. C. Silvera
Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
Shri Dutta Meghe
Shri I.G. Sanadi
Shrimati Krishna Bose
७)

/RS 2-4


ail
325
335
34.
35:
36.
375
38.
39.
. Shri Mukhtar Anees
41.
42.
43.
*44.
45.

Gi)
Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao
Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
Dr. ‘Krupasindhu Bhoi
Shri Pawan Diwan
Shri Krishna
Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri S.K. Karvendhan

Dr. M. Jagannath

Dr. Bali Ram

Shri Banen Barman

Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego
Shri Pradeep Jaiswal
SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary

Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

“Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 26th February, 1997)

1571/RS F—2-B
4


PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee, to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixtieth Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No.40) of the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare for the year 1997-98.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also heard the
Secretary and other officials of that Department on the said Demands for Grants in its
meeting held on 18 April, 1997.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted and same on 19th April,
1997.

New De.n; S.B. CHAVAN
19 Apri, 1997 Chairman,
ae Department-related Parliamentary
Chaitra 29, 1919 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development.

(iii)


REPORT

I. INTRODUCTION

1.1. The Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is instrumental and responsible
for implementation of various programmes of national importance like family welfare,
primary health care, prevention, control and eradication of major diseases which form the
main plank of our development efforts. Apart from these, the Ministry also takes special
care for preventing the spread of diseases assuming the dimension of epidemic. The
Department of Health, under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, which is
committed to achieve the goal of health for all by the year 2000 A.D. is responsible for
evolving broad policies for the health sector and provides financial and technical assistance
to State Governments in critical areas through the implementation of important health
programmes.

1.2. Broadly, the objectives of the Department are to undertake National Health
Programmes, to promote education, research and training in various medical disciplines, to
prevent adulteration of food as well as drugs, to provide primary health care at the door
steps of the people, to take steps for better implementation of health care programmes for
tribal and other weaker sections of the society and also to collaborate with member countries
of United Nations and international agencies like WHO, UNICEF, etc. in matters relating
to health promotion and development.

1.3. The Department finances a number of health programmes aimed at controlling
Malaria, Leprosy, Blindness, AIDS, TB, Gunieawarm either on 100 per cent or on 50 per
cent basis. The Department also finances wholly or substantially autonomous institutions
engaged in patient care and or research such as All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, All India Institute
of Speech and Hearing, Mysore, Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi, National
Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore etc. The Department also assists
voluntary organisations and institutions substantially such as Indian red Cross Society, New
Delhi, Tuberculosis Centre, New Delhi, Lala Ram Swarup TB Hospital, Mehrauli, etc.

1.4. The health infrastructure comprises 2424 Community Health Centres, 21853
Primary Health Centres and 1,32,727 Sub-centres. Some of the new programmes initiated
during the year by the Department are Urban Hospital Waste Management, Setting up of
National Illess Assistance Fund and National Blood Transfusion Council, Development of
Public Private Partnership and Joint Sector Approach and Epidemiological Surveillance and
Support System, etc. Pilot projects on Diabetes Control, Oral Health, Prevention of
deafness and hearing impairment, micro nutrient, malnutrition, medical rehabilitation and
cardio-vascular diseases have also been initiated.

Il. EIGHTH FIVE YEAR PLAN-REVIEW

2.1. The original outlay in the Eighth Plan was Rs. 1800 crores. The approved outlay
during all the annual plans period is Rs. 2965.11 crores and the actual expenditure made was
Rs. 3065.11 crores. Thus, the expenditure made a quantum jump from the original plan
outlay and approved annual outlay. At the start of Eight Five Year Plan, there were 81
schemes which were continuing. Besides these schemes 17 new schemes have been taken up

1

1S71/RS F—3-A


4

during the Eighth Plan period which required Rs. 309.07 crores. The overall Foreign Aid
Component during the period of 1992-93 to 1996-97 is Rs. 861.35 crores. For the year 1997-
98, the Ministry had requested an outlay of Rs. 1345.04 crores comprising of Rs. 810.39
crores as net budgetary support and Rs. 534.65 crores as external assistance. As against this
they were provided with Rs. 920.20 crores out of which Rs. 520.20 crores was in the from of
budgetary support and Rs. 400 crores represented external assistance.

2.2. The Committee, however, feels that increase in expenditure making a quantum
jump from the Eighth Plan outlay shows a faulty planning. At the outlay stage, the
Department should have given sufficient thought on the actual requirement. Now since the
Ninth Plan is on the anvil, the exercise should be done in minutest detail.

2.3. The Eighth Plan had envisaged improved access to health for the undeserved and
under privileged segments of the population. This was sought to be achieved mainly through
consolidation and operationalization of the health care infrastructure for optimal
performance, building up appropriate referral sevices with emphasis of primary care and
effective implementation of Natioanl Programmes relating to major public health problems.

2.4. These efforts had a distinct impact on the mortality though morbidity due to
communicable and Non-Communicable diseases had not shown a parallel decline. Crude
Birth Rate (CDR) has declined to 9 in 1995 [Sample Registration System (SRS) 1995
provisional]. An emerging factor is increasing morbidity due to non-communicable diseases
and newer infections like HIV.

‘2.5. However, the Committee is constrained to note that there remains a shortfall in
achieving the physical targets in some of the programmes such as T.B. Control Programme
and programme for control of Blindness. For example the achievement of physical targets
covered between 60% to 75% only. Similarly the targets achievements in the programme for
control of Blindness also was between 20% to 88%. Financial targets also could not be
achieved fully in these two programmes. The Department is required to make a thorough
review of such schemes to see where the things go wrong for the shortfall and corrective
measures are needed to be taken.

Ill. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS

3.1. The overall proportion of the Budget to the Health sector has not increased since
the beginning of the first Plan. The Health Sector including Family Welfare has been getting
only about 3 per cent of the total outlays through the successive Five Year Plans. The
working Group for Health Financing set up by the Planning Commission for the Eighth Five
Year Plan had recommended that the Health Sector allocation should not be less than 5% of
the total outlay. The Fourth Conference of Central Council of Health and Family Welfare
has recommended that the direct investment by the Government should be raised to a
minimum of 5 per cent of the GDP and the total investment in health could go up to 10 per
cent. The World Health Organisation (WHO) also recommended that the public health care
expenditure should be at least 5 per cent of the GDP if equity and universal coverage is to,
be realised. As per the figures available, the total investment on health and family sector is
1.3% by the Government. The Secretary in his discussion has regretted that there has been\
no substantial step up in the outlay of the health sector of the Ninth Plan.

3.2. The Secretary also mentioned the inadequacy of the outlay especially in view of the
additional services required to be provided under certain recent legal directives. In view of
the already insufficient funds available with the Department on all such legal directives, the
Department should approach Finance Ministry for additional funds over and above the

1571/RS F—3-B


é)

regular budgetary provisions. The Committee shares the concern about continuance of .
insufficient outlay in the first year of the Ninth Plan and strongly emphasises the need for
enhanced allocation. In this context, the Committee would look forward for finalisation of
outlays for the Ninth Plan for which the Ministry has proposed an outlay of Rs. 7578.11 |
crores for various schemes/institutions under Central health Sector. ;

IV. NINTH FIVE YEAR PLAN—APPROACH

4. According to Approach Paper to Ninth Five Year Plan, new initiative would be made
in the Ninth Plan in the areas which have already been covered in the Eighth Plan. The
focus would, however be on provision of rural health care for all through optimally
functioning of Primary Health Care and Sub-centres as a part of basic minimum services.
For control of communicable diseases major efforts would be made for horizontal integration
of these programmes at the district and below district levels within in the existing frame
work of the Primary Health Care infrastructure. This is expected to address the problem of
lack of key personnel in this programme and their sub-optimal performance. Even as efforts
for improved sanitation continue the strategy during the Ninth Plan will be to strengthen
health surveillance early alert and repid response mechanisms for timely detection to prevent
periodic outbreak of epidemics. For the non-communicable disease, the Ministry does not
contemplate in initiating and supporting separate vertical programme. Experience obtained
from pilot programme launched during Eighth Plan will be utilised towards integrated Non
Communicable Diseases Control Programmes. The Ministry also plafs to initiate an urban
Primary health Organisation to provide basic health services to all inhabitants within 1-2
Kms. of their dwellings. Besides, appropriate referral linkages for optimal utilisation of the
available facilities and increasing involvement of Nagar Palikas is envisaged. It is also
proposed to increase the efficiency of the health systems through creation of a functional
Health Management Information System, multi professional eductation and skill upgradation
of all categories of health workers. The objectives made in the Ninth Plan are very good.
Unless they are translated into action, they remain mere objectives. The Committee is happy
to note that focus is being laid on rural health care. The condition of Primary Health
Centres and Rural Family Welfare Centres is in a very bad shape. With the focus being laid
on them now, the Committee hopes that their condition would at least improve now.

Vv. COMMITTED LIABILITY

5.1. The Committee has noted that the committed liability of the plan schemes has not
been reflected in the budgetary allocations for 1997-98 which is the first year of the Ninth
Plan. The Committed expenditure which is accounted in the subsequent plan at the
termination of the previous plan is taken out from the plan and becomes a separate
committed expenditure. If this is not done, the Departments will be handicapped by this
amount of plan expenditure. The exercise of identifying committed liability has not been
done by any of the Departments for 1997-98. Committee in this connection has considered
the report of the Tenth Finance Commission. The Tenth Finance Commission have observed
in this regard as under:

“Although the Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of reference in
deciding the cut-off date for transfer of committed liabilty on account of plan
scheme, the incremental liabilities that would arise in 1997-98 on account of 8th Plan
scheme completed in the next two financial years would have to be provided for. The
Commission are, therefore, of the view that the Planning Commission may consider
providing for the maintenance of such schemes till 1999-2000 in the Plan itself as was
done for the schemes of the two Annual Plans of 1990-91 and 1991-92”.


4

5.2. The Committee was also given to understand that the Planning Commission issued
circular to all the Departments dated November 5, 1996 sending therewith guidelines for
classification of expenditure. The Ministries were also requested to make necessary provision
as committed non-plan expenditure for the upkeep of existing assets etc. Accordingly, all the
Ministries/Departments were asked to adopt the guidelines while submitting the plan
proposals for Ninth Five Year Plan and annual plan 1997-98. However, the Departments have
not done this exercise. The Committee in this connection heard the views of the Secretary,
Department of Expenditure to clarify the position. He informed the Committee that even
though communications were sent to various Ministries, the Ministries could not identify the
committed expenditure in time. Accordingly a lumpsum amount has been provided under
Demand No.31. The Department may approach the Department of Expenditure for their
share. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Department may complete the exercise at
the earliest so that they may not be handicapped on account of this. The Committee in this
connection also directs the Ministry of Finance to prepare a format and send it to all the
Ministries atleast one year before the termination of the plan period. The Departments should
be asked to identify the committed expenditure and send their proposals to Planning
Commission/Finance Ministry for consideration and approval, six month before the
termination of the plan. The Committee is also constrained to note that many Departments
have not done the exercise of identifying committed expenditure and to get it earmarked
separately for several plan periods. Accordingly, committed expenditure on the plan schemes
completed in 7th Plan or earlier and the assets created and staff employed in plan schemes has
been continuing on plan side resulting in severe resource crunch for the Department. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department, should make a thorough review of
the schemes and identify the committed liability. The Committee is very much surprised that
the guidelines given earlier were not followed at all. For this, responsibility should be fixed.

VI. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS)

6.1. The Plan allocation for CGHS was reduced from Rs. 6 cores in BE 1996-97 to
Rs. 5.4 crores in RE 1996-97. However, it has been stepped up from Rs. 5.4 crores in
RE 1996-97 to Rs. 9 crores in BE 1997-98. When the Department was asked to explain the
reason for the increase, the Department has stated that the plan 1997-98 is for the expansion
of the scheme to new cities, opening of new allopathic dispensaries/Homoeopathic Units/
Ayurvedic units and also setting up of new poly-clinics in the cities already covered under the
scheme. The Secretary, during the course of his evidence before the Committee stated that in
line with the recommendation of the Committee, the previous Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) had)
been set aside and the Ministry of Finance had agreed to constitute a new SIU. The
Committee desires that the new SIU should be constituted at the earliest and the work should)
be completed early.

6.2. CGHS beneficiaries are permitted to avail medical facilities and referral services
from private hospitals after being referred by a specialist of CGHS Dispensary. However, only
the approved expenditure is reimbursed. This defeats the very purpose of beneficiary having
treatment in a private hospital. The Committee therefore recommends that the total
expenditure should be reimbursed

शा, ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES, NEW DELHI (AIIMS)

7.1, All India Institute of Medical Sciences has been set up by an Act of Parliament in
1956 as a premier institute to conduct experiments and research on various disciplines of
medical services. It has a bed strength of 1589. The Central Government provides 100%
Financial support to the Institute. x


7.2, An allocation of Rs.131 crores, (i.e. Rs.54 crores on plan side and Rs.77 crores on
the Non-Plan side) has been provided during the current year to the institute. The
Committee was given to understand that the equipments used in the institute are obsolete
and should be replaced. The Committee feels that AIIMS is the premier institute of this
country and should be equipped with the latest equipment for which there is a need for huge |
resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a one time liberal grant should be
provided to the apex institute for replacement of equipments, so that the patients could|
derive the benefit.

7.3. The Committee notes that some patients go out of the country for some super-
speciality services. The Committee is of the view that there is a need to develop one institute
in the country of international standard, with latest super-speciality facilities and equipments.
The Committee feels that AIIMS is the ideal institute which can be given the necessary fillip
to lift it to world standard.

7.4, The premier institution like AIIMS was set up for promoting high standards of
medical education and training and also for providing comprehensive medical care to the
people. These were originally thought of being only as referral hospital where patients would
be referred from other hospitals for specialised treatment of a higher order. In other words,
Institute would not entertain new patients in the OPDs. However, due to overcrowding and
lack of medical facilities in and around Delhi at various levels, it has lost referral character
and become just like any other hospital working at the District level.

7.5. The critical role that has been assigned to the referral system in National Health
Policy (NHP) deserves emphasis; for the PHC approach is predicated on the proposition that
only 5% of ailments need reach tertiary hospitals and the rest can be treated at primary and
through referral to secondary levels. Only through such an integrally related referral system,
the poorer sections of society, living in rural and remote areas, can get equitable access to
quality medical care and preventive public health measures.

7.6. The Committee is deeply concerned about the deteriorating standards of research
and patient care and this needs to be strengthened.

7.7. An efficient and organised referral system, the Committee feels, can be a good
edifice of a competent medical care available in all the lower level peripheral hospitals. This
means that hospitals and health centres in and around Delhi and also in the States have to
be sustained and simultaneously developed with adequate funds over a period of time, so
that a successful referral system can function in premier hospitals like AIIMS, New Delhi.
After considering various practical difficulties, the Committee is of the view that there must
be a clear objective to make it purely referral hospital by a fixed date, and all necessary
short and medium term problems must be sorted out within a definite timeframe. The
Committee is convinced that this decision brooks no delay and expects that appropriate
mechanism would be developed to achieve this.

VIII. HOSPITALS

8.1. The Central Government hospitals are suffering from resource crunch which leads
to appalling conditions, sub-standard services, overcrowding, etc. There are no sophisticated
and latest equipments available in almost all the hospitals and staff scarcity and lack of basic
amenities are a regular feature in all the hospitals. It is high time the Government should
consider the importance of health sector in order to achieve the goal of “Health For All” by ©
2000 A.D. The Committee feels that sufficient funds should be made available to the health
sector during the Ninth Plan period to achieve the goal of ‘Health For All’.

1571/RS F—4-A


The Committee feels that lack of residential accommodation is a major problem being
faced by all the hospitals including AIIMS. Satisfaction level, in this regard, both in the case
of doctors and staff including nurses is very low. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that sufficient number of residential units for all the categories of employees be provided
keeping in view their nature of duty. The Committee also emphasises the need for providing
adequate hostel accommodation to resident doctors and nurses, preferably within the campus
of the hospital itself. The nurses should also be given priority in the working women’s
hostels situated near a hospital.

8.2. Safdarjung Hospital: The allocation to the hospital has been increased from
Rs.44.02 crore in BE 1996-97 to Rs.54.40 crores in BE 1997-98. Justifying the increase in

allocation, the Department stated that it proposes to strengthen the Departments of Burns & |

Plastic Surgery Department, Blood Bank, Emergency & Casualty, Obst. & Gynae and
Clinical Pathology. The Committee hopes that strengthening of Departments would be
undertaken as envisaged.

8.3. Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital: This year the allocation to the hospital has been
reduced from Rs. 32.53 crores in RE 1996-97 to Rs. 31.27 crores in BE 1997-98. Explaining
the reasons for the reduction, the Department stated that it was mainly due to the provision
made for clearing some inward claims of Government Medical Store Depot for the year
1994-95 and 1995-96. The Committee was informed that the availability of ambulance
services, in the hospital is not adequate. The Committee was given to understand that the
Cardio-Thoracic department in the hospital needs to be strengthened. All necessary steps
may be taken in this direction. The Committee desires that adequate steps for augmenting
the ambulance services may be undertaken by the Department for which necessary funds as

-required may be provided at the RE stage.

8.4. Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital, New Delhi: The allocation to the hospital has
been reduced from Rs. 36.93 crores in RE 1996-97 to Rs. 21.50 crores in BE 1997-98 on the
Plan side. Asked why a sharp reduction has been affected, the Department stated that it has
been done keeping in view the size and scope of Phase-II of the JICA Project. It is being
implemented in the hospital for construction of a central building, the facilities of OPD,
Radiology, Emergency House, Preventive and Social Medicine. The Committee in this
connection is constrained to note that the JICA aid received for the project was shown on
Revenue Expenditure which should not be done. The Department further stated that the
total cost of Phase II of the project would be Rs. 20.21 crores as against Rs. 45.55 crores in
Phase-I.

8.5. The Committee was given to understand that the Phase-I of JICA Project was to
be completed by 31st March, 1997, but the Department later stated that it would be
completed only by October, 1997. The Committee recommends that the Department should
stick to the revised target date.

IX. INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND MEDICAL SCIENCE,
SHILLONG.

9.1. Its objective is to provide advanced and specialised health care to the people of
North-Eastern region including Sikkim and to serve as a regional referral service centre, to
promote a programme of health, manpower development and training in idenfified fields of
super specialisation. The allocation for Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health &
Medical Science. Shillong has been increased from Rs. one crore in BE 1996-97 to
Rs. 4.5 crores in RE 1996-97 and further to Rs.10 crores in BE 1997-98.

1571/RS F—4-B


कक

9.2. Justifying the Increase, the Department stated that as part of Phase I of the
Project, a 30 bedded Hospital, with two Super speciality Departments in Cardiology and
Gastro-enterology, is being set up.

9.3. A sum of Rs. 1.00 crore was approved in the Annual Plan outlay for the year
1996-97. An additional provision of Rs. 3.50 crores has been sought mainly to meet the
expenditure on procurement of equipment required for the two Super-speciality
Departments, viz. Cardiology and Gastro-enterology. Tendering procedures has already
been initiated for procurement of medical equipment.

A provision of Rs. 10.00 crores is earmarked in the Annual Plan outlay for the year
1997-98. The provision is sought to meet the expenditure on:

(i) Spill over civil works;
(ii) Procurement of medical equipment;
(iii) Continuing cost of establishment;

(iv) Civil works proposed to be taken up for establishment of main referral hospital as
part of Phase II of the Project.

The Committee appreciates the increase in provisions for such an institute in‘ the
North East region but would like the project to be completed at the earliest.

X. CANCER RESEARCH

10.1. It is distressing to note that about 7 lakh new cases of cancer occur in the
country every year out of which two-third cases are in advance and incurable stage at the
time of diagnosis. It has been estimated that by the year 2026, cancer deaths in India will
be nearly threefold. The Secretary Department of Health informed the Committee that the
cancer control activities are being carried in the limited way because of the inadequate
resources.

10.2. For cancer research, there is a marginal increase in allocation i.e. from Rs. 18
crores in BE & RE 1996-97 to Rs. 20 crores in BE 1997-98. The Department while
explaining the adequacy of funds stated that the incidence of the Cancer in the country is
increasing as the life expectancy is going up and people are living longer. The most
common cancer amongst men is oral cancer and amongst females, it is cancer of cervix and
breast. The existing facilities for treatment in the country are grossly inadequate. There are
10 Regional Centres in the country which cover less than 10% of the population. Grants
being provided to these Regional Centres are to the extent of Rs. 50 lakhs per year for
developmental work. The cost of equipment and maintenance in the case of cancer
treatment is very high and it is being proposed that the grant to the Regional Centre be
enhanced from Rs. 50 lakhs to Rs. 75 lakhs. The Committee, however, desires that Cancer
diagnostic centres should be opened in all districts and referral centres should be at some
selected places. Necessary funds may therefore be provided for the purpose.

10.3. It has also been stated that providing Cobalt Unit to Medical Colleges and other
institutions for cancer treatment is a big problem. For a population of 1 million, the
requirement would be around 900 such units. At present there are 200 Cobalt Units
functioning in the country. This gap needs to be filled up. Similarly the funds required for
setting up a Department of Oncology in the Government Medical Colleges would be in the
range of Rs. 5 to 6 crores. Only 1.5 crores are provided to the Government Medical
Colleges for setting up Oncology wings. The funds required for providing adequate services


8

will be very large and the slight enhancement of Rs. 2 crores will only partly meet the
demand.

10.4. The Committee, therefore, feels that the marginal increase is grossly insufficient
in view of the growing incidence of cancer. Cancer requires a costly treatment. Majority of
our population affected by Cancer are poor people and they can not afford the treatment.
Government will have to step up its efforts to raise funds.

XI. MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA

11.1. The Committee is unable to appreciate the delay in setting up of a monitoring cell
in the Medical Council of India for monitoring the mushrooming Private Medical Colleges.
The Committee had recommended in its 19th Report to this effect. Explaining the modalities
being finalised, the Department has stated that the work of the Council was proposed to be
studied by Internal Work Study Unit of the Ministry in order to assess the actual
requirement before posts required in setting up of said monitoring cell can be created.

11.2. The Committee feels that it is only a delaying tactic. An immediate decision may
be taken in the matter. The Committee is also of the opinion that the private colleges should
be asked to maintain pay parity at par with Government Colleges.

XII. MEDICAL EDUCATION

12.1. The Committee after considering the relevance of Medical curriculum to the
actual needs of doctors in the Indian conditions, feels that the medical curricula continue to
remain unchanged despite the changing needs and priorities in developing a country like
India. This continues to be out of touch with the practical realities especially those faced by
the general practitioners and still reflect more of a theoretical approach. The knowledge of
majority. of doctors specially in Government Dispensaries and clinics remains out dated and
obsolete. Their main mode of updating of knowledge remains the medical representatives
wanting to promote their products.

12.2. The Committee views with concern this state of affairs and recommends that
periodic updating of medical education with latest innovations and developments should be
made compulsory for all the doctors. The doctor should have access to computer internet
etc. It should be made compulsory for them to read journals.

12.3. The Committee recommends that a new look should be taken and studies made in
the areas of obstetric practices, deliveries in line with the force of gravity as against the
present practice of deliveries against the force of gravity; vaccination and immunisation
schedules; desirability of milk in childhood in the light of its high water content and low
nutritional value.

XII. NATIONAL: MALARIA ERADICATION PROGRAMME

13.1. For malaria eradication programme, a substantial increase has been made i.e.
from Rs.137.50 crores in BE 1996-97 to Rs.144.01 crores in RE 1996-97 and further to
Rs.192.64 crores in BE 1997-98. When. Department was asked to explain as to whether the
said allocation would be sufficient for reducing the incidence of malaria, it has been stated
that the increase in the provision for the National Programme for Malaria to Rs.144.01 crore
in RE 1996-97 and to Rs.192.64 crores in BE 1997-98 represents an allocation of
Rs.142.64 crores for the on-going National Programme and Rs.50 crores as the externally
aided component to be utilised after the enhanced Programme for Malaria Control with
World Bank support becomes effective. This provision has been made keeping in view the
magnitude of the disease, its sudden focal outbreeaks from time to time and the rise of the


5

P. Falciparum variety of malaria in recent years. It has also been stated that intensified
efforts will be made to contain mortality and morbidity due to malaria with the resources
allocated but a lot depends on the extent to which community participation can be drawn
by the States in preventing the stagnation of water which is a fertile ground for mosquito
breeding and the intensity with which the Programme is implemented at the field level.
The Secretary informed that newer generation insecticides are being used except in North
East where DDT is still effective.

13.2. The Committee is concerned over the rising number of cases of Falciparum
Malaria which is resistant to the conventional anti-malarial. The Committee feels that
intensive programmes to create more awareness about stagnant water collections and
malaria as also timely spray of appropriate insecticides should receive more emphasis.

13.3. The Committee reiterates that there is no proper monitoring of the
implementation of the programme. The root cause of malaria is the dirty and unhygienic
conditions prevailing all around in public life. Unless clean and hygienic conditions are
created, the disease cannot be eradicated as the present steps are not targeted to attack
this root cause. Sufficient importance should, therefore, be given for providing clean and
hygienic surroundings.

13.4. The Committee also feels that monitoring should be done for timely spraying
of insecticides to which the mosquitoes have not become immune, at regular intervals. A
way out should be found out to remove the hurdles that are coming in the
implementation of this programme both by the Centre and the States.

XIV. NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME

14. This programme is implemented’ with the aim to achieve elimination of leprosy
by the year 2000 A.D. The Secretary, Department of Health informed the Committee
that when the leprosy is eliminated as a public health problem, the prevalence rate will
come down below one per ten thousand, thereby achieving the said goal. When the
Department was asked to explain as to how it proposed to achieve the target only by
marginally increasing the budget allocation in BE 1997-98, it was stated that based on the
trend of expenditure in 1996-97 the allocation for 1997-98 had been increased to Rs. 75
crores. The Committee re-iterates that the programme should be implemented with
greater vigour. Funds allocated should be utilised fully. Also, there is need for intensified
health education and public awareness campaigns to remove the social stigma attached
with the diesease.

XV. NATIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME

15.1. The Committee was informed that TB remains a worrying problem not only in
India but also in developed countries because of recent resurgence of this disease there.
In India, about 14 million people are reportedly suffering from acute TB of whom about
3 million are highly infectious sputum positive cases. The Committee is deeply concerned
over the fact that as many as 5 lakh people continue to die of this disease every year
even as new cases to the tune of 1.5 million are detected annually. The Committee is
also concerned at the high prevalance (about 60%) of TB in AIDS patients in India. The
nexus between two deadly diseases would require to be closely watched for evolving
effective strategies to prevent the impending explosion of AIDS becoming a major cause
of TB as well.

15.2. The Department has undertaken a revised strategy for TB control which plugs
an important cause responsible for high failure rates in development of drug resistant


10

cases and general spread of this infection. The experts have stated that revised strategy of
DOTS (Directly Observed Treatment with Short Course Chemotherapy) should be
implemented scrupulously and sincerely to achieve major breakthrough in the fight against
TB.

15.3. The Committee hopes that the expansion of revised strategy to the districts other
than the 102 endemic districts would be completed in a time bound manner. While the aid
from World Bank for revised National TB strategy would provide a much needed boost to
the efforts to contain TB. The Committee would have liked the BE of 1997-98 to be even
higher than Rs. 90 crores in view of the alarming resurgance of this diseases and an urgent
focussed need to attack it.

XVI. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS

16.1. India has 12.5 million blind persons out of which nearly 10 million are blind
because of cataract. National Blindness Control Programme which started in 1976 is 100%
Centrally sponsored programme. It aims to reduce the blindness from 1.4% to 0.3% by 2000
A.D. Despite the obvious seriousness of the problem, the programme continues to be
charactrised by under utilisation of funds and failure to achieve the targets. During last five
years funds allocated were never utilised fully. During the year 1996-97, Rs.75 crores were
allocated and the estimated expenditure is about Rs.67 crores. As regards the achievement
of targets the following statements shows repeated failures for last five years.

Performance of Cataract Operation
(Cases in lakhs)

Year Target Achievements
1992-93 20.00 16.05

1993-94 24.30 19.10

1994-95 24.50 21.56

1995-96 25.50 24.66

1996-97 26.20 15.7(upto 6.2.97)

16.2.The Committee is not satisfied with the shortfall in achieving both financial and
physical targets. There appears to be something wrong with the programme and its
implementation. The Department should make a thorough review and take necessary steps
in this regard.

XVII. NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME

17.1. The Committee is deeply troubled over the quick spread and future dangerous
potential of AIDS disease, which is not only incurable but is also capable of impairing the
defence mechanism of the body. The AIDS control programme was started in 1992. The
major thrust of the programme is towards screening the blood samples of high risk behaviour
groups and surveillance activities. The Secretary, Department of Health informed that till
November, 1996 a total of 2.95 million people had been screened out of whom 50984 were
found to be HIV positive. The number of confirmed cases are 3263. Seen against the fact
that 2.8 million persons had been screened upto June, 1996 and 23147 were found to be HIV


ine

positive, it would appear that between June, 1996 and November, 1996, 1.5 lakh people
were screened out of which 27837 were found to be HIV positive. The Committee draws the
attention of the Government to the false positive cases of HIV. The problem with the HIV
Tests which are being used in our country (ELISA & WESTERN BLOT) is that neither of
the test is specific to HIV. Both the tests react to many other proteins of other diseases. For
example the protein p24 generally accepted to be proof of existence of HIV, is also found in
all the retroviruses which are living in the human body and are not harmful.
Hepatitis 8 & C, Malaria, Papillomavirus warts, glandular fever, tuberculosis, syphillis and
leprosy are some of the few conditions that are capable of producing biological false
positives in ELISA Test. This means that all HIV positive cases will not lead to AIDS. But
once a person is found HIV positive he gets the social stigma. The Department must
therefore find out the incidence of False Positive cases and in that light modify its statistics
of HIV leading to AIDS. The Committee feels that this factor alone will modify the
estimates of the magnitude of the problem.

17.2. The results of the screening indicate that HIV infection has reached almost all
parts of the country. The existing surveillance mechanism is based on 62 HIV testing
laboratories. Designated as surveillance centres, located all over the country. The
Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over improper generation of data from these centres
and its inadequacy to meet rapidly changing trends. The Committee would like the
Department to carefully frame the data which can be generated from these centres keeping
in view the need for study of epidemeological trends, need for follow-up of AIDS cases and
utility data for research.

17.3. The Secretary also informed the Committee that HIV surveillance activities in the
country are being revamped by adopting sentinel surveillance methodology wherein few
selected sentinel sites and population would be screened (instead of a wide geographical
area) for HIV prevalance and trends with the active involvement of State AIDs cells. These
sites would represent not only high risk population groups but also low risks population
groups and data representing rural population. As there is no vaccination against AIDS, it is
of paramount importance to increase awareness among people about the mode of its
transmission, lack of any cure against it and existence of physical means to
prevent it.

17.4, The Committee however reiterates that this survey is not very effective and
foolproof. The Committee desires that the data collection should be strengthened and made
accurate.

17.5 The Committee also reiterates that a survey ‘should be got conducted through an
impartial and reliable agency to have an idea about the exact magnitude of the problem in
all the Metro towns beginning with Calcutta, Mumbai and Delhi.

17.6. The Committee is dismayed to note that allocation under the head National AIDS
Control Organisations has been reduced from Rs. 141 crores in BE 1996-97 to Rs. 100 crores
in RE 1997-98. Justifying the reduction, the Department stated that for 1997-98 the


12

organisation proposed an amount of Rs. 155 crores as per following components of the
programme:—

(Rs. in crores)

Programme Management 25.00

IEC including NGOs 80.00 (including 10
crores for NGOs)

Blood Safety 25.00

STD Control 10.00

Surveillence & Clinical 10.00

Management.
USAID APAC Project. 5.00

Tora: 155.00

17.7. The Department has further stated that against the proposed BE 1997-98, an
allocation of only Rs. 100 crores has been made, based on the total allocation of Rs. 400
crores (external aid component) for the Department in the annual plan 1997-98.

17.8. The Committee is not convinced with the justification in view of the worsening
AIDS scenario in the country, and feels that the provision should be restored to be last year
level.

XVIII. KALA AZAR CONTROL PROGRAMME

18. Kala Azar continues to be endemic in the States of West Bengal and Bihar. In its
last Report the Committee has emphasised the need for better co-ordination with State
Governments for more effective implementation of the Programme. The Committee is
concerned that the number of deaths has increased to 677 in 1996 from 382 in 1994. The
Committee has noted the efforts being made by the Central Government to bring about
more effective implementation on the part of the State Governments especially the
assessment carried out by expert team headed by Dr. A.K. Hati. The Committee would like
the Central Government to arrive at an early decision on the recommendation of the expert
team wherein it has been stated that possibilities of 100% central’ assistance should be
considered for the programme for effective control as the States have not been providing
adequate financial support.

XIX. TYPHOID

19. The Committee is concerned about the serious problem of Typhoid which has now
risen to greater heights than ever before. The Committee recommends that the Government
consider the feasibility of immunisation against Typhoid alongwith the Triple vaccine or
similar such strategy. The Haffkine Institute and the Haffkine Biopharmaceutical
Corporation must take up its earlier activity of manufacturing and supplying Typhoid
vaccine.

XX. EFFECTIVE HEALTH EDUCATION

20.1. The Committee feels that the poeple are not being given correct and factual health
information. There is a need for paying utmost attention for prevention of communicable
disease. The Committee is of the view that the level of knowledge about causes of these


13

diseases and their prevention is very low in the country. When the Department was asked to
make use of all forms of publicity and feed the people with health information, it has been
stated that as a part of IEC activities, Central Health Education Bureau has collaborated
with NFDC for telecasting health spots on Doordarshan. TV spots are also telecast under
various health programmes like National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme.
National Programme for control of Blindness etc. as a part of IEC activity under these
programmes. However, these telecasts are done on payment basis. As the telecasting of
health spots would be costly in the long run, there is need for Doordarshan to provide free
slots for telecasting health related issues. It has also been stated that at present there is no
proposal under consideration for an independent TV channel for community IEC activities
as it is felt that the scheme may not be economically viable.

20.2. The Committee recommends that adequate funds should be made available for IEC
activities as creating correct awareness about the epidemiological aspects of communicable
disease is critical for their prevention and eradication.

20.3. The Committee strongly advocates the need for having an independent TV channel
for community IEC activities in health sector.

XXI. PRIMARY HEALTH CENTRES

21.1. The functioning of Primary Health Centres in the rural areas is a cause of serious
concern for the Committee. As per the norms fixed by the Planning Commission, a Primary
Health Centre would cater 10 about 30,000 population. The Primary Health Centres are in
deplorable condition. There are no doctors not to talk of the other paramedical staff. The
Committee was given to understand that out of 21,853 PHCs, 1,136 PHCs are without
doctors. Even where the doctors have been posted, they are not regular and punctual in
attending to their duties. They do not stay in the villages and there is no provision for their
stay at these centres. Quite often, doctors posted in the Primary Health Centres are
reluctant to join their duties and manage to get their postings changed by using powerful
influences. The Committee feels that there should be exemplary punishment for such cases.
On the other hand, there are doctors who have been languishing in PHCs for years together
in the absence of any rotational transfer policy. There is no transfer policy worth the name
for the doctors in the Primary Helath Centres.

21.2. Often it is observed that there are no medicines available in the Primary Health
Centres. Even where the medicines are available, they are of either sub-standard quality or
date expired. In some of the Primary Health Centres, doctors are reported to be in league
with the private pathologists and recommend for unwarranted investigations so as to mint
money. Funds available for the Primary Health Centres are very meagre.

21.3. As per the norms followed, a Primary Centres should have 15 staff members
including one Medical Officer, one Pharmasist etc. The Committee is, however, constrained
to note that about 16 per cent of the Primary Health Centres do not have Doctors. In these
States in more than 30 per cent P.H.Cs. doctors are not available. The Committee has also
noted that a proposal is under consideration to utilise the services of private doctors through
their visits to the Centres twice or thrice a week. Ultimate goal should be that all the staff
particularly, doctors, should be in position in all P.H.Cs. It has been informed that the
appointments and posting of doctors at Primary Health Centres and Community Health
Centres are made by the State Governments. The Central Government has been impressing


14

upon the State Governments to ensure that all PHCs and CSCs have doctors and other staff
in position. In fact, the Central Council for Health and Family Welfare in a meeting held on
11-13 October, 1995 had passed the following resolution:

“The Council notes with great concern this severe scarcity of doctors in rural areas and
recommends that rural posting for a specific period be made compulsory and also a pre-
requisite before admission to postgraduate course.”

21.4, The Committee entirely agrees with the recommendation made by the Council.
The Committee recommends that out of the rotating internship of one year which is
mandatory after the Final MBBS, six months should be in the rural areas. The Committee
also feels that rural posting for a specific period from one year to five years should be a
precondition for promotions within the Health Services of the State and Centre.

21.5, The Committee feels that the functioning of the Primary Health Centre needs to
be thoroughly reviewed and revamped the malpractices prevailing in these centres should be
removed urgently. Sufficient funds should be made available for efficient functioning of
these centres. There should be regular and constant inspections by the senior doctors so as
to ensure their smooth and efficient functioning. The Committee also reiterates that the
Department should introduce a system and mechanism of foolproof monitoring both by the
Central and State Governments to plug these loopholes so as to put these PHCs in some
order.

21.6. The Committee draws the attention of the Government to the 250 page Report
prepared by the Expert Committee on the Public Health System headed by Shri J.S. Bajaj,
Member, Planning Commission. The Committee would like to know what action has been
taken on the recommendations of the Expert Group.

XXII. MONITORING MECHANISM

22.1. The approach paper to the Ninth Five Year Plan felt that more practical approach
to the programme foumulation, particularly for social sector programmes was to put the
lessons learnt from the experience to the implementation. The approach paper also felt that
in spite of the existence of an elaborate monitoring and evaluation system, the findings made
by the monitoring and evaluation system are not put to use. The Committee takes a very
serious note on this aspect and strongly recommends to the Department to first strengthen
the monitoring mechanism on various schemes and ensure strict implementation of the
findings made by the monitoring agencies. The Committee also observes with concern that
the schemes being taken up by the Central Government are not properly monitored by the
State Governments. Merely handing over the money and getting report from the State
Governments is not going to serve any purpose. The Committee is of the definite view that
thé State Governments, where the financial position is bad, divert the funds, given by the
Central Government for a particular scheme, to other purposes such as for giving salaries to
the employees of the State Government, etc. The Committee, therefore, desires that the
Centre should impress upon the States about the need to develop a mechanism to find out
whether the money being given to the States for implementation of various programmes is
utilised for the purpose specified and fix responsibility in case the purpose is defeated.

22.2 NGOs: There are certain areas where the Adivasis are the worst affected lot. The
Committee is constrained to note that not many NGOs are present in tribal areas. One will
find them mostly in areas where the atmosphere and the living conditions are very good.
They would not like to leave big and smaller cities and go into rural areas. The Adivasis are
mostly located in far-flung areas. The Committee, therefore, desires that NGOs which are
working in adivasi areas should be given encouragement.

+


15

22.3. There is no doubt-that there are committed and devoted NGOs in the field, but at
the same time, one cannot rule out the possibility of mushroom growth of NGOs which are
merely interested in getting assistance from the Government of India. The Department,
should, therefore, strengthen its monitoring mechanism to see whether they are working
properly or not and only those NGOs which have proven track record should be given
assistance.

XXII... GENERAL

23. Keeping in view the significant potential for transmission and spread of diseases like
AIDS etc., the Committee has constituted a Sub-Committee on Dreaded Diseases. In the
first instance, the Sub-Committee has decided to examine AIDS and Hepatitis-B. Another
Sub-Committee to make an indepth study on varios aspects of Drug Control has also been
constituted.


MINUTES



xi

“TWELFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 1st April, 1997 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS

1. Shri S.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. B.B. Dutta

3. Dr. M. Aram

4. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

5. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
6. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

7. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
8. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

9. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

10. Shri R. Margabandu

11. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

12. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

13. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

15. Shri Sartaj Singh

16. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
17. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

18. Dr. C. Silvera

19. Shri 1.0. Sanadi

20. Shrimati Krishna Bose

21. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao
22. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
23. Shri Krishna

24. Shri Shivanand H. Kovujaigli
25. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
26. Shri Samik Lahiri

27. Dr. M. Jagannath

28. Dr. Bali Ram

“Minutes of the Ist to 11th Meetings of the Committee relate to other matters.

19


29. Shri Ranen Barman
30. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

WITNESSES
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(i) Department of Health

Shri P.P. Chauhan, Secretary

Shri R.S. Bhatnagar, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Shailja Chandra, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Sunila Basant, Joint Secretary

Dr. P. Dasgupta, Drug Controller

Dr. S.P. Agarwal, DGHS

Shri Vijay Singh, Financial Adviser.

(ii) * के *

(iii) * * *
SECRETARIAT
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary

Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

5. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the
Department of Health, *** in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants for
the year 1997-98.

6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

SID) ७ कु ४२३० १५

7. The Committee then adjounred at 5.35 a.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on
2nd April, 1997.

***Relates to other matters.


Xv
“FIFTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Saturday, the 19th April, 1997 in Committee
Room 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.B. Chavan——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra $. Deo
Dr. B.B. Dutta

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Dr. Mohan Bahu

PrIAARYN

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

10. Dr. C. Silvera

11. Shri Dutta Meghe

12. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

13. Shri Samik Lahiri

14. Shri $.K. Karvendhan

15. Dr. M. Jagannath

16. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

SECKETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on the Demands for Grants for 1997-98
of the Department of *** Health (Demand No 40.) *** The Committee, after some
discussions, adopted the same with some modifications.

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati
Ray and Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri
Sartaj Singh and Shri Dau Dayal Joshi to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha. The Committee
decided that the reports may be laid/presented on 22nd April, 1997.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 a.m.

*Minutes of the 13th to 14th meetings relate to other matters.
*** Relates to other matters.

21


0४७२ AYERE

a snOrieial: ५ हट
: sud रस छ

COMO Toute :एें
ited mish) 30७5१.

oe

ude 85:४५
“SANTA NOL

SBR rd:
Cees Sone ae
317 Meo Gale a

iide-dinake काट 11.

iA जे. 8 03 «BI
कक fend.)
minigHe 1:01

SARA TQ ४986

: 10 942861 ४1089! 08 inde
हा : i ‘siokan (959७७ ९७५३८ psp bes
‘apisiaa? robril} uiagiadoenys.
1529 Oe fave OA. vale
35910 ५७11: 4859 SLAP ane

8९९९1 Tol ४४०४0 rot pet
sine raile- gotfiminoD ed]

> Hered me de) Aor
nd@ bap. pm bong
‘NiaeD sit 77271 है
“NRE ४५४ 9155 en ae

1 9४87 ६०७ Tix 300 bersbizios ०२1 ti
(Ob Ce BilysH * १३९ 70 4
20088 i SeOe NW 21158 1) 0५110: cite

jdt Biebsnionines ssitigiar Dac

89 Inst?