PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
पु ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FIFTEENTH REPORT
ON
THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-NINTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992

(Presented to Rajya Sabha on____________)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on____________)

सत्यमेव जयते

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI-

\


av 10 THaMALIALS

AHaAe ATLAS

ASTTIMIAOD QMIGKATS YAATAAMALIMAT OSTA Ia9-1Aa10T A IG
ee 70
TABUIOIATIG IAVORAA KAI

TAOWA HTVaETANM
te) ;
* S00r Ite (TMEMGVIMA HTMivey Thavde). YOITUTITZA9
403 हु

Ce ee ##0%2 #(४७४% 0॥15251५)
one: एहिंडट dod Yo sitet कं) ne 1४:1)

ज TAIMATISD Ie AAAS ATLAS
: 1Hiad Wan



nN

CONTENTS

Composition OF THE ComMITTEE

Report

(i) Background

(ii) Need for Constitutional Amendment
(iii) Evidence of NGOs, etc.

(iv) Views of Political Leaders

(v) Conclusions

(vi) Observations and Recommendations

Minutes of Dissent

ANNEXURES

Pages
(1)
1—8
2

3
4
6
6
a

9
10—45


Lia Ae Tinoiusite

anuipbnartirr



Is

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

Shri P. Upendra ——Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

CRIA # (० ९०

. Dr. M. Aram

Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

Miss Saroj Khaparde

Shri O.P. Kohli

Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

Shri Md. Salim

Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
. Prof. P.J. Kurien

. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
. Shri K.T. Vandayar

. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

. Shri Inder Jit

. Shri Anna Joshi

. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda

. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya

. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

. Shri Rambadan

. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

. Shri Ramchandra Dome

Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

Dr. Vasant Pawar

(i)

NS

)

X


(ii)

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Satish Kumar—Joint Secretary
2. Shri Nand Lal—Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh—Deputy Director
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu—Committee Officer


REPORT

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Fifteenth Report of the Committee on the Constitution (Seventy-

ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992.

2. The Bill, which was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 1992, seeks to
amend the Directive Principles of State Policy to provide that the State shall endeavour to
promote population control and to include in the Fundamental Duties a commitment to
promote and adopt the small family norm. It is also proposed that a person shall be
disqualified for being chosen as and for being a Member of either House of Parliament or of
the Legislature of a State, if he has more than two children. This will, however, have
prospective effect. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamen-
tary Standing Committees, the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred” the Bill to the
Committee for examination and report.

2.1 A Press Communique, inviting suggestions from various individuals, organisations
and institutions interested in the subject matter of the Bill, was issued on 20th June, 1994. A
copy of the Press Communique is placed as Annexure I.

2.2 The Committee also invited written views from leaders of the political parties in
Parliament and State Legislatures. A list containing names of persons from whom views
were invited and the names of those who responded is attached as Annexure II.

2.3 The Memoranda containing views, comments, opinions and suggestions received on
the Bill are attached as Annexure III.

2.4 The Committee considered the Bill in eleven sittings (Annexure-IV) and heard the
oral evidence of witnesses, including the representatives of Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare (Department of Family Welfare), and Ministry of Law, Justice and Company
Affairs (Department of Legal Affairs). The Committee also had the benefit of views of a
cross section of non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), important women’s organisations
engaged in the promotion of family welfare schemes, besides views of some eminent

Members of Parliament.

2.5 In its meeting, held on the 3rd January, 1995, the Committee considered the Draft
Report and adopted it for presentation/aying in both the Houses.

*Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, para 34548, dated June 14, 1994.

1


Background

3. The Department of Family Welfare, in its background note on the subject submitted
to the Committee, has stated that in pursuance of. a decision taken by the National
Development Council (NDC), in its meeting of 23rd/24th December, 1991, the Planning
Commission constituted a Committee of the NDC on Population in February, 1992. The
Committee of the NDC on Population was chaired by Shri K. Karunakaran, Chief Minister
of Kerala.

3.1. In the Meeting of the Committee of the NDC on Population, held on 12th
November, 1992, under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister, it was decided that a
proposal be moved for disqualifying person violating the small family norm from holding
elective office, prospectively and not retrospectively.

3.2. It was in pursuance of this decision, the Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amendment)
Bill, 1992, was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 1992.

3.3. The Report of the Committee of the NDC on Population was considered by the
NDC in its 46th meeting on 18.9.1993 and endorsed.

3.4. The Department of Family Welfare, in its note, has further stated that tackling the
growth of population, which is currently of the order of 17 million per year on a population
base of 846.3 million, as per 1991 census, requires a national consensus, with the
participation of all citizens, backed by strong political commitment. Elective representatives
have to set an example and demonstrate political will and commitment for population
control.

4. The Committee also took note of the following documents while considering the Bill:-

(i) Report of the Committee of the National Development Council on Population
(The Karunakaran Committee Report); and

(ii) Draft National Population Policy (The Swaminathan Committee Report).

4.1. The Karunakaran Committee had made the following recommendation in respect of
the people’s representatives: P

“Amendment to Panchayati Raj Act, brought by the Rajasthan Government, is
recommended to be emulated. The Central/State Governments should consider
bringing similar legislation for disqualifying the people’s representatives at different
levels if they violate small family norm after getting elected. Such a step would have
useful, demonstrative efiect on the people at large.” (para 5.8, page 80 of the
Report).

4.2. The Swaminathan Committee, in its Report, has also made recommendation in

respect of the People’s representatives, which is as under:-

“Rajasthan and Haryana have enacted laws which debar, prospectively, persons who
do not adopt two-child family norm from contesting elections for Panchayats, Zila
Parishads and Nagarpalikas. This reflects political commitment. Even if such
legislation does not exist, there should be a code of conduct which enjoins on all
elected representatives of the people, from Parliament to Panchayat, to adopt,

2;


3

voluntarily, the small family norm. Elected people’s representatives will then become
role models for the public to emulate. Future legislation in this area at Central or
State level should, however, safeguard the interests of women, particularly those
belonging to the socially and economically under privileged sections of society.”
(para 13.1. page 40 of the Report)

5. The Secretary, Department of Family Welfare, in the course of his oral evidence
before the Committee, recapitulated the background leading to the introduction of the Bill
in the Rajya Sabha in December, 1992. He stated that even before the Karunakaran
Committee was set up, there was discussion in the NDC meeting in December, 1991, and
some chief ministers had voiced the opinion that those who were elected to Parliament or to
the State Legislature should set an example by restricting the number of their children to
two. He added that it was in pursuance of this that this Bill had taken shape.

Need for Constitutional Amendment

6. Explaining the background, as far as the restrictive nature of the Bill was concerned,
Secretary, Family Welfare, mentioned that the Constitutional amendment was being sought
in case of elected representatives because a disqualification of this nature could only be
passed through a constitutional amendment. He added that there was some thinking going
on in the Department of Family Welfare to enlarge the scope of the Bill and bring in other
categories of people, such as civil servants, etc. as per the recommendations of the
Karunakaran Committee. He further clarified that in the case of other categories of people,
constitutional amendment was not required and the objective could be achieved through an
amendment of the relevant service conduct rules. While talking about the incentives and
disincentives, he mentioned that the Swaminathan Committee on the Draft National
Population Policy has suggested that those who have more than two children should have
more severe liabilities. In this connection, he drew the attention of the Committee to para
9.1 of part B IL of the Draft National Population Policy which reads as under:-

“The employees of the Central Government, State Governments, Municipalities, as
well as employees of various public sector undertakings, must give the lead in
adopting the small family norm. The service rules in the central and state
governments and their undertakings: would be suitably. modified to ensure that the
small family norm is adopted by their employees. Similarly, all new entrants to the
government, who are married before the age of 21 years in the case of boys and 18
years in the case of girls, will be debarred from recruitment. Promotion policies
should be such that the adoption of small family norm is encouraged. ............ कर

6.1 The Secretary, Department of Family Welfare, in response to certain queries from
some Members of the Committee, informed that apart from these measures, the Govern-
ment had also been taking certain other steps to achieve the objective of slowing down the
population growth and the Government was not depending upon legal measures only. The
main programme was the programme of providing contraceptives to the 154 million couples
who were in the reproductive group.

6.2 As regards incentives and disincentives, as suggested by the Karunakaran and
Swaminathan Committees, the Secretary stated that the whole issue would be placed before
a conference of Chief Ministers for a decision.

6.3. While making a distinction between a coercive method and disincentive, the
Secretary stated that the Government’s policy in this regard could, in no way, be regarded as
coercive.


7. In regard to the necessity of a constitutional amendment as proposed, the Committee
considered the legal opinion given by the Legislative Department (Ministry of Law, Justice
and Company Affairs) (Annexure V). The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, during
the course of his oral evidence, was specifically asked, by the Committee to clarify as to
whether a Constitutional amendment was necessary and what advice was given to the
Department of Family Welfare on this subject. He was further asked to clarify as to whether
a stipulation of a disqualification, either in the Constitution or in the Representation of
People’s Act would violate the fundamental right of a citizen to contest elections. Clarifying
the position, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, said that it was true that a
Constitutional amendment was not strictly a legal requirement, but it was the intention of
the. framers of the Constitution that certain things should be declared in the Constitution
itself as being of fundamental importance.

7.1 The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, further stated that in the advice given
to the Department of Family Welfare, they had advised that a constitutional amendment was
not a strict legal requirement. However, the Department of Family Welfare explained to
them that the amendment would lend moral authority to the programme of population
control, and as the matter would be placed on the priority agenda of the nation, it would
help in the emergence of a national consensus. Therefore, it became a matter of importance
that, from policy angle, certain provisions be incorporated in the Constitution on the subject.
It was in this context that amendment of the Constitution had been proposed.

7.2 The Secretary was also of the view that the provisions dealing with the disqualification
could be justified on legal grounds and would be perfectly in keeping with the letter and
spirit of the Constitution.

Evidence of NGOs etc.
8. The Committee also heard some eminent experts and Members of Parliament.

8.1 It was contended by one of the Hon’ble Members of Parliament that the number of
children in a family was related to the level of education and the economic condition of that
family. Achieving the goal of small family norm, he argued, depended mainly on literacy,
economic condition and propaganda compaign run by the State and voluntary organisations.
He apprehended that the provision of disqulaifying a person having more than two children,
if given effect to, might give rise to some kind of a class-bias as it would prevent women
from poor families from getting elected to the representative bodies. He, therefore,
suggested that people adhering to small family norm should be given certain positive
incentives instead of providing for disincentive to those who did not adhere to it. He
emphasised the States’ role in spreading education, improving the economic condition of the
people, particularly in the rural areas of the country. He described the idea of creating a
role model in this regard as a ‘wrong notion’ which would not work in India.

8.2 Representatives of the women’s organisations, which appeared before the Commit-
tee, expressed certain doubts about the Bill. They pleaded that disqualifying women having
more than two children from contesting elections did not seem to be a fair proposition, more
so, when they had the-least say in deciding the number of children they should have,
especially in villages. This apprehension is relevant in the context of reservation of 30 per
cent seats for women in the Panchyat Raj institutions.

8.3 The witnesses also felt that such a legislation did not tackle the basic problem of

population control. They suggested that, instead of enacting such a legislation, it would be
better if certain positive measures, such as better education, health facilities and adequate


5

employment opportunities, were provided for women. They also. expressed their doubts
whether the role, model concept would achieve the desired objective. In their view, it would
work only when it was supported by many other positive measures.

8.4 However, many witnesses belonging to non-government organisations, who
appeared before the Committee, were in general agreement with the main thrust of the Bill.
They felt that if the citizens were to be asked to control the number of children, there had
to be a role model from the top. They felt that the Bill was a step in the right direction.

8.5 Referring to the success of the family planning programmes in Kerala and Tamil
Nadu, one of the witnesses stated that these examples could not be applied to other parts of
the country, as there were multiple factors responsible for the success of the programme in
these two States. For example, if one were to tour Kerala, one would not normally find
highly underdeveloped villages such as those found in other parts of the country. More
thrust is laid in Kerala on literacy and the expenditure incurred by the State on health care
is higher as compared to other States. Furthermore, there are various voluntary organisa-
tions, which are very actively engaged in popularising family planning. Similarly, in Tamil
Nadu, the achievement was made mainly through better political will and committed
workers.

8.6 Some of the witnesses were of the view that a holistic approach needed to be
adopted, It was necessary to provide health-care particularly to women and children. Unless
literacy was improved among women to make them aware of their rights and the necessity
for adopting a small family norm, it would be difficult to achieve results.

8.7 The witnesses also generally agreed that the voluntary nature of the family planning
programme should not be watered down. It was felt that the programme should be
restructured in such a way that it would be closely inter-linked with developmental
programmes, with emphasis on decentralization.

8.8 However, many of them were of the view that in order to make the family planning
programme a success, the disincentives should also be extended to people in all walks of life,
particularly those in government, public sector undertakings, autonomous bodies and
organised private sector, as well as professionals, etc.

8.9 The Committee also took note of the fact that the State governments of Rajasthan
and Haryana have already amended their respective Panchayati Raj Acts to provide for
similar disqualification for contesting the Panchayat elections. The provisions made in the
Haryana and Rajasthan State Panchayati Raj Acts are at Annexure-VI.

8.10 The representative of the State government of Haryana, during the course of his
oral evidence before the Committee, stated that the spirit behind the amendment of the
Haryana Panchayati Raj Act was small family norm. Elections to Panchayats in Haryana
have since been held in December, 1994.

8.11 During the course of his oral evidence, the representative of the State government
of Rajasthan stated that Rajasthan had played a pioneering role in giving a new shape to
Panchayati Raj system in the State. The amendment relating to small family norm was made
in the Rajasthan Panchayati Raj Act in 1992. The amended Act came into effect from April
23, 1994. However, the Government of Rajasthan promulgated an Ordinance on December
30, 1994, which stipulates that the date of commencement of this provision would be 27th
November, 1995. According to the State Government, elections to Panchayats are scheduled
to be held during January-February, 1995.


Views of Political Leaders

9. The Committee also received written views of leaders of various political parties.
While some of them supported the proposed amendment to the Constitution for adoption of
small family norm by the Members of Parliament and State Legislatures, some others
expressed their reservations. They felt that the provisions of the Bill would erode the basic
democratic right of the people to choose freely any one as their representative, who was
otherwise qualified under the Constitution. It would also take away the basic right of any
voter, who has more than the prescribed number of children, to contest in an election. It
was also suggested that the Clauses 4, 5 and 6 should be deleted. They felt that what was
required was social education, as well as positive incentives.

Conclusions

10. Majority of Members of the Committee were generally in agreement with the
provisions of the Bill. The Members, while supporting the Bill, stated that this measure
would send out the right signal to the people and that it had to be enacted as early as
possible. Members also observed that although the country had been implementing several
voluntary family planning measures since 1951, not much headway had been made in this
regard. The proposed measure, would, therefore, go a long way in creating awareness
among the people for adopting a small family norm. The Members also expressed the view
that the Bill should not be opposed on human rights considerations.

10.1 Some of the Members said that they had serious reservations about this Bill, and
were opposed to it. They were of the view that this amendment would not stand the scrutiny
of a court of law and the evidence tendered before the Committee by the Law Secretary did
not convince them that such a provision would be upheld by the judiciary.

10.2 Referring to the good performance of Kerala, Goa and Tamil Nadu in regard to
the family planning programme, it was argued that one important reason for this success was
good education and the various incentives given to girl children, so as to encourage them to
attend school. It is this kind of incentives and schemes which should be given priority in'the
family planning programme and not the kind of ‘tokenism’ which characterised the present
Bill.

10.3 The Bill was also opposed from the angle of human rights, in general, and women’s
rights, in particular.

10.4 As regard human rights, a reference was made to the specific statement made at
the recent Cairo Conference on population that coercion should not be used in this area and
India was also a party to this. Members opposing the Bill felt that the proposed legislation
amounted to coercion and as such ran counter to the spirit of the Cairo Declaration.

10.5 Disagreeing that the Bill would establish a role model for the general public to
follow, it was pointed out that when a person became a Member of Parliament, he got
certain privileges and facilities which the general public did not enjoy. There could not be
any comparison between the mode of life of a Member of Parliament and that of an
ordinary citizen in the country. The question of role model, therefore, did not arise at all. It
was, thus, argued that there was no relationship, either casual or statistical, between the
family planning practices of the legislators and that of the society at large. Therefore, these
Members were opposed to the Bill.

10.6 Some of the Members felt that the Bill should have been more broad based to
include government servants, educationists, professionals, etc.

“~


10.7 In conclusion, an overwhelming majority of Members of the Committee wholehear-
tedely supported the provisions of the Bill. They felt that despite the fact that the country
had been independent for over forty years now, yet the standard of living of the common
man had not improved. Almost half of the population of the country was still below the
poverty line. The prime cause for this state of affairs was over-population which was
increasing unabated.

10.8 The Members supporting the Bill were of the view that the provisions of the Bill
should be applied irrestpective of caste, creed and religion. They were also of the view that
the Bill would send a positive message to the people at large and would thake the public
figures as role-models for the people to follow.

10.9 Those who were in favour felt that the Bill was not discriminatory against women.
Women who wished to contest elections, the Members felt, were enlightened enough to
follow the small family norm. In any case, contesting elections was purley voluntary and
there was no compulsion.

10.10 These Members were of the view that the Bill would have qualitative importance
and was in the country’s interest. In. totality, the Bill would create the necessary climate for
a small family norm and would establish the credibility of the people’s representatives. Thus,
the majority of the Members supported the Bill in toto.

Observations and Recommendations

11. The Committee notes with concern that the population of the country is growing at
a very rapid pace. As per the estimates of an Expert Committee of Planning Commission,
India’s population is expected to reach the one billion mark by the end of the current
century and double the present population by the year 2035 A.D. by which time it would be
the most populous country in the world.

11.1 The rapid growth of population has serious implications for economic develop-
ment and preservation of environment. The country, inspite of four decades of concerted
developmental efforts, has found it difficult to provide adequate food and nutrition, housing,
education, health care, employment and other basic amenities of life to millions of people.
The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the adoption of a small family norm should be
given the utmost priority and population stabilisation at the replacement level should be our

target.

11.2. The Committee notes that though it may be contended that an amendment of the
Constitution may not be necessary and the object of the Bill of debarring a citizen from
becoming either Member of Parliament or a State Legislature can be achieved by simply
amending the Representation of People’s Act, considering the fact that political leaders of
the country should serve as role models and that such a measure would lend moral authority
to the programme of population control, demonstrate the commitment of the political
leadership of the country and help in emergence of a national consensus, it would be
appropriate to amend the Constitution, as proposed in the Bill.

11.3 The Directive Principles of State Policy were embodied in the Constitution with
the objective of spelling out, expressely, the high ideals the nation should pursue and the
Fundamental Duties specify the obligations of the cititzens. The’ Committee, therefore,
endorses the proposed amendment to the Constitution, as embodied in the Bill, which
provides for disqualification and seeks to amend the Directive Principles of State Policy to
provide that the State shall endeavour to promote population control and small family norm
and also to include the same in the Fundamental Duties.


8

11.4 The Committee feels that if the political parties were to include the small family
norm in the code of conduct for their members, it would give an added impetus to the
family planning programme.

11.5. The Committee also took note of the Swaminathan Committee Report on the Draft
National Population Policy. The Committee recommends that the Government should take
an early decision on the report and come out soon with the final draft of the National
Population Policy.

11.6 The Committee also recommends that the incentives and disincentives, as suggested
in the reports of the two Committees, namely, the Committee of the National Development
Council on Population (The Karunakaran Committee) and the Draft National Population
Policy: (The Swaminathan Committee) should be implemented immediately and cover all the
sectors, such as government servants, teachers, professionals, organised groups in the private
sector, etc.

11.7. The Committee approves the Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992,
without any change and recommends that the Bill be passed.

11.8 The Committee, however, suggests that the Government might consider convening
a meeting of the leaders of the various parties in Parliament for further consultations on the
Bill so as to arrive at a consensus and ensure its smooth passage. This has become all the
more necessary due to the failure of a number of parties to respond to the Committee's
invitation to give their views on the Bill, in person or in writing.

NEW DELHI, (P. UPENDRA)
CHAIRMAN,
3 January, 1995 Committee on Human Resource Development,


Minute of Dissent from Shri Mohd. Salim, Shri Ram Chandra Dome, and Prof. Malini
Bhattacharya

We disagree with the recommendations to adopt the Bill made between Paras 11 to 11.8

(Pages 16—19) of draft report and present our Note of Dissent as our study of the evidence

confirms us in our opinion.
(a) that this would be mere tokensim and would have little effect on the people so far 85

the dissemination of small family norm is concerned.

(b) that at a time when through amendments of the Panchayat Act, participation of
women in politics is sought to be enhanced, this proposed act which is prelude to extension
of such restrictions at the Panchayat level, would exclude large number of women, who have
no empowerment in their own reproductive life, also from political empowerment; this was
the view, too of the women’s organisations that were examined;

(c) that it would be liable to be misused by men with poltiical ambitions, in cases of
accidental failure of contraception where the wife may be forced to undergo abortion at the
tisk of her health;

(d) that in view of the still ingrained preference for sons, this would encourage pre-natal
sex-determination and female foeticide;

(९) that even before giving the poorer sections of society motivation for and opportunity
of abiding by the small family norm, the proposed Act would tend to exclude many of them
from political empowerment;

(f) that it would undermine voluntary character of our population programme;

(g) that the State Legislations (Rajasthan, Haryana) regarding Panchayats do not stand
on clear grounds, have raised serious controversies and cannot be treated as models for a
Central Legislation;

(h) that most of the political parties neither sent representantives to give evidence, nor
sent their views, the one party.that did, categorically opposed the Bill and therefore, there is
no assurance that these parties would show that political will that would be essential in
implementing such a measure; and

(i) that the success of population programme in Kerala and Tamilnaduin the absence of
discincentives in these States, proves that success of the programme at the national level also
can be ensure without them.

Accordingly, we express our strong dissent to the general recommendations and propose
that the Bill be dropped.

Minute of dissent from Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, M.P.

| do not agree with the recommendation to adopt the Bill, made in para 11.7 of the
Report.


ANNEXURE-I
The Constitution (Seventy-Ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992

The Constitution (Seventy-Nonth Amendment) Bill, 1992, as introduced in the Rajya
Sabha on the 22nd December, 1992, has been referred to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development, headed by Shri P. Upendra, M.P., for
examination and report.

The proposed Bill seeks to generate awareness about the country’s population problem
and to contain the adverse impact of the unchecked population growth of the country on its
socio-economic development. It reflects the State’s endeavour to promote population control
and small family norm. It is proposed to amend the Directive Principles of the State Policy
and to include in the Fundamental Duties, a duty to promote and adopt the small family
norm. The elected representatives are expected to set an example and demonstrate political
will and commitment for population control.

It is proposed in the Bill that a person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for
being, a member of either House of Parliament of either house of Legislature of a State, if
he has more than two children. The proposed amendments will, however, have prospective
effect and will not apply to any person who has more than two children on the date of
commencement of the proposed amendment or within a period of one year of such
commencement. However, if such a person has another child after the said period of one
year he will incur the disqualification. Similarly, in the case of a person having only one
child on the date of commencement of the amendment or within a period of one year of
such commencement, it is proposed to provide that if a subsequent child birth results in the
birth of more than one child, he will not incur any disqualification. It is also proposed to
provide that mere act ef giving a child in adoption will not enable a person to escape
disqualification.

In this connection, it has been decided to invite memoranda, containing the views of
individuals, organisations, institutions, etc. interested in the subject matter of the Bill.
Accordingly, all the interested persons, organisations, institutions, etc. are requested to send
their views by the 4th July, 1994 to the Under Secretary (CHRD), Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament House Annexe (Room No. 539), New Delhi-110 001.

Copies of the Bill can be obtained on requisition from the Committee on Human
Resource Development, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Room No. 228, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.

Arrangements have also been made to keep copies of the Bill in the libraries of the
State Legislative Assemblies and Union Territory Legislatures, for reference purposes.

10


30.

CrP raneene

. Shri

Shri

. Shri

Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri

. Shri
. Shri
. Shri
itl,
12.
13:
14,
15:
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
253.
26.
yA
28.
29.

Shri
Shri
Shri
Dr.
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Smt
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri

ANNEXURE-II

Names of persons from whom views were invited:

Debabrata Biswas, M.P.

Tridib Chaudhuri, M.P.

Bhadreswar Gohain, M.P.

Satish Pradhan, M.P.

G.G. Swell, M.P.

Vizol, M.P.

Karam Topden, M.P.

Sharad Yadav, M.P., Leader of Janta Dal in Lok. Sabha.

P.G. Narayanan, M.P., Leader of A.I.A.D.M.K. in Lok Sabha.
Ram Sagar, M.P., Leader of Samajwadi Party in Lok Sabha.
Chandra Shekhar, M.P. Former Prime Minister.
K.P. Unnikrishnan, M.P.

P.C. Thomas, M.P.

Jayanta Ronypi, M.P.

Yaima Singh Yumnam, M.P.

Sikander Bakht, M.P., Leader of Opposition in Rajya Sabha.

Yerra Narayanaswamy, M.P. Leader of Telugu Desam-2 in Rajya Sabha.
B.V. Abdulla Koya, M.P. :

E. Ahmed, M.P.

Indrajit Gupta, M.P. Leader of CPI in Lok Sabha.

Sultan Salahuddin Owaisi, M.P.

imati Dil Kumari Bhandari, M.P.

. Jayanthi Natarajan, M.P.

Murasoli Maran, M.P. Leader of D.M.K. in Rajya Sabha.

G. Swaminathan, M.P., Leader of A.I.A.D.M.K. in Rajya Sabha.

Atal Bihari Vajpayee, M.P. Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha.

Som Nath Chatterjee, M.P. Leader of C.P.I(M) in Lok Sabha.

V. Sobhanadreeswara Kao, M.P. Leader of Telugu Desam in Lok Sabha.

Smt. Sushma Swaraj, M.P.

Shri

S. Jaipal Reddy, M.P. Leader of Janata Dal in Rajya Sabha.

ll


31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
. Shri Shibu Soren, M.P., Lok Sabha.
41.
42.
43.
. Shri Nar Bahadur Bhandari, Former Chief Minister of Sikkim, President Sikkim

45.

47.
48.
49.

50.
Sis

53.
54.
55.
56.

57;

Shri Chanderjeet Yadav, M.P.

Shri Satyaprakash Malaviya, M.P. Leader of Janta Dal(S) in Rajya Sabha.
Shri E. Balanandam, M.P. Leader of CPI(M) in Rajya Sabha.

Shri Shankar Dayal Singh, M.P.

Shri Syed Sahabuddin, M.P.

Shri Chaturanan Mishra, M.P., Leader of C.P.I. in Rajya Sabha.

Shri Ram Gopal Yadav, M.P. Leader of Samajwadi Party in Rajya Sabha.
Miss Mayawati, M.P.

Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar, M.P.

Shri Muhiram Saikia, M.P., Lok Sabha.
Capt. Amrinder Singh, MLA, Legislative Assembly of Punjab, Chandigarh.
Shri J.B. Patnaik, MLA, Former Chief Minister of Orissa, Bhubaneshwar.

Sangram Parishad, Gantok.

Shri Gopinath Mundey, MLA, Leader of Opposition, Legislative Assembly of
Maharashtra, Bombay.

. Shri Dharamchand Chaudia, MLC, Leader of Opposition, Legislative Council of

Maharashtra, Bombay.

Shri Parasram Maderna, Leader cf Opposition, Legislative Assembly of Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

Shri J.P. Nadda, MLA, Leader of Opposition, Legislative Assembly of Himachal
Pradesh, Shimla.

Shri Vamuzo Phesao, MLA, Leader of Naga Peoples Council, Legislative Assembly of
Nagaland, Kohima. .

Shri S. Bangarappa, MLA, Former Chief Minister of Karnataka, Bangalore.

Shri Kailashpati Mishra, MLA, Leader of BJP Group, Legislative Assembly of Bihar,
Patna.

. Shri P.S. Sreenivasan, MLA and Leader of CPI Group, Legislative Assembly of Karala,

Trivandrum.

Shri Prafulla Kumar Mahanta, MLA, Former Chief Minister of Assam and Leader of
Opposition, Legislative Assembly of Assam, Guwahati.

Shri Keshubhai Patel, MLA, Leader of Opposition. Legislative Assembly of Gujarat,
Gandhinagar.

Shri V.S. Achuthanandan, MLA, Leader of Opposition, Legislative Assembly of Kerala,
Trivandrum.

Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh, MLA, Leader of Opposition, Legislative Assembly of
Bihar, Patna.

Shri E.K. Nayanar, MLA, Former Chief Minister of Kerala, Trivandrum.


58.

59.
60,
él.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

Thy

72.

73.

74.

WSs

76.

72.
78.

13

Shri M.C. Nanaiah, MLC, Leader of Opposition, Legislative Council of Karnataka,
Bangalore.

Shri Om Prakash Chautala, MLA, Former Chief Minister of Haryana, Chandigarh.
Shri M. Karunanidhi, Former Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, Madras.

Shri B.B. Yadiyurappa, MLA and Leader of BJP Group in Legislative Assembly of
Karnataka, Bangalore.

. Shri Bodepudi Venkateshwara Rao, MLA and Leader of CPI(M) Group Legislative

Assembly of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad.

. Shri Puvvada Nageshwara Rao, MLA and Leader of CPI Group Legislative Assembly of

Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad,

Shri Jag Pravesh Chandra, Leader of Opposition, Legislative Assembly of National
Capital Territory of Delhi, Delhi.

Shri Rambilas Sharma, MLA, Leader of BJP Group, Legislative Assembly of Haryana,
Chandigarh.

Shri S.R. Balasubramanian, MLA, Leader of Opposition in Legislative Assembly of
Tamil Nadu, Madras.

Shri R.V. Deshpande, MLA, Leader of Opposition, Legislative Assembly of Karnataka,
Bangalore.

Shri C.H. Vidyasagar Rao, MLA, Leader of BJP Group in Andhra Pradesh, Legislative
Assembly, Hyderabad.

Shri N.T. Rama Rao, MLA, Former Chief Minister and Leader of Opposition in
Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad.

Shri Bansi Lal, Former Chief Minister of Haryana and Leader of Haryana Vikas Party,
Chandigarh.

Dr. Umeshwer Prasad Verma, MLC, Leader of Opposition, Legislative Council of
Bihar, Patna.

Shri Rambir Singh Bidhuri, MLA, Leader of Janta Dal Group, Legislative Assembly of
National Capital Territory of Delhi, Delhi.

Shri Vikram Verma, MLA, Leader of Opposition, Legislative Assembly of Madhya
Pradesh, Bhopal.

Dr. Zainul Abedin, M.L.A., Leader of Opposition, Legislative Assembly of West
Bengal, Calcutta.

Shri Narendra Singh, MLA, Leader of Cong.(I) Group Legislative Assembly of Uttar
Pradesh, Lucknow.

Shri Kalyan Singh, Former Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, Leader of Opposition ,
Lucknow.

Shri B.B. Lyngdoh, MLA, Leader of Hill Peoples’ Union, Shillong.

Shri Sampat Singh, MLA, Legislative Assembly of Haryana, Chandigarh.


14

Names of Persons from whom written views were received:

1,
- Dr. Zainul Abedin, Leader of the Opposition, Legislative Assembly, West Bengal,

we

es

Shri B.V. Abdulla Koya, Members of Parliament, Rajya Sabha

Calcutta.

. Sultan Salahuddin Owaisi, Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha.
. Shri Chaturanan Mishra, M.P., Rajya Sabha.
. Shri Jag Parvesh Chandra, Leader of Opposition, Legislative Assembly National Capital

Territory of Delhi

. Shri Nar Bahadur Bhandari, President, Sikkim Sangram Parishad, Former Chief

Minister, Sikkim.

. Shri Murasoli Maran, M.P. (Rajya Sabha), Leader, D.M.K. Parliamentary Group.

8. Shri Ratn Bilas Sharma, M.L.A., Haryana Legislative Assembly.

10.

115

12.
13;

14,
15.
16,

Shri Vadde Sobhanadreeswara Rao, M.P., Leader Telugn Desam in Lok Sabha.

Shri Vikram Verma, M.L.A., Leader of Opposition, Madhya Pradesh Legislative
Assembly.

Shri G.M. Banatwalla, Former Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha), President, Indian
Union Muslim League.

Shri Syed Shahabuddin, M.P.

Shri Prafulla Kumar Mahanta, M.L.A., Leader of the Opposition, Assam Legislative
Assembly and Former Chief Minister of Assam

Shri Shanker Dayal Singh, M.P.
Shri. E Balanandan, M.P. Leader of C.P.I (M) in Rajya Sabha
Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya, M.P., Leader of Janata Dal (S) in Rajya Sabha


ANNEXURE-IT
The Constitution (Seventy-Ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992
MEMORANDUM NO. 1

Submitted By:— DR. ZAINUL ABEDIN
Leader of the Opposition

Legislative Assembly
West Bengal

Reference your Letter No. RS. 29/94-Com. (HRD) dated, 20th September, 1994, I may
inform you that I have given my opinion on this subject of population control on many
occasions and I am in favour of one child family norm. The largest Country in Asia with
largest population has enforced one child family norm and the Country is successful also in
arresting population explosion.

2. With regard to disqualification of Legislator or Parliamentarian having more then 2
children if the principle has to be given effect prospectively than there should be no bar to
impose the same principle of one child family norm here.

3. To give effect to such legislation, it is necessary to prepare and enlighten the people
by massive propaganda and publicity through print and electronic media and through
organisations like Panchayat and Nagarpalika and even seeking cooperation from N.G.Os
also.

4. I shalll be happy if the growth of population can be arrested by persuasive means and
propagandas and voluntary adoptions of the means available in the Country for family
norms.

5. Endeavour in this regards is laudable

MEMORANDUM NO. 2

Submitted By:— SHRI CHATURANAN MISHRA
Member of Parliament
(Rajya Sabha)

1. 1 am all for family planning. People are also willing for it. Even large number of
Muslims and Catholics are now coming forward for it though there is resistence from the so-
called religions end. You have seen what happened at Cairo International meet. In our
country what is required is a continuous campaign for family planning both for uneducated
and educated youth’s boys and girls. College level campaign particularly in small towns and
villages and campaign in uneducated youths by youth organisations and College and
University Unions. All the youth organisations be drafted for this. Some better incentive for
family planning be worked out. Second most important thing is to have minimum facilities
for vasectomy operations at Primary Health centres. From my personal knowledge | can say
that practically there is no operation facilities at all in most of the Health centres at least of

Bihar.
As regards Constitutional amendment I am opposed to it. We have alreaay a bulky

Constitution and IX schedule soon will be like a Dictionary. Don’t add further. As regards
15


16

Directive principles it is a laughing stock. Nobody not even the government takes note of it.
Everybody quotes it when it suits him or her. Still we have the largest number of illiterates
in the world despite Directive Principle-a black spot on our life. Rather | think that now for
some mentions in Preamble and in Directive Principles which smells of socialism and the
government having disowned Nahruism will propose for its deletion! Let us wait till 1.M.F.
and W.B. prescribes this.

We have not made our Constitution a way of our life i.e. what we call in Hindi-JIWAN
KI SHAILI. Let us do it first. This will solve many of our serious problems.

MEMORANDUM NO. 3

Submitted By:— SHRI VADDE SOBHANADREESWARA RAO
Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha)

I fully conquer with the statement of objectives and reasons explained along with the
Amendment bill introduced in Rajya Sabha. | feel it is high time that the central Govt.,
state Govts, M.P.’s, MLA’s, and peoples representatives at all levels should take up on
themselves the task of controlling the population growth. Though Late Mr. Sanjay Gandhi
has shown keen interest on this subject. Forcebly and Coersive measures adopted during the
emergency, has unfortunately created negative impact after 1977. It is very sad to observe
that except extending some lip sympathy in political party is dedicating itself to this top most
agenda item before the nation. So, the present bill which aim at restricting the size of the
family of the Members of Parliament and State Legislatures who are the framers of policies
and programmes to be implemented at central or state levels. I fully conquer that the
provisions proposed in this constitution (79th Amendment Bill).

In addition to this management to the constitution the Govt. must introduce a scheme
of insentives and dissentives to promote small family norm. The Children of a family who
has only one child shquld be given top priority in the matter of developmental and welfare
programmes such as grant on residential house sites, sanction of houses under Indira. Awas
Yojana or rural/urban permanent housing programmes, sanctioned to assistance under
Jawhar/Nehru Rojgar Yojana seeup etc. etc. In provision of health care and educational
facilities the second priority may be given to children belonging to families who are having
two children the benefits of the above schemes should not be made available to families with
more than 2 children unless, until the family with one or two children are covered.

Suitable amendments should be brought forward giving equal right to the female
children along with male children in the property of their parents to alevate the status of the
women members. It will have a definite bearing on bias against female gender.

The improvement should be convened inviting leaders of different religions where the
need to control the population growth, the adverse impact and the need to intensify the
efforts to control the population growth and seek their cooperation in this important
programmes. I wish the Govt. will not stop at just bringing the constitution amendment but
make all out efforts to control the pepulation growth by involving peoples representatives at
all levels, officials working in Govt. services, public sector, as well as private sector. I fully
share your views that unless the population growth is restricted socio economic benefits can
not be really shared by the poorer sections of the society, I hope a good beginning will be
made particularly with passing this constitution Amendment Bill in the coming winter session
of the Parliament.


19

according to facts and circumstances of realities we face. Now the question is : Should we
amend the Constitution to include these amendments in Chapters which are not enforceable?
I strongly feel that it is not necessary—more so as the norms are likely to very according to
times. It has become a fashion in India to amend the Constitution according to the will and
pleasure of the majority and this is one such case. Even if the Government wants to add the
proposed Thirteenth Schedule in the Constitution, it can do so without amending the
Directive Principles of State Policy and the Fundamental Duties. If we add every ‘over-
riding national priority’ in the Directive Principles of State Policy and Fundamental Duties
arising now and then, then our Basic Law would become the nation’s diary of over-riding
national priorities.

3. The proposed Thirteenth Schedule implies that the “small family norm” means
“having two children” per couple, even though it is only mandatory for the Legislator, he
being an M.P. or M.L.A. or M.L.C. - The ‘two children norm’ cannot be a fixed norm. We
have now reduced the norm to a lesser figure from three. It is pertinent to point out that
China, with its 1.2 billion people, is selectively moving away from its 1979 official “one child
per couple” policy and is permitting some couples, especially in rural areas, to have two and
three children without economic penalty or forced abortion. Therefore, | think that it will be
rather unrealistic or even absurd to fix the norm of two children for a legislator-couple and

for a legislator-couple alone.

4, Whether the Thirteenth Schedule imposing a two-children norm to the Legislator-
couple is ultravires of the Constitution or not is itself a moot point because the Bill selects a
particular class of citizens and imposes a heavy punishment leaving others scot free. Even if
it is intra vires, this does not go with the principle of democracy. 1 do not think that in any
democratic country in the world, such constitutional provision exists. It can, at its worst, be
described as coercion and therefore a draconian measure,

5. 1 am afraid that th ue treads into the mine field of human rights. The Chinese
statement in the preparatory conference of the recent United Nations International
Conference on Population and Development (1994) in Cairo, Egypt says:

“Coercion in family planning programs, whether physical, economic or psychological,
is a breach of human rights and can never be acceptable; all in uals have the basic
right to choose when and if they will have children.”

6. The statement of objects And Reasons says that “India’s population may cross one
billion by 2000 A.D.”. But, how many Legislators are there in India to whom the Bill is
applicable? Only a few thousands! Attempting to control by coercive measures, the increase
of population by a few thousands of legislator-couples is definitely a drop in the ocean and
an exercise in futility.

7. Mr. John Rogosch, an expert on health and family planning at the USAID in New
Delhi s: ..-most children are born to mothers who are between the ages of 18 and
30—what we call the high fertility age group"—How many mothers of that fertility age
group are there among the Legislator-couples in India? It would be very few. To bring a
constitutional amendment to achieve that negligible target would be really ridiculous and not
worthwhile.

8. Why does this Bill choose the Legislator-couples for this coercive measure? Because
the law-makers think that the “Elected representatives have to set an example and
demonstrate political will and commitment for population control."—I am unable to
subscribe to this view. The purpose of any law is its utility—greatest advantage to the


20

greatest numbers and its basis is equality—not legislators—first. Any attribute of ‘responsible
citizenship’ may not and need not stop with legislators alone.-—I have a lurking fear that in due
course of time, the list would be enhanced to cover other ‘responsible citizens’ like the
Government Employees, Employees of Public Sector Undertakings and Defence Services etc. This
reminds me the days of ‘Nuys Bandhi’ during the days of Emergency and it is my firm opinion that
this Bill would breed negative massive reaction.

9. To seek to achieve the objective of “stabilisation of the population at the replacement
level” the answer lies elsewhere. The justification offered for having a large family hay its own
myths and truths. The developing nations have been urging that large families are a result of
poverty rather than a cause of it. Therefore, the slogan made famous at the U.N. Population
Conference in 1974 was, “Development is the best contraceptive.” The bumper sticker of Cairo
Conference might be “Women's empowerment works.” Then comes the preference for a boy-
child. Cultural factors and perceptions of economic advantages favour sons above daughters.
Experience in countries around the world has shown that birth rates drop and health and
economic conditions improve. Where once there was disagreement whether family planning or
economic progress was a pre-requisite to progress in either area, there is now a broad
recognition that both are important in their own right, but they work best when pursued
together. Therefore, it requires a holistic approach and it should go hand in hand with
community development, education, better health services for all age-groups, a social
revolution to raise the status of women, environmental protection etc.

10. India is not in a helpless position in population control and already the states of Tamil
Nadu and Kerala have achieved dramatic decline in birth-rates. Their fertility rates are at, or
close to, the levels in industrialized countries and it is pertinent to note that Kerala achieved a
low birth-rate with very low levels of contraceptive prevalence.

11. Therefore, | would advise that this legislative step may be dropped once and for all as it
serves no useful purpose and does not go into the heart of the problem itself. This Bill is nothing
but sound and fury that signifies the return of an internationally discredited Malthus. And it
disguises the malevolence of coercion under a paean to “political will and commitment” for
population control. If a stabilised population is such a good thing, why aren't a substantial
number of Indians stabilising their family numbers? Is it mere ignorance and lack of education
or are there compelling psycho-socio-economic forces that make large families a more rational
and beneficial proposition for large sections of the Indian rural poor? Unless we understand
these forces and counter them with holistic, bold and imginative strategies, stablising population
will remain a dream and this proposed piece of legislation will remain a gimmick.

MEMORANDUM NO. 9

Submitted By:— SHRI G.M. BANATWALLA
1 Wee Wb eas 1h 7
Former Member of Parliament (L.S.)
President
Indian Union Muslim League

I Confirm my following telegram sent to you:—

“Strongly oppose Constitution seventynine Amendment bill as violative of democratic and
secular norms and also repugnant, Contrary to principles of certain religions, including Islams
relating to families (stop) Bill undesirable misdirected and objectionable (stop) similar proposal
Suggested by Congress Sardar Swaran Singh Committee during emergency period was dropped
by late Indira Gandhi (stop) Letter follows.


2i
MEMORANDUM NO. 10

Submitted By:— PRAFULLA KUMAR MAHANTA
Leader of the Opposition, Assam Legislative Assembly

With reference to your letter (No. RS 29/94-Com (HRD), dated 20th September 1994
relating to the Constitution (Seventy-Ninth Amendment) Bill 1992, following points are
mentioned to you for consideration of the amendment of the Clause 6 of the said bill.

1. Section 2 of thirteenth Schedule requires amendment.
(i) Clause (a) Under the proviso will remain in tact;
(ii) Clause (b) Under the proviso be deleted and replaced by a second proviso as
hereunder—

“Provided further that any member having only one child on the date of commencement

of the Act shall not be disqualified if he begets a second child at any time after the
commencement of the Act and a child is actually born”.

(iii) The word “person” appearing in the first proviso be replaced by the word
“member”.

2. A new section 3 may be inserted in the Act as hereunder—

3. “The provision of the Act shall be equally applicable to all members irrespective of
Caste and religion to which they belong”.

4. “The bill needs clarification on the matter that in case a member lost one on both of
his children due to death etc. whether he may go for another child or not.”

MEMORANDUM NO. 11
Submitted By:— SYED SHAHBUDDIN, M.P.

While fully endorsed the Sections 2 and 3 of the draft, I consider Sections 4, 5 and 6 as
misconceived and inconsequential in controlling population or in establishing the small

family norm.

The Statement of Objects and Reasons include, in para 3, only one sentence to establish
a nexus between the object of legislation and its provision : “Elected representatives have to
set an example an demonstrate political will and commitment for population control”. This is
a very wide concept. There are many provisions under Directive Principles of State as well
as Fundamental Duties and 1 do not see any reason why only one of them should be singled
out for political disqualification.

Secondly, representation in the Legislature is not to serve only one specified purpose. A
legislator acts on behalf of his Constituency on all questions of public interest to the best of
his ability just as a lawyer pleads the case of his clients. In choosing a lawyer (or a doctor), a
person does not go into the question of whether the lawyer or the doctor practices family
planning or how many children he has. In the same way, most voters are not aware of nor
they particularly want to know, the number of children that a candidate has. Therefore, to
my mind, there is no nexus between the object and Reason of the Bill and the proposed
qualification for membership of the legislatures. In my view, such a provision could erode
the basic democratic right of the people freely to choose anyone as their representative, who


22

is otherwise qualified under the Constitution. What is worse, it shall take away the basic
right of any voter who has more than the prescribed number of children to stand for

election.

Needless to say that the proposed measure will not have any measureable impact on the
growth of population.

What is needed is social educational as well as positive incentives. Both these should be
covered by the National Population Policy.

There is yet another reason to oppose this provision. In our society, legislators alone do
not carry social prestige. In fact, they command less prestige than the wealth, the senior
Civil Servants and even top academicians. Are we going to prescribe a small family norm for
the top management, Civil Servants, bankers and academicians? I would, therefore, suggest
that the Bill should be trimmed by the Consultative Committee of this of its existing Sections
4, 5 and 6.

MEMORANDUM NO. 12

Submitted By:— SHRI VIKRAM VERMA
Leader of opposition
Madhya Pradesh Legislative Assembly

While appreciating the spirit and intensions behind the proposed legislation | would like
to make, certain submissions in this regard.

(a) Ours is a traditional society and especially in rural areas people still prefer for a
joint family pattern. The phrase used in the proposed legislation i.e. “the small family norm”
doesn’t connote the desired meaning. Alternatively the ‘small unit family norm’ may be
more accurate as well as technically correct.

(b) In my humble opinion operation of thirteenth shedule should be given effect in two
phases. First, article 102 (1) (b) should be implemented and after five years similar provision
in article 191 (1) (d) should be made operative. This would certainly be more practical as the
people serving in state politics shall be mentally prepared by that time. Similar provisions
should be enacted for the persons engaged in local self Govt. bodies and other elected
bodies.

MEMORANDUM NO. 13

Submitted By:— B.V. ABDULLA KOYA
Member of Parliament
(Rajya Sabha)

According to me, personnaly, I would feel the same bill creates more problems
misunderstandings and reactions and even encourage child killings of both unborn or newly
born babies.

Therefore I suggest that the bill is to be sufficiently circulated before adoption. The rest
in person.


ANNEXURE-IV

MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

VI
SIXTH MEETING’

The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday the 8th July, 1994 in Committee Room ‘D’
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Miss Saroj Khaparde
. Shri O.P. Kohli
. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
. Shri Md. Salim
Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
. Prof.'1.G Sanadi
. Prof. Ram Bakhash Singh Varma
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Viswanathan Kanithi
10, Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
11. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
12. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
13. Shri Aslam Sher Khan
14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
15. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia
17. Shri Anna Joshi
18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
19. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

9० 3 9७ ७ + w

“Minutes of I to V meetings of the Committee relate to matters not included in the report.

23


24

20. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
21. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
22. Shri Suraj Mandal
SPECIAL INVITEES
1. Shri H. Hanumanthappa, M.P.
2. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya, M.P.
WITNESS
1. Shri M. Ra:nachandran, Secretary (Department of Higher Education, U.P.)

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT (DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION)

1, Smt. Arti Kant, Director
2. Shri Nirmal Singh, Under Secretary
SECRETARIAT
1, Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary

2

3

4. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary

5. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer
6

. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer

* * * * * *

4. The Chairman, thereafter, informed the Members that the Chairman, Rajya Sabha
had referred the Constitution (Seventy-Ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992 to the Committee
which was introduced in Rajya Sabha on the 22nd December, 1992 and pending there, for
examination and report. The Chairman also informed that a Press Communique had been
issued inviting views of the individuals, organisations etc. interested in the subject matter of
the Bill to be received by the 4th July, 1994. He also requested Members to suggest the
names of the experts who could be appear before the Committee as witnesses.

6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.05 P.M. to meet again on Thursday, the 21st
July, 1994.

*Relatcs to other matters.


XI
ELEVENTH MEETIN.’*
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, tiie 24th August, 1994 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Dr. M. Aram
Shri O.P. Kohli
Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
10. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
11. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
12. Dr. Vasant Pawar
13. Shri K.T. Vandayar
14. Shri Inder Jit
15. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia
17. Shri Anna Joshi
18. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
19. Shri Ramchandra Dome
20. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
21. Shri Suraj Mandal
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

* * * * .

9० 3 9 ७ + (० ७७

“Minutes of VII to X meetings relate to matters not included in the report.
**Relates to other matters.

25


26

4. The Committee then discussed ubout its future programme and decided to take up
the following topics for consideration:—

i) Constitution (Seventy-Ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992;
ii) Functioning of Central Government Hospitals and Central Government Health
Scheme;
iii) Functioning of Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti and the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan;
and

iv) Steps for improvement of India’s performance in the International sports
events—functioning of the Sports Authority of India and various Sports Federations
receiving government grants.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 530 P.M.


जा
THIRTEENTH MEETING’

The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 8th September, 1994 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Dr. M. Aram
. Shri O.P. Kohli
. Shri Md. Salim
Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
. Prof. 1.6. Sanadi
. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Vasant Pawar
10. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
11. Shri Inder Jit
12. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
13. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
14. Dr. K.D. Jeswani
15. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

[i ee oS)

17. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

18. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

The Chairman introduced Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani, Member, Rajya Sabha,
to the members of the Committee, who had been nominated to the Committee recently.

3. The Committee then took up for consideration the Constitution (Seventy-Ninth

‘Minutes of XII meeting relates to matter not included in the report.

27


28

Amendment) Bill, 1992 and finalised the lists of witnesses to be called for ora! evidence in
the matter.

. * * * * *

5. The Committee, decided to meet again on Thursday, 22nd and Friday, 23rd
September, 1994 to hear oral evidence in connection with the Constitution (Seventy-Ninth

Amendment) Bill, 1992.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on
Thursday, 22nd September, 1994.

*Relates to other matter.


XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 22nd September, 1994 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. M. Aram
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde
4. Shri O.P. Kohli
5. Shri Md. Salim
6. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi
7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
8. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
9. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA
10. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
11. Shri Z.M. Kahandole
12. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
13. Shri Inder Jit
14. Shri Rambadan
15. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
16. Dr. K.D. Jeswani
17. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
18. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia
19. Shri Anna Joshi
20. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
21. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRIES
(i) MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS
1. Shri R.L. Meena, Additional Secretary, (Department of Legal Affairs)

2. Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Joint Secretary and Additional Legislative Counsel,
(Legislative Department)

3. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Assistant Legislative Counsel, (Legislative Department)

29


30

(ii) MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE, DEPARTMENT OF
FAMILY WELFARE

1. Shri V.K. Shunglu, Secretary

2. Shri Indrajit Pal, Director (Policy)
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Chairman introduced Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh, newly nominated member to
the Committee.

3. The Chairman then informed the Committee that the Additional Secretary of the
Department of Legal Affairs had written to the Secretariat that the Law Secretary, who was
to appear before the Committee for tendering oral evidence on that day in connection with
the Constitution (Seventy-Ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992, might not be in Delhi and has
nominated him to appear before the Committee. The Committee took a serious view of the
casual manner in which the Parliamentary matter was dealt by the Law Secretary. The
Committee was of the view that the Law Secretary should himself have written to the
Chairman of the Committee seeking permission. The Committee, therefore, decided to hear
the oral evidence of the Law Secretary on sdme other date to seek his personal clarifications
in the matter. The Committee, however, decided to hear the oral evidence of the Additional
Secretary for preliminary discussion on the Bill.

4. The Committee then heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses in
connection with the Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992.

5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.

6. The Chairman, thereafter, informed the Committee that Dr. M.S. Swaminathan, who
was invited to tender oral evidence at 10.00 a.m. on 23rd September, 1994, has expressed his
inability on the ground that he would be abroad till 4th and that he would be available after
6th October, 1994. The Committee, accordingly, decided to hear his views on some of its
later sittings. The Committee also decided to meet at 11.00 a.m. on 23rd September, 1994,
instead of at 10.00 a.m.

7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on Friday,
the 23rd September, 1994.


XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. and adjourned for lunch at 1.30 p.m. to meet again at
3.00 p.m. on Friday, the 23rd September, 1994 in Committee Room *A° Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

10. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

11. Dr. Vasant Pawar

12. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
13. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

14. Shri Inder Jit

15. Shri Rambadan

16. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

17. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
18. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

19. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

20. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
21. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

22. Shri Anna Joshi

23. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
24. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

25. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

WITNESSES

1. Prof. Hemalata Helen Simon,
Director, National Institute of Health and Family Welfare.

2. Shri M.D. Asthana,
Financial Commissioner (Development),
Government of Haryana.

3. Smt. Awabai B. Wadia,
President, Family Planning Association of India.

०9० 53 ७ (७ + ० ७

4. Shri R.S. Mathur,
Executive Director, National Federation of Labour Co-operatives Ltd.

31


5. Smt. Sudha Tewari,
Managing Director, Parivar Sewa Sanstha.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY
AFFAIRS (LEGISLATIVE DEPAR TMENT)

1. Shri T.K. Vishwanathan,
Joint Secretary and Additional Legislative Counsel.

2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Assistant Legislative Counsel.
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above witnesses in connection with the

Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992.
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.

4. The Committee then discussed its future programme and decided to meet again on
6th and 7th October, 1994, to hear further oral evidence on the above mentioned Bill. The

Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m.


XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 6th October, 1994 in Commitice

Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. M. Aram
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
4. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
5. Shri Md. Salim
6. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
7. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi
8. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
9. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

10. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

11. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

12. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

13. Dr. Vasant Pawar

14. Prof. P.J. Kurien

15. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
16. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

17. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
18. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

21. Shri Anna Joshi

22. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
23. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

24. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
25. Shri Suraj Mandal

WITNESSES

1. Shri Chandra Prakash, Secretary, Rural Development

Government of Rajasthan.

2. Mrs. Aparna Basu, Secretary-General, All India Women's Conference.

3. Mrs. Sham Mohini Pathak, Senior Member-in-charge,

Conference.

33

and Panchayati Raj,

All

India

Women’s


SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2, *+ . .

3. The Committee, thereafter, took the oral evidence of above mentioned witnesses on
the Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992.

A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.

7 . . .

5. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Friday,
the 7th October, 1994.


XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Friday, the 7th October, 1994 in Committee Room
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

Miss Saroj Khaparde

Shri O.P. Kholi

. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.0. Sanadi

Shri Ashok Kumar Sen

10. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

11. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
12. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

13. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

14. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
15. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
16. Shri Inder Jit

17. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
18. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Dr. G. L. Kanaujia

21. Shri Anna Joshi

22. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

23. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
24. Shri Suraj Mandal

SPECIAL INVITEES

1. Shri E. Balanandan, M.P.
2. Dr. Shankar Dayal Singh, M.P.
3. Smt. Suseela Gopalan, M.P.
President, All India Democratic Women’s Association.
4. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya, M.P.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY
AFFAIRS:—

1. Dr. P.C. Rao, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs.

०9० 3 9 (७ + ०० (०

2. Shri R.L. Meena, Additional Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs.

3. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Joint Secretary and Additional Legislative Counsel,
Legislative Department.

35


36

4. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Assistant Legislative Counsel, Legislative Department.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND
(DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY WELFARE)

FAMILY WELFARE
1. Shri Indrajit Pal, Director (Policy)

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of Dr. P.C. Rao, Secretary, Department of

Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs in connection with the
Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992.

A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.

3. The Committee also had the benefit of the views of some Members of Parliament
who attended the meeting as special invitees mentioned above, on the Constitution (Seventy-
ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992.

4, * है *

5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 p.m.

*Rclates to other matter.



जरा
EIGHTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 25th October, 1994, in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kholi

4. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

5. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

7. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
8. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
9. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
10. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
11. Shri Z. M. Kahandole
12. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
13. Shri Inder Jit
14. Shri Rambadan
15. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
16. Dr. K. D. Jeswani
17. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
_ 18. Dr. G. L. Kanaujia
19. Shri Anna Joshi
20. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
21. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
22. Shri Suraj Mandal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Chairman informed the Committee that Shri Syed Sahabuddin, M.P., who was
to attend the meeting that day could not come due to some unavoidable circumstances.

3. The Committee, thereafter, held general discussion on the Constitution (Seventy-
ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992. Tne discussion was not concluded.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m. to meet again at 9.15 a.m. on
Wednesday, the 26th October, 1994.

37


XX
TWENTIETH MEETING’

The Committtee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 8th November, 1994 in Committee
Room *4', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Miss Saroj Khaparde

3. Shri O.P. Kholi

4. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
5. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

6. Dr. Viswantham Kanithi

7. Shri Z. M. Kahandole

8. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda

9. Shri Rambadan

10. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

11. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya

12. Dr. G. L. Kanaujia

13. Shri Anna Joshi

14. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

15. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

16. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

17. Shri Suraj Mandal

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRIES

1. Shri Indrajit Pal, Director, Department of Family Welfare, Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare. ;

2. Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel, Legislative
Department, Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs.

3. Shri Z. S. Negi, Deputy Legislative Counsel, Legislative Department,
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs.

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer
2. The Committee, in the first instance, took up further clause by clause consideration
of the Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992 and after some discussion
adopted the Bill without any change.
Sue *
4. * * *

5. The Committee, then, adjourned at 1.30 p.m.

* *
*

*Minutes of XIX meeting of the Committce relates to matters not included in this report.

38


XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING

The Committtee met at 4.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 20th December, 1994 in Room No.
67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

10. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
11. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

12. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

13. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
14. Dr. Vasant Pawar

15. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

16. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

17. Shri Ummareddy Venkateswarlu

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

Pern auaen

2. * * * ‘
3) * * * .
| * * *

5. The Committee also considered the draft report on the Constitution (Seventy-ninth
Amendment) Bill, 1992. After some discussion, the Committee decided to further consider

the draft report at its next meeting.

6. The Committee also decided to hold its next meetings on the 3rd, 4th and Sth January,
1995.

7. The Committee then, adjourned at 5.00 P.M.

*Relates to other matter.

39


XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 3rd January, 1995 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1.

Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Ze
3s
4.
Be
6.

Dr. M. Aram a
Shri O.P. Kholi

Shri Md. Salim

Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

uk

8.

9:
10.
11.
12.
13;
14.
15.
16.
Ms
18.
19;
20.

Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
Dr. Vasant Pawar

Prof. P.J. Kurien

Shri Z.M. Kahandole

Shri Inder Jit

Shri Rambadan

Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

Shri Anna Joshi

Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. At the outset, the Chairman wished a very happy and prosperous New Year to all.

rhs
4.

* * *

5. The Committee then took up the revised draft Fifteenth Report of the Committee on
the Constitution (Seventy Ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992 for consideration. The Committee
adopted the report subject to the following changes in the revised draft:—

5.1 In Para 8.8 the words “The witnesses were generally” were substituted by “However,
many of them were”.

5.2 In Para 8.11 the last six lines were deleted and was substituted by, “The amended act

“Relates to other matter.


41

came into effect from April 23, 1994. However, the Government of Rajasthan promulgated
an ordinance on December 30, 1994, which stipulates that the date of commencement of this
provision would be 27th November, 1995. According to State Government, Elections to
Panchayats are scheduled to be held during January-February, 1995”.

5.3 Para 10, line 9, the words “and sensitising” were substituted by “among” and the
words “at large” were deleted.

5.4 Para 10.7, line 1, the words “a large” were substituted by the words “an over-
whelming”, and in line two, the word “overwhelmingly” was substituted by “whole
heartedly”.

5.5 Para 10.9, line 2, the words “such of those” were deleted.

5.6 Para 11.2, the first two lines were substituted by “The Committee notes that though
it may be contended that an amendment of the Constitution may not be necessary and the
object of the Bill of...... hr

5.7 In Para 11.8, in line 4 after the word “consensus”, the following words were added,
“and ensure its smooth passage”.

6, The Committee then authorised its Chairman to finalise the date on which the report
is to be presented/laid on both the Houses of Parliament and other details relating thereto.

7, The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 P.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on
Wednesday, the 4th January, 1995.


ANNEXURE-V
Ministry of Law, Justice & C.A.
(Legislative Department)

The proposals contained in D.O. letter No. 230225992-PLY, dated 13.11.1992,
received from Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Family
Welfare) and the note containing the views of Mr. Justice Retd. V.R. Krishna lyer have
been examined, The proposals, in brief, relate to —

(a) amending Part IV of the Constitution relating to directive principles of State
policy so as to insert a new article to cast a duty on the Government to take
measures to reduce the rate of population growth and make available medical,
economic and other facilities to promote small family norm;

(b) to amend Part IVA of the Constitution relating to fundamental duties so as
to cast a duty on every cititzen to actively promote and practice the small family
norm,

(c) to amend articles 102 and 191 of the Constitution so as to disqualify a
person, having more than two children, for being chosen as, and for being, a
Member of either House of Parliament or a Member of the Legislative Assembly or
Legislative Council of a State.

2. In so far as proposals (a) & (b) of the preceding paragraph are concerned, the matter
was examined in this Ministry in 1990 and the then Minister of Law and Justice (Shri Dinesh
Goswami) in his minutes, dated 20.9.1990 observed that “though I feel that the amendment
is not necessary yet when the administrative Ministry is keen for it, I will have no objection,
as no constitutional or legal point is involved”. The administrative Ministry finally insisted
for clearance of the Note for the Cabinet and it was cleared by this Ministry on 11.12.1990
and the same was considered by the then Cabinet and the proposal was not approved as per
minutes of the meeting of the Cabinet held on 23rd January, 1991. In case the administrative
Ministry want to persist with the said amendment in Parts IV and IVA of the Constitution
from policy angle, we may not have any legal and constitutional objections.

3. In so far as proposal (c) of paragraph 1 is concerned, it may be mentioned that sub-
clause (e) of clause (1) of articles 102 and 191 already provides that further disqualifications
can be laid down by or under any law made by the Parliament. Further Entry 20A of List
Ill of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution enables Parliament to make a law on
“population control and family planning.” In this view of the matter, the Constitution
amendment may not be strictly necessary for disqualifying people’s representatives in
Parliament or State Legislatures. However, for giving effect to this proposal by way of
Constitution amendment or a Parliamentary law, the following issues have to be carefully
considered, namely:—

(i) The amendment will operate only prospectively. During the discussions with Shri
S.S. Kapur, Director (Policy), Department of Family Welfare, on this point, it was
mentioned by him that the present office holders will not be affected. This raises an
issue as to whether the present office holders will be eligible for nominations in
elections to be held after the amendment. Perhaps the intention is that the

42

°-


43

amendment will not apply in the case of persons (whether holding any office or
not) who have more than two children before the coming into force of the
amendment or within one year of such amendment.

(ii) It may also be examined by the administrative Ministry as to whether the elected
representative who are already Members of Parliament or State Legislatures and
already have more than two children, will be disqualified if they have any further
child after the proposed amendment takes effect.

It is also observed that certain exceptions will have to be made with reference to
the proposed amendment whereby persons having more than two children in
certain special circumstances will be outside the purview of the amendment. This
has also been stated by Mr. Justice V.R. Krishna lyer. However, the administrative
Ministry will have to examine the matter thoroughly to cover the aspect of
exceptions as mentioned by Justice Iyer.

(iii

4. The administrative Ministry. may prepare,a Note for the Cabinet to give effect to the
above proposal after examining the matter in the light of above. A draft of the proposed
legislation will be prepared at the appropriate stage. The Note may be sent to this
Department and Deptt. of Legal Affairs of this Ministry.

5. Secretary may kindly see before this note is sent to the Department of Family
Welfare.


ANNEXURE-VI
Extracts from the Haryana Panchayati Raj Act, 1994

175. (1) No person shall be a Sarpanch; Up-Sarpanch or a Panch of a Gram Panchayat
or a member of a Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parisad or continue as such who—

(a) has, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, been convicted—

(i) of an. offence under the Protection of Civil Rights Act. 1955 (Act 22 of 1955), unless a
period of five years, or such lesser period as the Government say allow in any particular
case, has elapsed since his conviction; or

(ii) of any other offence and been sentenced to imprisonment for not 1055 than six months,
unless a period of five years, or such lesser period as the Government may allow in any
particular case, has elapsed since his release; or

(b) to (p)

(q) has more than two living children:

Provided that a person having more than two children on or upto the expiry of one year of the
commencement of this Act, shall not be deemed to be disqualified.

Extract from Rajasthan Panchayati Raj Act, 1994

19, Qualifications for election as a Panch or a member.—Every person registered as a voter in
the list of voters of a Panchayati Raj Institution shall be qualified for election as a Panch or, as the
case may be, a member of such Panchayati Raj Institution unless such person—

(a) is disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for the purposes of clection
to the Legislature of the State of Rajasthan:

Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is 1०55 than 25 years of age if
he has attained the age of 21 years;

(b) holds a salaried whole-time or part-time appointment under a local authority;

(c) has been dismissed from State Government service for misconduct involving moral
turpitude and has been declared to be disqualified for employment in the public service;

(d) holds any salaried post or place of profit under any Panchayati Raj Institution;

(e) has directly or indirectly by himself or by his partner, employer or employces, any share or
interest in any contract with, by or on behalf of the Panchayati Raj Institution concerned
while owning such share or interest in any work done for;

(f) is a leper or is suffering from any other bodily or mental defect or discase rendering him
incapable for work;

(g) has been convicted by a competent court of an offence ifvolving moral turpitude;
(h) is for the time being ineligible for election under section 38;

(i) has not paid, for two months from the date of the presentation of the notice of demand
therefor, the amount of any tax or fees imposed by the Panchayati Raj Institution
concerned;

(j) is employed as a legal practitioner on behalf of or against the Panchayati Raj Institution
concerned;

44

Disqualifications,


aa
pe

(k) has been convicted of an offence punishable under the Rajasthan Prevention of Mrityu
Bhoj Act, 1960; and

(1) has more than two children:

Provided that—

(i) a person shall not, by reason only of his being a share-holder in or a member of any
incorporated company or a cooperative socicty registered under the law for the time
being in force in the State of Rajasthan, be held to be interested in any contract entered
between the company or cooperative society and the Panchayati Raj Institution;

(ii) for the purpose of clauses (c), (g) and (k) any person shall become cligible for clection
after a lapse of six years from the date of his dismissal or conviction, as the case may be,
or earlicr if he is declared cligible for election by a gencral or special order of the State
Government in this behalf;

(iii) for the purpose of clause (i), a person shall not be deemed to be disqualified if he has
paid the amount of the tax or fee duc from him before the date of filling his nomination
papers;

“(iv) the birth during the period from the date of commencement of this Act, hereinafter in
this proviso referred to as the date of such commencement, to 27th November, 1995, of
an additional child shall not be taken into consideration for the purpose of the
disqualification mentioned in clause (1) and a person having more than two children
(excluding the child, if any, born during the period from the date of such
commencement to 27th November, 1995) shall not be disqualificd under that clause for
so long as the number of children he had on the date of commencement of this Act does
not increase.”

Explanation.—For the purpose of clause (1) of section 19, where the couple has only one child from
the earlier delivery or deliveries on the date of commencement of this Act and
thereafter, any number of children born out of a single subsequent delivery shall be
deemed to be one cntity.


[80 81४4 ३ fo 1%9159/2109 nod tert. (४)
Bam Qset 1०४ ton

Aowblida owt “ngs का 91 11)

Be IG ivert

im ono si oblod-orade 8 Bigs २॥ 10 ying 19879 गा] ॥812 #9/71905& 9
Wi wel oH 1990 942 संब १००७३ 4४॥१२६क७छ: ४ 3० ae 92870व४४.
19गराबज ee ॥ ५७० की 00591 50 ,11॥1% 151 19 वाहा89॥ Gime! ni god
aotunpal फटी Aoyainitodt bine ५७967  svidiaqous Fa शाइ1॥09 2A)

0299 tol oldigils 00:90 Hae, noeioq wan (ap 8683), +(०): 226/89 1७ 4०१7०
cam den 901 an noite 50 820७8 at to. sich 408 THOT हछ४%-ह६ Yo /%8(६| &
ant 10:%10 Ieisoqe to Inonsg & yd noligals jo? ofdigits 9915३ क ७1 1.1

cileilad’ ait ai 10५

भी UW 990॥199शी od ot bomasb.od 10॥ Unite nueva w(t) %७७॥|० 2G 98७थ२४/7०४! 101 Li,
अडताधाता हा 90111 16 86% sit solsed mid mun) oub 5-10 Kal ot 16 Inueme ०01 ६4

#येशो हाजी, 29# आग! 10 119990॥171009 10 sib sis mei 90040 ort grituh
19 ROOT rodmbvabt १४६ ov 07/09/001७: ४०२ to 0100 90% 0/057357 ox: {
॥ lo s26qiug 37. tol anerablano> ayn: nour) 70 ton 1416 sbfido. Isnoisilet
nothlids ows nar 210७ galved: रण 8 bine (1) geval nb bononiam nojssili!
Jo ota ov mort beltng ७ 87000 ined yng, के 9103. adr ants!
ly 1911 1997० boitlenpab’ad Yon 17 (2001 ,१३५४०४०१ 18 ot inomsan
+ दा! To 11911921/7 00 IO stub SAT AG bun od tobi Yo 15610 oMbeT ४
i sebotoni ion

mont 0019 ७1० yino asd siqhos.artaodw 21 feiss 10. (1) dents to seoqnug ७७/ 104— onan
ben toA 2th 10 119199196703 Wo Sink 9091-10 2aiieviish 10: 21519 191105 ०11
od lista yroviteb 19099800% 3909%)16 suo mid आज 9 01530 19800 Yne rotors.
(४४५ 506 9d के bom
: es "oh
ea Pe

33