ही की: पल कक

CONTENTS

CoMPoSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
PREFACE
REPORT
Minutes

PAGES
(i)-Gi)
(ii)
1-8
9-16


R COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1998-99)

Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Oscar Fernandes

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Shri O. Rajagopal

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray हे
Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
Shri Sartaj Singh

Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
Shri Chinmayanand Swami
Dr. Sanjay Singh

Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
Shri Indrajeet Mishra

Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
Shri Ashok Singh

Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
Shri Ashok Gehlot

Shri Sharhanur Shiv Shankarappa
Shri Ajit Jogi

Shri V.M. Sudheeran

Shri Laxman Singh

Shri Shankar Pannu

Shri Abdul Hamid

Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Samik Lahiri

Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja
Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
Shri H.P. Singh

Shri Chandu.-Lal Ajmeera
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
Shrimati Krishna Bose

Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
Shri S. Arumugham

@


Gi)

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixty-seventh Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 50) of the Department of Culture, Ministry of Human
Resource Development for the year 1998-99.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource Development and also heard the
Secretary and other Officials of the Department on the said Demands for Grants in its
meeting held on 22nd June, 1998.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the Ist July,
1998.

S.B. CHAVAN
New Deut; Chairman,
July 1, 1998 Department-Related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on

Aspdfianl Oy AUN Sene) Human Resource Development.

(ii)


REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION

1.1 The Department of Culture plays a vital role in the promotion and dissemination of art
and culture. The aim of the Department is to develop ways and means for instilling basic values
and perceptions in the minds of the people, particularly the young. The Department also
undertakes the programme of preservation, encouragement and dissemination of various
manifestations of creative activity, both past and present. The Department is engaged in
excavation, conservation and promotion of ancient monuments and historic sites;
administration of libraries, museums and institutions of anthropology; collection, preservation
and ethnology of national character; catering to institutions and organisations in the areas of
Buddhist and Tibetan Studies; promoting literary, visual and performing arts; observing
centenaries and anniversaries of important personalities and entering into cultural agreements
with foreign countries. The Department carries out its various programmes through two
attached offices, six subordinate offices and 26 autonomous organisations.

1.2 During the Ninth Five Year Plan period, the focus would be on a comprehensive plan
for preservation of the archeological heritage and development of the monumental complexes in
the country. Efforts would also be directed towards the preservation of archival heritage and the
promotion of classical, folk and tribal art and crafts and oral traditions which are threatened
with extinction. हे

1.3 The Department had prepared a modest Ninth Five Year Plan of Rs. 1124.40 crores for
effectively funding a variety of activities in Archaeology, Archives, Anthropology, Performing
Art, Buddhist and Tibetan Studies and library sector. As against this proposal of Rs. 1124.40
crores, only Rs. 794.30 crores have been allowed. This.reduction of Rs. 330 crores which is
almost 30% of the proposal means a steep cut in the promotional and support activities in the
field of performing arts (Rs. 97 crores), ASI (Rs. 49 crores), museums (Rs. 58 crores). The
Ninth Five Year Plan allocation for the Department of Culture is Rs. 794.30 crores of the total
plan outlay of Rs. 505161 crores which is only 0.16% of it. Whereas in Eighth Plan it was 0.19%
of the total plan outlay. The Committee feels that against the ongoing onslaught of western
culture through electronic media a greater attention towards cultural activities in general and a
reasonable budgetary allocation in particular in this regard is quite essential.

1.4 The Secretary informed the Committee that the 1998-99 budget provision of the
Department is Rs. 301.2 crores, plan and non-plan put together. Of this as much as Rs. 235
crores or roughly 75% of the total provision has been earmarked for 35 institutions attached to
the Department. If Rs. 22.24 crores, a one time provision for commemoration of 50th
anniversary of India’s Independence is excluded from the current year’s budget, the provision
for these institutions account for 81% of the Department’s outlay, the Committee was
informed.

1.5 During 1998-99, the Department projected a plan outlay of Rs. 200.40 crores.
However, finally the Department's plan allocation come down to Rs. 145 crores of which Rs. 5
crores is earmarked for the Science City, Jallandhar. According to the decision of the CCEA the
allocation for Science City has to be an additionality. Therefore, the annual plan outlay for the
Department is Rs. 140 crores only which is lower than the 1997-98 Revised Estimates of Rs.
143.21 crores. The Committee was given to understand that with the meagre Plan allocation the
Department would be handicapped in carrying out its functions effectively. Keeping in कल
projections made by the Department the Committee recommends that the Plan allocation for
1998-99 should be increased at the RE stage. x

1


1.6 The Secretary informed the Committee that during the current year, attention will
be given to all the sectors under Culture. However, the activities of the Department will be
particularly focussed on conservation and preservation of our Cultural Heritage, Scheme on
the National Culture Fund, Linkage between Education & Culture, Development of a Public
Library Movement, Archives Strengthening of Museums and Art Galleries. It has also been
decided to concentrate on a limited number of sites and bring them up to world standards.
These are Taj Mahal & Khajuraho, Ajartta & Ellora, Konark, Bodh Gaya, Nalanda,
Vaishali & Sarnath and Hampi, the Secretary added. Emphasis will also be there on
improving the Archaeological Museums.

1.7 The Department further informed that it is exploring the possibility of promoting
networking among allied institutions and exchange of professional information and expertise.
The Department is also trying to build strong linkages between the Central Akademies, the
Zonal Cultural Centres, State Governments and State Akademies so that there can be
greater pooling of resources and coordinated programme planning by which the out-reach of
the public sector cultural institutions can be extended.

1.8 Committed Liability:- The Committee in its 58th Report had recommended that the
Department should make a thorough review of the schemes and identify the committed
liability. In this matter, the Committee considered the Report of the Tenth Finance
Commission. The Tenth Finance Commission have observed as under:

“Although the Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of reference in

deciding the cut-off date for transfer of committed liability on account of plan scheme,

the incremental liabilities that would arise in 1997-98 on account of 8th Plan Scheme
completed in the next two financial years would have to be provided for. The

Commission are, therefore of the view that the Planning Commission may consider

providing for the maintenance of such schemes till 1999-2000 in the plan itself as was

done for the schemes of the two Annual Plans of 1990-91 and 1991-92.”

The Committee in this connection heard the views of the Secretary, Department of
Expenditure last year to clarify the position. He informed the Committee that even though
communications were sent to various Ministries, the Ministries could not identify the
committed expenditure on time. Accordingly a lumpsum amount has been provided under
Demand No. 31. The Secretary also assured that if required more funds for this purpose will
be provided at the RE stage. He also stated that the Departments may approach the
Department of Expenditure for their share.

1.9 The Department in its Action Taken Report has informed that only a certain
portion of the committed liability could be accommodated within the over-all allocation
under Non-Plan due to the sudden increase in Non-Plan requirements on account of the
implementation of the 50 Pay Commission’s recommendations. The Department further
stated that it has 12 schemes. under the Plan Head whose Non-Plan component is not
‘significant. It is meant only to defray the travel expenses of experts, meet the cost of their
sitting fees etc.. Therefore, there is little liability to be transferred from Plan to Non-Plan in
respect of these schemes. However, the budgets of individual organisations are being
reviewed to ensure that all Non-Plan activities which are undertaken with Plan funds are
transferred to Non-Plan. This will be reviewed once again this year when the Revised
Estimates are prepared in September-October, 1998.

The Committee views with concern that the Finance Ministry has not honoured such
clear cut commitment made before the Parliamentary Committee. As the recommendations

of the Tenth Finance Commission have been accepted by the Government, it is the
e


3

commitment of Government too. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department of Culture should get the assurance implemented without any delay.

1.10 National Culture Fund:- The Committee was informed that the National Culture
Fund with the Government contribution of Rs. 19.5 crores was created on 28.11.99. So far,
Rs. 4 crores have been released during 1996-97 and 1997-98 from the plan budget of the
Department. In addition commitment of Rs. 1.61 crores which includes Rs. 1.5 crores from
Indo-British Fiftieth Anniversary Trust have been secured till now.

_ 1.11 The Committee is, however, constrained to note that incentives for contributions to
the NCF are inadequate. The Committee was informed that efforts of the Department for
securing 100% exemption under Section 80G(2) of the Income Tax Act to the donations
made to the National Culture Fund have not met with success so far. There are many other
organisations like the National Defence Fund, National Children’s Fund and National Sports
Fund, Universities etc. which are already having 100% tax exemption. The Committee feels
that a total exemption to the contribution made to NCF will prove to be a much desired
incentive for the possible donors. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
contribution to the NCF be fully exempted from Income Tax.

Il. ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA

2.1 The Committee desired that there should be a Light and Sound Programme at
Ajanta & Ellora. The Department in its reply stated that the Light and Sound
im protected monuments are organised by the Department of Tourism, Government of India
or the State Tourism Department with the permission of the ASI. The Department assured .,
that suggestion of the Committee would be communicated to the Central and State Tourism
Departments.

2.2 The Committee expressed its serious concern over the announcements made by
many archeaologists regarding dates of their findings without proper verification. The
Department clarified that apart from conducting excavations themselves, the ASI also
authorises the State Departments of Archaeology, Universities and Research Institutions for
excavation work. The ASI staff is fully trained to date the findings based on established
scientific methods. However, ASI is not responsible for statements given in this regard by
other agencies conducting excavation.

2.3 The Committee took serious note of the lack of preservation of monuments,
paintings and sculptures. The Department explained that the ASI has 3593 Centrally
protected monuments and complexes in the country. ASI has been taking up about 500
protected monuments for conservation, preservation and environmental development
annually. Besides that, paintings and sculptures in the Centrally protected monuments are
also taken up for chemical treatment. However, funds allocated for the overall conservation
of protected monuments and museums are quite meagre. For 1998-99, despite a projection
of Rs. 48 crores under plan, only Rs. 20 crores have been provided.

2.4 The Committee recommends that additional funds should be provided for ASI at the
RE stage so that ASI can increase the number of. monuments to be taken up annually.

2.5 The issue of creation of 5000 posts of Monument Attendants against an overall
requirement of about 11000 additional posts has been commented upon by the Committee in
its earlier Reports. In its 58th Report, the Committee had strongly recommended that the
Department should take immediate steps for creation of these posts and their subsequent
filling up. The Department in its reply has informed that the proposal, initiated by ASI in
1996 was kept in abeyance in view of Ministry of Finance instructions dated 9.2.1997 putting


4

a ban on creation of new posts. Meanwhile, ASI suggested that a Committee be constituted
with a Member from the SIU to look into the actual requirement of Monument Attendants.
This proposal was not accepted by the Integrated Finance Division and it was processed
further in consultation with the FA and referred to the Planning Commission in November,
1997. Based on their advice, a draft EFC proposal was prepared and sent to the appraising
agencies including the Planning Commission for comments. Comments from all the
appraising agencies have not yet reached and a reminder was last sent by the ASI in early
May, the Department informed.

2.6 The Committee takes serious note of virtually no progress being made in the matter
of filling up of posts of Monument Attendants. The Committee can well imagine the time
that would be taken by when these posts would be finally filled up. It is very surprising that
the proposal for additional Monument Attendants initiated in 1996 has not been finalised
even after a lapse of almost two years. The Committee wonders what would be the state of
3593 centrally protected monuments in the care of only 3443 Attendants till now. Hence the
Committee recommends that steps must be taken in this direction without further delay.

गा. NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

3.1 The Committee in its 58th Report has stressed upon the need for improvement of
services provided by the National Archives. The Committee was given to understand that
the plan allocation for NAI was reduced from Rs. 3.50 crores to Rs. 2.65 crores at RE stage
in 1997-98 because the Computerisation Programme was deferred. Also the proposals to
revise the scheme of Financial Assistance for preservation of Archival material did not
materialise. The Department clarified that the allocation for NAI has been restored in BE
1998-99 since NAI has already initiated action to implement the Computerisation
Programme. Preparation of: computerised indices has been taken up with assistance of
ET&T, a public sector undertaking. This would faciliate retrieval of documents needed by
scholars. The Committee hopes that funds earmarked for National Archives in BE 1998-99
would be utilised fully.

3.2 As a result of efforts made by the Department, the officials of the National
Archives, System Specialists, young researchers and senior academicians of the Indian
Council of Historical Research are engaged, at present, in finding out ways and means to
make the Indices more user friendly, the Committee was informed.

3.3 The Committee suggested that as the National Archives was going in for large scale
Computerisation, research scholars visiting NAI should be allowed to use Lap-Top
Computers. The Secretary assured the Committee that the use of Lap-Top Computers by
Research Scholars will be permitted.

IV. MUSEUMS ‘

4.1 Indian Museum, Calcutta—The Committee had expressed its concern over the need
for expansion of space for increasing the range of display in the Indian Museum, Calcutta.
The Department has informed that although some upgradation has been executed during
1997-98, installation of Videogames, audio playback system, interactive display methods and
central air-conditioning of the building depended upon the completion of the new annexe
building. When asked to specify the time by when the proposed annexe building was likely
to be completed, the Department informed the Committee that the plan for constructing the
new Annexe Building of the Indian Museum which was taken up in October 1993 was
estimated to be completed within a span of 3 years from the date of approval by the
Calcutta Municipal Corporation. Unfortunately, work was stalled on account of an


5

injunction passed by the Calcutta High Court in July, 1994 which has since been vacated.
However, the estimate (Rs. 19.50 crores) for the building has still to be approved by the
Expenditure Finance Committee, which is, at present under exantination of the Department.
The Department further informed that the project for construction of the annexe building is
expected to be completed within a span of 5 years from the commencement of the actual
work, subject to availability of necessary funds for this purpose.

4.2 The Committee is constrained to note that no serious efforts have been made by the
Department with regard to construction of new annexe building for the Indian Museum,
Calcutta. Estimate for the building at present under examination of the Department is still
to be approved by EFC. The Committee can foresee that there is no likelihood of
construction of annexe building being started in near future. The Committee strongly
recommends that Department should get cleared all the procedural delays and monitor the
construction work of new annexe building of Indian Museum, Calcutta closely.

4.3 Salarjung Museum, Hyderabad—Expressing its concern over a number of thefts that
had taken place in the Salarjung Museum, the Committee had enquired about details of
action taken by the Government in this regard. The Department informed the Committee
that CBI enquiry in this regard is still continuing and its report is awaited. The Committee
feels that the CBI enquiry be completed at the earliest and appropriate action be taken. The
responsibility for the lapses should also be fixed.

4.4 While giving details about other remedial measures taken by them, the Department
also stated that a “Review Committee” has been set up by the Government to review Salar
jung Museum Act and Rules etc. and to draw up a Perspective Plan for the Museum.
However, the Review Committee was unable to finalise its ‘report due to the resignation of
its Chairman. Approval for the composition of the revised Committee as proposed by the
Salarjung Museum Board in its meeting held on 19.2.98 is awaited. The Committee falls to
understand the reasons for undue delay for approving the Revised Review Committee. The
Committee therefore, recommends that action in this regard should be taken without further
delay.

4.5 The Committee expressed its concern over the slow pace of construction of the new
wing of Salarjung Museum. The Department in its reply has informed that the NBCC were
not able to hand over the completed building by the target date of December, 1995. This
slow progress has been viewed seriously by the Salarjung Museum Board. All pending work
is expected to be completed by the end of August, 1998 and the Eastern and European
galleries made operational by October, 1998. The Committee takes serious note of the very
slow pace of construction work in Salarjung Museum and strongly recommends that the
works must be finished and galleries made operational within the time-schedule.

4.6 The Committee enquired about steps being taken to professionally catalogue the
collections of Salarjung Museum. The Department informed that the work of preparing
Catalogue/Index Cards for each art object has been completed in 1983 itself. However,
some cards were incomplete as far as pasting photographs was concerned. So far, 33,703
cards have been completed leaving a balance of 14,000 cards. The Committee hopes that
remaining work would be completed: by December, 1998.

५. LIBRARIES

5.1 Rural Libraries—The Committee was given to understand that the Rural Library
Scheme was proposed to be implemented through the Raja Rammohan Library Foundation
under the Scheme-of Financial Assistance for setting up Rural Libraries at the Panchayat


level. However, the Department informed that the scheme for establishing Rural Libraries at
the Panchayat level was drafted in consultation with the State Governments and referred to
the Planning Commission for approval. The Planning Commission, after examining the
proposal in detail, communicated in September, 1997 that they were unable to support the
idea in view of the NDC approved policy to transfer all Centrally Sponsored Schemes
(barring exceptional cases) to the States. In view of the NDC decision the Department now
wishes to support the State and local Governments to strengthen existing Rural Libraries.
For this, there is scope within the existing scheme of Raja Rammohan Roy Library
Foundation, the Committee was informed. Close coordination will be maintained with the
National Literacy Mission. The Department further informed that Library legislation has
been enacted in 10 States and action is being taken to persuade other States. The Committee
is of the opinion that steps should be taken to make Rural Library Scheme a reality with the
coordination of the State Governments. Keeping in view the noble objective behind this
scheme, the Committee desires that the Department should again approach the Planning
Commission.

VI. PROMOTION OF ART AND CULTURE

6.1 Centenaries—The Committee desired to ma about
Department in holding various centenary celebrations duri: -98. The Department in its
reply stated that during last year, the birth cente celebrations of Netaji Subhash
Chandra Bose, Zakir Hussain and Shri V.K. Krishna Menon, Enlightenment of Bhagwan
Raman and commemoration of the 400th death anniversary of Maharana Pratap were held.
Besides that the observance of the 50th anniversary of the Martyrdom of Mahatma Gandhi,
125th birth anniversary of Sri Aurobindo and birth bi-centenary of Mirza Ghalib have also
begun; Programmes for the current year are commencement of celebrations of the 600th
birth anniversary of Sant Kabir and the birth centenary of Shri Gulzari Lal Nanda and also
preparations for celebration for the 300th anniversary of the founding of Khalsa. The
Department also intended to attend to a number of unfinished tasks arising from the
decisions of the National and Implementation Committees like the establishment of the
Netaji Foundation, establishment of Netaji Memorial at Cuttack, Moirang and Calcutta, the
full release of the Rs. 3 crores committed for the memorial of Maharana Pratap and so on.

iflitiatives taken by the

6.2 The Committee enquired whether the Department was considering giving assistance
to Sisters of Ramkrishan Mission for organising the centenary of Sister Nivedita’s arrival in
India later this year. It was informed that the Department was in the process of examining
the proposal. The Committee feels that needful must be done in this regard.

6.3 The Committee appreciates the various initiatives taken by the Department in the
celebration of various centenaries and hopes that the Department would be able to attend to
various unfinished tasks during the current year. The Committee desires that the freedom
. fighters such as Kunhali Marikar of Kerala, Pazhassi Raja of Malabar and Veluthambi

-Dalawa of Travancore may be given due place in the programme of the Department.

6.4 Netaji Research Bureau—The Committee was constrained to note that out of
publicly committed grant of Rs. 6.25 crores, only a corpus grant of Rs. 3 crores has been
released to the Netaji Research Bureau by the Department. The Department informed that
the matter was taken up with the Prime Minister’s Office which conveyed on
14th November, 1996, Prime Minister’s directive for release of corpus grant of Rs. 3 crores
to Netaji Research Bureau and accordingly Rs. 3.00 crores was released in March, 1997. The
matter was again discussed in the meeting of the National Committee on 17.1.98 held under
the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister and it was decided that apart from Netaji Research
Bureau, other institutions like Netaji Institute of Asian Studies should also be helped.


7

Further, it was suggested that the Research Bureau, which has now received substantial
funds should be asked to amend its bye-laws to include academicians, on a rotational basis,
so that views and experience are not restricted to a limited group of people. However, in
view of the observations of the Standing Committee the matter would once again be taken
up with the PMO, the Department assured. Taking note of these developments the
Committee would like to emphasize again that the public commitments made by three
former Prime Ministers must be honoured and the balance amount should be released to
Netaji Research Bureau which has proved its worth over forty years and holds great
potential for the future.

6.5 Sahitya Akademi—The Committee was given to understand that about 50% of the
Sahitya Akademi’s publications are lying unsold. The Department clarified that Sahitya
Akademi publishes literary works in all the major Indian languages including less popular
languages such as Kashmiri and Dogri. While it is not always possible to take a very
commerical approach in the matter, the Department has advised the Sahitya Akademi to
plan their publications in such a manner that stocks do not accumulate. The Committee feels
that besides devising means to reduce the inventory of unsold publications of Sahitya
Akademi, steps should also be initiated for creating and increasing the interest of public in
such books so that they do not remain unsold in such large numbers. The Committee also
feels that the unsold publications may be distributed to all the Libraries.

6.6 Sangeet Natak Akademi—The Committee desired to know the various steps being
taken for promotion of the performing arts of India. The Department in its reply stated that
by arranging performances in various parts of the country by renowned veterans as well as
by talented young artists, through training programmes supported by scholarship and
through documentation and dissemination, the Akademi seeks and enhanced public
appreciation of music etc. The Akademi confers Fellowships and Awards to eminent
performers every year. The Committee, while appreciating the activities of Sangeet Natak
Akademi observes that special efforts should be made for nurturing Kathakali which needs
financial support for sustenance.

6.7 Multi Purpose Cultural Complexes—A maximum grant of Rs. 1 crore is given for
setting up Multi-Purpose Cultural Complex to an autonomous body set up by the concerned
State Government. The Committee desires that there shold be a proper monitoring
mechanism for the successful completion of these complexes under construction so as to
make them functional at the earliest. The Committee was informed that a number of sites
have been visited by the Officers of the Department. However sites yet to be inspected are
Manipur, Orissa, Mizoram, Jammu & Kashmir and Haryana. The Committee is perturbed to
note that most of the projects are still in the construction stage, and none of the Multi-
Purpose Cultural Complexes has become operational as yet. The Committee’ therefore,
recommends that special efforts should be made so that these Multi-Cultural Complexes
become operational without further delay.

6.8 Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts (IGNCA)—The Indira Gandhi National
Centre for Arts (IGNCA) which was launched in November, 1986 was formally established
as an Autonomous Trust in March, 1987. The Committee was given to understand that the
Government’s commitment is to provide Rs. 100 crores for building and Rs. 50 crores
towards the corpus. The entire amount of Rs. 50 crores towards the corpus has been
released. As far as the amount of Rs. 100 crores is concerned, Rs. 80 crores have been
released and Rs. 45 crores have been spent. This amount of Rs. 100 crores is now going to
be increased to Rs. 300 crores. The allocation for the current year is Rs. 1.02 crores (Rs. 1
crore Plan and Rs. 2 lakhs Non-Plan).


8

6.9 It has come to the notice of the Committee that efforts are being made to interfere
in its internal working. It is an autonomous body doing excellent work with the help of
donations received from abroad. The Committee strongly feels that being an autonomous
institution Government should not interfere in its internal working.


MINUTES



I
FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 16th June, 1998 in Committee Room
‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
Shri Oscar Fernandes
. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati *Ray
. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Sartaj Singh
10. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
11. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
12. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
13. Dr. Sanjay Singh
14. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
15. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
16. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
17. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
18. Shri Shankar Pannu
19. Shri Abdul Hamid
20. Shri Samik Lahiri
. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja
. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
. Shri H.P. Singh
. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera
. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
26. Shrimati Krishna Bose
27. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
28. Shri S. Arumugham

9० 3 9७ ७ + ७० 3

e

REBRE

il


SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary

Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
2o8 * *
3..¢ 2

j 4. The Chairman, then, informed about the schedule of the Meetings of the Committee
in connection with the examination of the Demands for Grants 1998-99 of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development *** and invited suggestions from the Members on the
general working of the Departments which are under the purview of the Committee.

5. The Members made some suggestions pertaining to most of the Departments under
the two Ministries. The Chairman, then informed that the issues may be discussed in detail
when the Secretaries of the concerned Departments appear before the Committee.

6. The Committee, then adjourned at 12.15 p.m. to meet again on 18th June, 1998.

*

***Relates to other mattets.


sly,
FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 22nd June, 1998 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Shri O. Rajagopal
. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
. Dr. ९. Narayana Reddy
LOK SABHA
12. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
13. Shri Sartaj Singh
14. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
15. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
16. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
17. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
18. Shri Ashok Gehlot
19. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
20. Shri Ajit Jogi
21. Shri Shankar Pannu
22. Shri Samik Lahiri
23. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja
24. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
25. Shri H.P. Singh
26. Shrimati Krishna Bose

७ 9० 3 ०७9 ७ + WD

७ 5
a

*Minutes of 2nd and 3rd meeting of the Committee relates to other matters.

13


WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Culture)
. Dr. R.V. Vaidyanatha Ayyar, Secretary
. Shri R.L. Sudhir, Additional Secretary
. Shri Ajai Shankar, DG(ASI)
. Shrimati Kasturi Gupta Menon, Joint Secretary
. Shri S. Sathyamoorthy, Joint Secretary
. Shri Sanjay Narayan, Joint Secretary
Shri P:S. -Randhwa, Joint Secretary
. Ms. S. Mukheri, Secretary (SNA)
. Mr. K.S. Suryanarayanan, Secretary, (LKA)
10. Prof. K. Satchidananda, Secretary (SA)
11. Prof. Ram Gopal Bajaj, Director (NSD)
12. Shri Sudhir Nath, F.A.
13. Shri S. Joshi, C.C.A.
14. Shrimati Anjali Sen, Director

Co mnt 9७४ ४ PF WN +

15. Shri Vishwas Mehta, Deputy Secretary
16. Shri S. Sarkar, DG (NAI)
17. Shrimati Kalpana Das Gupta, Director (CSL)

| ie 53
111 fee 2
SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the
Departments of Culture, *** in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants
for the year 1998-99.

2.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

3. The Committee, then adjourned at 6.00 p.m.

***Relates to other matters.


iy.
FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the Ist July, 1998 in Main Committee
Room Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS

1. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

. Shri Oscar Fernandes

. Shri O. Rajagopal

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

AnPwWN

. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
. Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
10. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
11. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

12. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
13. Shri Ashok Gehlot

14. Shri Ajit Jogi

15. Shri Abdul Hamid

16. Shri Samik Lahiri

17. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
18. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
19. Shri H.P. Singh

20. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera
21. Shrimati Krishna Bose

22. Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT

won

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on Demands for Grants for 1998-99 of
the Departments of, *** Culture (Demand No. 50) ***The Committee after some
discussions, adopted the Reports with some modifications.

3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m.

***Relates ‘to other matters.

45


VI
SIXTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. 6n Thursday, the 2nd July, 1998 in Committee Room
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
. Shri Oscar Fernandes
. Shri O. Rajagopal

Pw

LOK SABHA

. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
> Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
10. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

11. Shri Abdul Hamid

12. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
13. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
14. Shri H.P. Singh

15. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
16. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera
17. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
18. Shri S. Arumugham

9 90० -+ 9७ (०७

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

2 = * <

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati
Ray and Shri Oscar Fernandes to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Smt. Sumitra
Mahajan and Shri Ajit Jogi to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha of the Ministries of Human
Resource Development on 3rd July and Health and Family Welfare on 6th July, 1998.

4. The Committee, then adjourned at 11.30 a.m.

*** Relates to other matters.

16