RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Twenty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resource Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11.3.96)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12.3.96)

सब्यमेव aay

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 1996/Phalguna, 1917 (Saka)


1817 58
as fT AWGS

uate 8010179 Yo sodet noilgA)
Sai Jo 15 75में 12 00रकाउका



CONTENTS

PAGES

COMPOSETION OB PHE COMIMEDTBE, .«२४०२६००६००)३४६७०५३६००००००४ लेंस ००० १००१ ० लीक gia gem slates (i)

INTRODUCTION $+ <cs.sc1-20csesstcteetaranceeecsereolze-tysecba saree) fekarsieonvs tet eeanemeeeeeear sree as (iii)

CHAPTER I TREDOEG:«<.2:00+-.s00<0cacsessusstssenenaossey sevatensetivenntagaansastsess 441540 1—12
CuapTer II Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by

thie कं ५,२७७ ४०२ू२००००२००००५+२३३४%००३४५५०३२५० ०००] कक ते 3 कल अक 58 13—16

Cuapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies... 17—21

(शहर IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
COMICS 55... ssc rsacerevesssesceeuscantssaetactunessaued किक gr 22

CuapteR V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Govern-
tent has noteiven any reply ..<:.1..3:cesesseacvsecoa?svs erect cqcayees 5 23—24

MINUTES «50 suns scgewsrcsensaucdsas vs censsverepeensobes ५५०३ 500 Grs > फट 3११३९ ५२०० eee 25


enoievreedOUnotiBhemingg 5 1! fete!
374045ए6 0 odi

॥७०४४०1927 On oot UI aatAHD
OFT Ti or — eb

10 ७, oo Vi dara
overly. iipegisve oft. 36
; aap 3911077039

at ne ही
दक्ष. 1130:

1]



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)

1, Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

4. Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Shri O.P. Kohli

6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

8. Shri Md. Salim

9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. I.G. Sanadi

11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar

21. Vacant

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

24. Shri Z. M. Kahandole

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Vacant

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

३4, Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

38. Shri Rambadan

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

(i)


(ii)

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

3. Shri Om Datta Sharma, Under Secretary

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on
its behalf, present this Thirty-sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its 21st Report on “Demands for Grants” (1995-96) of
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Women and Child
Development).

2. The Twenty-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 250 April,
1995 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 250 April, 1995. Replies of Government on the
recommendations contained in the report, received from the Department of Women and
Child Development were considered by the Committee and this report was adopted at its
sitting held on 7th March, 1996.

New Deu; P. UPENDRA

7th March, 1996 Chairman,
Phalguna 1917 (Saka) Commceeen ~~

(iii)


CHAPTER-I
REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained .in its Twenty-first Report on Demands for Grants of the
Ministry. of Human Resource Development (Department of Women and Child
Development) for the year 1995-96, which was presented to Rajya Sabha on 25.4.95 and laid
on the table of Lok Sabha on 25.4.95.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendatians contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
10%, T1-5, 105, 40, Io, io:

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.7, 3.8, 6.1, 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 11.2,
13.2, 14, 20, 21.

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: 2.1, 2.3, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 3.6, 3.9, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 6.3,
6.4, 6:5, 6:6, 7.3, 9, 14, 12.1, 13, 15, 883, 993, 1

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government has not given
any reply: 2.2, 2.4, 2.5, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 6, 12, 16.2, 18.1, 18.3.

-3. The Committee will now deal with some of its recommendations on which the Action
Taken note of the Government has not been accepted by the Committee:

Budgetary Provisions
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.1, 2.3 & 2.6)

2.1 The Committee is of the opinion that some of the important and useful schemes
relating to women and child development have remained non-expanding mainly due to
resource constraints inspite of the fact that there are no other schemes adquate to
supplement or replace these schemes and which need to be strengthened. The Committee
feels that the Planning Commission. by providing much less than what was asked for, has
not taken a realistic view o: the requirements of the Department.

The Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate provision should be made to the
Department so that it may not only continue its ongoing projects but also expand and
strengthen many of its important schemes.

The Committee is constrained to observe that the progress of expenditure in case of the
schemes mentioned above is not satisfactory and hence their implementation is tardy. It fails
to understand as to how the Department would appropriate the surplus provision in regard
to those programmes within the remaining one year of the 8th Five Year Plan. The
Committee feels that either the overall performance of Department was not found upto the
mark by the Planning Commission or the Department was not able to convince the Planning
Commission about its requirement. The Committee recommends that the Departnient should
plead its case strongly before the Planning Commission to get maximum funds released at
the RE stage this year and also in the terminal year of the plan. ~

Ministry’s reply
The schemes like Balwadi Nutrition Programme (BNP) Early Childhood Programme
(ECE) and that of Creches, in particular, have been non-expanding. Looking to increased

1


2

demand of creches, a National Creche Fund has been set up to sanction more creches. The
ICDS has been the most significant programme for children with countrywide coverage. The
programme is being universalised. As such the other programmes like BNP, ECE will, in
fact, be phased out when ICDS extends its out reach to the areas of these programmes.

Provision of adequate funds for the ongoing projects is always pleaded with the Planning
Commission at the time of finalising the Annual plans of the Department.

The Department has been always pleading with the Planning Commission for providing
adequate resources for different programmes. The Planning Commission have often
expressed their regrets because of the resource crunch.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the routine reply. What the Committee
intended to recommend was that keeping in view the fact that women and children being the
most vulnerable yet vital sections of the society, the Department should actively and
effectively plead with the Planning Commission to get adequate provisions to sustain,
strengthen and expand its schemes/programmes. The Committee, reiterating its
recommendation, urges upon the Department to actively pursue its case with the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission should also give due consideration to the demands
of the Department keeping in view the importance and necessity of various schemes run by
the Department.

Proliferation of Schemes
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.7 & 2.8)

The Committee notes with great concern that there appears to be a tendency in the
Department to proliferate more and more schemes having identical activities. Such a
fragmented and unorganised approach results in wastage of scarce resources. For example,
for imparting vocational training to women, the Department has, such schemes as (i)
Condensed courses for Education for Adult Women and Vocational Training; (ii) Support to
Training and Employment Programme to Women; (iii) Training and Employment-cum-
Production Centres for Women; (iv) Assistance to Voluntary Agencies for replication of
successful Programmes; and (v) Integrated project for Development of Women. Similarly,
Indira Mahila Yojana, Rashtriya Mahila Kosh, Mahila Samridhi Yojana and other socio-
economic programmes also appear to have a common objectives and overlapping activities.
Likewise, Information and Mass Education Cell; Integrated Nutrition Education; Nutrition
Education and Extension, Mass Media Communication are engaged in spreading
information/awareness about nutrition.

This fact was pointed out by the Committee in its 7th Report (para 44) also, but no
satisfactory reply has been given by the Department in its Action Taken Report. Therefore,
the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation and urges upon the Department to
revamp and rationalise all such schemes. It also suggests that instead of allocating a token
amount for all of them every year, the Department should concentrate on and consolidate
only important and meaningful schemes.

Ministry’s reply

All the schemes of Department of Women & Child Development have got different
objectives as well as different target groups.

It is submitted that there is no overlapping and no duplication involved. For example,

the programme of Condensed Courses for Education for Adult Women and Vocational
Training i$ targeted to the women of the age group 15 and above for passing the formal


3

examinations like middle, matric and secondary level to improve their chances in the
employment market. The vocational training content is added to this programme to improve
the skills of women for self-employment. The STEP programme is meant to upgrade the
skills of poor and assetless women, mobilise, sensitize and provide them training and
employment on a sustainable basis the traditional sectors of agriculture, fisheries,
handlooms, handicrafts, sericulture, social forestry, wasteland development etc. The
programme of Training and Employment-cum-Production Centres for Women (NORAD) is
an externally aided scheme targeted to women and girls of 18 and above to provide them
training for sustained employment in non-traditional upcoming modern. trades like
electronics, watch manufacturing/assembling, computer programming, printing and binding,
handlooms, weaving and spinning, garment making etc. Rashtriya Mahila Kosh was set up to
meet the credit needs of poor and assetless women who have rather difficult access to formal
credit systems. Mahila Samriddhi Yojana was designed to inclucate among the rural women
the habit of thrift, operate Post Office saving accounts by themselves; give them a sense of
possession over the resources etc.

The Indira Mahila Yojana has been launched during this year i.e. 1995-96. The Yojana
envisages delivery of integrated services to women in a convergent manner for their
empowerment. There is a provision for training and skill development also. Thus, the IMY
encompasses all the services so that in the near future when IMY outreach extends, other
schemes could be merged with IMY.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee does not agree with this view of the Department. It is of the firm
opinion that fragmented and disconcerted approach is definitely not going to do any good to
their cause of the women and children. The Committee, had, with this view, recommended
that the schemes of identical nature be amalgamated so that optimum results could be
achieved. The Committee, hence, suggests that the Department shquld give serious
consideration to the recommendation of the Committee and revamp and rationalie the
schemes. The Committee again reterates its earlier stand that the Department should
consolidate and concentrate on important and meaningful scheme.

Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.6)

The Secretary , Department of Women and Child Development, stated that an ICDS
project took 18 months to be fully operational. The Committee feels that the time likewise,
Information and Mass Education Cell; Integrated Nutrition Education; Nutrition Education
and Extension, Mass Media Communication are engaged in spreading information/
awareness about nutrition.

Ministry’s reply हे

It is submitted that the States are required to undertake a number of related activities in
operationalising a sanctioned project. To undertake these activities, a system called as ‘Plan
of Introduction of Services’ (PIS) has been designed which sets the stages and time limits for
various activites including recruitment of functionaries, their training and mobilization and
involvement of community. PIS has been designed to ensure that functionaries are sensitized
to the needs and objectives of the Programme and the community is effectively involved
before the start of the Project. The period of 18 months as included in the PIS scheduled
sets the maximum time limit for the States to operationalise a new sanctioned ICDS Project.
The States are, however, invariably requested to take urgent action in operationalising the
new project at the earliest.


Comments of the Committee

The Department has not given any categorical reply as to whether it has taken any steps
to reduce the time-limit of 18 months for an.ICDS scheme to be fully operationalised
However, the Secretary, Department of. Women and Child Development assured the
Committee of positive steps in this regard. The Commitee, while welcoming this positive
response, reiterates its recommendation to cut short the time-limit to the extent possible

Recommendation (Para No. 3.9)

The Committee is surprised to note that while the Department has shown to have
achieved the target of opening new ICDS projects and also of utilising the given funds, there
is a shortfall in achieving the target of beneficiaries for the last three years. The Department
informed that this shortfall was owing to under-reporting of ICDS projects. The Committee
feels that the Department should be more vigilant in this regard and should see that this sort
of under reporting is avoided.

Ministry’s reply

The States are being regularly addressed, on a quarterly basis, to ensure 100% reporting
by the ICDS projects. The States are regularly requested to ensure that all the operational
projects report and that there are no interruptions in the delivery of services in the
operational projects. In view of the efforts made by the Department, the number of non-
reporting projects have declined from 276 during March 1994 to 248 during March 1995 बात
the number of reporting projects have increased from 2490 to 2810 during the corresponding.
period.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not happy with the progress made. The Committee takes a very
serious view of the phenomenon of non-reporting ICDS projects as such projects may be
running only on papers. The Committee strongly recommends ‘that the matter should be
looked into and ensure 100% reporting by ICDS projects.

Training of ICDS Functionaries
Recommendations (Para Nos. 4.1, 4.2 & 4.3)

The Committee notes that the target of imparting training to the ICDS. functionaries has
remained static for the last three years and is not commensurate with the increase in the
ICDS projects over the years as shown in the table below:

Year No. of Projects Increase
1992 (upto 31.12.92) 2765 =
1993 (upto 30.9.93) 2871 106
1994 (upto 30.9.94) 3187 316
As on 31.3.95 3899 1712

The Committee feels that, with the present rate of increase in the number of projects,
the requirement of trained functionaries is bound to grow. It recommends, therefore, that a
thorough assessment of the requirement of trained functionaries may be undertaken and the
target of imparting training to the ICDS functionaries should be accordingly: revised.

It is also noted that there was shortfall in achieving the targets set for training the ICDS
functionaries at all levels during the year 1994-95. Non-deputation of trainees by the State
Governments and non-reporting of trainees at training centres were the reasons given by the


5

Department for this shortfall. On being asked as to why the State Governments are not
deputing trainees and why those who have been deputed are not reporting, the Secretary
stated that it was mainly because of slow pace of recruitment and some court cases. The
Committee express its concern over this phenomenon as it would adversely affect the
progress of the ICDS in the long run and recommends that the Department should make all
out efforts to sort out this problem with the State Governments immediately.

Ministry’s reply

The target of imparting training to the ICDS functionaries depend on the number and
capacity of training centres. Training centres are opened or closed depending on the
requirement. Regular assessment of the requirements of trainees as well as the training

centres is done through review meetings with State Secretaries/Directors and various
instructions issued to the State Government/UTs.

Shortfall in achievement of the training targets, mainly due to non-deputation of
trainees by the State Governments and non-reporting of trainees at training centres, has
been worrying the Central Government. Several efforts have/are being made by the
Department to improve the training performance. It was observed that one of the reasons
for this was their difficulty in joining the training course due to its long duration (3 Months).
This Department has recently introduced Sandwich pattern of training from 1995-96 in which
training will be imparted in phases and the trainee will not be required to be away from her
home for a long duration of months. It is hoped that the position will improve to great
extent. State Governments have also been requested to designate one of their officers as
State Nodal Officers for proper implementation/monitoring of ICDS training programme in
the State as also to establish better co-ordination with training centres and thereby improve
the training process.

Comments of the Committee

The reply given is not satisfactory. The target should be fixed according to the number
of persons to be trained and not with reference to number and capacity of training centres.

Creches/Day Care Centres/National Creche Fund
Recommendation (Para No. 6.3)

On being asked as to how fake and bogus organisations managed to receive
Government grants and whether their antecedents were thoroughly checked before funds
were sanctioned to them and what mechanism the Department had to keep a check on this,
the Secretary, Department of Women and Child Development replied that whenever
irregularities came to their notice, either through a complaint made or during our regular
inspection, necessary action was taken. The Committee is thus given to understand that the
Department does not have any effective mechanism of supervision and monitoring and it
relies mostly on the complaints which are brought to its notice. The Committee, therefore,

+ recommends that a foolproof system of supervision and monitoring (including proper
auditing) to ensure proper utilisation of funds be evolved. It also recommends that the
organisations, found be inolved in committing irregularities and misuse of funds, be
blacklisted and debarred from receiving any sort of grant under any scheme of the
Department. A list of such organisations may be circulated to all other Ministries/
Departments. The Committee also suggests that the Department should undertake random
checking frequently.

Ministry’s reply

In order to monitor the various schemes/programmes of the Department from time to
time and to suggest ways and means for effective supervision/improvement on these


6

programmes, there exists a Monitoring Division in the Department headed by a Director.
The programmes are also monitored by obtaining reports/returns, completion certificates,
utilisation certificates alongwith audited statement of accounts. Evaluation of, the major
programmes is also conducted from time to time with the help of leading research and
academic institutions and NGOs. Besides this Deptt. has a system of Area Officers of the
rank of Deputy Secretaiies/Directors who have been assigned to conduct visits to different
States/UTs to have on-the-spot assessment of our programmes/schemes in that particular
part of the country, to discuss various issues with the State Govt. and sort out the difficulties
and problem, if any, in implementing such programmes. These Area Officers are required to
submit a quarterly report on their visits. In addition, a circular has been issued in the Deptt.
recently, emphasizing the need for effective supervision and monitoring of implementation of
programmes of this Deptt. and bringing the observation of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on HRD in this regard to the notice of all officers/sections/Desks of the Deptt.
with the reguest to undertake random field visits to their respective projects more frequently
than before.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is constrained to observe that notwithstanding the existence of a
monitoring Division and a system of Area Officers, the Department has not been able to
prevent and check the irregularities being perpetrated in running creches by the known
NGO like the Bhartiya Adim Jati Sevak Sangh as well as the Indian Council for Child
Welfare, Central Social Board and Bhagini Nivedita Pratisthan. It shows that the existing
mechanisms of Department are ineffective and have not been able to deliver the goods. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation of evolving a foolproof and effective
system of monitoring and inspection, black-listing and debarring the organisation (involved
in committing irregularities and misuse of funds) from receiving any grant and also frequent
random checks.

Recommendation (Para No. 6.4)

The amount, which remains unspent owing to closure/cancellation of certain creche
centres involved in irregularities, should not be surrendered by the Department; rather it
should be used for opening new creches wherever necessary.

Ministry’s Reply

Under the regular scheme of Creches, a budget provision of Rs 23.05 crores (Rupees
15.55 crore Non-Plan and Rupees 7.50 Plan) is provided in each financial year for
maintenance of 12,470 existing creches. There has been no expansion of the scheme for the
last 4 years due to non-availability of additional funds. The funds provided are used for
implementation of the scheme regularly. The unspent amount, if any, owing to clousure/
cancellation of cartain creche centres-involved in irregularities, may not be used for opening
of new creches as the sheme is a non-expanding one.

Comments of the Committee

The pretext that the scheme is non-expanding is not acceptable as it has remained so
only due to non-availabililty of additional funds. The scheme should be transformed into an
expanding scheme. If the funds are available owing to closure/cancellation of certain creche
centres, they should be spent on it.

Recommendation (Para No. 6.5)

The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the progress of the action taken in
pursuance of its recommendation made in its two previous reports (3rd and 7th) on the need


7

to conduct an enquiry into the affairs of the Bhartiya Adim Jati Sevak Sangh, which has not
been completed even after almost one and half years. The Committee desires that the matter
be expedited.
Ministry’s reply

The National Institute of Public Co-operation and Child Development (NIPCCD), an
organisation under the administrative control of the Deptt. of Women & Child
Development, was asked to conduct an enquiry into the affairs of Bhartiya Adimjati Sevak
Sangh and submit a report to the Deptt. An interim enquiry report has since been received.
The observations made in the report are as under:—

1. Compartmentalisation of grants

The major thrust of the Bhartiya Adimjati Sevak Sangh is on the welfare of the child
although they have schemes for women also. The grants which are received by the Sangh are
for specific purpose i.e. either for child welfare or for women welfare and these are utilised
accordingly.

2. Annual General Meetings

It was observed that the Annual General Meetings of the Bhartya Adimjati Sevak
Sangh did take place during the last two years on 18th December 1993 for 1992-93 at New
Delhi, and on 6th March, 1995 for 1993-94 at Nasik.

3. Annual Report for 1991-92

It was observed that the Annual Report of the Bhartiya Adimjati Sevak Sangh for the
period 1991-92 which had been printed in Hindi did not have the year 1991-92 printed on the
cover page. However on perusal of the information contained in the report (11 & 15) it can
be made out that this report pertains to the year 1991-92. It was informed that it was an
oversight the year was not printed on the cover page of the report. Regarding the
information in the report about the receipt of funds and expenditure, it was informed that
the size of the report did not allow them to include the statement of accounts in the report.
The Sangh had, however, prepared a statement of account separately which had been
cyclostyled and had been sent to all the members.

4, Audited Accounts

The statement of Accounts for the year 1991-92 was shown by the Bhartiya Adimjati
Sevak Sangh for the purpose of verification. The president, BAJSS informed that the Sangh
takes every care to submit their Annual Reports and the Audited Accounts Complete in all
respects giving therein a complete picture of all the funds received by them and expenditure
incurred on various items separately.

Govt. Representative on the Board of the Sangh

The Bhartiya Adimjati Sevak Sangh has a representative each from the Ministry of
Welfare and the Department of Women and Child Development in its Board. They are
invited for the Sangh’s Annual General Meetings regularly.

Comments of the Committee

Despite the Committee’s repeated recomendations, the Department has miserably failed
to initiate any punitive action against the Sangh. The Annual General Meetings are not held
at regular intervals. The latest Annual Report printed was for the year 1991-92. The
Committee, while expressing its anguish, strongly recommends that pending completion of
enquiry, no grant whatsoever be released to the Sangh. All possible measures should also be


8

taken to see that the Annual report and Audited accounts of the Sangh are_up to date.
Similar action should be taken in respect of other beneficiaries also.

Recommendation (Para No. 6.6)

Malpractices and irregularities on a large scale, the Committee feels, put a question
mark on the credibility of voluntary organisations like Bhartiya Adimjati Sewak Sangh
(BAJSS). The Committee is also not happy with the working of organisations like the
Central Social Welfare Board and ICCW, which are receiving huge amount of grants from
the Department. The Committee is constrained to observe that the Department has failed in
its task of ensuring proper utilisation of the hefty sums being given to them. While
appreciating the attempts of the CSWB in the areas where ICDS projects have not been
provided, the Committee is constrained to express its unhappiness over the general working
of the Board where a major chunk of the grant is being spent on administration and very
little on other activities. The Committee reiterates its earlier suggestion to assess the
functioning of the CSWB without any delay so as to remove all lacunae in its working.
Ministry’s reply -

(a) The Department is appointing a small committee for assessing the functioning of
CSWB which will visit CSWB and some of the State units and the Committee will
submit its recommendations to the Department in a time-bound manner. The
Department is also following the instances where CSWB has not submitted the
funds utilisation certificates.

(b) List of the Short Stay Home will be circulated to every State Secretary Incharge of
3 Women & Child Development Department and be requested to get the homes
inspected at least once in a year.
(c) CSWB is also being asked to utilise its own machinery for inspecting these home,
and
(d) A panel of 2-3 retired officers with known integrity and interest in these areas is
being formed, who will inspect these homes once a year.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee, is dismayed over the inordinate delay in assessing the functioning of
CSWB. The Committee desires that the assessment and corrective follow up steps be taken
before the Demands for Grants 1996-97 of the Department are considered by the
Committee.

Early Childhood Education Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 7.3)

The Committee feels that the rate of honorarium to teachers and helpers is nominal
considering the escalation of prices. The Committee, therefore, suggests that the rate of
honorarium be appropriately enhanced.

Ministry’s reply

Rates of honorarium to teachefs and helpers have not been Static. Since the inception
of the Early Childhood Education Scheme, rates have been enhanced thrice. Last
enhancement has been made about 3 years back i.e. w.e.f: 15.1.1993.

Comments of the Committee

In view of the escalation in prices. the revision of honorarium is over-due as the last
revision was done 3-4 years ago. The Department must act on this immediately.


Cultural Exchange Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 9)

The Committee notes that this scheme has virtually remained on paper for the last five
years and every year a token allocation ranging from Rs. 50,000 to Rs. one lakh in being
made. Asked about this, the Secretary stated that it was being kept alive in the hope that
some proposal might be received in future. The Committee is of the opinion that since a
number of good scheme are facing financial constraints, there is no point in blocking money
for this scheme which may better be wound up.

Ministry’s reply

The Cultural Exchange Programme has been undertaken for Students/Children within
the country. A Cultural Exchange Programme is now being undertaken for Students/
Children of North-East States and to other parts of the Country to promote & foster
National Integration. i

Comments of the Committee

The Committee, not being convinced by the reply reiterates its recommendation to wind
up the scheme and reappropriate such unspent funds for other purposeful schemes.

Mahila Samridhi Yojana
Recommendation (Para No. 11.4)

The Committee expresses its unhappiness over the poor response to the scheme in
States like Bihar (12%), Gujarat (20%), Maharashtra (31%), Rajasthan (15%) and West
Bengal (11%). The Secretary clarified that the Department was taking up this matter with
the State Governments because it was mainly they who were responsible for implementing
the scheme. The Committee recommends that the Department should intensify its efforts to
enlist the requisite cooperation from the State Governments. The Committee also suggests
that the Department of Posts should be requested to provide adequate number of Post
Offices in tribal and rural areas so that more and more women could be benefited by the
scheme. The Committee emphasises the need for making adequate publicity about the
scheme through mass media. The Committee feels that elected local bodies could play a
significant role in this regard and hence suggests that their help may be taken by evolving a
suitable mechanism. The Cooperation of Mahila Mandals and other NGOs may also be
enlisted.

Ministry’s reply
This matter has been taken up with the concerned States and media campaign has been

launched in some States. Deptt. of Posts has also been requested to intensify their efforts in
these States.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not fully satisfied over the action taken by the Department. All the
States should be persuaded to launch the campaign. The Commitee also desires that the
scheme be extended to the urban poor.

Working Women’s Hostels
Recommendation (Para No. 12.1)

In reply to the Committee’s recommendations made last year for evolving a system of
monitoring to contain cases of irregularities and mismanagement of the hostels, the
Department has stated that the existing system in this regard was adequate. But the
Committee is not convinced by the reply given by the Department, as more and more cases


esau

10

of irregularities and atrocities committed against the inmates are being reported. The
Committee therefore reaffirms its previous recommendations of including one government
representative on the Board of Management of each of these hostels.
Ministry’s reply

In consonance with recommendations of the Standing Committee on Demand for Grants
of the Department of Women & Child Development for the year 1995-96; the Department
has issued instructions to the State Governments/UT Administrations and Non-
Governmental Organisations to set up Hostel Management Committee giving representation
to the Women’s Development/Social Welfare Departments of the State Governments/Union
Territqry Administrations, Directorate of Women’s Development/Social Welfare, Collector/
District Magistrate, State Social Welfare Advisory Board and the residents of the Hostel.
The Hostel Management Committee is to meet at least once in three months.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. Irregularities in the
functioning of Hostels and ill treatment of the inmates have not been contained to the
desired level. The Committee, therefore, suggests to take effective remedial measures in this
regard. 7

Atrocities against Women
Recommendation (Para No. 13)

The subject of initiating legal action in cases of atrocities against women falls within the
purview of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee. however, feels that the
Department of Women & Child Development, being the nodal agency to look after the
welfare of women, should work in close tandem with the Minstry of Home Affairs in this
regard. It becomes all the more necessary in view of the fact that incidents of atrocities
against women are increasing day by day. It is a matter of concern that “Crime against
Women Cells” have been set up, so far, only in 12 States/UTs. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the Department should take up this matter with the Home Ministry and
see that such Cells are set up in the remaining States/UTs at the earliest. It also suggests
that studies on the subject of violence against women, initiated by the Department, and. the
Bill on “Domestic Violence against Women.” which is presently under consideration should
be expedited so that follow up action could be taken without much delay.

Ministry’s reply

Crimes against Women Cells have already been set up in 13 States and 2 UTs. Ministry of
Home Affairs has been requested to take it, up with the remaining States to set up such
Cells. As regards studies on the subject of atrocities against women, the National
Commission for Women, Women’s studies centres, non-Governmental organisations, and
this Department are already conducting and supporting such studies. Besides, this
Department has a scheme for giving grants-in-aid to NGOs for Education work for
prevention of atrocities against‘ women. Awareness generation programmes, legal literacy
camps and media campaigns are also conducted. As regards the bill on ‘Domestic Violence
Against women’ the bill prepared by the National Commission for women is under
consideration in this Department in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is unhappy over the poor progress made in regard to setting up ‘“‘crime
against women cells”. After the Committee recommended that the matter be expedited, only
three such cells have been set up. The committee desires that in view of growing incidence
of atrocities the women cells be created at the earliest in the remaining States.


ll

National Commission for Women (NCW)
Recommendation (Para No. 15)

The Committee expresses its concern over the delay in reconstituting the Commissions.
Although its term has expired quite some time back. It is also unhappy to note that the
Annual Reports of the Financial Commission for Women have not been placed so far
before the Parliament. The Committee hopes that the Commission would be reconstituted
soon and its Annual Reports presented to the Parliament regularly.

Ministry’s reply

The National, Commission for Women has since been reconstituted with the following

composition:—

1. Ms. V. Mohini Giri Chairperson
2. Ms. Kailashpati Member
3. Ms. Ganga Potai Member
4. Ms. Manorama Singh Member
5. Mrs. Kokila Vyas Member
6. Mrs. Padma Seth Member
7. Mr. T.N. Srivastava Member-Secretary

Annual Report 1992-93 of the Commission has been placed on the table of both the
Houses on 25.8.95 and 26.8.95. The Annual Reports 1993-94 and 1994-95 are yet to be
received from the National Commission for Women.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is happy to note that as desired by it the commission has been
reconstituted but is constrained to observe that the Annual Report of the Commission
presented to the Parliament is for the year 1992-93. The Commission is thus running 3-4
years behind the schedule. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Annual Report for
the remaining years be presented at the earliest and there must not be any backlog.

Family Counselling Centres
Recbmmendation (Para No. 18.3)

Questioned whether the Department wants to continue with the programme, the
Secretary said that the Central Social Welfare Board had substantial budget for Family
Counselling Centres. But this does not hold good in the face of the allocation made this
year. The Committee, therefore, feels that this important scheme should not be starved
of funds. It also recommends that the outstanding dues of the Centres be released
forthwith.

Ministry has not given any reply
Comments of ‘the Committee

Since the Department has not mzede any comment on the para, the Committee does
not know whether the outstanding dues have been released or not. It, therefore,
reiterates its earlier recommendation.

National Nutrition Policy
Recommendation (Para No. 19.2)

The Committee is happy that the National Nutrition Council set up as-an apex body to
oversea and monitor the implementation of NNP, is headed by the Prime Minister
himself. The Committee emphasises the need for having such bodies at the State level


12

headed by the respective Chief Ministers. It also suggests setting up of Inter-departmental
Coordination Committees in all the States for monitoring the implementation of the policy.
Ministry’s reply

The National Nutrition Policy was circulated to the Chief Secretaries of all the States with
the request to constitute State level National Nutrition Councils under the chairmanship of
the respective Chief Ministers and Inter-departmental Coordination Committees under the
Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary. Some of the State Governments have taken action in
this regard.
Comments of the Committee

The Committee while reaffirming its earlier recommendation, suggests that Inter-
departmental Coordination Committees be set up in the remaining States without any
further delay.
Recommendation (Para No. 19.4)

The Committee observes that a plethora of small schemes are being run in the field of
nutrition and food and the allocations made to them indicate that these are being run just
for the sake of running them. The Committee feels that it is better to have fewer schemes
and run them effectively and efficiently, rather than having many of them and implementing
halfheartedly.

Ministry’s reply

A National Plan of Action on Nutrition has been developed seeking inputs from
14 different sectors, national institutes and experts with a view to serve as a framework for
implementing the Nutrition Policy in the country. The National Plan of Action on Nutrition
has been released by Hon’ble Minister for Human Resource Development on 21st April,
1995. The copies of the Plan document have been provided to the Planning Commission and
the Secretaries of the concerned sectors for information and necessary action. The
implementation of the National Nutrition Policy through the National Plan of Action on
Nutrition would be one of the main agenda items of the National Nutrition Council meeting
under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister. It is proposed to establish a Nutrition Policy
Cell in the Department exclusively for the implementation of the Nutrition Policy.

Comments of the Committee

The Action Taken Note of the Department does not contain any response to the specific
observation of the Committee regarding plethora of small schemes being run in the field of
food and nutrition just for name-sake. Hence, the Committee, while reiterating its earlier
observation, recommends that the number of schemes should be made fewer to ensure their
proper implementation.


CHAPTER-II

RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Indira Mehila Yojana

10.1 In this background, the Committee is of the view that instead of intermingling it
with ICDS, the awareness generation components of the Indira Mahila Yojana should be
taken up as a new scheme and the other schemes of awareness generation should be merged
with it. The Committee is happy to learn that the Department has already submitted a
detailed proposal on this to the Planning Commission. The Committee suggests that the
Department should make efforts to get the said proposal cleared as early as possible.
Reply

Indira Mahila Yojana (IMY) was launched on 20th August, 1995. IMY will ensure
coordination and convergence of various programmes meant for women in integrated fashion
so as to maximise the benefits from all the programmes. The IMY will also ensure the
building up of a strong delivery system as also an information system through a series of
awareness generation programmes. This will be an attempt to enable women to gain
experience in decision making, participatory interaction and management of Women’s assets.
Through IMY smooth flow of benefits from all the programmes on a systematic basis for the
social and economic advancement of Women will be ensured. To begin with the IMY has
been launched in 200 blocks of all the States and UTs in the country.
Mahila Samridhi Yojana

11.3 In response to the Committee’s recommendation, made last yar, to extend this
scheme to the urban areas also, the Secretary informed that the planning Commission has
decided to take this matter into consideration only after two years of its implementation.
The Committee fails to understand as to why the Planning Commission has lacked to wait
for two years, while the scheme has proved to be useful in the rural areas. The Committee,
therefore recommends that the matter may again be taken up with the Planning Commission
so that the scheme may be extended to the urban areas, with suitable modifications.
Reply

Planning Commission has taken up Evaluation study of MSY in 16 States. The
recommendations of Parliamentary Standing Committee will be taken up appropriately after
receipt of the Study Report from Planning Commission.
Atrocities Against Women

13.1 The Committee suggests that the Legal Literacy Manuals, prepared to create
awareness among women about the laws concerning them, should be made available in
regional languages as well.
Reply

1. The legal literacy manuals have already been translated and published in many
regional languages by the concerned State Governments.

2. A provision of Rs. 35.00 lakhs has been made for the Scheme of Education work for
prevention of Atrocities Against Women. The provision can be suitably increased by re-
appropriation. Further, a scheme for payment of compensation to the victims of rape and

sexual assaults for their rehabilitation has been formulated by the National Commission for
Women, which is presently under examination in the Home Affairs.

13


14
Women’s Bureau

17. The Committee was informed that there had been tremendous increase in the work-
load of the Women’s Bureau due to setting up of National Commission for Women,
Rashtriya Mahila Kosh, etc. The sanctioned strength of the Bureau continues to be almost
the same as was approved in 1976. A proposal to create a division in the Bureau, the
Committee was informed, is under consideration and the Planning Commission has agreed to
provide the necessary funds for the proposal. In view of the important responsibilities and
increasing work-load of the Women’s Bureau, the need for increasing its staff adequately,
the Committee feels, is quite genuine. It, therefore recommends that this matter should be
taken up with all concerned and the needful be done urgently.

Reply

Two Desks have been created to strengthen the Women’s Development Bureau of the
Department.

National Nutrition Policy

19.3 Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) is the technical wing of the Department in the
matter of implementation of VNP. Most of the schemes, run under FNB, the Committees
notes with concern are not performing satisfactorily. Targets fixed, both physical and
financial are not being achieved. For example, the schemes for Fortification of Milk with
Vitamin ‘A’ is being implemented by only 54 dairies in the entire country. Fortification of
salt with Iron, as accepted by the Secretary, has been a non-starter due to some technical
problem. Important activities like Research and Development and quality control also do
not appear to have received due attention. Progress of Mass Media Communication which is
meant for creating awareness about nutrition, an important component of NNP, is also
tardy. Last but not the least the production of nutritious foods also appears to have fallen
upto rough weather and it has been decided not to sanction any grant on account of this in
future.

Reply

A National Plan of Action on Nutrition has been developed seeking inputs from
14 different sectors, national institutes and experts with a view to serve as a framework for
implementing the Nutrition Policy in the country. The National Plan of Action on Nutrition
has been released by Hon’ble Minister for Human Resource Development on 21st. April,
1995. The copies of the Plan document have been provided to the Planning Commission and
the Secretaries of the concerned sectors for information and necessary action. The
implementation of the National Nutrition Policy through the National Plan of Action on
Nutrition would be one of the main ‘agenda items of the National Nutrition Council meeting
under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister. It is proposed to establish a Nutrition Policy
Cell in the Department exclusively for the implementation of the Nutrition Policy.

As regards the schemes of FNB not performing satisfactorily, it may be mentioned here
that Nutrition Education and Extension has been one of the main activities of FNB and


a

15

targets against all these activities have been achieved. A few schemes, however, have
suffered set-back, which are as under:—

@)

(ii)

(iii)

(b)

(©)

(d)

(०)
(f)
(g)

Fortification of Salt with Iron—In early 1980's the fortification of salt with iron as a
measure to combat nutritional anaemia was experimented at four national institutes
in the country on behalf of the Department. Two projects were initiated at
Vallinakam in Tamil Nadu and Sambhar Lake in Rajasthan. The universal iodization
of Salt adopted by the Government and subsequent ban on sale of non-iodised Salt in
different parts of the country has virtually led to failure of this important programme.
FNB is, however, exploring the possiblity of double fortification of Salt with Iron and
iodine so that atleast in the 9th Plan such a programme could take shape, as advised
by Prof. J. S. Bajaj, Member, Planning Commission in the meeting of the nutrition
experts held on 28.6.1994.

Another scheme which could not be implemented during the financial year 1994-95 is
the Community Based Production of Nutritious Foods through NGOs with UNICEF
assistance. The Department had inducted 9 NGOs under this project and many of the
NGOs are facing difficulties in supplying food to the ICDS beneficiaries because of
the non-cooperation of the State Governments, thus defeating the objective of the
project. UNICEF also has not been inclined to induct NGOs under this project and
hence a shortfall in the achievement of target under this project.

Community Food & Nutrition Extension Units (CFENUs) being set up in
collaboration with the State Governments—In view of the limited number of
CFNEUs of the FNB, it was envisaged to assist the State Governments in setting up
model CFNEUs with tapering assistance from the Department. The State
Governments, however, have not been able to undertake the project as envisaged
leading to shortfalls in targets. This activity could, however, be dropped.

In view of the important task of implementation of the National Nutrition
Policy, FNB schemes could be restructured to highlight action on the following
issues:

Nutrition Education support to concerned sectors.

Sensitisation of the State Governments towards the National Nutrition Policy and
implementation of the National Plan of Action on Nutrition and Micro-nutrient
Malnutrition control activities.

Creating a Data Bank in the Department with regular inputs from organisations
concerned with collection of data on food, nutrition and health like NSSO,
Directorate of Economics & Statistics, Registrar General’s Office, NNMB, Health
infrastructure etc.

Making disaggregated data available on nutrition profile of People at district level to
enable area-specific plan.

Establishing a National Nutrition Surveillance System.
Research & Development activities.
Development/Fortification of food with limiting nutrients.

19.5 The Committee, therefore, feels that this is the high time that a review and
evaluation of all the schemes relating to food and nutrition should be done and important
and useful schemes should be strengthened accordingly. The Committee feels, it would be
desirable to restructure the scheme and arrange for the distribution of Vitamin ‘A’ and Iron
directly through ICDS.


16

Reply

It may be mentioned here that the Nutrition Education Schemes of FNB have been
evaluated by an independent agency twice during 70s and 80s and are now being evaluated
by NIPCCD. Further, a Review Committee constituted under the chairmanship of the
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Food in 1991 studied the functioning of the Food and
Nutrition Board and its role in the context of the present nutrition scenario. It may be men-
tioned here that the FNB field units have been restructured on the basis of the
recommendation of this Committee while the strengthening of field units and establishing at
least one such unit in each State/UT is yet to be undertaken. FNB has, however, mooted a
proposal for establishing 14 new CFNEUs, which is awaiting clearance from the Planning
Commission.


CHAPTER-III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE

Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)

3.3 The Committee is not satisfied with the progress of this scheme, as even after 25
years of its operation, the ICDS projects could not be provided in all the blocks of the
country. The target of universalisation of this scheme during the Eight Five Year Plan
appears to be a far cry. The Committee is anguished 10 note that the proposal ‘for
universalisation of ICDS scheme has been pending with Planning Commision for a long
time. The Committee is constrained to observe that there appears to be slackness on part of
both, the Department as well as the Planning Commission in finalising the proposal.

3.4 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should pursue the
pending proposal vigorously with the Planning Commission and get it cleared without any
further delay.

3.5 The outlay for the ICDS scheme provided this year which also includes a*component
of Rs. 12 crores for the Indira Mahila Yojana does not appear to be adequate. It is not
commensurate with the goals that the Department has proposed to achieve. The Committee
is unable to understand as to how the Department would be able to meet the expenditure
for taking up so many new ICDS projects in 1995-96 as well as bearing the operational costs
of the existing ones. The Committee therefore, suggests that the Planning Commission
should make a realistic assessment of the financial requirements for. achieving
universalisation of ICDS Scheme and provide a suitable amount for this purpose.

Reply
Paras 3.3 & 3.4

The ICDS Scheme has been universalised. All the 5291 Community Development
Blocks in the country have been covered under the umbrella of the Scheme during 1995-96
(25.1.1996).

Para 3.5

As regards para 3.5, it is indicated that the proposal of the Department on
universalisation of the ICDS schemes submitted to the Planning Commission clearly included
the additional universalising the Scheme by the end of the 8th Five Year Plan. With the
approved budget of Rs. 555.34 crores in RE 1995-96, the Department would be in a position
to take up the newly sanctioned ICDS projects.

3.7 The Committee observes that, over the years, more amd more new schemes/
components have been added to the ICDS scheme, such as Creches; Adolescent Girls
Scheme; Early Childhood Education and Indira Mahila Yojana. Besides, Anganwadi
Workers are also in great demand in implementing such programmes as Family Planning,
National Literacy Mission, etc. The Committee apprehends that the over-burdening of this
scheme might lead to the deviation of the scheme from its main objective and over-streching
of financial allocations.

3.8 Despite the integration of so many schemes into the ICDS in due course, the staff
strength of its centres remains the same, as original'y provided. The Committee suggest that
a study should be conducted to’ find out whether the staff strength of the ICDS centres in
the present circumstances is sufficient or not. As regards addition of new components to it,

17


18

the Committee recommends that this matter be given a fresh look by the Department. While
the Committee has no objection for taking up additional components, it recommends that
adequate and separate allocation be earmarked for all the additional components so that no
funds need be diverted from the main ICDS scheme.

Reply

The Adolescent Girls Scheme was sanctioned as a special intervention in the existing
ICDS in selected 507 blocks only during 1991-92. And under Scheme-II of the Adolescent
Girls Scheme, the Anganwadi workers have been compensated for additional work by a
provison of additional honorarium of Rs. 150% p.m. The Early Childhood Education
continues to remain a part of the package of services under the ICDS Scheme since its
inception in the year 1975-76. The Scheme of Creches/Day Care Centres and Indira Mahila
Yojana are totally separate Schemes and not a part of the ICDS. As regards involvement of
Anganwadi workers in other programmes as Family Planning and National Literacy Mission,
it is indicated that efforts are being made to secure convergence of inter-sectoral services in
the anganwadi centres to ensure that relevant sectoral service meant for women and children
converge at the village level at one point. Thus, the co-ordination of different cutting edge
level functionaries including anganwadi workers in absolutely essential to ensure convergence
of sectoral service. The convergence is aimed at achieving cost effective and efficient delivery
of services. Care is, however, taken to ensure that the main responsibilities of the Anganwadi
workers as regards delivery of vital services under the ICDS Scheme do not suffer.

It is submitted that other sectoral schemes are not being incorporated into the ICDS
Schemes. The effort is only being made in the direction of ensuring effective convergence of
sectoral services through closer co-ordination between different village level, sector level and
block level functionaries. The guidelines on ICDS Scheme clearly prescribe the norms of the
staff/functionaries of ICDS which are being strictly followed. It is also clarified that no new
components are being added to the ICDS Scheme. Efforts are only being made for ensuring
strengthening of the ICDS Scheme through adequate infrastructural and equipment support,
greater involvement of community and through enrichment of the components included in the
package of services under the ICDS Scheme. Further, adequate funds are being released to
the States as per the schematic pattern of the assistance under the ICDS schemes and in case
of any additional activity, not covered under the approved norms for the Scheme is proposed
additional funds are specifically earmarked and released for such activities.

Créches/Day Care Centres/National Creche Fund

6.1 Now that more and more women are coming out of their hearth and opting for newer
vocations, requirement of creches is being felt in smaller cities and towns also. The Committee
feels that since the National Creche Fund has been established, the Department should make
all out efforts to meet the requirement of creches all over the country through this scheme.

Reply

During the year 1993-94 Department set up the National Creche Fund with a corpus fund
of Rupees 19.90 crores with a view to opening more creches to meet the growing requirements
of creches. Under the Fund, creches are sanctioned only with the interest earned on the
investment of the corpus fund of NCF. The Department has set up a target of sanctioning
450 creches and 150 Anganwadi-cum-Creches in each year of the remaining period of 8th Five
Year Plan. During the year 1994-95 450 creches and 150 Anganwadi-cum-Creches were
sanctioned under National Creche Fund.


19

Early Childhood Education Scheme

7.1 The Committee is quite unhappy to note that this programme has remained static
since 1988 due to financial constraints and this year also, budgetary provision under: this
scheme is the same as that of last year.

7.2 The Committee finds that it is a very good scheme meant for preparing children for
entry into primary school by taking care of their social, mental, physical, moral and
emotional development. But the chances of its expansion appear to be very bleak with the
present level of allocations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government
should provide ‘sufficient funds for this scheme so that it could be extended to more and
more districts having large SC/ST population.

Reply

Since preschool education is being imparted under the Integrated Child Development
Services (ICDS) Programme of the Department, the Early Childhood Education Scheme has
been non-expanding since 1988-89. In order to ensure coverage of as many as areas as
possible under the Child Welfare Schemes, instructions have been issued that if ICDS is
operationalised in a Block, the existing ECE Centres should be shifted to non-ICDS areas.
It is proposed that with universalisation of ICDS, the Early Childhood Education (ECE)
Scheme would be phased out.

Child Prostitution

8.1 Though the Committee is happy that some steps for strengthening the
implementation machinery have been initiated by the Department, it feels that simple
strengthening of the existing machinery would be enough. The Committee is of the opinion
that the problem of child prostitution has not received due attention so far and emphasis ‘thas
been more on legal than developmental or rehabilitative aspect of this problem. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that a multi-pronged strategy be evolved for combating
this evil effectively. It also recommends that the proposal of the Department to set up
Special Cells for this purpose be cleared at the earliest.

Reply ४

With the objective of eradicating the evil of Child Prostitution the Department of
Women & Child Development has set up the Central Advisory Committee to suggest
various measures such as welfare programmes to be implemented at the national level for
the care, protection, treatment, development and rehabilitation of young fallen victims,
amendments to the existing laws or for enanctment of new laws for the prevention of sexual
exploitation of children; examine the Devadasi and Jogin systems and to recommend to the
Government the Setting up of an appropriate machinery for the proper implementation of
the Committee’s suggestions. The Committee submitted its report ‘Child prostitution in the
Twilight: A status and Action Report’ . This report was sent to all States/UTs for taking
follow-up action on the recommendations contained in the Report.

The Ministry of Home Affairs has been requested to issue strict instructions to rescue
children in the redlight areas; Chief Secretaries of all state Government/UT Administrations
were also asked to set up Advisory Committees and for providing adequate rehabilitation
homes etc. e

A Desk has been created in the Department of Women & Child Development for
monitoring the implementation of the recommendations of Child Prostitution Report. A
series of the consultation meetings on Child Prostitution are being held by NGOS and by
UNICEF. Based on the recommendations of these meetings and the Report of. the Central
Advisory Committee it is proposed to draw up an Action Plan to combat this evil effectively.


20
Mahila Samridhi Yojana
11.2 The Committee notes that the target of opening 1.50 crore accounts under this scheme
could not be reached last year. The Department has, in its note furnished to the Committee,
pointed out, inter alia, that the Department of Posts could not providé adequate number of
Staff and stationery in the rural Post offices for the purpose. It has also been brought to the
notice of the Committee that smaller amounts generally are not accepted by the Post Offices.

The Committee suggests that the Department should take up the matter with the Deptt. of Posts
and ensure speedy and effective implementation of this scheme:

Reply

The matter has been taken up with the Deptt. of Posts.
Atrocities Against Women - :

13.2 The scheme of “Education Work for Prevention of Atrocities against Women”, it -
appears, has not made much headway. The allocation for this purpose has remained static for
the last two years. The amount of Rs. 35 lakhs, provided for this scheme in 1995-96, does not
inspire enough hope. There is a greater need for intensifying the educational publicity against
atrocities on women. The Committee, therefore, recommends that sufficient provision be made

for this important programme. The Committee also suggests that a separate fund be created in
the Department for rehabilitating the victims of atrocities, particularly the young girls.

Reply

2. A provision of Rs. 35.00 lakhs has been made for the scheme of Education work for
prevention of Atrocities Against Women. The provision can be suitably increased by re-
appropriation. Further, a scheme for payment of compensation to the victims of rape and sexual
assaults for their rehabilitation has been formulated by the National Commission for Women,
which is presently under examination in the Home Affairs.

Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK)

14. The Committee noted that the Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK) has sanctioned credit
limit to 48 NGOs to cover 62,322 women in the first two years, as against the target of covering
two lakh women in a six-year period. It is also noted that its performance in terms of
disbursement has been poor. The main reason for low disbursement, the Department stated,
‘was low consumption capacity of poor women who were the target beneficiaries. The
Department expects greater demand for loans this year. The Committee feels that lack of
awareness about this scheme in the rural and far-flung areas is also one of the major reasons for
low disbursement. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take
necessary steps to give wide publicity to the scheme. As the scheme is being implemented
mainly through Voluntary Organisations, it also recommends that the Department should
ensure that only those organisations which have good credentials are involved in this scheme.
Reply

The Committee has recommended that the Department of Women and Child Development
should take necessary steps to give wide publicity to the scheme. In-this connection Rashtriya
Mahila Kosh is already giving wide publicity about the working of the Rashtriya Mahila Kosh.

The Scheme is being implemented by the Office of the Rashtriya Mahila Kosh throughout the
country.

As per the guidelines of the scheme, the Kosh is disseminating the credit mainly through
NGO/Self Help Group (SHGs) to poor women both in rural and urban areas. Due care is taken
while giving loans to the concerned NGO that the organisation has good/sound credentials.


21

20.. The Committee is happy to know that the Department has already taken a lot of
interest and initiative for involving Panchayats and Nagar Palikas in the implementation and
monitoring of its programmes. The Department has also participated in organising awareness
generation and training programmes for elected members of the Panchayats; started Balvikas
Mahila Samitis for monitoring all children and women related programmes at village, block
and district levels; and requested State Governments to form such Samitis. The Committee,
however, feels that the Department should take all necessary steps to seek more and more
participation and cooperation of the local bodies in implementing, monitoring, etc. of
various programmes meant for rural and semi-urban women and children.

Reply

The Department has prepared training modules for training in decision making skills for
Women Panchayat members and is also conducting pilot training programmes for Women
Panchayat members and Chairpersons. Local bodies like Municipalities are also being
assisted under the Working Women’s Hostel’s Scheme.

The Indira Mahila Yojana which was launched on 20.8.1995 will seek to create synergy
in the implementation of Women specific and women related programmes at the
Anganwadi/Block Panchayat and District levels by ensuring bottom upwards identification
and prioritisation of local women’s needs and their reflection in the District Development
Plan as a distinct Women’s Component Plan. The Task would be done in close collaboration
with the Panchayati Raj Institutions. The elected member of the Gram Panchayat residing in
the area covered by an Anganwadi (IMK) will be Ex-officio member of that Indira Mahila
Kendra.

Under the Mahila Samriddhi Yojana many Panchayats have been very enthusiastic in
popularising the scheme and have ‘done commendable work in implementing MSY. For
instance, in Kerala a few Panchayats in Palakkad District have been able to motivate and
enrol women in each family to open an MSY account.

21. It has been reported that ‘Sathin’ schemes has run into some difficulty because of
non-cooperation of Panchayats and a decision of the State Government of Rajasthan to
make them redundant. The Committee desires that the Department should take up the
matter with the concerned State to see that their sérvices are utilised suitably.

Reply

Government of Rajasthan have informed that no decision to discontinue the scheme of
‘Sathins’ has been taken.


CHAPTER-IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE wwUT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Please see Chapter-I.

22


CHAPTER-V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED

Budgetary Provisions

2.2 In view of the price escalation and other related factors, this increase, would not be
enough to sustain even the on-going projects. While the women and child should have
received the utmost consideration of the Government, only 4.28% of the total budget of the
Government has been earmarked for their welfare. Children and women being the most
vulnerable sections, a developing society like India’s can ill-afford any slackness at this
juncture in the implementation of schemes meant for their development.

Utilisation of allocation

2.4 The Committee, however, finds that there is a big gap between the amount spent so
far on various schemes like creches/day care centres, training of ICDS functionaries,
Balwadi Nutrition Programme etc. and that provided for the entire 8th Plan period.

2.5 The secretary explained that the slow progress in appropriating the 8th Plan outlay
in the case of certain programmes, in fact, was mainly due to the non release of
proportionate amounts every year by the Planning Commission. She, however, maintained
that such was not the case with all the schemes and, in fact, the 8th Plan outlay would fall
short of the total requirement of the Department.

World Bank Assisted ICDS Projects

5.1 The total Eighth Plan outlay under the World Bank assisted ICDS is Rs. 330.00
crores, whereas the Department has been able to make use of only Rs. 240.42 crores so far.
Even in the penultimate year of the Eighth Five Year Plan, the budgetary provision
earmarked is only Rs. 64.00 crores. In this way, a hefty amount of Rs. 90.00 crores remains
unutilised.

5.2 On being asked as to whether the Department would be able to fully use the
unutilised amount, the Secretary explained that since the ICDS-II was gaining momentum,
more resources would be required and, therefore, the Department was hopeful of utilising
the available amount during the Eighth Five Year Plan. The Committee recommends that
the Department should ensure that the available resources be utilised in right earnest and
there should not be any let up in this regard.

5.3 As regards the ICDS projects, started with World Bank Assistance, nothing is
known about their fate after the flow of funds ceases on completion of the stipulated period
because no separate provision for it has been made. The Committee suggests that the
Department should continue with those projects by providing adequate allocation etc.

Creches/Day Care Centres/National Creche Fund

6. The scheme of Creches/ Day Care Centres was started in 1975. It was proposed to
start 50,000 additional creche units during the Eighth Five Year Plan at’ the rate of 10,000
every year. But there has not been any increase in the number of creches since 1991-92. The
sole reason for this was stated to be inadequate resources. The Committee, however, notes
from the table, showing financial targets and achievements, that the Department has not

23


been able to achieve the financial targets during the last three years owing to some reason or
the other. The Committee is baffled to learn that while the Department was not able to
open any creche since 1991-92, due to alleged inadequate funds on the one hand, it,was not
able to achieve its financial target during the last three years on the other.
Working Women’s Hostels

12. The financial allocation under this scheme for this year in the same as' that of last
year i.e. Rs. 7.75 crores, inspite of the fact that evaluation studies undertaken by the
external agencies have underlined an emergent need to expand this programme and to
upgrade the facilities in the hostels. The Committee, in its previous report, while expressing
concern over the inadequacy of hostels for working women, had recommended that
construction of more hostels should be encouraged. This has become more necessary in view
of the fact that the progress of the scheme during the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 was very
poor. Last year also, the Department had to reduce its original target of constructing 60
hostels to 50 in view of the cost escalation factor. Keeping the budgetary allocation at the
last year’s level shows that the Department has not taken the recommendations of the
Committee seriously. The Committee however, reiterates that the allocation for this scheme
be adequately enhanced so that the backlog of the last three years could be cleared. It
should also, at the same time, encourage more and more voluntary organisations to come
forward in this field by increasing their grants.

Support to Training and Employment Programme

16.2 The Committee is of the opinion that this is a good scheme which is gathering
momentum. In view of this, more proposals from unrepresented areas/sectors also are
likely to be received. It would give rise to more demand for assistance under the Scheme.
The Committee feels that the provision of Rs. 16 crores for 1995-96, would not be sufficient
to meet the requirements of both ongoing projects, as well as extending the scheme to new
areas / sectors. The Committee, therefore, recommends that more funds should be provided
for this scheme. To make the Scheme more attractive, the Department, the Committee
feels, should devise method for helping the trainees in taking 'a suitable occupation/
employment.

Family Counselling Centres

18.1 An evaluation of these family counselling centres undertaken by the Government
of. India through National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development
(HIPCCD) had highlighted inter-alia the need to strengthen its infrastructure. The
Committee is also given to understand that grants for some of the centres had not been
released last year.

18.3 Questioned whether the Department wants to continue with the programme, the
Secretary said that the Central Social Welfare Board had substantial budget for family
counselling centres. But this does not-hold good in the face of the allocation made this year.
The Committee, therefore, feels that this important scheme should not be starved of funds.
It also recommends that the outstanding dues of the centres be released forthwith.


MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

अड्डा
THIRTY-FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 2.00 p.m. on Monday, the 11th March, 1996 in Committee Room
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri P. Upendra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

- Shri O.P. Kohli

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

. Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.6. Sanadi

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma

SABHA

8999० :७ 9 ७ # 0० (७

sed
on
tal

. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
. Dr. ५. Rajeshwaran

. Dr. Vasant Pawar

. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
. Shri Ramachandra Dome

Pee ee
७ + ०० ७४७०

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
2. Shri 0.0. Sharma, Under Secretary
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer.

2. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Thirty-seventh, Thirty-eighth,
Thirty-Ninth and Fortieth Reports on the Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations / Observations contained in its Twenty-second, Nineteenth, Twentieth
and Seventeenth reports respectively with minor changes.

3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram and
Prof. I.G. Sanadi to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Prof. Malini Bhattacharya and
in her absence Dr. V.,Rajeshwaran to lay them on the table of Lok Sabha.

4. The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on the 19th March,
1996 to consider and adopt’the draft report on the Private Universities (Establishment and
Regulation) Bill, 1995.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 p.m.

5