7 tare *sar'.
On page 11 ‘para no. 40, Pt.No. (pp) line 1 fox ‘Al read

a aNWIAIVILINI UF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

THIRTY FIFTH REPORT
ON

DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Eighteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resource Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11.03.96)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12.03.96)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 1996/Phalguna, 1917 (Saka)


कक 1S ERAN
MO 37 TINMOD

od किए aoa nOBIAI
oqeH ‘aPirsatright



CONTENTS

PAGEs

Composition OF THE COMMITTEE.

INTRODUCTION Se
CHAPTER है. RE (OER. oa cans nck eee est ee ene 1-12
Cuapter If Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the

(GOVE RIIIEN 25s a0 5: dsckce secs Seenee ea 3००० मेने ett cscs eee 13-19
Cuaprer III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not

desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.................. 20-23
Cuapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the

Government have not been accepted by the Committee .............. 24

CuHarrer V_ Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government
has not given any reply

Minutes ..



Pram, ant 40. MOrriZoIMG. 4
Act soe
ogee $ अब1७##0७००

मी] 11 अछाप «1४2
al 11981019%90

१३750 88075% 7 LT Aaa?

VI ३१०७2
fon avo jpamnwevon)

ie ५४291 71! HOM ore.
WIGS 6७ 19५18

Ae



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

4. Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Shri O.P. Kohli

6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

8. Shri Md. Salim

9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. I.G. Sanadi

11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar
21. Vacant

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
24. Shri Z. M. Kahandole
25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Vacant

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda

35. Dr. K. D. Jeswani

@


(ii)

36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

38. Shri Rambadan

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

3. Shri Om Datta Sharma, Under Secretary

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on
its behalf, present this Thirty-Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its 18th Report on “Demands for Grants ” (1995-96) of
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Culture).

2. The Eighteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 25th April,
1995 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2Sth April, 1995. Replies of Government on the
recommendations contained in the report, received from the Department of Culture were
considered by the Committee and this report was adopted at its sitting held on 7th March,
1996.

New De.ut; P. UPENDRA,
7th March, 1996 Chairman,
Phalguna, 1917 (Saka) Committee on Human Resource Development.

(iii)


ROReRD:  - shige ey
1#$७9५०६४५५७ ३5३४५

regs cpdniad के 0
ea .inemqoisved ७:
261 1055501 Siyded: att

11019): 1758. otf 5
75998 ४ पते mb Sein
to side T ऋ! 10 bial जी है
tbSninings, enoyAbrommoss:
6 sana SAP Yd basbieog



CHAPTER-I
REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommerdations contained in its Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry
of Human Resource Development (Department of Culture) for the year 1995-96 which was
presented to Rajya Sabha on 25.4.95 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25.4.95.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: para
1:22.35 240, 3, 0 stdedd Ses «६ «1.4 100] , 10, he 1 04% 40000 + 5 1 8 20,
26.1 26.2, 27.

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: para 3, 3.2, 4.3, 5, 8.1, 9.1, 9.2, 13.4, 15, 16.2,
18.1, 22.3, 22-4, 29:

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 1.3, 2.2, 2.4, 2.5, 6, 8, 11, 12.1, 12.2, 14, 17.1,
19.1, 19:2, 20, 20.1, 28.3, 30, 31.1. 31.2, 31.3, 31.4

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited : nil.

3. The Committee will now deal with some of its recommendations on which the action
taken note of the Government has not been accepted by the Committee:

Recommendation (Para No. 1.3)

The Committee, in its Tenth Report on Demands for Grants of the Department for
1994-95, recommended setting up of a National Cultural Fund. The Department has stated
that while working out the modalities, it was inter-alia, proposed that initially a corpus of
Rs. 200 crores would be created by a contribution of Rs. 100 crores from the Government
and the other Rs. 100 crores raised from the public/corporate bodies and philanthropic
individuals. The fund could be utilised for proper maintenance of monuments, upgradation
and improvement of the environment at the monuments, construction of additional space to
accommodate special galleries in the Museums, inter-disciplinary research, documentation,
and promotion of the art forms which are in danger of extinction, folk and tribal arts,
artifacts, publications in specialised areas, etc.

The contribution of the Fund would be exempted from computation of income, as
envisaged in section 10 of the Income-Tax Act. it was further stated that it was also
proposed to have an Advisory Committee and an Administrative Committee for the
operation of the Fund.

Comments of the Ministry

In the Approach Paper to the National Policy on Culture, it was delineated that
Government would formulate appropriate schemes to attract private funding of projects on
culture. The Parliamentary Standing Committee attached to the Ministry of Human
Resource Development also strongly endorsed the view of find avenues for mobilising
resources from outside the Governmental sector.

In the meeting of Expenditure Finance Committee held on 16th November, 1995 under
the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary-in-charge Department of Culture which was
attached, jinter-alia, by representatives of Department of Expenditure, Planning

1


Commission, Central Public Works Department, it was decided to set up National Culture
Fund.

It was, inter-alia, decided in the meeting that the resources of the fund shall consist of
(i) contributions, gifts or bequeaths which may be made by individuals, associations, public
or private bodies at the Panchayats, District, State, National and International levels:
(ii) any interest due on the resources of the funds: (iii) funds raised by collections and
receipts from Government events organised for the benefit of the fund and (iv) any other
resurces acceptable to the Managing Committee of the Fund. It was also decided that the
contribution of the Government to the Fund Should be restricted to Rs. 19.5 crores.

Meanwhile, other necessary action for creation of the Fund are being taken on a
priority basis, As soon as the Fund is created, necessary action for exemption from Section
10 (23C) (iv) of the contribution made by the Government to the Fund and also the amount
of contribution/donations received from any source towards the Fund from the purview of
Section 80G of the Income-Tax Act would be taken.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that all the formalities be completed expeditiously for creation
of the National Culture Fund at the earliest.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
Recommendation (Para No. 2.2)

The Committee, in its 10th Report, recommended increase in the staff strength of the
ASI for augmenting protection and preservation of monuments. The Department of Culture
has stated that a proposal had been sent to Ministry of Finance to increase the number of
staff in the ASI. The Committee recommends that the Department should pursue the matter
with the Ministry of Finance for the sanction of additional staff strength which was urgently
needed for protecting our ancient monuments. The Committee, also recommends that as
soon as the National Culture Fund come into being, a plan of action may be prepared and
implemented to utilise some of the amount for protection and preservation of monuments.
The Committee reiterates its recommendation, made earlier, to expand the network of ASI
and also to involve voluntary organisations in protecting out ancient monuments under the
supervision of the Archaeological Survey of India.

Comments of the Ministry

Due to shortage of Watch and Ward staff the centrally protected monument under the
control of the ASI, there has been constant requirement received from different circles for
Watch and Ward staff. However, the Committee has been formed with Joint Director, SIU,
Ministry of Finance. Being the Member of the Committee he is to assess the factual position
of Watch and Ward staff at the centrally protected monuments. The Committee will assess
actual requirement tof the staff by the spot inspection of the circle offices. Two meetings in
this regard have already been held of the said Committee and the assessment of the
requirement of the staff is under progress. It may take some more time as they are to
inspect a number of circles.

Pending the introduction of the National Culture Fund at the instance of Planning
Commission, a scheme for conservation of wall paintings has been approved by the
Department of Culture and the Planning Commission. The scheme is being taken up for
implementation from 1996-97.

Comments of the Committee
The Committee expresses its concern over the inordinate delay in appointing the staff


3

keeping in view decaying condition of many valuable monuments. Inspite of the urgency
involved in the matter, the requirement of the staff has not yet been assessed. The
Committee agrees that it would take some time to complete inspection of all the
monuments. The Committee strongly recommends that inspection may be completed at the
earliest and the process of appointing the staff be initiated expeditiously. Pending inspection,
an adhoc assessment may be made immediately and staff be appointed. The Committee also
recommends that the Department should involve voluntary organisations in the protection of
monuments, as recommended earlier.

Recommendation (Para 2.4)

PARA 2.4 : The Committee observed that at several places of interest the entry fee to
go into the ASI-protected monuments is very small and the amount collected is not sufficient
to pay the salaries. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Department of Culture should
rationalise the entry fee that is being charged at such places.

Comments of the Ministry

The ASI has already initiated a proposal for enhancing the entry fee to monuments
from 50 paise to RS. 5/ and Rs. 2 for different categories of monuments. The same shall
be implemented once the proposal is approved.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels that hike in the fees proposed is rather low and the Secretary,
Department of Culture has agreed with this view. ASI should consider rationalising the entry
fee structure based on the importance of the monuments/sites. The Committee is also of the
view that the entry fee structure should reflect uniformity and the amount so realised be
credited to the National Culture Fund.

Recommendation

PARA 2.5 : The Committee was further informed that the ASI was in the process of
preparing a blueprint of an Action Plan for maintaining and upgrading the various
monuments, improving their environment and for effective mobilisation of finance and
manpower. The Committee recommends that this work should be completed at the earliest
and the implementation of the Action Plan should be taken up during the current financial
year itself.

Comments of the Ministry

The maintenance, conservation and preservation besides improving their environments
is a continuous process and is being taken by the ASI depending upon the availability of
funds. During the current financial year 280 monuments are being attended.
Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels that annual plans for maintenance, conservation and preservation
of monuments be prepared well in advance.

VICTORIA MEMORIAL HALL, CALCUTTA
Recommendation

PARA 6: Plan allocation for the Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta, has been increased
from Rs. 1 crore for 1994-95 to Rs. 1.50 crore for 1995-96. Clarifying the position on the
increased allocation, the Department informed the Committee that it was for the purposes of
carrying out maintenance and renovation work and also to purchase quarters for
administrative block. The Committee desires that the money allocated may be fully spent.
The Committee also desires that the purchase of the quarters may not be delayed.


Comments of the Ministry

Efforts are being made to ensure that the allocated funds are fully utilised as far as
possible. As regards purchase of quarters, efforts will be made to complete the process by an
early date.

The Ministry, clarifying the present position of utilisation of Rs. 1.5 crores, have stated
in the additional comments as under:

Further Comments of the Ministry

Out of the Plan provision of Rs. 1.5 crore for 1995-96. Victoria Memorial Hall has so
far utilised Rs. 28.00 lakhs. For repair and renovation work of Victoria Memorial Building,
funds amounting to Rs. 36.00 lakhs are to be released by February, 1996 to the
Archaeological Survey of India. Funds of Rs. 14.00 lakhs have been earmarked for CPWD
(for Civil and Electrical Works), on the basis of the estimates received by the Victoria
Memorial Hall from the CPWD. Besides this, funds of Rs. 50.00 lakhs are likely to be
utilised by March, 1996 for acquiring administrative block and purchase of staff quarters for
which negotiations are reported to be going on with the concerned authorities.

Comments of the Committee

The Ministry has, however, not given account for the entire amount. Out of the details
given by the Ministry, the Committee feels that only Rs. 78 lakhs are likely to be spent. As
regards Rs. 50 lakhs earmarked for acquiring administrative block and purchase of quarters,
negotiations are still going on and it is doubtful whether the amount could be spent in the
current financial year. Besides the remaining Rs. 22 lakhs are not likely to be spent at all as
there is no account given for that. The Department should make realistic targets and
allocations.

SCHEME FOR PROMOTION AND STRENGTHENING OF REGIONAL AND LOCAL
MUSEUMS.

Recommendation

PARA 8: The aim of this scheme is to enable establishment of Regional museums in
the country. The Budgetary provision made during last year was Rs. 10 lakhs and it has
been raised to one crore rupees this year as suggested by the Committee last year. The
Committee is of the view that elected Panchayats and Nagarpalikas should be involved in
this scheme to achieve better results. The Department should explore the ways and means in
this direction.

The Planning Commission is giving utmost importance to the scheme and desired that
the Panchayats and Districts should be involved in the implementation of the Scheme. As
suggested efforts are being made for setting up of atleast one Museum in a District. The
scheme is being revised to widen its scope, so that the benefit of the scheme can reach not
only the local or District level but also to the Panchayats.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that an early action be taken to involve Panchayats and
Nagarpalikas in this regard.

LIBRARIES

Recommendation

PARA 11: The Committee feels that unless the library network, is improved,
educational standards and literacy rate of the people at large cannot be improved. The
Committee, therefore, stresses that the Central Government should hold discussions with the

State Governments as early as possible and devise a suitable methodology. A beginning
should be made in this direction during the current financial year itself.


Comments of the Ministry न
- Necessary action for arranging discussion with the State Governments is being taken.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee recommends that the discussions with the State Governments be
completed as early as possible and an action plan chalked out at the earliest.

SCHOOL-CUM-VILLAGE LIBRARIES.
Recommendations

PARA 12.1 : During 1994-95 the allocation was Rs. 100 lakhs and it has been raised to
Rs. 300 lakhs in 1995-96. The scheme has been provided with additional funds to the extent
of Rs. 200 lakhs. Explaining the reasons for this additional allocation, the Department
informed the Committee that during the year 1994-95, it was proposed to operate the
scheme only on a pilot basis by covering about 500 villages. In case the Department received
adequate response from all the States and if the review of the scheme suggested positive
results, then more villages would be covered during the year 1995-96 and in the remaining
years of the VIII plan.

PARA 12.2 : The Secretary also informed the Committee that one of the things that the
Department had decided was to set up libraries in schools where there was some place and a
teacher could work as part-time Librarian. In this way, there could be saving on the
infrastructural expenditure. But, unfortunately, the Finance Ministry could not be convinced
that this scheme was different from the other schemes. The scheme is directed at children
and women who were literate and who are likely to read. The Government offcials, who are
posted in these areas could also make use of it. Appreciating the idea of the scheme, the
Committee is not happy with the attitude of the Ministry of Finance in regard to allocation
of funds for the purpose. The Department should make further efforts in this direction. The
Committee feels that with the elected Panchayats coming up everywhere the scheme could
be expanded in a big way. It could become an effective agency for reaching out to the
people of rural areas. In many States there are the Zilla Granthalaya Sanghathans which are
incharge of rural libraries. The Department could coordinate with them. The Committee
recommends that concrete steps should be taken in this regard.

Comments of the Ministry

The scheme has not yet been finalised due to the view taken by the Ministry of Finance
that this scheme is a duplication of the schemes being implemented by the Department of
Education under their Adult Education Programme. As desired by the Department of
Expenditure, this Department has taken up the matter with the adviser (Education),
Planning Commission to get the existing schemes on library services evaluated with special
reference to the utility of the scheme of School-cum-Village libraries.
Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that the matter be pursued with the Planning Commission for an
early evaluation of the schemes.

DELHI PUBLIC LIBRARY

Recommendations

PARA 14: The allocation on plan side has been increased to Rs. 120 lakhs for 1995-96
from Rs. 80 lakhs in 1994-95.

PARA 14.2: However, the Committee, in its 10th Report, recommended higher
allocation of funds to spread its network in slums and under developed areas and for more


mobile vans. The additional allocation made for 1995-96 does not appear to be in fulfilment
of the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee is also of the view that no efforts
have since been made to spread its network. The Committee reiterates its recommendation,
made earlier, to spread the network of the Delhi Public Library in the slum and under-
developed areas.
Comments of the Ministry

The Delhi Public Library has spread its network in slums and under-developed areas
and more mobile vans as could be seen from the attached statement (Annexure “A” at page
28—30). However, no reading room/library has been set up in the slums and under-
developed areas in 1995-96 so far. The Delhi Public Library opens the library where free
accommodation is available to them.

On clarification, the Ministry has given the following further comments :
Further Comments of the Ministry

During 1995-96 the following libraries were opened in the slums for weaker section of
the society:

1. Shakarpur 2. Love and Care, Jaffarabad

Areas which have been identified for opening libraries under the DPL system and land
has been purchased are :

1. Raja Garden 2. Janakpuri 3. R.K. Puram 4. Patparganj 5. Ashok Vihar.
Construction cannot be done due to non-availability of funds.

Slums and re-settlement colonies which have been identified for opening reading room/
libraries are :

1. Munshi Ram Colony, Mukherjee Nagar, MCD has not given necessary clearance for
acquiring rent free accommodation.

2. Tagore Garden re-settlement colony—MCD has given clearance for giving rent free
accommodation.

3. Village Khera Kalan, Delhi-82—Rural libraries. The construction of this library will
be taken up shortly and the NDMC has given the necessary permission.

There are many applications pending for opening of branches of the Delhi Public
Library, but without rent free accommodation and necessary staff/basic infrastructure,
libraries in slums and resettlement colonies cannot be opened at present,

Delhi Public Library on its own also wrote to Municipal Corporation Development and
Delhi Development Authority to allot rent free accommodation in the community centres in
slunvesettlement colonies, but there had been no response from either of them.

As desired by the Chairman, Standing Parliamentary Committee, a meeting will be
convened in the Department of Culture with the representatives of MCD and NDMC for
availability of free accomodation for setting up of libraries in slums and under developed
areas of Delhi.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels that efforts should be made to open libraries/reading rooms in all
the slum areas immediately. The Department should convene a meeting with MCD/NDMC
at the earliest for making the free accommodation in the slum areas available for opening
libraries/reading rooms.


7

NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA

Recommendation

PARA 17.1: About the opening of new regional centres of NSD, the Secretary
informed the Committee that no new centre could be opened during the year 1994-95
because the functioning of the only regional centre of NSD at Bangalore was not reviewed
and he further added that the Department was of the view that before opening any new
regional centres, it would be appropriate to evaluate the functioning of the existing centre.
The Secretary further added that it would be done during 1995-96. The Committee
recommends that the proposed new regional centres in the East-and West should be opened
during this year.
Comments of the Ministry

The Department will consider the recommendation regarding setting up of more
regional centres subject to the approval of the Ministry of Finance.

The Ministry in the additional comments have clarified the position as under:
Additional comments of the Ministry

The National School of Drama has already opend its regional centre at Bangalore. The
Department will evaluate the functioning of the existing centre at Bangalore. The National
School of Drama is planning to open two new centres one in the East and one in the West.
The Department is examining the proposal. This is being the last year of the 8th Five Year
Plan the Planning Commission on a separate issue has informed that they are not in favour
of taking up any new proposal during the current Five Year Plan. Even then the
Department is willing to support the views of the National School of Drama for opening its
new centres. This will be subject to additional financial allocation by Department of
Expenditure.
Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not happy with the non-implementation of this recommendation. It is
taking unduly long time. The Department of Culture may take up the matter with the
Department of Expenditure for additional allocation to ensure that the centres are opened
atleast during the next financial year.

SCHEME OF BUILDING GRANTS TO VOLUNTARY CULTURAL
ORGANISATIONS

Recommendation

PARA 19.1 : The Committee is constrained to observe that applications for building
grants are not being properly scrutinised. The organisations/people have to make frequent
visits to the Ministry, even from far-off places. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the system of scrutinising applications may be streamlined and simplified. There should also
be a method of provisional sanction of amount subject to the submission of other papers.
The bonafides of the organisation should also be verified.

As recommended by the Committee., the following action has been taken:

(i) The application are being examined thoroughly. Whenever an application is
substantially incomplete, it is returned to the applicant for re-submission after doing
the needful.

(ii) In case the documents are missing in an applications which are not of a vital
nature. The application is considered on merit. If admissible, the grant is sanctioned
in such cases subject to submission of missing documents.

(iii) List of incomplete applications (to be returned) is also placed before the


8

Expert Committee so that the members can see and examine these applications, if
they so desire.

(iv) Earlier, the applicant organisations were required to submit plans and
details of expenditure duly approved by the Executive Engineer of the PWD. To
simplify the procedure, these documents are accepted if they are certified by a
Registered Architect.

(v) Cost of land is now accepted as part of matching share of the applicant
organisation. This measure will help the organisations which may not have enough
funds to be eligible for a grant.

PARA 19.2: The Committee has also noted that the scheme provides for physical
verification of construction and checking of accounts by the Chartered Accountant and
Members of Expert Committee. The Committee feels that the verification system is not
functioning effectively. The Committee feels that it needs to be strengthened.

Comments: Inspection of the Construction work and performance of grantee organisations is
being watched. During the year 1995-96, two organisations have been inspected.
Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. The Committee has received many
complaints on the disbursement of the grants. The Department should examine the matter
thoroughly and ensure that only deserving persons/organisations are sanctioned the requisite
grants. The Committee also reiterates its earlier recommendation of verifying the bonafides
of the applicants before releasing the grants. Deserving cases, rejected earlier, should be
reviewed and grants sanctioned during the current financial year.

SCHEME FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO DANCE, DRAMA AND THEATRE
ENSEMBLES

Recommendation

PARA 20: The Committee is surprised to know that the same organisations are getting
lakhs and lakhs of rupees under this scheme and the Department is not encouraging new
organisations or individual artists. The Committee feels that there must be something wrong
with the way State Governments are recommending cases for grants and vested interests and
favouritism might have developed. The Committee is also of the view that while genuine
organisations are suffering for want of funds., fake organisations are taking substantial grants
year after year. The Committee observes that the: Department could involve the Zonal
Cultural Centres somewhere in the process so that they could also recommend certain cases
and help the Department in verifying the bonafides of the applicants. The Sangeet Natak
Akademi and such other organisations could also be authorised to recommend certain
deserving cases.

Comments: As advised by the Standing Committee, the selection of organisations has
been made more rigorous and the recommendation of State Governments is not taken as a
final word in the matter. The progress of performances is being put to more watchful
scrutiny. The recommendation of Zonal Cultural Centres are being taken into account
wherever available/feasible.

Recommendation

PARA 20.1: The Committee recommends, that the scheme may be streamlined. The
Department should have a list of functions, including the invitation cards that the
organisations get printed etc., for verifying ja pha muiness and also whether they are
actually organising these functions or not. Similar ¢ be ‘made to verify and whether they



9

are implementing the projects for which production grants have been given. The Committee
also recommends that institutions running on commercial lines by, renting their premises,
theatres, conference halls etc. and earning substantial revenue should not be given any
financial grants’ or assistance.

Comments: The scheme has also been got evaluated by the Planning Commission and
action is being initiated to implement their recommendations. With a view to the
performance of the grantee organisations, it has been decided recently to set up a
Committee having a representative each of the Department of Culture, Sangeet Natak
Akademi and the CCRI.

Comments of the Committee

The comments are not satisfactory. The Committee has received many representations
alleging that genuine artists/organisations are not being given grants. From the statement
given by the Government, it appears that the same people are getting grants year after year
by virtue of their contacts in the department and those who do not have any access fail to
get the grants. All the applications should be properly registered. The Committee is of the
view that the whole system needs to be streamlined. Cases rejected earlier should be
reviewed and deserving organisations/individuals should be given grants during the current
financial year.

NAV NALANDA MAHAVIR, NALANDA (BIHAR)
Recommendation

PARA 28.3: The activities of the Mahavira are understood to have come to a standstill.
Only a few students have been enrolled and are pursuing academic activities there. The
hostel meant for the students is virtually non-functioning. In view of this, the Committee
recommends that thé activities of the institute be streamlined and activated. The Committee
also recommends that the funds allocated should be properly utilised.

Comments of the Ministry

A Committee comprising of Smt. Komal Anand, Joint Secretary as Chairperson and
Director (works), CPWD and Consultant, Secretariat of Governor, Bihar has been
constituted to recognise and review the priority of works and the activities of Nav Nalanda
Mahavira. Due attention is being given to the revival of Nav Nalanda Mahavira. The new
Director will be appointed as soon as the proposal is cleared by the ACC of Ministry of
Personnel, Deptt. of Personnel and Training. The pace of events and development may
appear to be slow at the moment due to the initial teething troubles. However, once the new
Director takes over, the Mahavira will definitely make fast strides to achieve its original
glory and prestige.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee, headed by Smt. Komal Anand, should complete its study and give
suggestions expeditiously. The Department of Personnel and Training should clear the
appointment of a new Director immediately to enable it function smoothly.

INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR ARTS
Recommendation

PARA 30: The Centre was set up in 1987. A sum of Rs. 25 crores was released to the
Centre as the initial corpus fund with the stipulation that the centre would run on the
interest accruing from the investment. During the 8th Plan an additional corpus fund of
Rs. 25 crores was approved. The allocation for 1995-96 is the same, both on plan and non-plan


10

side, as that of 1994-95 i.e. Rs. 20 crores on plan side and Rs. 2 lakhs on non-plan side. The
Committee is of the view that the Centre is being allotted substantial budgetary allocations
but it is not clear whether its activities are commensurate with the sanctioned funds. The
Committee suggests that allocations be made depending on the progress of work, so that
other schemes are not starved of funds.

Comments of the Ministry
No further funds are required to be released for the corpus of Indira Gandhi National

Centre for Arts. However, the suggestion of the Committee would be kept in mind while
releasing the funds for Building Project of IGNCA.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that a regular monitoring of the expenditure incurred by the
Centre be done. Funds should be released on the basis of this monitoring report only.

NATIONAL POLICY ON CULTURE
Recommendation

PARA 31.1: The Committee considered the Approach Paper on the National Policy on
Culture and after a detailed and indepth study of the various aspects of Indian cultural scene
presented its 12th report thereon.

PARA 31.2: The Committee while make various suggestions on the Approach Paper,
recommended early drafting of the final document on National Policy on Culture.

PARA 31.3: On being asked to comment on the progress being made in regard to
redrafting the final policy document, the Secretary informed the Committee that they had
already initiated the process of the redrafting, in consultation with various agencies.

PARA 31.4: The Committee recommends that the Department should complete the
process of redrafting the final document on National Policy on Culture at the earliest and
bring it before the Parliament.

Comments of the Ministry

A Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Ashok Vajpeyi, Joint Secretary,
Department of Culture, with Director, CCRT, Director, IGRMS and Director (CH) as its
members, has been constituted to draft the National Cultural Policy. Draft is being prepared
taking into account of the observation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee.

The Ministry have further clarified the position in the additional comments as under:
Further Comments of the Ministry

The Approach Paper on ‘National Policy on Culture’ was laid on the Table of the
House on Sth August, 1992. Two meetings of the Consultative Committee of Parliament

attached to Ministry of Human Resource Development were held on 06.08.92 and 17.08.92
which discussed the Draft Policy on Culture.

2. The Standing Committee attached to the Ministry of Human Resource Development
laid its 10th Report before the both the Houses of Parliament on 25th August, 1994 giving
its recommendations on the Approach Paper. In para 12 of the aforesaid report the
Committee recommended as under:

“The Committee is submitting its report after an indepth study of various aspects of
the indian Cultural scene. It hopes that its observations and recommendations will be
implemented in letter and spirit, while formulating the National Policy on Culture.”


il

3. The Standing Committee attached to the Ministry of Human Resource Development
presenting its 18th Report before both the Houses of Parliament on 25.04.95 recommended
in paras 31.4 as under:

“The Committee recommends that the Department should complete the process of
redrafting the final document of National Policy on Culture at the earliest and bring
it before the Parliament”.
4. On the notice of Motion given by the Ministry of Human Resource Development
regarding National Cultural Policy, Rajya Sabha Secretariat vide its U.O.No.9/4/94-L dated
January 5, 1995 informed as under:

“The Business Advisory Committee of the Rajya Sabha which considered the matter
at its meeting held on December 15, 1994 recommended that in the light of the
recommendations made by the Department related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development, a revised Draft National Cultural
Policy may be submitted to the House and the discussion thereon may be held during
the next session.”

5. Upon instructions from the then Secretary (Culture), a query was made to the Lok
Sabha Secretariat in June 1995 as to whether they would like to take up the Standing
Committee Report for further consideration. Vide their U.O. Note No. 4/1(1)/95S-L-I dated
9th June, 1995, the Lok Sabha Secretariat clarified that the approval of Lok Sabha
Secretariat for re-drafting of the National Culture Policy, is therefore, not necessary.

6. Whereupon a Committee under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary, Department of
Culture, has been constituted to draft the National Culture Policy vide order No. 20-1/92-
parisar dated 11.07.95. The policy document has been divided into various parts and
chapters relating to performing arts, culture and education, culture and management,
museums, anthropology efc., and have been allocated to the various members for preparing
suitable drafts, taking into consideration the recommendations of the Standing Committee.
They would also be taking into consideration various suggestions received by the
Department of Culture from the vast number of members of the creative community, the
State Governments, the National Colloquium and the reports and comments that have
appeared in the media besides the deliberations done by the Consultative Committee of the
Ministry of Human Resource Development. The Group has been asked to expedite the
drafting and submit the draft/chapters early so that the policy document could be further
processed. Since National Policy on Culture is being drafted for the first time in India and
has to address itself to a large number of complex issues, it has to be very carefully and
sensitively drafted incorporating various suggestions which have been made.

The draft National Cultural Policy shall be finalised at the Official Level Committee
headed by the Joint Secretary, by March, 1996 and submitted to Government for further
consideration.

Comments of the Committee

It was way back in the year 1992 that the Approach Paper on the National Policy on
Culture was presented to the Parliament and this Committee presented its report thereon in
August. 1994. The Department appears not taking the matter of preparing the final draft of
the National Culture Policy very seriously which is borne out by the fact that more than one
and a half years have gone by since the Committee submitted its report on the Approach
Paper and no progress has taken place in this regard. The Committee takes a very serious
view of this abnormal delay in a matter of utmost national importance. The Committee
strongly recommends that the final draft of the National Policy on Culture be completed by


12

March 31, 1996 and released for a nation wide debate. It may be submitted to the
Parliament in its First Session after the ensuing General Elections.


CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation

PARA 1.2: The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the efforts made by the
Department of Culture in implementing the recommendations made by the Committee in its
10th Report on the Demands for Grants of the Department for 1994-95. The Committee,
however, is constrained to observe that the budgetary grants given to the Department for
1995-96 accounts for only 0.12% of the total budget of the Government of India. The
Committee understands that this is not the sole responsibility of the Department of Culture.
Inspite of the recommendations of the Committee, made in its 10th Report, the allocations
to various wings of the Department have not been increased. The Secretary, Department of
Culture, while explaining the position in this regard, stated that even though the Planning
Commission recognised the need for more funds, yet, in view of the emphasis on
infrastructure development and the demands from different departments it was not in a
position to give more than the amount allocated which showed a slight increase over 1994-
95. The allocation made to the Department is far less than what was asked for by the
Department. The Committee feels that it is an indication of the failure of the Planning
Commission to recognise the need for preservation and promotion of our cultural heritage
and art forms.
Comments of the Ministry

A provision of Rs. 88.27 crores has been made for the Department of Culture under
Non-plan and Rs. 123 crores under plan for the year 1995-96 in the Revised Estimates as
against the Budget estimates of Rs. 82.73 crores under Non-Plan and Rs. 113 crores under
Plan.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA

Recommendation

PARA 2.3: The Department has also stated that, in addition to the present monuments,
about 100 monuments were under process for being brought under central protection. The
Committee recommends that an early decision be taken in regard to the selection of
monuments. As far as the Japanese grant of US $8,00,000 for Sanchi and Satdhara is
concerned, the Committee was informed that the work was in progress and the Japanese
experts were satisified with the level of upgradation. Regarding the ADB assistance for
conservation of Taj Mahal, it was stated that the proposal was still at a preliminary stage.
The Committee recommends that the matter should be pursued vigorously.
Comments of the Ministry

As regards the UNESCO project on conservation of Buddhist monuments Sanchi and
Satdhara, funded by the Government of Japan under the Japanese Trust Fund, it may be
mentioned that fund sanctioned to ASI is US $ 5,00,000 instead of $ 8,00;000 as mentioned in
the report, The work is under execution.

Regarding the assistance of ADB for conservation of Taj Mahal, it is mentioned that
the ADB has already approved the Technical assistance grant for the project “TA No. 2474-
IND: Technical assistance for environmental improvement and sustainable development of
Agra-Mathura-Ferozabad ‘Trapezium in Uttar Pradesh”.

Recommendation

PARA 2.6: :A-Fhe Committee also recommends that in view of the increasing number
of monuments and activities, of ASI, the allocation to it should be further increased.


14

Comments of the Ministry

Against the allocation of Rs. 14.10 crores for the Annual Action Plan 1995-96, the
demand projected for 1996-97 is Rs. 26.70 crores.

During the current financial year, as part of 125th brith anniversay of Mahatma Gandhi,
Father of the Nation, the ASI has established two museums namely, Swatantrata Sangram
Sangrahalaya at Red Fort and Swatantra Senani Smarak at Salimgarh. The museums have
already been completed, inaugurated and opened for public.

NATIONAL MUSEUM
Recommendation

PARA 3.1: The Department has stated that a number of exhibitions are proposed to be
held during 1995-96. Exhibitions at Vienna, Budapest, Brussels, Hague, Australia and South
Korea were in the final stages of agreement. Besides the above, many European and Asian
countries have also shown keen interest and they are under negotiations. On an enquiry as
to whether the Persian manuscripts exhibition which was proposed to be held in Teheran
and the exhibition of miniature paintings scheduled at Tashkent were organised last year, the
Department has stated that the exhibition was to be sent to Teheran but was postponed at
the last moment on the advice of the Indian embassy. In regard to the proposed miniatures
painting exhibition at Tashkent, the Department has explained that the exhibition could not
be held in view of heavy snowfall in Tashkent and on the advice received from the Tashkent
authorities. The Committee observes that such cancellations of exhibitions at the last
moment should be avoided, unless inescapable.

Comments of the Ministry

During 1995-96, the following exhibitions have been organised/are being organised by
National Museum:

(i) “Buddha in India—Early Indian Sculptures” at Vienna, Austria from April to July,
1995. (ii) “International Buddhist Culture” at Seoul, South Korea ended on ३18 January,
1996. (iii) “Femine Ideal in Indian Art” at Paris, France, from April to May, 1995. (iv)
“Vision of Kings, Art and Experiences in India” is currently on show at Canberra,
Australia. (v) “Jewels from India” is scheduled to be held at Milan, Italy in March, 1996.

The exhibition at Budapest, Brussels and Hague could not be held due to various
administrative and technical reasons on both the sides. The National Museum, however,
tried their level best not to cancel any exhibition at the last moment unless, it is
unavoidable.

Recommendation

PARA 3.3: The Committee is constrained to observe that during the transit of exhibits
abroad and also during the course of the exhibitions there, sufficient protection to art pieces
is not ensured due to which it has often reported that several exhibits come back to the
country in a damaged condition. The Committee takes a very serious view of this. The
Committee recommends that all necessary steps should be taken for the protection of art
pieces which are taken for exhibitions abroad and no damage of whatsoever nature should
be allowed to take place.

Comments of the Ministry

National Museum will ensure that no damage of whatsoever nature to the exhibits is
allowed to take place while sending and bringing them back. All the necessary steps shall be
taken for protecting the art objects in accordance to the guidelines.


15

Recommendation

PARA 3.4: The Committee finds it difficult to understand that whereas our country has
been sending high quality material abroad for holding exhibitions, the foreign countries have
been reluctant to send equally high class articles of heritage to India. The Committee is of
the view that while finalising the agreements, it should be ensured that India’s efforts to
send high quality of objects are reciprocated by other countries.

Comments of the Ministry

The matter of receiving high quality exhibitions from abroad on reciprocal basis has
been given a serious thought by National Museum and above recently asked the Australian
authorities to send equally important exhibitions in exchange of our recently exhibition
“Vision of Kings, Art and Experiences in India”. The same policy will be adopted in future
as well.

NEHRU MEMORIAL MUSEUM AND LIBRARY
Recommendation

PARA 7: The Museum is an autonomous organisation under the Department of Culture
and is responsible for collection of books, newspapers, unpublished references, private
papers, photographs, film tapes and also translation of important papers relating to Pt.
Jawaharlal Nahru. It is also responsible for preservation of papers on national leaders of
modern India, arranging exhibitions organising lectures, seminars and conferences, as also
instituting awards and fellowships, etc. There is an increase of Rs. 25 lakhs on plan side for
1995-96 as compared to 1994-95. The Department has stated that the increase in the budget
estimates for 1995-96 is for the purpose of their constructing Scholar hostels in Teen Murti
House. The Committee is of the view that it is necessary to spread the activities of the
Nehru Memorial Museum, Teen Murti House, if necessary in collaboration with other
organisations. The Executive Council of the Nehru Memorial Museum and Library and the
Department of Culture should prepare a blue print for the purpose and take necessary
action.

Comments of the Ministry

The Nehru Memorial Museum and Library would, with appropriate financial support
expand its activites, at the same time as it strengthens its relations with Centres of research
within and outside India. For this purpose, the Department would take action to consider
preparation of a blue-print.

NATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENCE MUSEUMS, CALCUTTA
| Recommendations

PARA 7.1: The Department has stated that the NCSM has set up Regional Science
Centres at Tirupati, Guwahati, Bardwan, Bhopal and Dhenkanal. The work of setting up of
a Regional Science Centre at Calicut, with a planetarium, and a District Science Centre at
Vijayawada are in the final stages of completion and are likely to he opened during 1995-96.
The Science part at Kapilas, Orissa was formally inaugurated during 1994-95.

PARA 7.2: The Committee in its 10th Report, had recommended that additional grant
be given for this scheme to increase scientific temper among the people. However, in the
allocation for 1995-96 only Rs. 1 crore has been increased on plan side and Rs. 30 lakhs on
non-plan side. Due attention does not appear to have been paid towards achieving the
objective of increasing scientific temper among people. The Committee is of the view that
the main objective of the Council i.e. popularizing science and technology has not been
achieved to the desired extent. Particularly, the rural areas have not been benefitted by the
programmes, and activites. The Committee is of the view that a perspective plan should be


16

prepared to cover the majority of the population, particularly in the rural, tribal and slum
areas. The Council should also involve Nagarpalikas and Panchayats in its programmes and
‘activities. The Council needs a substantial increase in its allocation to strengthen and widen
its programmes.

Comments of the Ministry

For achieving the main objective i.e. popularizing science and technology. The NCSM
has organised/being organised mobile Science exhibitions, School Science Centres, Science
seminars for students and Science fairs.

24 museobuses containing working exhibits on topics related to the life of a common
man viz. agriculture, environment, nutrition, water, electricity and energy etc. travelled
throught the country for holding exhibitions in deep interior areas. In 1994-95, these buses
were travelled to 988 sites (including towns and villages) which 27.05 lakh visitors visited the
exhibitions. During the first six months of the current financial year, these travelled to 629
sites which 12.18 lakh people visited the exhibitions. NCSM has started a new programme
for setting up small size low capital intensive school science centres in under privileged
schools in rural areas. Under this scheme NCSM provides nucleus exhibits. Kits and tools
for science hobby work. The Council organising Science Seminars and Science fairs on
current scientific topics for students every year all over the country from block level to
National level.

The funds will be allocated on the basis of the availability of funds.
KHUDA BAKSH ORIENTAL PUBLIC LIBRARY, PATNA
Recommendation

PARA 10.1: The Committee has been given to understand that the condition of the
library is in a very bad shape. The preservation and upkeep of manuscripts in the library is
not properly being done. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a thorough study be
made regarding the functioning of the library and proper upkeep and maintenance of
manuscripts be ensured.

Comments of the Ministry

The library has been functioning well and no particular lapse or inadequacy in regard to
its maintenance has come to the notice of the Department. However, efforts are being made
to provide adequate resources for further improving the maintenance of the Library.

ACADEMIES
Recommendation

PARA 16.1: The Committee hopes that the allocation made for Sahitya Akademi and
Sangeet Natak Akademi would be fully and properly utilised.

Comments of the Ministry

Both Sangeet Natak Akademi and Sahitya Akademi will endeavour to utilise the budget
allocation fully and properly.

NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
Recommendation

PARA 17.2: The Committee understands that the North-Eastern Part of the country
has different cultural values. It would be inappropriate to club this region with the Eastern
centre. There should be a separate centre for the North-Eastern region.


17

Comments of the Ministry
The Department accepts the proposal.
FESTIVALS OF INDIA

Recommendation

PARA 21.1: On the non-Plan side, an allocation ot Ks. 220 lakhs has been proposed
while it was only Rs. 100 lakhs during the last year. The Department was asked to explain as
to when only one festival was going to be held this year, what was the need for increase in
allocation. The Department of Culture has informed the Committee that during the year
1994-95, only minimum preparatory activities for the Festival of Thailand and payment of
residual bills of organising Festival of India in China were involved. The Department also
stated that the Festival of India in Thailand was proposed to be inaugurated on the 15th
July, 1995, and the expenditure for this purpose worked out approximately to Rs. 3.6 crores.
However, the allocation made was Rs. 2.2 crores, the Department added. The Committee
feels that proper utilisation of the money needs to be ensured. The Committee also desires
that the allocation may be suitably increased.

Comments of the Ministry

To ensure that the funds are properly utilised, second instalment will be released only
after obtaining the expenditure statements from the implementing agencies. Also, at the
end, all agencies will be asked to submit the “Utilisation Certificate” and the “Audited
Statement of Accounts”. These documents will be examined in the department and the
agencies will be asked to deposit the unspent amount if any in the Government's account.

ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES
Recommendation

PARA 22.2: Since 1985, when the ZCC’s were set up, there has been a total lack of
creative involvement of the academies. The Committee is constrained to note that the
representatives of the academies and artistes hardly find time for associating themselves with
the functioning of the ZCCs. This trend has been accentuated by the persistence of the
Department in having serving bureaucrats as heads of these institutions. The Committee is,
therefore, of the opinion that this trend can not be reversed unless the professional
institutions of the academies, as well as outstanding artists, are invloved in the work of the
ZCCs.

Comments of the Ministry

A high powered review Committee under the Chairmanship of Prof. U.R.
Ananthamurthy was set up in August, 1994 to review the functioning of the Zonal Cultural
Centres. The Committee submitted its report on 11th January, 1996. The report is being
examined and changes in the organisational structure and functional areas of outreach of
ZCCs would be contemplated now in the light of this report as well as experience gained
over the years.

SCHEME FOR SETTING UP OF MULTIPURPOSE CULTURAL COMPLEXES

Recommendations

PARA 24.1: The Department informed that on the recommendation of this Committee,
made in its 10th Report, a Committee comprising a leading architect Shri Charles Correa
and one senior officer each of the Planning Commission and the Department of Culture had
been constituted to suggest the best places available in the States (preferably rural/semi-
urban area) and cost-effective methdology to develop the complex. It was further stated that
the Department had received proposals from same State Governments and it was decided to



18

extend support wherever the proposals were found to be in order. The budgetary provision
for the scheme for the years 1994-95 and 1995-96 has been the same i.e. Rs. 200 lakhs.

PARA 24.2: The Committee recommends that the allocation may be increased as it may
not be sufficient to meet the requirement.

Comments of the Ministry

Increasing budgetary allocation for 1996-97 will be considered as per the
recommendation of the Committee.

NATIONAL CULTURAL COMPLEX, NEW DELHI
Recommendation
PARA 25.1: A new place is being identified in pursuance of the Committee’s

recommendation made earlier. The Committee again recommends that the Department
should go slow on this project.

Comments of the Ministry

As advised by the Committee only token provision of Rs. 1 lakh has been made for the
project during the current financial year.

MEMORIALS AND CENTENARIES
Recommendation

PARA 26: Apart from commemorating the 125th Birth Anniversary of Mahatma
Gandhi and 75th anniversary of Jallianwala Bagh Martyrdom, the Committee has been
informed that the department proposes to celebrate the Birth Centenary of Rafi Ahmad
Kidwai, Centenary of Acharya Vinobha Bhave and the 10th Anniversary of Martyrdom of
Smt. Indira Gandhi. However, the Committee feels that allocation made are not enough and
recommends that adequate allocations be made in the budget, even at the revised stage. The
Committee recommends that separate allocations be made for each event.

PARA 26.1: For the 125th Birth Anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, a tentative provision
of Rs. 160 lakhs has been made. The Committee feels that in view of the large-scale
celebrations of the event it might require additional funds. The Secretary informed’ the
Committee that the Department was given to understand that whenever’ an additional
allocation was required for this purpose, it would be made available to them as a special
grant in addition to what had already been given.

Comments of the Ministry

(PARA 26 & 26.1): Demands for additional funds are raised on the basis of the
recommendations of the National Committees /Sub-committees set up to commemorate the
Birth/Death Centenaries and anniversaries of eminent personalities in case it is observed
that the funds already provided are not adequate. Additional provision of Rs. 1.5 crores
each for the years 1995-96 and 1996-97 has been agreed to by the Ministry of Finance for the
‘Gandhi Peace Prize’ instituted as a part of celebration of 125th Birth Anniversary of
Mahatma Gandhi. Every effort will however be made for separate allocation for each event.

Recommendation

PARA 26.2: The current year is the Hundredth Birth Anniversary of our former Prime
Minister, Shri Morarji Desai. Shri Morarji Bhai has passed away on April 10, while the
Committee was in the process of finalising the report. The Committee desires that the
department should observe the centenary year in a befitting manner and steps be taken to
set up a memorial for the departed leader.


19

The Committee feels that the Department of Culture is not taking any steps to observe
the anniversaries, centenaries or martyrdom of several other freedom fighters who laid down
their lives for liberation of the country from foreign rule. For ४.६. this year is the birth
centenary of-Shri Kartar Singh Sarabha, the great martyr of Gadar movement.

The Department should take care to take notice of all great man in various walks of life
and make provisions for observing centenaries/birth anniversaries.

Comments of the Ministry

»The Department is making all efforts to observe the 100th Birth Anniversary of
Shri Morarji Desai in a befitting manner. As regard the setting up of Memorial, necessary
steps are being taken in this regard.

Department of Culture will take care and consider to observe the Anniversaries,
Centenaries or Martyrdom of other freedom fighters at the appropriate time. Meanwhile,
National Committees have been set up to commemorate, in a befitting manner, the 200th
Death Anniversary of Devi Ahilyabai, the 400th Death anniversary of Maharana Pratap and
the Birth Centenary of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose.

KALAKSHETRA, MADRAS
Recommendation

PARA 27: The plan allocation has been increased from Rs. 50 lakhs (Both in BE and
RE) ‘in the year 1994-95 to Rs. 75 lakhs for the year 1995-96. In the non-plan Rs. 42 lakhs
has been given this year whereas no provision was there last year. When the Department
was asked to explain the reasons for increase in allocation, the Committee was informed that
the institution, was taken over at the end of 1993. The authorities of the institution gave
detailed plans of renovation of their very old cottages housing the class-rooms and
performance areas and proper salary structures had been worked out for the teachers and
other staff of the institution. Therefore, a higher provision has been made on the plan and
non-plan side, the department added. The Committee was further informed that it might
require additional funds during the year 1995-96 to fulfil its commitments before the end of
the 8th Plan. The Committee, however, desires that the utilisation of funds needs to be
regularly monitored.

Comments of the Ministry
The recommendation of the Committee is accepted.


CHAPTER-III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE
NATIONAL MUSEUM

Recommendations

PARA 3: The National Museum, established in 1948-49, is a premier museum in the
country. The main activities of the Museum are acquisition and conservation of art objects,
documentation, bringing out publications on art and culture, organising exhibitions and
conservations etc. The plan allocation for the museum for 1995-96 has been increased to
Rs. 2.35 lakhs from Rs. 190 lakhs in 1994-95 while on the non-plan side it has been
increased to Rs. 370 lakhs from Rs. 360 lakhs. The Committee, in its 10th Report,
recommended substantial increase in the allocation for the museum. This was not done.

PARA 3.2: The Committee feels that the National Museum has got heavy commitments
but the increase in the Budget allocation is a mere Rs. 45 lakhs, including the cost of
holding many exhibitions abroad. This aspect may be taken into consideration at the Revised
Estimate stage.
Comments of the Ministry

It is stated that the allocation was increased on the basis of the funds available as well
as the expenditure incurred, similarly, during this year the funds will be allocated on the
basis of availability.

INDIAN MUSEUM

Recommendation

PARA 4.3: The Committee feels that the allocation increased on plan side this year is
insignificant inspite of the fact that very good work is being done by the Museum. The plan
allocation has been increased from Rs. 190 lakhs to only Rs. 200 lakhs. The Committee has
been given to understand that there are hundreds of objects lying in the godowns and in the
basements in a very bad condition. The building itself is an archaic treasure. Unless there is
more space and more number of rooms these objects are likely to be damaged. The
Secretary informed the Committee that the Indian Museum had given space to the
Zoological Survey of India, Botanical Survey of India and Anthropological Survey of India
and the matter had been taken up at the appropriate levels. The Anthropological Survey
would be shifting out very soon, he added. The Committee recommends that all other
organisations occupying space in the building may be got shifted at the earliest. The
Committee also recommends that the allocations be increased adequately.

Comments of the Ministry

The Anthropological Survey of India has since vacated a small area measuring about
2765 sq. ft. of the Museum building and the matter including complete vacation by other
organisations is being pursued with the concerned authorities for expediting the same. The
matter relating to increase in the allocation for Plan and Non-Plan is under consideration in
consultation with Budget division of the Department.

SALARJUNG MUSEUM
Recommendation

PARA 5: The Salarjung Museum is a prestigious museum, recognised as an institution
of national importance. It is having a wide range of collection of art, rare manuscripts in
Persian, Arabic and Urdu scripts. The Museum has been allocated Rs. 300 lakhs for

20



21

1995-96, which is Rs. 50 lakhs more than that for 1994-95 on plan side. On the non-plan
side, it has been increased from Rs. 36.19 lakhs to Rs. 73.39 lakhs. Explaining the 100%
increase in the non-plan allocation, the Department has stated that a Committee, consisting
of a finance representative and departmental officers visited the Museum to assess its
requirements. It was noticed that there was a diversion of Plan funds to non-plan
expenditure. The allocation has, therefore, been increased this year on the non-plan side.
The Museum also proposes to speed up the construction of additional wings i.e. the
European Gallery and Far Eastern Gallery. The Committee’ recommends that the
construction of the additional wings of the Museum be completed as early as possible.

Comments of the Ministry

The constructional works in respect of two additional wings has been geared up and the
N.B.C.C. has assured completion of the Eastern block by 31.05.96 and European block by
1Sth July, 1996.

ANTHROPOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA

Recommendation

PARA 8.1: The Anthropological Survey of India is instrumental in conducting research/
studies to record and understand the bio-cultural diversities of Indian population and to
serve as an information bank for national planning development. On being questioned as to
how many of the proposed 43 volumes of the prestigious national project “People of India”
have been completed, the Committee was informed that six National volumes and nine State
volumes had been completed. The Committee feels that progress in this regard has been
rather slow.

Comments of the Ministry

20 of the proposed 43 volumes of “People of India” project have so far been published,
of which seven are National volumes and thirteen are State volumes. The project is likely to
be completed in the middle of 1997.

NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

Recommendations

PARA 9.1: The budgetary provision for the Institution has been increased to Rs. 400
lakhs for 1995-96 from Rs. 300 lakhs in 1994-95 on plan side.

PARA 9.2: Explaining the increase in the Plan provision, the Department stated that it
was for the purpose of enabling the National Archives to carry out construction activities at
various places all over the country. The Committee recommends that the amount earmarked
for this purpose should be fully spent and construction should be completed as per schedule.
Comments of the Ministry

The cases for timely completion of all Capital works of the National Archives of India
have been taken up by them with the concerned authorities

NATIONAL LIBRARY
Recommendation

PARA 13.4: The Committee suggests that the Department should ensure that
construction work is speeded up and completed at the earliest.
Comments of the Ministry

The construction of Bhasha Bhawan is under progress and the matter for completion of
the project in time has been taken up with the concerned authorities ४.०. CPWD.


22

RAJA RAM MOHAN ROY LIBRARY
Recommendation

PARA 15: The Committee is happy to note that the Department has ordered an inquiry
into the purchasing methdology in the library, on the recommendation of the Committee in its
10th Report. However, the Committee is constrained to note that the constitution of the
Committee for the purpose has taken a very long time. The Committee recommends that the
enquiry be expedited. While the enquiry goes on, a check must be kept against controversial
activities at the foundation in the intervening period.

Comments of the Ministry
The Committee is being requested to expedite its work and submit its Report.
ACADEMIES
Recommendation

PARA 16.2: The allocation for Lalit Kala Akademi has been increased only marginally i.e.
from Rs. 150 lakhs in 1994-95 to Rs. 170 lakhs for 1995-96. The Committee expresses its distress
over the happenings at the Akademi. The Secretary, Department of Culture, during the course
of his oral evidence admitted the fact that there was some problem about the mechanism of
awards. Some awardees had turned out to be the family members of the judges. The Committee
is of the view that when judges are appointed for particular awards, none of their relations
should be allowed to participate in the competition. The Committee is surprised to find that this
basic rule has been violated. The Committee recommends that an enquiry be held into the
whole issue as well as a roving enquiry into the functioning of the Akademi itself.

Comments of the Ministry

The Department is already examining the proposal to have a CVC enquiry into the affairs
of the Lalit Kala Akademi. The recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee
regarding awards is acceptable to the Government.

CENTRE FOR CULTURAL RESOURCES AND TRAINING
Recommendation

PARA 18.1: Two regional centres of CCRT, one at Hyderabad and the other at Udaipur,
were started during 1994-95. On a querry as to the opening of other centres, and particularly the
one in the East and the one in the North-East, the Secretary stated that the Department, in the
first instance, would like to make the two existing regional centres function properly before
opening new centres. An early review of the centres, already set-up would be made. The
Committee, however, feels that this should not be an excuse for delay in the opening of new
centres. A decision should be taken on the new centres at the earliest.

Comments of the Ministry

The Department has already circulated the draft SFC on setting up of more regional centres
by the Centre for Cultural Resources and Training. A final decision will be taken after the
meeting is convened.

ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES
Recommendation

PARA 22.3: The East Zone Cultural Centre is located at Calcutta. It was originally
proposed to be located in Shantiniketan where Gurudev Rabindra Nath Tagore’s Vishvabharati
exists. The Committee suggest that the Centre be shifted to Bolpur, especially because a
Shilpagram is located at Bolpur.


Comments of the Ministry

The headquarters of the East Zone Cultural Centre has to be shifted to Calcutta due to
logistics and infrastructural reasons. However, by setting up the Shilpgram at Shantiniketan,
it is being ensured that the cultural infrastructure of the Zonal Centre is not concentrated at
one place.

Recommendation

PARA 22.4: Similarly, a sub-centre of the South Zone’s Cultural Centre is being set up
in Hyderabad, which is a metropolitan city, though Srisailam was originally selected for the
purpose. The Department could not offer any plausible reason for this change.
Comments of the Ministry

There is no scheme to set up sub-centres of Zonal Cultural Centres. In fact, such
suggestions are being resisted to safeguard and protect the primary objective of building up
cultural cohesiveness at the grass-roots level.

DISSEMINATION OF TRIBAL FOLK ART AND CULTURE
Recommendation

PARA 23: The allocation for this scheme has been increased to
Rs. 50 lakhs for 1995-96 from Rs. 40 lakhs for 1994-95.

PARA 23.1: The Committee feels that the allocation made 15 insufficient and should be
increased. It should also be ensured that the amount reached the deserving artists. The
Committee in its 10th Report, recommended progressive establishment of a network of
organisations to ensure that folk artistes in villages are enabled to derive the full advantage
of the scheme would be worked out. The Committee feels that much progress has not taken
place in this regard.

Comments of the Ministry

The Expert Advisory Committee has been reconstituted to include both the experts and
some of the Directors of Zonal Cultural centres submitted its report on 11th January, 1996.
The report is being examined and changes in the organisational structure and functional
areas of outreach of ZCCs would be contemplated now in the light of this report as well
experience gained over the years.


CHAPTER-IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Pl. See Chapter-I

24


CHAPTER-V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS FINAL REPLIES OF WHICH ARE STILL
AWAITED

-NIL-

25


MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

XXX
*THIRTIETH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 7th March, 1996 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra ___ Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

. Shri O.P. Kohli

Shri Md. Salim

Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. 1.60. Sanadi

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

10. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

11. Prof. (Smt.) Savithiri Lakshmanan
12. Dr. Vasant Pawar

13. Shri Anna Joshi

14. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

15. Shri Ramachandra Dome

16. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

2. Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Thirty-fifth and Thirty-sixth Reports on the
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in its
Twenty-first and Eighteenth Reports and adopted the same with minor changes.

3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram and
Shri Md. Salim to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Vasant Pawar and in his
absence Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi to lay them on the Table of Lok Sabha.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 p.m.

9०:१9 ४ # ७७ ०

*Minutes of 1st to 29th meetings relate to matters not included in this Report.

26


Corrigendum to the Thirty Fifth Report of the Department of Culture on
the Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Eighteenth Report.

Sh. Page Para Line For Fead
No. No. No. No.

28 1 1.3 19 of to
2. 2 1.0 8 resurces resources
a. 2 2.8 10 out onr

: fl 1775६ 181 opend opened

£ 2 Heading Mahavir Mahavira

a. 10 £ 2 on of
The 15 प्र 3 Nahvw Nehru
8. 1h tf 15 activites activities
We le tl § part, park
10, Lh 7,8 7 benefitted benefited
lh. 15 7.2 8 activites notivities
2. 16 tne वा
13 1 7 invleved