PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

EIGHTEENTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1995-96 (DEMAND NO. 48) OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF CULTURE
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25-04-95
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25-04-95)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April 1995/Chaitra 1917 (Saka)


ConrTren ts

Pace No.
1, Composition OF THE COMMITTEE ...... pestetlscticticsatasseaasaacateenasestisaaeci on के me (il)
2. PREFACE (v)
3. Revort. » 1—14

4. MINUTES . 15—16



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

4. Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Shri O.P. Kohli

6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

8. Shri Md. Salim

9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19, Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar

21. Prof. P.J. Kurien

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

24. Shri Z. M. Kahandole

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Prof. K.D. Jeswani

36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

38. Shri Rambadan

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tirpathy
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar—Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal—Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh—Deputy Director
_ 4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu—Committee Officer


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Eighteenth Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 48) of the Department of Culture, Ministry of Human
Resource Development for the: year 1995-96.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Deptt. of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource Development and also heard the
Secretary and other Officials of that Deptt. on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting
held on 30th March, 1995.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 17th April,

1995.

New Deu; P. UPENDRA
April 17, 1995 Chairman,
ee: Department-related Parliamentary
27 Chaitra, 1917 (Saka) Standing Committee on

Human Resource Development.

Oo)


REPORT

1. The Department of Culture plays a vital role in the promotion and dissemination of art
and culture. The aim of the Department is to develop ways and means for instilling basic
values and perceptions in the minds of people, particularly the young. The department also
undertakes the programmes of preservation, encouragement and dissemination of various
manifestations of creative activity, both past and present. The Department is engaged in
excavation, conservation and promotion of ancient monuments and historic sites; administra-
tion of libraries, museums and institutions of anthropology; collection, preservation and
ethnology of national character; catering to institutions and organisations in the areas of
Buddhist and Tibetan Studies; promoting literary, visual and performing arts; observing
centenaries and anniversaries of important personalities and entering into cultural agreements
with foreign countries.

1.1 The Department carries out its various programmes through two attached offices, six
subordinate offices and 26 autonomous organisations.

The Department of Culture has been allocated Rs. 195.73 crores, which includes
Rs. 113.00 crores as plan component and Rs. 82.73 crores as non-plan component.

1.2 The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the efforts made by the Department of
Culture in implementing the recommendations made by the Committee in its 10th Report on
the Demands for Grants of the Department for 1994-95. The Committee, however, is
constrained to observe that the budgetary grants given to the Department for 1995-96 account
for only 0.12% of the total budget of the Government of India. The Committee understands
that this is not the sole responsibility of the Department of Culture. Inspite of the
recommendations of the Committee, made in its 10th Report, the allocations to various wings
of the Department have not been increased. The Secretary, Department of Culture, while
explaining the position in this regard, stated that even though the Planning Commission
recognised the need for more funds, yet, in view of the emphasis on infrastructure
development and the demands from different departments it was not in a position to give
more than the amount allocated which showed a slight increase over 1994-95. The allocation
made to the Department is far less than what was asked for by the Department. The
Committee feels that it is an indication of the failure of the Planning Commission to recognise
the need for preservation and promotion of our cultural heritage and art forms.

1.3 The Committee, in its Tenth Report on Demands for Grants of the Department for
1994-95, recommended setting up of a National Cultural Fund. The- Department has stated
that while working out the modalities, it was inter-alia, proposed that initially a corpus of
Rs. 200 crores would be created by a contribution of Rs. 100 crores from the Government and
the other Rs. 100 crores raised from the public/corporate bodies and philanthropic
individuals. The fund could be utilised for proper maintenance of monuments, upgradation
and improvement of the environment at the monuments, construction of additional space to
accommodate special galleries in the Museums, inter-disciplinary research, documentation,
and promotion of the art forms which are in danger of extinction, folk and tribal arts, artifacts,
publications in specialised areas, etc. The contribution to the Fund would be exempted from
computation of income, as envisaged in section 10 of the Income-tax Act. It was further stated
that it was also proposed to have an Advisory Committee and an Administrative Committee
for the operation of the Fund.

1.4 While noting that the Department has taken positive steps in the direction of
implementing its recommendations, the Committee hopes that all formalities for setting up of
the Fund would be completed at the earliest.


1.5 The Committee, taking note of the fact that all over the country elected Panchayats
and Nagarpalikas are coming into existence on the basis of the new Panchayat Raj
Legislation, there is nothing in the allocation of the Department to indicate the involvement
of the Panchayats and Nagarpalikas in the promotion of culture. The Committee feels that
the Department should come forward with concrete proposals in this regard.

1.6 The Committee also observes that the internal allocation for various wings and
projects of the Department has not been rational or based on the past performance. For
example, the Indira Gandhi Nationa! Centre for Arts was allocated Rs. 20 crores last year
which could not be spent, but the same amount is being allocated during the current year:
The Committee recommends that the Department should make a proper review of the inter
state allocations.

Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi

2. The Archaeological Survey of India was set up in 1861. Conservation, preservation
and maintenance of the centrally protected monuments and sites is the prime task of this
organisation. At present, it has 3562 centrally protected monuments, declared to be of
national importance, with more than 5000 structures.

2.1 The Archaeological Survey of India was allocated a sum of Rs. 13.00 crores on the
plan side and Rs. 33.00 crores on non-plan side, both under the Budget Estimate and
Revised Estimate last year. This year it has been increased to Rs. 14.10 crores and 34.50
crores respectively. Explaning the increase in the budget provisions and the monuments to
be taken up for protection, the Deptt. of Culture has stated that the increase of Rs. 1.10
crore under plan and Rs. 1.50 crore under non-plan is primarily due to addition of
monuments to the protected list.

2.2 The Committee, in its 10th Report, recommended increase in the staff strength of
the ASI for augmenting protection and preservation of monuments. The Department of
Culture has stated that a proposal had been sent to Ministry of Finance to increase the
number of staff in the ASI. The Committee recommends that the Department should pursue
the matter with the Ministry of Finance for the sanction of additional staff strength which is
urgently needed for protecting our ancient monuments. The Committee, also recommends
that as soon as the National Culture Fund comes into being, a plan of action may be
prepared and implemented to utilise some of the amount for protection and preservation of
monuments. The Committee reiterates its recommendation, made earlier, to expand the
network of ASI and also to involve voluntary organisations in protecting our ancient
monuments under the supervision of the Archaeological Survey of India.

2.3 The Department has also stated that, in addition to the present monuments, about
100 monuments were under process for being brought under central protection. The
Committee recommends that an early decision be taken in regard to the selection of
monuments. As far as the Japanese Grant of U.S. $ 8,00,000 for Sanchi and Satdhara is
concerned, the Committee was informed that the work was in progress and the Japanese
experts were satisfied with the level of upgradation. Regarding the ADB assistance for
conservation of Taj Mahal, it was stated that the proposal was still at a preliminary stage.
The Committee recommends that the matter should be pursued vigorously.

2.4 The Committee observed that at several places of interest the entry fee to go into
the ASI-protected monuments is very small and the amount collected is not sufficient to pay
the salaries. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Department of Culture should
rationalise the entry fee that is being charged at such places.


2.5 The Committee was further informed that the ASI was in the process of preparing a
blueprint of an Action Plan for maintaining and upgrading the various monuments,
improving their environment and for effective mobilisation of finance and manpower. The
Committee recommends that this work should be completed at the earliest and the
implementation of the Action Plan should be taken up during the current financial year
itself.

2.6 The Committee also recommends that in view of the increasing number of
monuments and activities of ASI, the allocation to it should be further increased.

National Museum

3. The National Museum, established in 1948-49, is a premier museum in the country.
The main activities of the museum are acquisition and conservation of art objects,
documentation, bringing out publications on art and culture, organising exhibitions and
conservation etc. The plan allocation for the museum for 1995-96 has been increased to
Rs. 235 lakhs from Rs. 190 lakhs in 1994-95 on the plan side, while on the non-plan side it
has been increased to Rs. 370 lakhs from Rs. 360 lakhs. The Committee, in its 10th Report,
recommended substantial increase in the allocation for the museum. This was not done.

3.1 The Department has stated that a number of exhibitions are proposed to be held
during 1995-96. Exhibitions at Vienna, Budapest, Brussels, Hague, Australia and South
Korea were in the final stages of agreement. Besides the above, many European and Asian
countries have also shown keen interest and they are under negotiations. On an enquiry as
to whether the Persian manuscripts exhibition which was proposed to be held in Teheran
and the exhibition of miniature paintings scheduled at Tashkent were organised last year, the
Department has stated that the exhibition scheduled at Teheran could not be held. On three
occasions the exhibition was to be sent to Teheran but was postponed at the last moment on
the advice of the Indian Embassy. In regard to the proposed miniatures painting exhibition
at Tashkent, the Department has explained that the exhibition could not be held in view of a
heavy snow-fall in Tashkent and on the advice received from the Tashkent authorities. The
Committee observes that such cancellations of exhibitions at the last moment should be
avoided, unless inescapable.

3.2 The Committee feels that the National Museum has got heavy commitments but the
increase in the Budget allocation is a mere Rs. 45 lakhs, including the cost of holding many
exhibitions abroad. This aspect may be taken into consideration at the Revised Estimate
stage.

3.3 The Committee is constrained to observe that during the transit of exhibits for
exhibitions abroad and also during the course of the exhibitions there, sufficient protection
to art pieces is not ensured due to which it has often been reported that several exhibits
come back to the country in a damaged condition. The Committee takes a very serious view
of this. The Committee recommends that all necessary steps should be taken for the
protection of art pieces which are taken for exhibitions abroad and no damage of whatsoever
nature should be allowed to take place.

3.4 The Committee finds it difficult to understand that whereas our country has been
sending high quality material abroad for holding exhibitions, the foreign countries have been
reluctant to send equally high class articles of heritage to India. The Committee is of the
view that while finalising the agreements, it should be ensured that India’s efforts to send
high quality of objects are reciprocated by other countries.


Indian Museum, Calcutta

4. The Indian Museum, established in 1814, is the oldest and the largest institution of
its kind in the country. It houses unique treasures of Indian and foreign art, representing
centuries of cultural ethos and traditions.

4.1 The allocation on the -plan side has been increased to Rs. 200 lakhs for 1995-96
from Rs. 190 lakhs for 1994-95 and on non-plan side from Rs. 94.05 lakhs to Rs. 119.05
lakhs.

4.2 Explaining the increase in provision on the non-plan side, the Department has
stated that each year there had been a short fall in the actual requirement of the Museum
and that the Museum authorities were actually resorting to diversion of funds from the plan
side to meet the essential committed expenditure including salaries. To obviate such
problems, this increase had been made on the basis of the actuals so that théir plan schemes
and other important works did not suffer.

4.3 The Committee feels that the allocation increased on plan side this year is
insignificant inspite of the fact that very good work is being done by the Museum. The plan
allocation has been increased from Rs. 190 lakhs to only Rs. 200 lakhs. The Committee has
been given to understand that there are hundreds of objects lying in the godowns and in the
basements in a very bad condition. The building itself is an archaic treasure. Unless there is
more space and more number of rooms these objects are likely to be damaged. The
Secretary informed the Committee that the Indian Museum had given space. to the
Zoological Survey of India, Botanical Survey of India and Anthropological Survey of India
and the matter had been taken up at the appropriate levels. The Anthropological Survey
would be shifting out very soon, he added. The Committee recommends that all other
organisations occupying space in the building may be got shifted at the earliest. The
Committee also recommends that the allocations be increased adequately.

Salarjung Museum, Hyderabad

5. The Salarjung Museum is a prestigious museum, recognised as an institution of
national importance. It is having a wide range of collection of art, rare manuscripts in
Persian, Arabic and Urdu scripts. The Museum has been allocated Rs. 300 lakhs for 1995-
96, which is Rs. 50 lakhs more than that for 1994-95 on plan side. On the non-plan side, it
has been increased from Rs. 36.19 lakhs to Rs. 73.39 lakhs. Explaining the 100% increase in
the non-plan allocation, the Department has stated that a Committee, consisting of a finance
representative and departmental officers, visited the Museum to assess its requirements. It
was noticed that there was a diversion of Plan funds to non-plan expenditure. The allocation
has, therefore, been increased this year on the non-plan side. The Museum also proposes to
speed up the construction of additional wings i.e. the European Gallery and Far Eastern
Gallery. The Committee recommends that the construction of the additional wings of the
Museum be completed as early as possible.

Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta

6. Plan allocation for the Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta, has been increased from
Rs. 1 crore for 1994-95 to Rs. 1.5 crore for 1995-96. Clarifying the position on the increased
allocation, the Department informed the Committee that it was for the purposes of carrying
out maintenance and renovation work and also to purchase quarters for administrative
block. The Committee desires that the money allocated may be fully spent. The Committee
also desires that the purchase of the quarters may not be delayed.


Nehru Memorial Museum and. Library

7. The Museum is an autonomous organization under the Department of Culture and is
responsible for collection of books, newspapers, unpublished references, private papers,
photographs, film tapes and also translation of important papers relating to Pt. Jawaharlal
Nehru. It is also responsible for preservation of papers on national leaders of modern India,
arranging exhibitions, organising lectures, seminars and conferences, as also instituting
awards and fellowships, etc. There is an increase of Rs. 25 lakhs on plan side for 1995-96 as
compared to 1994-95. The Department has stated that the increase in the budget estimates
for 1995-96 is for the purpose of their constructing Scholar Hostels in Teen Murti House.
The Committee is of the view that it is necessary to spread the activities of the Nehru
Memorial Museum, Teen Murti House, if necessary in collaboration with other
organisations. The Executive Council of the Nehru Memorial Museum and Library and the
Department of Culture should prepare a blue-print for the purpose and take necessary
action.

National Council of Science Museums, Calcutta

The NCSM, set up in April 1978 at Calcutta, is primarily engaged in the task of
popularising science and technology among students in particular and the masses in general
through a wide range of programmes. It has 22 constituent units spread over 14 States and
two Union Territories.

7.1 The Department has stated that the NCSM has set up Regional Science Centres at
Tirupati, Guwahati, Bardwan, Bhopal and Dhenkanal. The work of setting up of a Regional
Science Centre at Calicut, with a planetarium, and a District Science Centre at Vijayawada
are in the final stages of completion and are likely to be opened during 1995-96. The Science
Park at Kapilas, Orissa was formally inaugurated during 1994-95.

7.2 The Committee, in its 10th Report, had recommended that additional grant be
given for this scheme to increase scientific temper among the people. However, in the
allocation for 1995-96 only Rs. 1 crore has been increased on plan side and Rs. 30 lakhs on
non-plan side. Due attention does not appear to have been paid towards achieving the
objective of increasing scientific temper among people. The Committee is of the view that
the main objective of the Council i.e. popularizing science and technology has not been
achieved to the desired extent. Particularly, the rural areas have not been benefited by the
programmes and activities. The Committee is of the view that a perspective plan should be
prepared to cover the majority of the population, particularly in the rural, tribal and slum
areas. The Council should also involve Nagarpalikas and Panchayats in its programmes and
activities. The Council needs a substantial increase in its allocation to strengthen and widen
its programmes.

Scheme for Promotion and Strengthening of Regional and Local Museums

8. The aim of this Scheme is to enable establishment of Regional Museums in the
country. The Budgetary provision made during last year was Rs. 10 lakhs and it has been
raised to one crore rupees this year as suggested by the Committee last year. The
Committee is of the view that elected Panchayats and Nagarpalikas should be involved in
this scheme to achieve better results. The Department should explore the ways and means in
this direction.


Anthropological Survey of India

8.1 The Anthropological Survey of India is instrumental in conducting research / studies
to record and understand the bio-cultural diversities of Indian population and to serve as an
information bank for national planning development. On being questioned as to how many
of the proposed 43 volumes of the prestigious national project “People of India’ have been
completed, the Committee was informed that six national volumes and nine State volumes
had been completed. The Committee feels that progress in this regard has been rather slow.

National Archives of India

9. The NAI is an institution of non-current records of permanent value of the
Government of India. It is engaged in preservation and dissemination of documentary
heritage. The institute also assists various Ministries/ Departments of the Government of
India in their recards management programme.

9.1 The budgetary provision for the Institution has been increased to Rs. 400 lakhs for
1995-96 from Rs. 300 lakhs in 1994-95 on plan side.

9.2 Explaining the increase in the Plan provision, the Department stated that it was for
the purpose of enabling the National Archives to carry out construction activities at various
places all over the country. The Committee recommends that the amount earmarked for this
purpose should be fully spent and construction should be completed as per schedule.

Khuda Baksh Oriental Public Library, Patna

10. Khuda Baksh Oriental Public Library, Patna with over 18,000 manuscripts, 95,000
old and rare printed books and over 200 original paintings of Mughal, Rajput, Iranian and
Turkish Schools, is an institution of national importance. The library has instituted a Khuda
Baksh Award to recognise the original creative work done in related fields.

10.1 The Committee has been given to understand that the condition of the library is in
a very bad shape. The preservation and upkeep of manuscripts in the library is not properly
being done. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a thorough study be made
regarding the functioning of the library and proper upkeep and maintenance of manuscripts
be ensured.

Libraries

11. The Committee, in its 10th report recommended that suitable schemes be devised to
spread the network of libraries with computer facilities. The Department has stated that it
proposed to have discussions wih the State Governments to work out a methodology during
the year 1995-96 to spread the network of libraries in small towns. The interlinking of major
libraries through computer network has already commenced and before the end of the Plan
period it is proposed to complete the programme.

11.1 The Committee feels that unless the library network is improved, educational
standards and literacy rate of the people at large cannot be improved. The Committee,
therefore, stresses that the Central Government should hold discussions with the State
Governments as early as possible and devise a suitable methodology. A beginning should be
made in this direction during the current financial year itself.

School-cum-Village Libraries

12. The Scheme aims at reachin, the rural areas for the benefit of neo-literates and
literate rural population. The Committee was informed that the Department had received
proposals from 24 States/ Union Territories which were under the active consideration of
the Department and it was expected that grants would be released to the States during the


current financial year and the scheme would make much headway in the coming financial
year.

12.1 During 1994-95 the allocation was Rs. 100 lakhs and it has been raised to Rs. 300
lakhs in 1995-96. The scheme has been provided with additional funds to the extent of
Rs. 200 lakhs. Explaining the reasons for: this additional allocation, the Department
informed the Committee that during the year 1994-95, it was proposed to operate the
scheme only on a pilot basis by covering about 500 villages. In case the Department received
adequate response from all the States and if the review of the scheme suggested positive
results, then more villages would be covered during the year 1995-96 and in the remaining
years of the शा plan.

12.2 The Secretary also informed the Committee that one of the things that the
Department had decided was to set up libraries in schools where there was some place and a
teacher could work as a part-time librarian. In this way, there could be saving on the
infrastructural expenditure. But, unfortunately, the Finance Ministry could not be convinced
that this scheme was different from the other schemes. The scheme is directed at children
and women who were literate and who are like to read. The Government officials, who are
posted in these areas could also make use of it. Appreciating the idea of the scheme, the
Committee is not happy with the attitude of the Ministry of Finance in regard to allocation
of funds for the purpose. The Department should make further efforts in this direction. The
Committee feels that with the elected Panchayats coming up everywhere the scheme could
be expanded in a big way. It could become an effective agency for reaching out to the
people of rural areas. In many States there are the Zilla Granthalaya Sanghathans which are
in charge of rural libraries. The Department could Coordinate with them. The Committee
recommends that concrete steps should be taken in this regard.

National Library, Calcutta

13. The National Library, Calcutta, is the biggest library in the country. It is one of the
recipient libraries under the provisions of the Delivery of Books Act, 1954 and is the
foremost repository of the Indian printed cultural heritage.

13.1 The budgetary provisions for the Library for the years 1994-95 and 1995-96 are as
under:
(Rs. in Lakhs)

1994-95 1995-96

BE RE BE
Plan 720.00 720.00 250.00
Non-Plan 310.00 310.00 328.00

13.2 The Department has stated that the plan provision for the Library has been
reduced considerably as there was no progress in construction activities for which additional
money was given to the Library during the financial year 1994-95.

13.3 The Secretary informed the Committee that the Department had already released
Rs. 6 crores in 1994-95 but the construction work was yet to start and provision of another
Rs. 1 crore had been made available for the year 1995-96 for this purpose. Altogether, Rs. 7
crores are available for them for the purpose and Rs. 250 lakhs have been allocated for
carrying out regular activites.

13.4 The Committee sugests that the Department should ensure that Construction work
is speeded, up and Completed at the earliest.


Delhi Public Library

14. The allocation on plan side has been increased to Rs. 120 lakhs for 1995-96 from
Rs. 80 lakhs 1994-95

14.1 The Department has stated that the additional provision on the plan side was for
enabling the Library to carry out construction activities at places where land had been
purchased long time back. The Committee is happy to note that allocation for this has been
raised.

14.2 However, the Committee, in its. 10th Report, recommended higher allocation of
funds to spread its network in slums and under-developed areas and for more mobile vans.
The additional allocation made for 1995-96 does not appear to be in fulfilment of the
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee is also of the view that no efforts have
since been made to spread its network. The Committee reiterates its recommendation, made
earlier, to spread the network of the Delhi Public Library in the slum and under-developed
areas.

Raja Ram Mohan Roy Library

15. The Committee is happy to note that the Department has ordered an inquiry into
the purchasing methdology in the library, on the recommendation of the Committee in its
10th Report. However, the Committee is. constrained to note that the constitution of the
Committee for the purpose has taken a very long time. The Committee recommends that the
enquiry be expedited. While the enquiry goes on, a check must be kept against
Controversial activities at the foundation in the intervening period.

AKADEMIES

16. The Committee, in its Tenth Report, recommended increased allocation for Sahitya
Akademi and Sangeet Natak Akademi. The allocation for Sahitya Akademi has been
increased from Rs. 200 lakhs 1994-95 to Rs. 250 lakhs for 1995-96. Similarly, the allocation
for Sangeet Natak Akademi has also been increased from Rs. 290 lakhs to Rs. 340 lakhs on
the plan side.

16.1 The Committee hopes that the allocation made for Sahitya Akademi and Sangeet
Natak Akademi would be fully and properly utilised.

16.2 The allocation for Lalit Kala Akademi has been increased only marginally i.e. from
Rs. 150 Jakhs in 1994-95 to Rs. 170 lakhs for 1995-96. The Committee expresses its distress
over the happenings at the Akademi. The Secretary, Department of Culture, during the
course of his oral evidence admitted the fact that there was some problem about the
mechanism of awards. Some awardees had turned out to be the family members of the
judges. The Committee is of the view that when judges are appointed for particular awards,
none of their relations should be allowed to-participate in the competition. The Committee
is surprised to find that this basic rule has been violated. The Committee recommends that
an enquiry be held into the whole issue as well as a roving enguiry into the functioning of
the Akademi itself.

NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA

17. It was set up in 1959 to impart training in academic arts, and it also has a one year
fellowship programme. The increase in budgetary provision this year is a mere Rs. 10 lakhs.
The Committee wonders as to how with this meagre increase, it would be able to set up new
tegional centres. The Committee recommends that adequate allocations may be made so
that expansion can take place. ~


17.1 About the opening of new regional centres of NSD, the Secretary informed the
Committee that no new centre could be opened during the year 1994-95 because the
functioning of the only regional centre of NSD at Bangalore was not reviewed and he
further added that the Department was of the view that before opening any new regional
centres, it would be appropriate to evluate the functioning of the existing centre. The
Secretary further added that it would be done during 1995-96. The Committee recommends
that the proposed new regional centres in the East and West shold be opened during this
year.

17.2 The Committee understands that the North-Eastern part of the country has
different cultural values. It would be inappropriate to club this region with the Eastern
Centre. There should be a separate centre for the North-Eastern region.

PROMOTION AND DISSEMINATION OF CULTURE
Centre for Cultural Resources and Training

18. The Committee is happy to note that the plan allocation for the Centre has been
increased from Rs. 260 lakhs in 1994-95 to Rs. 310 lakhs for 1995-96 on the recommendation
made by the Committee in its Tenth Report.

18.1 Two regional centres of CCRT, one at Hyderabad and the other at Udaipur, were
started during 1994-95. On a querry as to the opening of other centres, and particularly the
one in the East and the one in the North East, the Secretary started that the Department, in
the first instance, would like to make the two existing regional centres function properly
before opening new centres. An early review of the centres, already set up, would be made.
The Committee, however, feels that this should not be an excuse for delay in the opening of
new centres. A decision should be taken on the new centres at the earliest.

SCHEME OF BUILDING GRANTS TO VOLUNTARY CULTURAL ORGANISATIONS

19. The Committee finds it surprising to note that out of 176 applications only 37 could
qualify for grant under the scheme. The Department has stated that the remaining 139
applications were not accompanied by essential documents and had not raised matching
funds; hence they could not be considered for the grant.

19.1 The Committee is constrained to observe that applications for building grants are
not being properly scrutinised. The organisationspeople have to make frequent visits to the
Ministry, even from far-off places. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the system
of scrutinishing applications may be streamlined and simplified. There should also be a
method of provisional sanction of amount subject to the submission of other papers. The
bonafides of the organization should also be verified.

19.2 The Committee has also noted that the scheme provides for physical verification of
construction and checking of accounts by the Chartered Accountants and Members of expert
committee. The Committee feels that the verification system is not functioning effectively.
The Committee feels that it needs to be strengthened.

SCHEME FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO DANCE, DRAMA AND THEATRE
ENSEMBLES

20. The Committee is surprised to know that the same organisations are getting lakhs
and lakhs of rupees under this scheme and the Deptt. is not encouraging new organisations
or individual artistes. The Committee feels that there must be something wrong withsthé Way
State Governments are recommending cases for grants and vested interests and favouritism
might have developed. The Committee is also of the view that while genuine organisations
are suffering for want of funds, fake organisations are taking substantial grants year after
year. The Committee observes that the Department could involve the Zonal Cultural


Centres somewhere in the process so that they could also recommend certain cases and help
the Department in verifying the bonafides of the applicants. The Sangeet Natak Akademi
and such other organisations could also be authorised to recommend certain deserving cases.

20.1 The Committee recommends that the scheme may be streamlined. The Department
should have a list of the functions, including the invitation cards that the organisations get
printed, etc., for verifying their genuineness and also whether they are actually organising
these functions or not. Similar check be made to verify and whether they are implementing
the projects for which production grants have been given. The Committee also recommends
that institutions running on commercial lines by renting their premises, theatres, conference
halls etc. and earning substantial revenue should not be given any financial grants or
assistance.

FESTIVALS OF INDIA

21. Festivals of India are organised in various parts of the world and these festivals have
served as effective vehicles to disseminate Indian Culture across the seas. The Committee
has been informed that during the year 1995-96, Festival of India in Thialand is scheduled to
be held.

21.1 On the Non-Plan side, an allocation of Rs. 220 lakhs has been proposed while it
was only Rs. 100 lakhs during the last year. The Department was asked to explain as to
when only one festival was going to be held this year, what was the need for increase in
allocation. The Department of Culture has’ informed the Committee that during the year
1994-95, only minimum preparatory activities for the Festival of Thailand and payment of
residual bills of organising Festival of India in China were involved. The Department also
stated that the Festival of India in Thailand was proposed to be inaugurated on the 15th
July, 1995, and the expenditure for this purpose worked out approximately to Rs. 3.6 crores.
However, the allocation made was Rs. 2.2 crores, the Department added. The Committee
feels that proper utilisation of the money needs to be ensured. The Committee also desires
that the allocation may be suitably increased.

ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES

22. Seven Zonal Cultural Centres have been set up in different parts of the country to
provide facilities for the creative development in the entire spectrum of culture, particularly
in the field of folk and tribal arts. The Zonal Cultural Centres organise and participate in
various cultural programmes conducted in different regions of the country. The Centres are
instrumental in organising a number of local, zonal and regional festivals. The Department
has informed that the West Zonal Cultural Centre has already set up a Shilpagram at
Udaipur. Setting up of Shilpagram by the South Zone Cultural Centre at Hyderabad is in
progress. The State Government of Andhra Pradesh has allotted land for the purpose and
work in this regard had been started. As regards the recommendation made by the
Committee last year, the Department has stated that from the year 1995-96 onwards, a
separate statement would be made available on the actual amount given to each Centre. The
budgetary provision for the Zonal Cultural Centres have been retained at the same level for
the year 1995-96 as in the year 1994-95, i.e. Rs. 2.00 lakhs.

22.1 It was also stated that as per the recommendation made by this Committee last
year in its 10th report, a Committee has been set up to review the functioning of the Zonal
Cultural Centres with Dr. U.R. Ananthanmurthy as Chairman and Shri Komal Kothari, Shri
V.K. Kitchlu, Shri Manjeet Bawa and Shri M.K. Raina as Members.

22.2 Since 1985, when the ZCCs were set up, there has been a total lack of creative
involvement of the academies. The Committee is constrained to note that the representatives


of the academies and artistes hardly find time for associating themselves with the functioning
of the ZCCs. This trend has been accentuated by the persistence of the Department in having
serving bureaucrats as heads of these institutions. The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion
that this trend can not be reversed unless the professional institutions of the academies, as well
as outstanding artists, are involved in the work of the ZCCs.

22.3 The East Zone Cultural Centre is located at Calcutta. It was originally proposed te
be located in Shantiniketan where Gurudev Rabindra Nath Tagore’s Vishvabharati exists. The
Committee suggests that the Centre be shifted to Bolpur, especially because a Shilpagram is
located at Bolpur.

22.4 Similarly, a sub-centre of the South Zone’s Cultural Centre is being set up in
Hyderabad, which is a metropolitan city, though Srisailam was originally selected for the
purpose. The Department could not offer any plausible reason for this change.

DISSEMINATION OF TRIBAL FOLK ART AND CULTURE

23. The Scheme provides for financial assistance to voluntary cultural organisations,
institutions and individuals both tribal and non-tribal for undertaking small projects of about a
year’s duration on preservation, development and dissemination of tribaVfolk art and culture.
The allocation has been increased to Rs. 50 lakhs for 1995-96 from Rs. 40 lakhs for 1994-95.

23.1 The Committee feels that the allocation made is insufficient and should be increased.
It should also be ensured that the amount reaches the deserving artistes. The Committee in its
10th report, recommended progressive establishment of a network of organisations to ensure
that folk artistes in villages are enabled to derive the full advatage of the scheme meant for
them. Accepting the recommendation of the Committee, the Department stated that a scheme
would be worked out. The Committee feels that much progress has not taken place in this
regard.

SCHEME FOR SETTING UP MULTIPURPOSE CULTURAL COMPLEXES

24. The objective of the scheme is to provide financial assistance to autonomous bodies
set up by the State Governments for establishment of cultural complexes with the objective of
improving the quality of life among youth and students and making them sensitive to what is
aesthetically and morally good in our society. These are also expected to expose the youth to
the finest forms of creative expression and to foster coordinated activities in the states in
different cultural fields, such as music, drama, dance, literature, fine arts, etc.

24.1 The Department informed that on the recommendation of this Committee, made in
its 10th report, a Committee comprising a leading architect Shri Charles Correa and one
senior officer each of the Planning Commission and the Department of Culture had been
constituted to suggest the best places available in the States (preferably rurat/semi-urban area)
and cost-effective methodology to develop the complex. It was further stated that the
Department had received proposals from same State Governments and it was decided to
extend support wherever the proposals were fouhd to be in order. The budgetary provision for
the scheme for the years 1994-95 and 1995-96 has been the same i.e. Rs. 200 lakhs.

24.2 The Committee recommends that the allocation may be increased as it may not be
sufficient to meet the requirement.
National Cultural Complex, New Delhi

25. The Committee has been informed that the Department is having a rethinking of the
proposal and, therefore, only a token provision of Rs. 130 lakhs has been made for the project
during the financial year 1995-96. The budgetary provision of Rs. 130 lakhs provided for the
project in 1994-95, could not be utilised.


25.1 A new place is being identified in pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation
made earlier. The Committee again recommends that the Deptt. should go slow on this
project.

MEMORIALS AND CENTENARIES

26. Apart from commemorating the 125th Birth Anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi and
75th Anniversary of Jallianwala Bagh Martyrdom, the Committee has been informed that the
department proposes to celebrate the Birth Centenary of Rafi Ahmad Kidwai, Centenary of
Acharya Vinobha Bhave and the 10th Anniversary of Martydom of Smt. Indira Gandhi.
However, the Committee notes that the allocation for this purpose remains the same as that of
last year. The Committee feels that allocations made are not enough and recommends that
adequate allocations be made in the budget, even at the revised stage. The Committee
recommends that separate allocations be made for each event.

26.1 For the 125th Birth Anniversary of Mahatama’ Gandhi, a tentative provision of
Rs. 160 lakhs has been made. The Committee feels that in view of the large-scale celebrations
of the event it might require additional funds. The Secretary informed the Committee that the
Department was given to understand that whenever an additional allocation was required for
this purpose, it would be made available to them as a special grant in addition to what had
already been given.

26.2 The current year is the hundredth birth anniversary of our former Prime Minister,
Shri Morarji Desai. Shxi Morarji Bhai has passed away on April 10, while the Committee was
in the process of finalising the report. The Committee desires that the deptt. should observe
the centenary year in a befitting manner and steps be taken to set up a memorial for the
departed leader.

The Committee feels that the Department of Culture is not taking any steps to observe
the anniversaries, centenaries or martyrdom of several other freedom fighters who laid down
their lives for liberation of the country from foreign rule. For e.g. this year is the birth
centenary of Shri Kartar Singh Sarabha, the great martyr of Gadar Movement.

The Department should take care to take notice of all great man in various walks of life
and make provisions for observing centenaries/birth anniversaries.

KALAKSHETRA

27. The plan allocation has been increased from Rs. 50 lakhs (Both in RE and BE) in the
year 1994-95 to Rs. 75 lakhs for the year 1995-96. In the non-plan Rs. 42. lakhs has been given
this year whereas no provision was there last year. When the Department was asked to explain
the reasons for increase in allocation, the Committee was informed that the institution, was
taken over at the end of 1993. The authorities of the institution gave detailed plans of
renovation of their very old cottages housing the classrooms and performance areas and
proper salary structures had been worked out for the teachers and other staff of the
institution. Therefore, a higher provision has been made on the plan and non-plan sides, the
department added. The Committee was further informed that it might require additional funds
during the year 1995-96 to fulfil its commitments before the end of the 8th plan. The
Committee, however, desires that the utilisztion of funds needs to be regularly monitored.


Nav Nalanda Mahavihara, Nalanda (Bihar)

28. The Nav Nalanda Mahavihara, Nalanda, an institute dedicated to post-graduate
studies and research in Pali language and literature and engaged in reviving some of the past
glories of the ancient University of Nalanda, has been taken over by the Government of
India.

28.1 The budgetary provision for the organization is as under :

(Rs. in lakhs)

1994-95 1995-96

BE RE BE

Plan 10.00 10.00 50.00
Non-Plan — _ 25.00

28.2 Explaining the reason for increase in allocation the Department stated that the
Nav Nalanda Mahavihara was taken over towards the fag end of 1993-94 with the result that
the provisions could not be made to cover their requirements. With this in mind and based
on their actual requirement, an allocation of Rs. 50 lakhs on the Plan side and Rs. 25.5
lakhs on the non-Plan side have been proposed.

28.3 The activities of the Mahavihara are understood to have come to a standstill. Only
a few students have been enrolled and are pursuing academic activities there. The hostel
meant for the students is virtually non-functioning. In view of this, the Committee
recommends that the activities of the Institute be streamlined and activated. The Committee
also recommends that the funds allocated should be properly utilised.

CULTURAL AGREEMENTS AND CULTURAL EXCHANGE PROGRAMMES

29, The allocation made for the scheme during 1994-95 and 1995-96 is Rs. 32.50 lakhs.
The Committee has noted that at present the Government of India has cultural agreements
with 97 countries, out of which specific biennial and triennial cultural exchange agreements
have been entered into with 69 countries. When the Committee sought to know about the
agreements signed during 1994-95 and proposed to be signed during 1995-96, the
Department informed the Committee that during 1994-95 cultural agreements were signed
with Laos and Belize and an agreement is likely to be signed with South Africa during the
current year. The Committee feels that the allocation is not sufficient and needs to be
suitably increased.

Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts, New Delhi

30. The Centre was set up in 1987. A sum of Rs. 25 crores was released to the Centre
as the initial corpus fund with the stipulation that the centre would run on the interest
accruing from the investment. During the 8th Plan an additional corpus fund of Rs. 25
crores was approved. The allocation for 1995-96 is the same, both on plan side and non-plan
side, as that of 1994-95 i.e. Rs. 20 crores on plan side and Rs. 2 lakhs on non-plan side. The
Committee is of the view that the Centre is being allotted substantial budgetary allocations
but it is not clear whether its activities are commensurate with the sanctioned funds. The
Committee suggests that allocations be made depending on the progress of work, so that
other schemes are not starved of funds.


National Policy on Culture

31.1 The Committee considered the Approach Paper on the National Policy on Culture
and after a detailed and indepth study of the varied aspects of Indian cultural scene
presented its 12th report thereon.

31.2 The Committee while make various suggestions on the Approach Paper,
recommended early drafting of the final document on National Policy on Culture.

31.3 On being asked to comment on the progress being made in regard to redrafting the
final policy document, the Secretary informed the Committee that they had already initiated
the process of the redrafting, in consultation with various agencies.

31.4 The Committee recommends that the Department should complete the process of

redrafting the final document of National Policy on Culture at the earliest and bring it
before the Parliament. \


MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

XXXI
“THIRTY FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 9.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 30th March, 1995 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri P. Upendra——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kohli

4. Prof. 1.0. Sanadi

5. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

7. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
8. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

9. Dr. Vasant Pawar

10. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

11. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
12. Shri K.T. Vandayar

13. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

15. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

16. Shri Anna Joshi

17, Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

18. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

WITNESSES

1. Dr. Sitakant Mahapatra, Secretary, Deptt. of Culture.
2. Shri Ashok Bajpayi, Joint Secretary
3. Shri G. Venkatramani, Director

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer.

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary and other officials of the
Deptt. of Culture in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants 1995-96.

3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.00 a.m. to meet on 4th April, 1994.

“Minutes of 1st to thirtieth Meeting relate to matters not incluaed in this Report.


FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 17th April, 1995 in Committee Room
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri P. Upendra——Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

Shri O.P. Kohli

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

. Shri Md. Salim

9० 3 9 ७ # ७० ०

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Vasant Pawar

10. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
11. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

12. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

13. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

14. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
15. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

16. Shri Anna Joshi

17. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

18. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Seventeenth and Eighteenth Reports
of the Departments of Youth Affairs & Sports (Demand No. 47) and Culture
(Demand No. 48) on Demands for Grants 1995-96 and adopted the same with some
modifications.

3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on
18th April, 1995.

16


ERRATA OF THE EIGHTEENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS 1995-96 (DEMAND NO.48) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE, MINISTRY OF H.R.D.

Page Noe (iii) Si. No.39 for "Tirpathy" read "Tripathy".

Page No.7 Para No.13.3. Last Line for “activites”
read "activities"

Page Noe? Para No.13.4 first line for "sugests"
read “suggests".

Page No.8 Para Noel6.2 line No.9 for "enguiry"
पे read “enquiry”.

Page Noe? Para Nool7.1 line No.5 for “ev. luate'
‘read "evaluate".

Page No.9 Para No.19-1 line No.4 for "Scrutinishing"
read "scrutinising".