PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SEVENTY-SECOND REPORT
ON
ADULT EDUCATION

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH DEC., 1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8TH DEC., 1998)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

SEPTEMBER, 1998/BHADRAPADA, 1920 (SAKA)


CONTENTS

1: COMPOSITION: OF THE COMMITTEES «ii: /5655 26550 22 २४००४७३३ ४३३ /३३०४४७७०४०९७

2. PREFACE

S3REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE: costes ccs cscrssdoseasyois Geedpadehercng saab dveee dang

4. MINUTES

2७685

(iii)
()
1—7

9—18


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
| (1998-99)
1. Shri $.B. Chavan’ — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

3. Shri Balkavi Bairagi

4. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

5. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

6. Shri O. Rajagopal

7. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

8. Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

9. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

10. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

11. Shri M.P.A. Samad Samadani

12. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
13. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

15. Dr. Akhtar Hasan Rizvi

LOK SABHA

16. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam

17. Shri Sartaj Singh

18. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan

19. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

20. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

21. Dr. Sanjay Singh

22. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

23. Shri (\sldrajeet Mishra

24. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

25. Shri Ashok Singh

26. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

27. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
28. Shri Ashok Gehlot

29. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
30. Shri Ajit Jogi

31. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

32. Shri Laxman Singh

33. Shri Shankar Pannu

34. Shri Abdul Hamid

35. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

36. Shri Samik Lahiri

37. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

( 38. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja

39. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

40. Shri H.P. Singh

41. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
42. Smt. Krishna Bose

43. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

44. Shri S. Arumugham

=
=

@

4308 / RS / F—2-A


(i)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

4308 / RS/ F—2-B


| COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
} (1997-98)
| 1. Shri $.B, Chavan—Chairman
} RAJYA SABHA
. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 1
. Dr. 8.8. Dutta
. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

2
3
4
5. Dr. Srikant Ramchandra Jichkar
6. Shri Raj Nath Singh
7
8
9

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

| 10. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

{ 11. Shri R. Margabandu

i 12. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

| 13. Dr. Mohan Babu

: 14. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

16. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
17. Shri Sartaj Singh

18. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
19. Shri Jai Prakash (Hardoi)

20. Shri Rajendrasingh Rana

it 21. Maharani Divya Singh

| 22. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

23. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

24. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

25. Dr. C. Silvera

26. Shri Ishwarbhai K, Chavda
27. Shri Dutta Meghe

28. Shri 1.0, Sanadi

29. Shrimati Krishna Bose

30. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

31. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
32. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

33. Shri Pawan Diwan ©

34. Shri Krishna

35. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi

a 36. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

5 37. Shri Samik Lahiri

} 38. Shri S.K. Kaarvendhan

| 39. Shri Mukhtar Anis

40. Dr. M. Jagannath

| 41. Dr. Bali Ram

v 42. Shri Ranen Barman

43. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

| 44. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

_
a

(iii)



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the

Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Seventy-second Report of the Committee on
Adult Education

2. The Committee in this connection appointed a Sub-Committee under the
convenorship of Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha, in its meeting held on 16th January, 1997, to
look into the various aspects of Adult Education for making an in-depth study on the subject
and to present a report thereon to the Committee at an early date.

3. The Sub-Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received
from the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development and also

heard oral evidence of the Officials of that Department on the subject and got the first hand
information during its visits

4. The Draft Report submitted by the Sub-Committee was considered and adopted on
15th September, 1998. The Committee at its meeting held on 19th Nov., 1998 decided to
present the Report in the House during the Winter session of Parliament.

New Deni; S.B. CHAVAN

15th September, 1998 Chairman,
tment-Related Parli. te

Bhadrapada 24, 1920 (Saka) Department-Related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, +

(y)

4308 / RS /F—3-A


REPORT

INTRODUTION

1. Development of a nation in every sphere depends largely on the attitude, values,
knowledge and skills of its people which are in accordance with the modern-day life. The
only way this can be accomplished is through education and literacy is the first step towards
education. The National Literacy Mission was set up in 1988 with the goal of making 80
million persons in the age-group of 15-35 years functionally literate by the year 1995. NLM
is now committed to make 100 million people literate by 1998-99 and to bring about total
literacy by 2005.

2) The Sub-Committee on Adult Education, initially constituted on 16th Jan. 1997 was
reconstituted on 6th August, 1997. The Sub-Committee heard the views of representatives of
the Deptt. of Education, Education Secretaries of State Govts. of Kerala and Orissa and
also UT of Delhi. As the assessment of overall impact of Total Literacy Campaigns launched
in different parts of the country could not be possible without. making on the spot study
visits, the Sub-Committee visited Trivandrum and Bhubaneswar from 22nd te 28th
September, 1997. During its field visits, the Sub-Committee visited a number of Adult
Education centres and also interected with various authorities involved in literacy campaigns
and also learners.

3. The Background Note furnished by the Deptt. of Education states that ‘the Total
Literacy Campaign (TLC) is the principal strategy of the NLM for eradication of illiteracy in
the country. TLCs are delivered through voluntarism and implemented by Zilla Saksharta
Samities (ZSS) or Distrsict Literacy Committees usually headed by District Collectors
Literacy campaigns are implemented by ‘funding ZSS through the Central and State
Governments'in the ratio of 2:1. However, for distrsicts under Tribal Sub Plan their ratie is
4:1

4. The compaigns are initiated with appropriate environment-building activity coupled
with a door-to-door literacy survey during which potential learners and volunters are
identified, Suitable primers are developed and primer-specific training is provided'to the
trainers. The environment-building activity as well as the monitoring and supervision are
continued throughout the teaching/learning process which accounts for a total of 200 heurs
spread over a period of 6’months. Concurrent, mid-course and external evaluations are
conducted by evaluation agencies identified for the State Directorate of Adult Education and
NLM.

5. After completion of the TLC, Post Literacy Campaign (PLC) is launched to reach
out to remaining illiterates to consolidate the gains acquired during TLC, and also to enable
the neo-literates to develop self-learning-skills.

6. The Department informed the Committee that an Expert Group was constituted in
April, 1993 under the Chairmanship of Prof. Arun Ghosh to undertake a status-cum-impact
evaluation of literacy campaigns launched in different parts of the country. Some ef the
important findings of the Report are as under:—

Overwhelming impact on women;
Positive impact on caste and communal relations;
Demand generated for primary education;

d:

ee an 2


2

Literacy placed on the national agenda;

Quality suffered in some places because of pre-occupation with total literacy;
Bureaucratization—in some cases;

Need for quick follow-up post literacy campaigns in order to consolidate fragile literacy
skills;

Some campaigns launched without adequate preparations.

The Committee was given to understand that in view of the way the Mission has moved
and findings of the Prof. Arun Ghosh Committee, the Government have evolved the
following new strategies:

— Preparation of time-bound action plans for TLC coverage of uncovered districts in the
States of Bihar, U.P., Rajasthan and Maharashtra.
—Non-cash incentives for motivating volunteers.

— Establishment of strong linkages between literacy campaigns and Panchayati Raj
Institutions.

— Decentralisation and delegation of authority for implementation of literacy programme to
State Government by establishment of State Literacy Mission Authorities (SLMAS).

7. In the light of findings and recommendations of the Expert Group and having regard
to the emerging literacy scenario, the Scheme of Continuning Education of neo-literates was
launched in December, 1995 to replace the earlier scheme of Post Literacy and Continuing
Education and the Jan Shikshan Nilayams (JSNs) under the pre-revised scheme was ceased
with effect from 1st April, 1996. However, in the districts which have not so far been
covered under TLC/PLC, JSNs established under the earlier scheme will remain the

——~principal mechanism to fulfil Post Literacy and Continuing Education needs of. the local
population. The existing JSNs will, therefore, be continued in the non-TLC districts until
such districts are also taken up for TLC

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

8.1 National Literacy Mission is committed to make 100 million people literate by 1998-
99 and to bring about total literacy by 2005. The Committee notes that 442 districts i.e
majority of the districts in the country have been covered under TLC so far. However, the
Committee finds that the number of persons made literate is very less if details are gone
into. The compaigns have covered an estimated 147 million persons among whom 120.34 -
million learners were identified through surveys. Out of these, only 90.55 million persons
could be enrolled and only 64.34 million persons have been made literate so far. The
Committee fails to understand as to how the proposed target of making 100 million people
literate by 1998-99 can be achieved. The Committee feels that whereas coverage of districts
under TLC has been impressive, it seems to be only on paper. Although identification of
illiterate persons through surveys is being done, the follow-up action for enrolling such
illiterate persons and making them literate is not being taken up with the same spirit. The
Committee apprehends that until some radical measures are taken, the target date may again
have to be extended. There is a strong need of working out a mechanism of enrolment of
adults, their retention and their continuing education. It must be ensured that any adult
enroled is helped to reach the final stage of permanent functional literacy. Therefore, tracer
study approach will have to be adopted.

8.2 The Committee would also like to point out that against the total allocation of
Rs. 1400 crores for Adult Education during the 8th Plan, actual expenditure was only Rs.
718.14 crores. Similarly, for 1997-98 although there was an allocation of Rs. 129.81 crores,


|

3

expenditure was only Rs. 84.48 crores. The Committee expresses its deep concern over
under-utilisation of funds. It is true that in some of the educationally backward States like
Bihar, U.P., Rajasthan and MP, campaigns have lagged behind leading to under-utilisation
of funds. The Committee strongly feels that merely requesting such State Govts. to draw up
a time-bound action plan for bringing uncovered districts under Tot~'” ost Literacy
Campaigns will not serve the purpose. What is required is a result-oriented co-ordination
between the Centre and States. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Deptt.
should impress upon the States for effective implementation of Adult Education Programme.
The role of bureaucracy should recede and involvement of people should increase to the
ownership level of the programme. Strategy for this will have to be worked out.

POST LITERACY CAMPAIGNS

9.1 The Committee was informed that after completion of TLC, Post Literacy Campaign
(PLC) is launched to mop up the left over illiterates and to consolidate the gains of literacy
acquired during TLC and to enable the new-literates to develop abilities for self-learning and
help upgradation of skills for their economic betterment. The Committee, however, is -
constrained to note that PLCs have not taken off in the country in the real sense. Whereas
442 districts have been covered under TLC, Post Literacy Campaigns have been launched in
only 229 districts so far. Figures relating to educationally backward States are self-
explanatory.

State TLCs launched PLCs launched
Bihar 40 distts. 11 distts.
MP 45 distts. 19 distts.
Orissa 24 distts. i 12 distts.
Rajasthan 31 distts. 18 distts.

UP 68 distts. 11 distts.

9.2 The Committee also finds that there is a gap of 2 to 3 years in the launching of TLC
and PLC in all the districts. Thus the basic objective of PLC to provide opportunities of
continuing education to neo-literates so as to facilitate retention of their literacy skills and to
enable the learners to continue their learning beyond elementary literacy stands defeated.
The Committee therefore recommends that the Department should impress upon all the
States specially the educationally backward States to launch PLCs in the remaining districts
so as to ensure that benefits of literacy are sustained by the neo-literates.
OPERATION RESTORATION है eo

%

10. The Committee was informed that ‘Operation: Restoration’ for TLC Projects in the
districts which for various unavoidable reasons have stagnated or have not taken off is being
taken up during the Ninth Plan. 25 districts in six States of Bihar, Haryana, Karnataka,
Orissa, Rajasthan and UP have been identified. The Committee finds that districts identified
are those which had taken up the Campaign Programme without adequate preparation, the
project had dragged behind for ‘two to three years and are stagnating after an initially
successful Total Literacy phase. However, mere identification of districts and allocation of
funds would not achieve the desired results. Concerted efforts by the Central Govt. are
required so that State Govts. are impressed upon to take corrective measures


4

BROAD-BASING THE COURSE CONTENT

_11. Persons in the age-group of 15-35 years are to be made functionally literate under
Adult Education Programme. The Committee feels that traditional literacy courses will not
prove to be attractive for this particular age-group. Hence, special area-specific approach
needs to be kept in mind while formulating primers for learners. Element of folk lore/folk
songs/dramas can also be inducted so as to draw larger number of adult population towards
this programme. The Committee also recommends that steps should be taken for introducing
some vocational courses based on local needs which can become source of income for the
participants.

WOMEN MAJOR BENEFICIARIES

12.1 The Committee is happy to note that women constitute 62% of total beneficiaries
under the Adult Education Programme. Involvement of women at such a large scale has led
to several wholesome social spin-offs reported from various districts such as:

— improvement in enrolment of children at primary level.
— women becoming more confident and forward-looking.
— immunisation improved to record levels.

— small family norm getting increasingly accepted.

The Committee is of the view that successful implementation of Adult Education
Programme would also indirectly result’ in a positive impact on various Govt.-run Family
Welfare Programmes.

12.2 The Committee feels that Anganwadis can also be used as Adult Education
Centres for women. The Committee would also like to point out that besides normal
education courses, traditional rural art/vocation/skills can be imparted in an organised way
to women at these centres. The Govt. should also work out a via media whereby a
commercial outlet is provided for such products made by women through co-operative
movements.

CLIENTELE OF ADULT EDUCATION PROGRAMME

13.1 The Committee was informed that the initial objective of NLM was to make 80
million persons in the age-group of 15-35 years literate by the year 1995. However,
subsequently, this was revised to include children in the age-group of 9-14 years also in areas
where Non-Formal Education Programme was not in operation.

13.2 The Committee had noticed children in the age-group of 9-14 years in Adult
Education Centres during its field visits in Delhi. This may be the position in other areas
also. The Committee is very much disturbed by the fact that children in the age-group of 9-
14 years are also being handled by Adult Education Centres. The Committee feels that this
is not a healthy trend. Adult Education Centres are located in the villages/localities where
already Normal School/NFE facilities exist for children in the age-group of 9-14 years. Steps
are also being taken by both Govt. and voluntary agencies to motivate out of school children
to attend schools/NFE Centres. The Committee, therefore, fails to understand the rationale
behind inclusion of children in the age-group of 9-14 years under the Adult Education
Programme. The Committee is of the firm view that Adult Education Programme should
strictly adhere to the age-group of 15-35 years.

SHRAMIK VIDYAPEETH

14. The programme, with specially designed courses, addresses the needs of the socially
and economically deprived sections of workers communities. The Committee notes that


during the year 1996-97, 4,86,556 persons out of whom 35.20% were males and 64.80%
females benefited from 11,663 programmes conducted by SVPs. The Committee was given
to understand that the Scheme of SVPs which was hitherto restricted to urban/semi-urban
industrial areas will now be expanded to all districts. It is proposed to sanction at least one
SVP to each district in the country. The Committee, however, feels that Govt. proposal to
sanction at least one SVP to each district would not have the desired results. There might be
many districts where there is no industry at all. What is required is to make, in the first
instance, the existing 58 SVPs more purposeful, based on the area-specific needs of the
working class. Evaluation of SVP Scheme, if not already done, may be initiated by the
Deptt. before further expansion of this Scheme.

ADULT EDUCATION CENTRES

_ 15, The Committee would like to point out that location and timing of Adult Education
Centres is very important for achieving the set goals under Adult Education Programme.
Centres should be as near to general masses as is possible. Infrastructure available at schools
and even the services of school teachers can be used by Centres after school hours. Keeping
in view the social background of women, there should be exclusive centres being run by
women volunteers (Preraks) and during the timings convenient to women at large.

SELECTION OF VOLUNTEERS (PRERAKS)

16, The Committee feels that the village education committee/ocal community should
be involved in the selection of volunteers for running of Adult Education Centres in order to
ensure the acceptability of Preraks in the community. Local students from higher classes may
also be involved in this task.

VOLUNTARY AGENCIES

17.1 The Committee finds that Voluntary Agencies are playing a big role in the Adult
Education Programme. The Committee was given to understand that upto March, 1996, 158
TLC Projects have been sanctioned to 148VAs for making a total of about 23 lakh persons
literate. The Committee, however, finds that non-constitution of Screening Committees for
identification of VAs at State and district level, adverse reports from certain State Govts,
regarding performance of VAs and non-submission of audited accounts and proper Project
Reports by VAs are some of the main hurdles which are coming in the way of effective
involvement of VAs in Adult Education Programme, The Committee feels that services of
VAs can be more gainfully employed if identification of really motivated VAs is got done by
State Governments.

17.2 During the course of interaction with State Govt. officials as well as NGOs in
Orissa, the Committee came to know that the literacy rate in the tribal areas was very low.
It seems that Total Literacy Campaigns have not reached the remote tribal areas of Orissa.
The Committee was given to understand that in Orissa, TLC has not become a mass
movement as yet as it is still in the hands of State’ authorities. The Committee is of the firm
view that in such a situation, Voluntary Agencies can play a vital role. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Deptt. should impress upon the State Govts. to take steps to
involve the VAs having a good track-record in reaching out to illiterate population in tribal
areas.

ROLE OF MEDIA

18.1 The Committee was informed that as part of media support to literacy campaigns
some of the: main activities undertaken are as follows:—

1. Production of video films in various languages.
2. Half-an-hour chunk for literacy on DD-1 on every Friday.


6

3. Attractive spots highlighting benefits of literacy telecast through Doordarshan and
closed circuit TVs at selected railway station/ airports.

4. Special Ads. designed and released through DAVP in National Dailies of different
languages in connection with International Literacy Day.

5. Literacy Messages printed on postal stationery and computerised railway tickets of
Northern Railway.

18.2 Mass awareness is an integral part of Adult Education Programme. This
programme can be successfully implemented only if a message reaches to the general masses
that without literacy, a person cannot be successful in, life. The Committee, however, feels
that effective use of media is not being made in the implementation of Adult Education
Programme. The Committee is of the view that steps like advertisements in Hindi on TV,
literacy messages printed on postal stationery and computerised railway tickets of Northern
Railway etc. would not serve the purpose. The Committee therefore recommends that Govt.
should plan its media campaign keeping in view the region-specific demands of areas where
Adult Education Programme is yet to take its roots. Advertisements/Posters in the language
of the area and according to the specific social background would result in higher
participation in this programme.

LIBRARIES

19. The Cornmittee feels that libraries are a must for neo-literates if their interest in
education is to be, sustained. The Committee finds that libraries have played a very
important role in spreading literacy in Kerala. Similar efforts are required in other parts of
the country. Community libraries can be made use of in generating interest in reading
among the neo-literates.

ROLE OF PANCHAYATI RAJ INSTITUTIONS

20.1 The Committee was informed that the 73rd and 74th Amendments to the
Constitution have assigned the responsibility of implementation of Adult Education
Programmes to Panchayats. This is being ensured wherever Panchayat Bodies are active by
involving their representatives in the Executive Bodies of the Zilla Saksharta Samities. The
areas where it is proposed to involve them actively are generation of environment and
creation of motivation among learners and volunteers, in securing cooperation and mass
participation of people and in monitoring and evaluation of literacy programmes. However,
as gathered during interaction with public, the Committee feels that the Panchayats have
their own preferences such as economic activities, construction, development and literacy is
accorded the least priority. The“Committee, therefore, recommends that steps should be
taken to ensure that Adult Education programme is taken up on a priority basis by
Panchayats. There is a specific responsibility of making the district fully literate as per
functional norms set by the NLM which may be given to Zilla Panchayats with total
planning, implementation and monitoring. The funds for this as per requirements of the
Zilla Panchayat should ‘be provided by the Central Government from the Centrally
sponsored schemes. [t must be made clear that this fund is in addition to the fund allocated
by the State Finance Commission. The achievement of the target set by the Zilla Panchayat
should be externally evaluated and responsibility for any shortfall should be fixed on the
concerned agency. This will ensure the responsibility and accountability coupled with
decentralisation of power and implementation.


7

20.2 The Committee was also given to understand that there is a proposal to shift
Collector Centric model to alternative second-line of command to implement the campaigns,
through involvement of more and more non-officials and voluntary agencies. The Committee
in this connection would like to suggest that the Kerala model may be experimented by
making District Panchayat President as the Chairman and District Collector as coordinator.
EVALUATION

21.1 The Committee was informed that the NLM has introduced more meaningful and
rigorous evaluation system and each literacy campaign is now required to take up concurrent
evaluation of the ongoing programme through an outside agency nominated by the State
Directorates of Adult Education. The State Directorates have been asked to empanel
agencies for undertaking concurrent evaluation. Concurrent evaluation aims at quick mid-
term appraisal of a project to assess the strengths and weaknesses of an ongoing programme
and to identify correctives for improvement of the programme. Besides concurrent
evaluation, each literacy campaign district is now subject to final evaluation towards the end
of the project through an independent external evaluation agency nominated by the NLM.

21.2 While appreciating the monitaring mechanism for Adult Education, the Committee
feels that involvement of local MPs/MLAs in this task will prove to be more effective.


ea RSTO oie oa eer os

MINUTES


12

to each Sub-Committee and the tentative composition of the seven Sub-Committees are as
under:

G2 ‘ ”
Gi)sc* * *
(iii) Sub-Committee on Adult Education

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha, Convernor
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav, Member
. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana, Member

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath, Member

. Dr. Krupsindhu Bhoi, Member

. Shri Mukhtar Anees, Member

. Shri Ranen Barman, Member

(५) * * i *
(vy) * * *
(vi) * * he

(vii) * * yon *

NAMSWNE

5. The Committee then discussed about the role of the Sub-Committees and also decided
that the Sub-Committees after the detailed examination of the respective subjects would
submit their Reports to the main Committee.

6. * * |! *
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 Noon.

Mie a
***Relate to other matters.



|
|
i,
}
|
i

I

FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Monday, the 4th August, 1997 in Committee Room
‘C’ First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S. B. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. B.B, Dutta
3. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
4. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
5. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
6. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati:Sumitra Mahajan
8. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
9. Shri Sartaj Singh
10. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
11, Shrimati Krishna Bose
12. Shri Krishna
13. Dr. Bali Ram
14, Shri Ranen Barman
15. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri 1.0, Negi, Committee Officer
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

2. * . *

3. The Committee then reviewed the work done by the previous Committee. The
Chairman informed the Committee that the following subjects were taken up by the previous
Committee for detailed study and a separate Sub-Committee on each of the subjects was
appointed:— : \

1. Value Based Education;
2. Vocational Education;
. Non-Formal Education;
. Adult Education;
. Problem of Drop-Outs;
. Dreaded Diseases;
. Drug Control; and
. National Family Welfare Programme.

The Committee, after some discussion, decided that since none of the Sub-Committees has
completed the work, it was necessary to identify the same subjects again. The Committee
then authorised the Chairman to constitute the Sub-Committees on each of the subjects
identified. The Chairman informed the Committee that he would re-constitute the same Sub-
Committees.

4. * के *

5, The Committee: then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

90० >३ ०७ (७ + ०

++*र6]ववा८ to other matter.

13


1

9०:०० ७ | ७ ०

xX

TENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 15th September, 1998 in Room No.
63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS

. Shri 5.8. Chavan — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Balkavi Bairagi

Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi

Shri O. Rajagopal

Shri Dina Nath Mishra

Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
LOK SABHA

. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
. Shri Ajit Jogi

. Shri Shankar Pannu

. Shri Abdul Hamid

. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri H.P. Singh

. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES

*

* *

Representatives of Department of Education
Shri M.C. Satyawadi, Additional Secretary

ik

9०:०७ ७ | ५७ ०

2.

Kum. Rameshwari Handa, Director

. Shri Bhasker Chaterjee, Joint Secretary
. Shri Abhimanyu Singh, Joint Secretary
. Smt. V.K. Jena, Director

Shri G. Balasubramaniam, Director (CBSE)
Shri P.K. Tripathi, Deputy Secretary

Shri D. Jhingran, Deputy Secretary
SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

*

* *

3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the oral evidence of the ***Representatives of the
Department of Education on Adult Education.

3.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4.

***Relate to other matters.

16


न््प्स्य््य्य््य््छा

17

5. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft Report on Adult
Education and adopted the same with some modifications.

6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 p.m to meet again on 24th September, 1998.



*XIV
a FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 19th November, 1998 in Committee

Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT हे

Shri 5.8. Chavan — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

. Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri Dina Nath Mishra

. Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy

. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam

. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

. Shri Mallangouda Basanagouda Patil

. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa

. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

. Shri Abdul Hamid

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

22. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja

. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy

. Smt. Krishna Bose

. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES

* . *
SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary

2
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate requisite number of Members

=

* * *

for presentation of some Reports of the Committee to the Rajya Sabha and lay the same in
the Lok Sabha during the ensuing session of Parliament.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 p.m.

*Minutcs of XIth to XIIth meetings of the Committee relate to other matters.
***Relate to other matters.

18