PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY FIRST REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1995-96 OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
WOMEN & CHILD DEVELOPMENT
(DEMAND NO. 49)

(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25.04.95)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25.04.95)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 1995/Chaitra, 1917 (Saka)


GONTENZAS

20685
1. Composition oF THE COMMITTEE ah (i)-(ii)
2. PREFACE wi (iii)
3. Report o : ng 1-42

4. Minutes Ren 13-15


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

1. Shri P. Upendra——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury a
4. Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Shri O.P. Kohli

6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

8. Shri Md. Salim

9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

10. Prof. 1.0. Sanadi

11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar

21. Prof. P.J. Kurien

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23; Shri Bapu Hari Chaure °

24. Shri Z:M. Kahandole

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34. Prof. K, Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

38. Shri Rambadan

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

42. gn Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram


Gi)
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, do hereby present this Twenty-first Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants
(Demand No. 49) of the Department of Women and Child Development (Ministry of Human
Resource Development) for the year 1995-96.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the
Deptt. of Women and Child Development and also heard the Secretary and other Officials of that
Deptt. on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 6th April, 1995.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adepted the same on 20th April, 1995.

New DELHI; P. UPENDRA,
April 20, 1995 nana an
a मा 32) 9 अकाल Department-related Parliamentary
30 Chaitra, 1917 (Saka) Standing Committee on

Human Resource Development.


REPORT

1. The Department of Women and Child Development, under the Ministry of Human
Resource Development is engaged in all-round development and welfare of women and
children who constitute roughly two-thirds of the total population of the country.

1.2 The activities of the Department may broadly be classified into three categories—(i)
child-related; (ii) women-related; and (iii) nutrition.

1.3 Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS); Creches/Day Care Centres; Early
Childhood Education, etc. are some of the major programmes being implemented for the
welfare of children.

1.4 As regards women-related activities, the main objective of the Department is to
encourage women to come to the fore and contribute their share to the national
development. The Department undertakes such activities as framing, enactment and
amendment of legislation on women-related issues; formulation of plans, policies and
programmes in the areas of welfare and support services; implementation of employment
and income generation, as well as awareness generation’ programmes; coordination of the
efforts of both governmental and non-governmental organisations engaged in the field of
women and child development, etc. To make women self-reliant by enhancing their
employment avenues, training is being imparted to them in conventional sectors like
agriculture, dairying, handicrafts, sericulture, fishries, etc. and also in modern vocations such
as electronics, computers, beauty culture, catering, etc.

1.5 Two schemes namely, Rashtriya Mahila Kosh and Mahila Samridhi Yojana have
also been launched in recent years to take care of the credit and marketing needs of the self
employed-women as well as women engaged in the informal sector. Side by side, in order to
provide safe and cheaper accommodation to single women working in cities/towns, the
scheme of hostels for working women, and creches/day care centres to ease out the child
care burden of working mothers are also being supported by the Department.

1.6 The Department, through its different schemes, is not only trying to provide
pregnant women, nursing mothers, as well as children, with nutritious food but also making
them aware of its necessity. Nutrition Education & Extensions; Itegrated Education in
Nutrition; quality control laboratories; production of nutritious foods through NGOs with
UNICEF assistance etc. are some of the schemes being implemented in this regard.

1.7 However, all these efforts and initiatives have not been able to bring about the
desired level of improvement in the condition of women and children. A large number of
women, particularly in the rural and backward areas, continue to be the victims of age old
social evils and are economically dependent on men. In the urban areas, particularly in the
metropolitan cities, cases of atrocities against women and their exploitation are on the
increase. The condition of children is not better either and is marked by such disconcerting
features as high incidence of malnutrition, abnormal rate of infant mortaility, female
foeticide; prevalence of common disorders like Vitamin ‘A’ deficiéncy, iodine deficiency in
some areas; extremely low levels of opportunities for early childhood stimulation, etc.

2..The Committee notes that the budgetary allocation, both plan and non-plan, to the
Department of Women and Child Development this year is Rs. 730 crores and Rs. 44.89


crores respectively. This amount, the Committee notes, is higher only by Rs. 69.3 crores as
compared to the B.E. of 1994-95. During the course of her oral evidence, the Secretary,
Department of Women & Child Development, admitted that the amount provided this year
would be inadequate and that the Department was given Rs. 730.00 crores in the Plan
against a demand of Rs. 965.00 crores.

2.1 The Committee is of the opinion that some of the important and useful schemes
relating to women and child development have remained non-expanding mainly due to
resource constraints inspite of the fact that there are no other schemes adequate to
supplement or replace these schemes and which need to be strengthened. The Committee
feels that the Planning Commission, by providing much less than what was asked for, has
not taken a realistic view of the requirements of the Department.

2.2 In view of the price escalation and other related factors, this increase, would not be
enough to sustain even the on-going projects. While the women and child shouid have
received the utmost consideration of the Government, only 4.28% of the total budget of the
Government has been earmarked for their welfare. Children and women being the most
vulnerable sections, a developing society like India’s can ill-afford any slackness at this
juncture in the implementation cf schemes meant for their development.

2.3 The Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate provision should be made to
the Department so that it may not only continue its ongoing projects but also expand and
strengthen many of its important schemes.

2.4 The Committee, however, finds that there is a big gap between the amount spent so
far on various schemes like creches/day care centres, training of ICDS functionaries,
Balwadi Nutrition Programme etc. and that provided for the entire 8th Plan period.

2.5 The secretary explained that the slow progress in appropriating the 8th Plan outlay
in the case of certain programmes, in fact, was mainly due to the non release of
proportionate amounts every year by the Planning Commission. She, however, maintained
that such was not the case with all the schemes and, in fact, the 8th Plan outlay would fall
short of the total requirement of the Department.

2.6 The Committee is constrained to observe that the progress of expenditure in case of
the schemes mentioned above is not satisfactory and hence their implementation is tardy. It
fails to understand as to"how the Department would appropriate the surplus provision in
regard to those programmes within the remaining one year of the 8th Five Year Plan. The
Committee feels that either the overall performance of Department was not found upto the
mark by the Planning Commission er the Department was not able to convince the Planning
Commission about its requirement. The Committee recommends that the Department should
plead its case strongly before the Planning Commission to get maximum funds released at
the RE stage this year and also in the terminal year of the plan.

2.7 The Committee notes with great concern that there appears to be a tendency in the
Department to proliferate more and more schemes having identical activities. Such a
fragmented and unorganised approach results in wastage of scarce resources. For example,
for imparting vocational training to women, the Department has such schemes as (i)
Condensed Courses for Education for Adult Women and Vocational Training; (ii) Support
to Training and Employment Programme to Women; (iii) Training and Employment-cum-
Production Centres for Women; (iv) Assistance to Voluntary Agencies for replication of
successful Programmes; and (v) Integrated project for Development of Women. Similarly,
Indira Mahila Yojana. Rashtriya Mahila Kosh, Mahila Samridhi Yojana and other socio-
economic programmes also appear to have a common objectives and overlapping activities.



Likewise, Information and Mass Education Cell; Integrated Nutrition Education; Nutrition
Education and Extension, Mass Media Communication are engaged in spreading
information/awareness about nutrition.

2.8 This fact was pointed out by the Committee in its 7th Report (para 44) also, but
no satisfactory reply has been given by the Department in its Action Taken Report.
Therefore, the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation and urges upon the
Department to revamp and rationalise all such schemes. It also suggests that instead of
allocating a token amount for all of them every year, the Department should concentrate
on and consolidate only important and meaningful schemes.

Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)

3. The Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) aims at providing an integrated
package of services to children below the age of six years, pregnant women and nursing
mothers. It is one of the major components of the Department which alone accounts for
approximately 65% of the total budgetary allocation.

3.1 The Committee notes that Rs. 512 crores has been provided for this scheme in
1995-96, as: against Rs. 434 crores last year. The Committee was informed that this
increase was mainly for expanding the programme by sanctioning. new ICDS projects in
uncovered blocks/urban slums and for sanctioning Indira Mahila Yojana (IMY) in 200
blocks, for which an amount of Rs. 12 crores is also included in it. On being asked, it was
stated by the Secretary that the amount provisioned for ICDS scheme this year would be
sufficient not only for meeting the operational costs of existing projects, but also for taking
up the proposed 463 new projects, presently under the consideration of the Planning
Commission.

3.2 The Committee was also informed that out of 3774 ICDS Projects sanctioned upto
December, 1994, 3342 have been made operational so far. The proposal of the Department
for the universalisation of ICDS scheme during the remaining period of the Eighth Five
Year Plan has been submitted to the Planning Commission and is awaiting its approval.

3.3 The Committee is not satisfied with the progress of this scheme, as even after 25
years of its operation, the ICDS projects could not be provided in all the blocks of the
country. The target of universalisation of this scheme during the Eighth Five Year Plan
appears to be a far cry. The Committee is anguished to note that the proposal for
universalisation of ICDS scheme has been pending with the Planning Commission for a
long time. The Committee is constrained to observe that there appears to be slackness on
part of both, the Department as well as the Planning Commission in finalising the
proposal.

3.4 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should pursue the
pending proposal vigorously with the Planning Commission and get it cleared without any
further delay.

3.5 The outlay for the ICDS scheme provided this year which also includes a
component of Rs. 12 crores for the Indira Mahila Yojana does not appear to be adequate.
It is not commensurate with the goals that the Department has proposed to achieve. The
Committee is unable to understand as to how the Department would be able to meet the
expenditure for taking up so many new ICDS projects in 1995-96 as well as bearing the
operational costs of the existing ones. The Committee therefore, suggests that the Planning
Commission should make a realistic assessment of the financial requirements for achieving
universalisation of ICDS Scheme and provide a suitable amount for this purpose.

3.6 The Secretary, Department of Women and Child Development, stated that an
ICDS project took 18 months to be fully operational. The Committee feels that the time


taken in this regard is long and the Department should make efforts to minimise it to the
extent possible.

3.7 The Committee observes that, over the years, more and more new schemes/
components have been added to the ICDS scheme, such as Creches; Adolescent Girls
Scheme; Early Childhood Education and Indira Mahila Yojana . Besides, Anganwadi
workers are also in great demand in implementing such programmes as family planning,
National Literacy Mission, etc. The Committee apprehends that the overburdening of this
scheme might lead to the deviation of the scheme from its main objective and over-streching
of financial allocations.

3.8 Despite the integration of so many schemes into the ICDS in due course, the staff
strength of its centres remains the same, as originally (5 vided. The Committee suggests that
a study should be cenducted to find out whether th. staff strength of the ICDS centres in
the present circumstances is sufficient or not. As regards addition of new components to it,
the Committee recommends that this matter be given a fresh look by the Department. While
the Committee has no objection for taking up additional components, it recommends that
adequate and separate allocation be earmarked for all the additional components so that no
funds need be diverted from the main ICDS scheme.

3.9 The Committee is surprised to note that while the Department has shown to have
achieved the target of opening new ICDS projects and also of utilising the given funds, there
is a shortfall in achieving the target of beneficiaries for the last three years. The Department
informed that this shortfall was owing to under-reporting of ICDS projects. The Committee
feels that the Department should be more vigilant in this regard and should see that this sort
of under reporting is avoided.

Training of ICDS Functionnaires

4. A comprehensive training programme for the ICDS functionaries at various levels, is
being run by the Department with the help of the National Institute of Public Cooperation
and Development (NIPCCD), voluntary organisations, State Governments and Uttar
Pradesh Bharat Scouts and Guides. At present, There are 304 training centres for various
levels of programme functionnaires. a

4.1 The Committee notes that the target of imparting training to the ICDS functionaries
has remained static for the last three years and is not commensurate with the increase in the
ICDS projects over the years as shown in the table below:

Year छा No. of Projects Increase
1992 (upto 31.12.92) 2765 _
1993 (upto 30.9.93) 2871 - 106
1994 (upto 30.9.94) 3187 316
: As on 31.3.95 3899 712

4.2 The Committee feels that, with the present rate of increase in the number of
projects, the requirement of trained functionaries is bound to grow. It recommends,
therefore, that a thorough assessment of the requirement of trained functionaries may be
undertaken and the target of imparting training to the ICDS functionaries should be
accordingly revised.

4.3 It is also. noted that there was shortfall in achieving the targets set for training the


ICDS functionaries at all levels during the year 1994-95. Non-deputation of trainees by the
State Governments and non-reporting of trainees at training centres were the reasons given
by the Department for this shortfall. On being asked as to why the State Governments are
not deputing trainees and why those who have been deputed are not reporting, the Secretary
stated that it was mainly because of slow pace of recruitment and some court cases. The
Committee expresses it concern over this phenomenon as it would adversely affect the
progress of the ICDS in the long run and recommends that the Department should make all-
out efforts to sort out this problem with the State Governments immediately.

World Bank Assisted ICDS Projects

5. At present, there are two World Bank assisted ICDS projects, ICDS-I for Andhra
Pradesh and Orissa; and ICDS-II for Bihar and Madhya Pradesh. These projects, apart from
the package of services envisaged under the ICDS schemes, also include such components as
income generating activities for women, construction of Anganwadi buildings, Nutritional
Rehabilitation Centres, etc. The period of ICDS-I project is 1990-91 to 1995-96 while that of
ICDS-II is 1993-94 to 1999-2000 A:D.

5.1 The total Eighth Plan outlay under the World Bank assisted ICDS is Rs. 330.00
crores, whereas the Department has been able to make use of only Rs. 240.42 crores so far.
Even in the penultimate year of the Eighth Five Year Plan, the budgetary provision
earmarked is only Rs. 64.00 crores. In this way, a hefty amount of Rs. 90.00 crores remains
unutilised.

5.2 On being asked as to whether the Department would be able to fully use the
unutilised amount, the Secretary explained that since the ICDS-II was gaining momentum,
more resources would be required and, therefore, the Department was hopeful of utilising
the available amount during the Eighth Five Year Plan. The Committee recommends that
the Department should ensure that the available resources be utilised in right earnest and
there should not be any let up in this regard.

5.3 As regards the ICDS projects, started with World Bank Assistance, nothing is
known about their fate after the flow of funds ceases on completion of the stipulated period
because no separate provision for it has been made. The Committee suggests that the
Department should continue with those projects by providing adequate allocation etc.

Creches/Day Care Centres/National Creche Fund

6. The scheme of Creches/Day Care Centres was started in 1975. It was proposed to
start 50,000 additional creche units during the Eighth five Year Plan at the rate of 10,000
every year. But there has not been any increase in the number of creches since 1991-92. The
sole reason for this was stated to be inadequate resources. The Committee, however, notes
from the table, showing financial targets and achievements, that the Department has not
been able to achieve the financial targets during the last three years owing to some reason or
‘the other. The Committee is baffled to learn that while the Department was not able to
open any creche since 1991-92, due to alleged inadequate funds on the one hand, it was not
able to achieve its financial target during the last three years on the other.

6.1 Now that more and more women are coming out of their hearth and opting for
newer vocations, requirement of creches is being felt in smaller cities and towns also. The
Committee feels that since the National Creche Fund has been established, the Department
should make all out efforts to meet the requirement of creches all over the country through
this scheme.

6.2 The Department has in. its note’ supplied to the Committee, mentioned that
consequent upon audit report and CBI inquiry, 25 creches run by the Indian Council for


Child Welfare, and 6 run by the Bhartiya Adim Jati Sevak Sangh had been closed
temporarily Fifty creches run by the Central Social Welfare Board have been cancelled and
sanction of 68 creches run by the Bhagini Nivedita Pratishthan, Karnataka, has been
withheld pending an enquiry.

6.3 On being asked as to how fake and bogus organisations managed to receive
Government grants and whether their antecedents were thoroughly checked before funds
were sanctioned to them and what mechanism the Department had to keep a check on this,
the Secretary, Department of Women and Child Development replied that whenever
irregularities came to their notice, either through a complaint made or during our regular
inspection, necessary action was taken. The Committee is thus given to understand that the
Department does not have any effective mechanism of supervision and monitoring and it
relies mostly on the complaints which are brought to its notice. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that a foolproof system of supervision and monitoring (including proper
auditing) to ensure proper utilisation of funds be evolved. It also recommends that the
organisations, found to be involved in committing irregularities and misuse of funds, be
blacklisted and debarred from receiving any sort of grant under any scheme of the
Department. A list of such organisations may be circulated to all other Ministries/
Departments. The Committee also suggests that the Department should undertake random
checking frequently.

6.4 The amount, which remains unspent owing to closure/cancellation of certain creche
centres involved in irregularities , should not be surrendered by the Department; rather it
should be used, for opening new creches wherever necessary.

6.5 The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the progress of the action taken in
pursuance of its recommendation made in its two previous reports (3rd and 7th) on the need
to conduct an enquiry into the affairs of the Bhartiya Adim Jati Sevak Sangh, which has not
been completed even after almost one and half years. The Committee desires that the matter
be .expedited.

6.6 Malpractices and irregularities on a large scale, the Committee feels, put a question
mark on the credibility of volunatary organisations like Bhartiya Adim Jati Sewak Sangh
(BAJSS). The Committee is also not happy with the working of organisations like the
Central Social Welfare Board and ICCW, which are receiving huge amount of grants from
the Department.. The Committee is constrained to observe that the Department has failed in
its task of ensuring proper utilisation of the hefty sums being given to them. While
appreciating the attemps of the CSWB in the areas where ICDS projects have not been
provided, the Committee is constrained to express its unhappiness over the general working
of the Board where a major chunk of the grant is being spent on administration and very
little on other activities. The Committee reiterates its earlier suggestion to assess the
functioning of the CSWB without any delay so as to remove all lacunae in its working.

Early Childhood Education Scheme

7. This scheme is being implementea through voluntary organisations in nine most
educationally backward districts of the country, the major beneficiaries of which are the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

7.1 The Committee is quite unhappy to note that this programme has remained static
since 1988 due to financial constraints and this year also, budgetary provision under this
scheme is the same as that of last year.

7.2 The Committee finds that it is a very good scheme meant for preparing children for
entry into primary school by taking care of their social, mental, physical, moral and


emotional develapment. But the chances of its expansion appear to be very bleak with the
present level of allocations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government
should provide sufficient funds for this scheme so that it'could be extended to more and
more districts having large SC/ST population.

7.3 The Committee feels that the rate of honorarium to teachers and helpers is nominal
considering the escalation of prices. The Committee, therefore, suggests that the rate of
honorarium be appropriately enhanced.

Child Prostitution

8. The Committee feels strongly about the prevailing practice of child prostitution in
India. The Committee was informed that a proposal had been moved in pursuance of the
directive of the Supreme Court for strengthening the implementation machinery for
coordinated efforts ut national and State level, to combat the evil of child prostitution and
also to rehabilitate prostitutes/devadasis. A proposal to set up a Special Cell for this purpose
has also been moved.

8.1 Though the Committee is happy that some steps for strengthening the
implementation machinery have been initiated by the Department, it feels that simple
strengthening of the existing machinery would not be enough. The Committee is of the
opinion that the problem of child prostitution has not received due attention so far and
emphasis has been more on legal than developmental or rehabilitative aspect of this
problem. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a multi-pronged strategy be evolved
for combating this evil effectively. It also recommends that the proposal of the Department
to set up Special Cells for this purpose be cleared at the earliest.

Cultural Exchange Programme

9. The Committee notes that this scheme has virtually remained on paper for the last
five years and every year a token allocation ranging from Rs. 50,000 to Rs. one lakh is being
made. Asked about this, the Secretary stated that it was being kept alive in the hope that
some proposal might be received in future. The Committee is of the opinion that since a
number of good scheme are facing financial constraints, there is no point in blocking money
for this scheme which may better be wound up.

Indira Mahila Yojana

10. The Government has been reiterating its commitment about implementing the Indira
Mahila Yojana for the last several years but it is yet to take a final shape. This scheme has
nothing new to offer to women, since the awareness generation and income generation
components are already being taken care of by various other schemes of the Department. Its
novelty lies, to some extent, in offering an integrated delivery of services to women as
against the previous fragmented systems on which the Committee in its earlier report (7th
para 21), has commented: “whether a single-window delivery system would benefit women
in immensely varied circumstances has also to be assessed .”

10.1 In this background, the Committee is of the view that instead of intermingling it
with ICDS, the awareness generation components of the Indira Mahila Yojana should be
taken up as a new scheme and the other schemes of awareness generation should be merged
with it. The Committee is happy to learn that the Department has already submitted a
detailed proposal on this to the Planning Commission. The Committee suggests that the
Department should make efforts to get the said proposal cleared as early as possible.

Mahila Samridhi Yojana
11. This scheme aims at encouraging the saving habit among rural women and is being


implemented through a network of 1.30 lakh post offices in the rural areas. Under this
scheme, a total of 80.47 lakh accounts have been opened, with a deposit of Rs. 77.85 crores
by the end of February 1995.

11.1 The Committee was informed that an increase to the tune of Rs. 10 crore in the
budgetary provision in 1995-96 had been made, mainly to pay the incentive to account
holders, and also to pay operational cost to the Deptt. of Posts.

11.2 The Committee notes that the target of opening 1.50 crore accounts under this
scheme could not be reached last year. The Department has, in its note furnished to the
Committee, pointed out, inter alia, that the Department of Posts could not provide adequate
number of Staff and stationery in the rural post offices for the purpose. It has also been
brought to the notice of the Committee that smaller amounts generally are not accepted by
the Post Offices. The Committee suggests that the Department should take up the matter
with the Deptt. of Posts and ensure speedy and effective implementation of this scheme.

11.3 In response to the Committee’s recommendation, made last year, to extend this
scheme to the urban areas also, the Secretary informed that the planning Commission has
decided to take this matter into consideration only after two years of its implementation.
The Committee fails to understand as to why the Planning Commission has lacked to wait
for two yeurs, while the scheme has proved to be useful in the rural areas. The Committee,
therfore recommends that the matter may again be taken up with the Planning Commission
so that the scheme may be extended to the urban areas, with suitable modifications.

11.4 The Committee expresses its unhappiness over the poor response to the scheme in
States like Bihar (12%), Gujarat (20%), Maharashtra (31%), Rajasthan (15%) and West
Bengal (11%). The Secretary clarified that the Department was taking up this matter with
the State Governments because it was mainly they who were responsible for implementing
the scheme. The Committee recommends that the Department should intensify its efforts to
enlist the requisite cooperation from the State Governments. The Committee also suggests
that the Department of Posts should be requested to provide adequate number of Post
Offices in tribal and rural areas so that more and more women could be benefited by the
heme. The Committee emphasises the need for making adequate publicity about the
scheme through mass media. The Committee feels that elected local bodies could play a
significant role in this regard and hence suggests that their help may be taken by evolving a
suitable mechanism. The cooperation of Mahila Mandals and other NGOs may also be
enlisted.

Working Women’s Hostels

12. The financial allocation under this. scheme for this year in the same as that of last
year i.e. Rs. 7.75 crores, inspite of the fact that evaluation studies undertaken by the
external agencies have underlined an emergent need to expand this programme and to
upgrade the facilities in the hostels. The committee, in its previous report, while expressing
concern over the inadequacy of hostels for working women, had recommended that
construction of more hostels should be encouraged. This has become more necessary in view
of the fact that the progress of the scheme during the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 was very
poor. Last year also, the Department had to reduce its original target of constructing 60
hostels to 50 in view of the cost escalation factor. Keeping the budgetary allocation at the
last year’s level shows that the Department has not taken the recommendations of the
Committee seriously. The Committee however, reiterates that the allocation for this scheme
be adequately enhanced so that the backlog of the last three years could be cleared. It



7

should also, at the same time, encourage more and more voluntary organisations to come
forward in this field by increasing their grants.

12.1 In reply to the Committee’s recommendations made last year for evolving a system
of monitoring to contain cases of irregularities and mismanagement of the hostels, the
Department has stated that the existing system in this regard was adequate. But the
Committee is not convinced by the reply given by the Department, as more and more cases
of irregularities and atrocities committed against the inmates are being reported. The
Committee therefore reaffirms its previous recommendation of including one government
representative on the Board of Management of each of these hostels.

Atrocities Against Women

13. The subject of initiating legal action in cases of atrocities against women falls within
the purview of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee, however, feels that the
Department of Women & Child Development, being the nodal agency to look after the
welfare of women, should work in close tandem with the Ministry of Home Affairs in this
regard. It becomes all the more necessary in view of the fact that incidents of atrocities
against women are increasing day by day. It is a matter of concern that “Crime against
Women Cells” have been set up, so far, only in 12 States/UTs. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the Department should take up this matter with the Home Ministry and
see that such Cells are set up in the remaining States/UTs at the earliest. It also sugges*s
that studies on the subject of violence against women, initiated by the Department, anc the
Bill on “Domestic Violence against Women.” which is presently under consideration should
be expedited so that follow up action could be taken without much delay.

13.1 The Committee suggests that the Legal Literacy Manuals, prepared to create
awareness among women about the laws concerning them, should be made available in
regional languages as well.

13.2 The scheme of “Education Work for Prevention of Atrocities against Women”, it
appears, has not made much headway. The allocation for this purpose has remained static
for the last two years. The amount of Rs. 35 lakhs, provided for this scheme in 1995-96,
does not inspire enough hope. There is a greater need for intensifying the educational
publicity against atrocities on women. The Committee, therefore, recommends that sufficient
provision be made for this important programme. The Committee also suggests that a
separate fund be created in the Department for rehabilitating the victims of atrocities,
particularly the young girls.

Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK)

14. The Committee noted that the Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK) has sanctioned credit
limit to 48 NGOs to cover 62,322 women in the first two years, as against the target of
covering two lakh women in a six-year period. It is also noted that its performance in terms
of disbursement has been poor. The main reason for low disbursement, the Department
stated, was low consumption capacity of poor women who were the target beneficiaries. The
Department expects greater demand for loans this year. The Committee feels that lack of
awareness about this scheme in the rural and far-flung areas is also one of the major reasons
for low disbursement. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
take necessary steps to give wide publicity to the scheme. As the scheme is being
implemented. mainly through Voluntary Organisations, it also recommends that the
Department should ensure that only those organisations which have good credentials are
involved in this scheme.


National Commission for Women (NCW)

15. The Committee expresses its concern over the ‘ela’ in reconstituting the
Commissions. Although its term has expired quite some time back. It is also unhappy to
note that the Annual Reports of the financial Commission for Women have not been placed
so far before the Parliament. The Committee hopes that the Commission would be
reconstituted soon and its Annual Reports presented to the Parliament regularly.

Support to Training and Employment Programme

16. Under the scheme of ‘Support to Training and Employment Programme for
Women’, projects are sanctioned for income generating activities and support services on
90:10% cost sharing basis.

16.1 The Committee was apprised that at present, 25 projects were at various stages of
implementation and that the budget provisions were fully utilised during the last three years
for operating the ongoing projects, besides sanctioning some new projects every year.

16.2 The Committee is of the opinion that this is a good scheme which is gathering
momentum. In view of this, more proposals from unrepresented areas/sectors also are likely
to be received. It would give rise to more demand for assistance under the Scheme. ‘The
Committee feels that the provision of Rs. 16 crores for 1995-96, would not be sufficient to
meet the requirements of both ongoing projects, as well as extending the scheme to new
areas/sectors. The committee, therefore, recommends that more funds should be provided
for this scheme. To make the Scheme more attractive, the Department, the Committee
feels, should devise method for helping the trainees in taking a suitable occupation/
employment.

Women’s Bureau

17. The Committee was informed that there had been tremendous increase in the work-
load of the Women’s Bureau due to setting up of National Commission for Women,
Rashtriya Mahila Kosh, etc. The sanctioned strength of the Bureau continues to be almost
the same as was approved in 1976. A proposal to create a division in the Bureau, the
Committee was informed, is under consideration and the Planning Commission has agreed to
provide the necessary funds for the proposal. In view of the important responsibilities and
increasing work-load of the Women’s Bureau, the need for increasing its staff adequately,
the Committee feels, is quite genuine. It, therefore, recommends that this mater.should be ©
taken up with all concerned and the needful be done urgently.

Family Counselling Centres

18. The programme of Voluntary Action Bureaux and Family Counsalling Centres was
launched by the Central Social Welfare Board in 1982 with a view to extending preventive,
curative and rehabilitative services to those women and children who are the victims of
atrocities and exploitation.

18.1 An evaluation of these family counselling centres undertaken by the Government
of India through National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development
(HIPCCD) had highlighted inter alia the need to strengthen its infrastructure. The
Committee is also given to understand that grants for some of the centres had not been
released last year. . E

18.2 The Committee is surprised to note that inspite of the above position, a drastic cut
has been made this year in the allocation for this scheme it has been reduced to Rs. 1 lakh
this year as against Rs. 2.00 crores last year.

18.3 Questioned whether the Department wants to continue with the programme, the
Secretary said that the Central Social Welfare Board had substantial budget for family


counselling centres. But this does not hold good in the face of the allocation made this year.
The Committee, therefore, feels that this important scheme should not be starved of funds.
It also recommends that the outstanding dues of the centres be released forthwith.

National Nutrition Policy

19. The National Nutrition Policy (NNP) aims at tackling the problem of malnutrition in
the country through a set of various direct nutrition interventions of vulnerable groups and
indirect policy instruments involving long term institutional and structural changes.

19.1 The Committee was informed that as a follow-up of the NNP, a Nutritional
Surveillance System is being developed and District Diet and Nutrition Profiles are being
prepared for identifying area specific deficiencies and strategies to combat them are being
worked out.

19.2 The Committee is happy that the National Nutrition Council set up as an apex
body to oversea and monitor the implementation of NNP, is headed by the Prime Minister
himself. The Committee emphasises the need for having such bodies at the State level
headed by the respective Chief Ministers. It also suggests setting up ‘of inter-departmental
coordination Committees in all the States for monitoring the implementation of the policy.

19.3 Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) is the technical wing of the Department in the
matter of implementation of VNP. Most of the scnemes, run under FNB, the Committees
notes with concern are not performing satisfactorily Targets fixed, both physical and
financial are not being uchieved. For example, the schemes for Fortification of Milk with
Vitamin ‘A’ is being implemented by only 54 dairies in the entire country. Fortification of
salt with Iron, as accepted by the Secretary, has been a non-starter due to some technical
problem. Important activities like Research and Development and quality control also do
not appear to have received due attention Progress of Mass Media Communication, which is
meant for creating awareness about nutrition, an important component of NNP, is also
tardy. Last but not the least the production of nutritious foods also appears to have fallen
upto rough weather and it has been decided not to sanction any grant on account of this in
future.

19.4 The Committee observes that a plethora of small schemes are being run in the field
of nutrition and food and the allocations made to them indicate that these are being run just
for the sake of running them. The Committee feels that it is better to have fewer schemes
and run them effectively and’efficiently, rather than having many of them and implementing
halfheartedly.

19.5 The Committee, therefore, feels that this is the high time that a review and
evaluation of all the schemes relating to food and nutrition should be done and important
and useful schemes should be strengthened accordingly. The Committee feels, it would be
desirable to restructure the scheme and arrange for the distribution of Vitamin ‘A’ and Iron
directly through ICDS.

20. The Committee is happy to know that the Department has already taken a lot of
interest and initiative for involving Panchayats and Nagar Palikas in the implementation and
monitoring of its programmes. The Department has also participated in organising awareness
generation and training programmes for elected members of the Panchayats; started Balvikas
Mahila Samitis for monitorifg all children and women related programmes at village, block
and district levels; and requested State Governments to form such Samitis. The Committee,
however, feels that the Department should take all necessary steps to seek more and more
participation and cooperation of the local bodies in implementing, monitoring, etc. of
various programmes meant for rural and semi-urban women and children.


21. It has been reported that ‘Sathin’ schemes has run into some difficulty because of
non-cooperation of Panchayats and a decision of the State Government of Rajasthan to
make them redundant. The Committee desires that the Department should take up the
matter with the concerned State to see that their services are utilised suitably.


MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

XXXIV
“THIRTY FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 6th April, 1995 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri P. Upendra——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri O.P. Kohli

3. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
4. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

5. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

LOK SABHA

6. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
7. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
8. Dr. Vasant Pawar

9. Prof. P.J. Kurien

10. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
11, Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
12. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
13. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

14. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
15. Shri Anna Joshi

16. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
17. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
18. Shri Ramchandra Dome-
19. Shri Suraj Mandal

WITNESSES

1. Dr. (Smt.) Lata Singh, Secretary
2. Smt. B. Sen, Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.K. Guha, Joint Secretary
4. Smt. C.R. Chibber, Director
5. Shri Rajesh Kishore, Director

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary and other officials of the
Deptt. of Women and Child Development in connection with the examination of Demands

for Grants 1995-96. न

“Minutes of I-XXXIIIrd meeting relate to matters not included in this Report.


3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4. The.Committee them adjourned at 1.20 p.m. to meet again at 10.20 a.m. on 7th
April, 1995.


Iv
“FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 20th April, 1995 in Committee
Room No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri P. Upendra——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr, M. Aram

3. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
4. Shri Md. Salim

5. Prof. 1.0. Sanadi

LOK SABHA

6. Prof. (Smt.) Savithiri Lakshman

7. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
8. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

9. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

10. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

11. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
12. Shri Suraj Mandal

13, Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

14. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

15. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami -«

SECRETARIAT
i. Smt. V.S, Rama Devi, Secretary-General
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director ,
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the draft; twenty-first report on Demands for Grants
1995-96 of the Department of Women and. Child Development and adopted the same with
some modifications

३, The Committee, decided to prestnt,the adopted reports of the Committee i.e. 17th.
18th, 19th, 20th and 21st reports to both*the Houses of Parliament on 25th April, 3995

4. The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Miss Saroj Kharparde
and Shri O.P. Kohli to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Prof. (Smt.) Savithri
Lakshmanan and Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha.

5. The Committee decided to cancel its sitting to be held on 2ist April, 1995.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 p.m. to meet again on 250 April, 1995.

*Minutes of Ist—IlIrd mecting relate to matters not included in this Report.


ERRATA TO THE TWENTY-FIRST REPORT ON DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS 1995.96 OF THE DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN
AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT (DEMAND No.49), MINISTRY
OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT.

Page No.t Para 1.6, line3, for “Itegrated" read
"Integrated".

mage NO-& Between para 3.9 and para 4 in the heading
for "Functionnaires" read "Functionaries".

-do- Para 4, line 3, insert the word "child"
between ‘and’ and ‘development’.

-do- Para 4, last line for "Functionnaires"
read “Func tionaries".

Page Noe Para 6.6, line 2, for "volunatary" read
"voluntary".

Page Noeld Para 15, line 3, for “Financial” read
"National":

-do- Para 15, first line, for "ela" read "delay".

Page Noell Para 19.2, line 2, for “oversea” read
"oversee"

-do- Para 19.3, line.2, for "VNP" read "NNP",

for "scnemes" read "schemes".

Page No.14 Para 4, line] for “them" read "then".