~·· 
r 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
TWELFTH REPORT 
ON 
NATIONAL POLICY ON CULTURE-AN APPROACH PAPER, 1992 
Presented to Rajya Sabha on the 25th August, 1994. 
Laid on the Table of Lok S13bha on the 25th August, 1994. 
I 
~ 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST 1994/BHADRA 1916 (SAKA) 
.. 

~ 
• 
l r 

,. 
~\ 
:• 
. •. 
• .. .... 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA· 
RAJYA SABHA · 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
TWELFTH REPORT 
ON 
NATIONAL POLICY ON CULTURE-AN APPROACH PAPER, 1992 
·Presented to Rajya Sabha on the 25th August, 1994. 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 25th August, 1994. 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW 'DELHI 
AUGUST 1994/BHADRA 1916 (SAKA) 

J 
I 

CONTENTS 
Pages 
I. Cornpositibns of the Committee ...................... . 
2. Report .................................... . 
( 
(i) Introductory ............................... . 
(ii) Ohjcctives .............................. ·· .. . 
(iii 1 Pl.m of Action ............................. . 
1. \ppendices .......................... · · · · · · .. · · 
(ii) - (v) 
1- 14 
2-4 
4-5 
5- 14 
15-63 

I I l 
l 
l 
\ 
.. 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(1993-94) 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav- Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury 
4. Dr. Jinendra Kumar Jain 
5. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
6. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
* 7. Shrimati Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel 
8. Shri Md. Salim 
9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
10. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen 
12. Shri Vishnu Kan~ Shastri 
13. Shri P. Upendra 
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
•• 15. Dr. M. Aram 
WKSABHA 
16. Dr. Vishwanatham Kanithi 
17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran 
18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
20. Dr. Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
21. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak 
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure . 
.;~ 
* Nominated l!i« vacancy caused by the death ofShri T. Chandrasekhar Reddy on 15.9.1993. 
•• Nominated Ykk Parliamentary Bulletin Part-IT No. 34301 dated the February 18, 1994. 
(ii) 

24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole 
25. Sbri Datta Meghe 
26. Shri l~hwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
27. Shri K. Thulasiab Vandayar 
28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
29. Shri Inder Jit 
t 
30. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
31. Shri Chinmayanand Swami 
32. Shri Dau DayaJ·Joshi 
33. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda 
34. Dr. K.D. Jeswani 
35. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
36. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
*** 37. Shri Anna Joshi 
38. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
39. Shri Rambadan 
4Q. Shrimati Malini Bhattacharya ...... ,,. 
41. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
42. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
43. Prof. Ummareddy Venkateswarlu 
44. Shri Suraj Mandai 
45. Shri Kanshi Ram 
•' 
***Nominated w.e.f. 26.8.1993 in the vacuncy caused by the resignation of 
Shri Chandrajeet Yadav w.e.f. 13.4.1993. 
(iii) 
• 
\ 

1. Shri P. Upendra- Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Smt. Re~IUka Chowdhury 
4. Miss. Saroj Khaparde 
5. Shri O.P. Kohli 
6. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel 
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
8. Shri Md. Salim 
9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
10. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen 
12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
15. 
LOKSABHA 
16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran 
18. Prof. (smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
20. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
"'21. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
22.'Shri Subash Chandra Nayak 
Z3. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole 
(1994-95) 
(iv) 

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe 
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar 
28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
29. Shri Inder Jit 
30. Shri Anna Joshi 
31. Or. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami 
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda 
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani 
36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
37. D.r. G.L. Kanaujia 
38. Shri Rambadan 
39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
40. ProC Malini Bhattacharya 
41. Shri Ramchandra Dome 
42. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai 
43. Shri Venkal~W6rlu Ummareddy 
44. Shri Suraj Mandai 
45. Shri Kanshi Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secr~ary 
Shri Nand Lal- Deputy Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar- Under Secretary 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu ~Committee Officer 
.. . 
J 
... 
.... 
(v) 

REPORT 
1. The Chairman of the Department-related Parliar:nentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, 
present this Twelfth Report of the Committee on the National Policy on Culture (NPC), laid on the 
TableofLok Sabha on the 5th August, 1992 and on the TableofRajya Sabha on the lOth August, 1992. 
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parlimentary Standing 
Committee, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred* the National Policy on Culture to the Committee 
for examination and report. 
3. The Committee made a study of and deliberated on, the Approach Paper on ~he.National 
Policy on Culture (NPC) (Appendix I) prepared by the Department of Culture, Ministry of Human 
Resource Development. The Committee also considered the "Observations, Comments, and 
Recommendations" made by the Consultative Commitlee attached to the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development and by participants in the National Colloquium organised by the Department of Culture. 
4. The Committee sat in a number of sessions and held in all15 meetings (Appendix II). In these 
sessions, evidence was taken from officials of the Department of Culture, representatives of the three 
National Akademis and the National School of Drama, the Zonal Cultural Centres, selected State 
Governments and personalities connected with art and culture (Appendix III). Opinions of some State 
Governments, well-known cultural institutions and eminent personalities were also elicited through the 
circulation af a questionnaire (Appendix IV). These constitute the basis of the observations, comments 
and recommendations of the Committee. 
5. In its meeting, held· on the 9th June, 1994, the Committee decided to constitute a drafting 
Committee comprising seven members (Appendix V), with Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar and Prof. Malini 
Bhattacharya, as co-convenors, to draft the Committee's Report on the National Policy on Culture. 
The Drafting Committee held five sittings (Appendix VI) and held extensive deliberations on various 
points discussed during the course of meetings of the Committee. In. its meeting, held on the 29th July, 
1994, the Drafting Committee finalised the Draft Report on the National Policy on Culture for 
consideration and adoption by the Committee. 
6. In its meetings, held on the 23rd and 24th August, 1994,the committee considered the Draft 
Report and adopted it for presentation to the house. 
7. The committee places on record its deep appreciation of the commendable work done by the 
Drafting Committee in finalising the Report. The Committee also expresses its thanks to the individuals, 
organisations and the officials of the Department of Culture who placed their views and gave their 
valuable suggestions in the matter which facilitated the Committee's study of the Approach Paper. 
8. The Approach Paper is divided into three parts :­
Part I Introductory 
Part II Objectives 
Part III Plan of Action 
The Committee's views on each of these parts are given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, Para 14.lQQ dated the 17th December, 1993. 

4 
NPC. 
9.11 The Committee finds that several paragraphs of" part I: Introductory" of the Approach 
Paper, specifically paragraphs 1.6 to 1.9, raise issues which should properly find place in "Part II : 
objectives", everi as several paragraphs of "Part II objectives" , specifically paragraphs 2.4 and 2. 5 should 
more appropriately find place in the Introductory Part. Also, it is evident that the points included in 
paragraphs 3.36 to 3.41 under the sub-heading "Resources and Review" should be largely incorporated 
in Part II. While the Approach Paper has not dealt, in any details, with a review mechanism for the Plan 
of Action, the final draft of NPC should provide for such a review mechanism and the incorporation 
thereof in the Plan of Action. · 
PART II- OBJECTIVES 
10.1 The focus of the Part relating to Objectives must be on preserving the quintessence of our 
millennia! heritage in the face of the challenge that is being mounted by global market forces and the 
emerging global village. The terminology used at paras 2.6 to 2.10 deculturalisation, dehumanisum, 
alienation and community participation need to be further elaborated. Similarly, the relationship ~ 
between tradition and modernity is required to be linked for strengthening the Cultural heritage. 
Culture is multi-faceted and multi-dimensional encompassing knowledge, values, ethos, heritage, " 
beliefs, art, morals, law, customs, rituals, ceremonies, festivals and any other capabilities and habits 
acquired by persons as members of society. We must neither equate modernisation with Westernisation 
nor must we attempt to shut ourselves off from influences which have their provenance elsewhere. We 
must contin:ue the ancient Indian tradition of assimiliation and synthesis, openness and tolerance, 
broadmindedness and self-confidence, which had characterised our civilization over the centuries. 
Equally, we must preserve that unique tradition of unity in diversity which has given us our pluralistic 
national ethos, evident in the greatest respect, care and concern for each of our numerous Cultural 
traditions, without which there can be no larger national identity. Sometimes we have found that in the 
process of development there is a tendency towards homogenisation and uniformity, leading to the 
marginalisation of Cultural forms and creative expression of linguistic, ethnic and religious minorities. 
Such marginalisation also affects economically and socially disadvantaged groups. Countering such 
marginalisation, even while strenthening national unity, must be a crucial elemen~ of the NPC. 
Culture and Urbanisation: 
10.2 The Committee wishes to underline that there is a process of urbanisation going on space 
which can neither be reversed nor even, perhaps, should be reversed. However, this rapid urbanisation, 
which already covers nearly a quarter oflndia's population, could have, and is having, serious deleterious 
consequences for many of our cultural traditions . The NPC must squarely address these issues and 
ensur e that urbanisation does not lead to the atrophy of invaluable art forms and Cultural expressions. 
At the same time, the NPC must seek to preserve the creative vigour of our people which must not be 
allowed to succumb imitatively to cultural forms imported from elsewhere. · 
Spirituality· and Artistic Wealth: 
10.3 The Committee notes that running through the immense diversity of India's Cultural 
traditions is a rich vein of spirituality, which is shared by all communiti es and restricted to nos pecific 
denominations of faith. This tradition of spirituality must be conserved. At the same time creative forms 
• -

I 
'\ 
.. - . . . -.. 
• • • •• ·-- - - ••• • • ••• - + -··. - --
5 
that relate to our material life, love of nature, affection and compassion towards fellow-beings, arrl the 
everyday productive activities of the common people, which enrich and activise humane feelings and 
imagination, should be encouraged. Side by side with this popular tradition of Secular Culture, there is 
a rich body of realist/ experimental works in literature, painting, music, dance, theatre, cinema, and so 
forth, which are contributing significantly to the modern .and post-modern phases in Indian-culture. All 
this artistic wealth-traditional, modern and futuristic-must be preserved and its values and practices 
encouraged through proper institutional support. 
Commercialisation of Culture : 
10.4 It should also be a key objective of the NPC to foster a creative resistance and response 
to the consumerism and commercialisation of culture which are the inevitable consequences of 
accelerated economic deve,lopment and profound social change. This can be achieved only by a 
conscious effort to synchronise Cultural evolution and economic development in such a manner as will 
enable us to advance economically, without losing the soul of India. Much of what i_s extensively 
marketed in the cultural sector, particularly through the mass media, comprise the most vulgar and 
debased material, both tndigenous and foreign; this tendt?ncy is bound to grow with the advance of 
market operations in Culture. Therefore, a major effort of the State should be in the direction of support 
to serious artistic practices in traditional, popular and realist experimental spheres. While all 
opportunities for the exchange of cultural experiences at the international level are desirable, the 
vulgarisation of indigenous Cultural forms for the promotion of the tourist industry has to be withstood 
and needs to be discouraged. Culture does not mean heritage alone the Culture of yore or of the hoary 
past; it is omnipresent, vibrant and all-pervasive, giving now, as in the past and future, a sense of purpose 
to human existence. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the NPC should underline the 
necessity of estbalishing active linkages between age-old tradition and the contemporary aspirations. 
Linkages of the National Policy on Culture with New Policy on Education and Panchayats and 
Nagarpalikas : 
10.5 The Committee carmot but express its profound concern over the fact that the centrepiece 
of the Approach Paper appears to be the proposal for establishment of Bharatiya Sanskriti Parishad. 
In fact, the core of the NPC should be the linking together of three major policy initiatives, of recent 
times ; the new policy on education, the 73rd and 74th Constitution amendments relating to the 
Panchayats and Nagarpalikas and the proposed NPC. It is in the concerting of these three major policy 
initiatives, establishing linkages between the NPC and activities of direct concern to Culture undertaken 
by other Ministries and-Departments that the NPC will really come into its own. In other words the 
thrust of the NPC should not be in the direction of merely thinking with institutions or encouraging the 
proliferation of new institutions but rather towards setting larger and clearer goals in the sector of 
culture for the second half century of democracy and all-round development in independent India. 
PART Ill - PLAN OF ACTION 
11.1 The Committee focussed on the broad themes that should be dealt with in the NPC's Plan 
of Action rather than with some of the specifics and details which have over-burdened the Approach 
Paper. Therefore, the Committee prefers to deal with the larger issues rather than undertake a 
paragraph by paragraph exegesis of the Plan of Action as set out in Part III. 

6 
Coordinating Mechanism : 
11.2 With regard to the proposal for the establishment of a statutory body to be called the 
Bharatiya Sanskriti Parishad, the Committee is unable to agree with the view that such an o'ver- arching, 
top-heavy body is called for. The Committee is glad to note from the evidence of the Secretary to tl'c 
Department of Culture th~t Government is not committed to the specific proposal of a Bharatiya 
Sanskriti Parishad and would be prepared to co.nsider any alternative mechanism for coordination. 
11.3 One major reason for which the Committee disf.wours the proposal for a Bharatiya 
Sanskriti Paris had is that the autonomy and primacy of the three existing Akademis must be preserved; 
equally, tne autol!omy and the primacy of the State counterparts ' •f the Akademis must be preserved; 
·and the role being played by sister Cultural institutions, both at the Centre and in the States, must not, 
in any way, be undermined. If a new body is superimposed on the existing institutions, this cannot rut 
diminish th~ importance and freedom _of action of these institutions ; at the same time, such a 
superimposed body _cannot but draw away to itself precious financial resources that would be much 
better spent on promoting Cultural activities and creative expression all over the country than in setting 
up shiny new institutions in the Capital. 
· 11.4 Further, the Committee is definitely of the view that the trend towards the centralisation 
of fund disbursement and decision-making in cultural matters, which is already so regrettably in 
evidence, must be firmly resisted. The NPC will validate itse.lf most if it promotes the decentralisation 
of.grant disbursement activites, and the involvement of the local bodies estblished under the 73rd and 
74th Constitutional Amendments in a dynamic manner for future Cultural development in the Country. 
_ 11._5 While disfavouring the proposal for a Bharatiya Sanskriti Parishad, the Committee fully 
appreci~tes the concern expressed in the Approach Paper for an appropriate coordinating mechanism 
among the numerous institutions at the nationql, State and local levels which are involved in Cultural 
devlopmen-t. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in elaborating the NPC, the Government 
seck. to work out the framework, not of a separate body, but of a coordinating mechanism, involving 
the democratically elected Presidents of the three Akademis ; representatives (but not bureaucratic 
nominees) of,. ihe sister Cultural Institutions , including· the National School of Drama, the Zonal 
Cultural Centres, ICCR, IGNCA and State Government as well as representatives of Cultural 
Organisations at the State level, and six eminent artists two each selected by the three Akademis. 
11.6 Instead of ad hoc nominations to this coordinating mechanism from the artistic community, 
it would be proper to let the Akademis themselves determine their own representation on the body. 
What is of particular importance is that the mechanism must allow for the representation of neglected 
segments of the artistic community, the bhule bisre ka!nkm: who are the torch-bearers of India's vibrant 
folk, tribal and rural trad itions. It is equally important that the local bodies, whose voice has never so 
far been heard in Delhi, be given full and adequate representation in the co-ordinating mechanism. 
11.7 A key question that the NPC would have to consider is the relationship between the Central 
Government and the State Government, on the one hand, and this coordinating mechanism on the 
other: If the coordinating mechanism is to represent the a·utonomous view of the artistic and Cultura I 
community, and act in an advisory relationship with the Central and State Governments, it might have 
been desirable to avoid any direct participation of the Central and State Governments in the 
coordinating mechanism. In practical terms, however, the participation of official or ministerial 
.. 

7 
representatives of the Central and State Governments in the coordinating mechanism might be 
necessary in a ·limited and specific role for the effective functioning of the coordinating mechanism. 
11.8 Keeping in view the factors mentioned above, the Chairman of rhe coordinating mechanism 
could be the Minister of Human Resource Development (Minister inch~rge.of Culture) with the three· 
heads of the Akademis functioning as working Presidents. in rotation annually. The coordinating 
mechanism should be assisted by a ~uitable permanent secretariat. 
Akademis & Zonal Cultural Centres : 
11.9 The Committee is astonished to note that the Plan of Action treats the three National · 
Akademis and Zonal Cultural Centres in a casual and peripheral manner. The Committee stresses that 
the NPC must not result in the marginalisation of these institutions. The Natrona! Akademis and ther 
State counterparts are crucial to the fostering of the creative endeavours of our artistit: mmmunity. The 
Zonal Cultural Centres are the crucial instruments for the dissemination of our cullure to mofussil, 
rural, tribal and remote parts of our Country, as well as to the economically and socially clisadvant aged 
sections of our population. These institutions must th~refore, continue to play the central role incultural 
development that they have been playing since their foundatiol'1. Their autonomy must be preserved in 
full, even while ensu ring internal democracy and transparency in their working. 
11.10 As. regards the. National Akademis, the Committee is distressed to find that the 
recommendations of the high-powered Haksar Committee have been treated in a casual and even 
cavalier manner by the Akademis and the Government as well. The NPC provides the opportunity for 
Government to refract the experience of the Akademis through the prism of the Haksar Committee's 
recommendations with a view to giving a sense of direction and purpose, as well as renewed institutional 
vigour, which the Akademis require to fulfil the high hopes which the nation vests in them. 
11.11 The Akademis have sometimes been accused of having fostered vested interests in culture 
and of an autocratic mode of functioning which defeats the basic purpose of encouraging creative 
freedom and providing wider access to cultural experience for the people. These tendencies must be 
identified and counteracted in the NPC. 
11 .12 As for the Zonal Cultura l Centres, the Committee stresses that the role of dissemination 
and inter-zonal, as well as intra- zonal, cross -fertilisation envisaged for them cannot be under- estimated. 
The nation has no other equivalent mechanism for undertaking these vital functions. It is true that the 
.ZCCs, in actual practice, have lost much of their intial zeal and seems sometimes to have moved away 
from their original objective. That only underlines the need to establish a high powered Review 
Committee to thoroughly look into the ZCCs and sec how they <.:an be rd'ashioned and refurbished to 
pursue the objective for whit:h they were founded. In particular, it seems essential that the ZCCs be 
de-bureaucratised and given a leadership from the cultural community itself which would be able to 
enthuse creative artistes all over the country, nctwo~k creative activity within and between zones, and 
reat:h out the numerous different cultural traditions of India to all our people living everywhere, 
however remote the ham let or however deprived the locality. 
Education and Culture : 
11.13 Culture should be inter-linked with education. Art should be made as one of the 
compulsory subjects right [rom primary to high school level. At least one period per week should be 

8 
provided for cultural activities in schools. Films, lectures and demonstrat ions by eminent personalit ies 
in the form of music, dance, drama and literature should be organised in schools. The committee a 
recommends that education should be used as a tool to infuse, develop and disseminate culture. Students 
may also be taken to historically important places, museums, and cultural exhibitions to inculcate and 
enthuse in them a sense of appreciation and affinity to culture. 
11.14 The NPC may consider the concept of neighbourhood schools as a means of establishing 
a nexus between the home and the school which would foster vibrant Cultura l awareness without 
imposing an additional curricular burden on the child. Here again, the aim should be not an artificill 
homogenous standard imposed from above, but encouragement to the full flowering of various cultural 
traditions represented by school children in a particular locality. 
11.15 Experience, in Cultural activities should be made a pre-condition for recruitment of 
teachers and in-service reorientation should be arranged for teachers to ensure better appreciation for 
culture in the younger generation. 
11.16 The Secretary, Department of Culture, during the course of his oral evidence tendered 
before the Committee, submitted that the view of ·the Educat ion Ministry has been to start teaching 
music and craft in schools on a pilot basis during the current year and that they have written tot~ State 
Governments also in this regard. 
11.17 The Committee recommends that all out efforts be made to ensure its speedy 
implementation. Depending upon the need of schools one or more full/part time Arts and Crafts 
Teachers may be engaged. 
11.18 The traditional concept of guru-shishya Parampara envisages a relationship between the 
tc:acher and the taught which goes beyond class room instruction. Even in traditional forms of training 
it would be difficult to adhere wholly to this model today. A broader exposure to different art forms 
may be more desirable in today's situat ion. But fostering of a closer and more comprehensive social 
relationship between the teacher and the taught, in whatever form, should be encouraged (o counteract 
the effects of commercialisation of education and culture. The old form of one Guru and many disci pies 
may be changed to a new form of disciples and groups of Gurus teaching subjects or arts. Such activities 
can be conducted by different institutions for different time interva ls, 
11.19 Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCR 1) is doing a commendab le job in taking 
culture to the students and teachers but it being a solitary institution of its kind with a skelton network, 
much more remains to be achieved. Therefore, the Committee recommends that as envisaged in the 
plan of action (para 3.2) the network of C.C.R.T. be considerably expanded and strenghtened. In view 
of the Committee's observations on decentralisation, in the succeeding paragraphs, the NPC must 
outline schemes for carrying the work of C.C.R.T. more intensively to the State level and then to the 
district level. 
Decentralisation: The role of the Pancbayats and Nagarp alikas: 
11.20 The Approach Paper says: decen tralisation is a key factor in Cultura l promotion'. While 
accepting this, the Committee affirms that true decentralisation cannot be achieved mere ly by the 
Government handing over its responsibilities to autonomous and voluntary bodies. The extent and 
quality of community involvement and participat ion going down to the lowest level must be the measure 
,. 

11 
confronting the artistes and art forms in the process of modernisation, urbanisation and 
commercialisation, and to nurture them in the soil from where they get their sustenance. Secretary. 
Culture during the course of his oral evidence, stated that one of the things taken up by the department 
within the policy framework as an Action Plan is the documentation of folk and tribal Culture. While 
fully recognising the importance of documentation, the Commitee stresses that the NPC must spell out 
in whose interest such documentation is being undertaken. Hitherto, documentation has been the 
closed and exclusive preserve of a few scholars; the public hardly gets to know even about the existence 
of documentation. The tribals themeselves have virtually no access to this documentation. A living link, 
therefore, needs to be established between the documentation that must necessarily be undertaken in 
a scientific manner and the artistes who are objects of such documentation. The Comittee is of the view 
that in States where there is sizeable concentration of tribal population, the NPC should provide f<.r a 
separate Akademi for tribal arts and culture. 
M!dia and Culture : 
11.30 The Committee is deeply d·isturbed at the virtual absence of any reference in the Approach 
Paper to the impact of the mass media on Cultural development, especially as this is in striking contrast 
to the primacy accorded to the subject of "Mass Media!f.V./Films" in the "Observations/Comments" 
made by various personalities in the Approach Paper (see page 11) Nothing in the recent past has had 
such dramatic and deleterious impact on our Cultural traditions as the invasion of the mass media, both 
indigenous and foreign. An important objective of the NPC is to evolve a creative response to this rew 
challenge which alone will enable us to preserve our Cultural continuity with the past, while rejecting 
the baneful and integrating the desirable, in the influences which arc entering our country through the 
new electronic technology. Should we fail to evolve a sufficiently creative responses to this challc nge, 
there is every danger of India succumbing to an imitative culture and losing its indigenous creative 
genius. It will avail us nothing if we attain material progress but lose our soul in the bargain. There is 
no way in which we can shut ourselves off from the consequences of satellite technology. Retracting 
into a shell is not the answer. At the same time, passively succumbing to the invasion is not the an;wer 
either. Even while emphasising the need for a creative response to this invasion, the NPC must sec oow 
we can avail ourselves of this technology to promote an understanding of our cultural heritage among 
the masses of our people at large, as well as take the message of India to the outside world. On the 
domestic front, this will require the conscious and deliberate use of the electronic media for the 
dissemination of our many rich regional cultural and linguistic traditions within the region and in the 
country at large. It will also call f01 the deployment of numerous local T.V. video and Radio Production 
centres, especially in remote and rural areas, for local communities to actively participate in Radio and 
T.V. programmes of their own making, instead of being reduced, as at present, to merely passive 
recipients o~ programmes produced, broadcast and telecast from elsewhere, many of which have little 
relevance to their lives. Such production centres, with responsibility delegated to grass root bodies, 
would be the ultimate answer to the dangers of consumerism, commercialism, heedless Westernisation. 
and imitative Cultural modes. 
11.31 This will also counteract the tokenism which now represents the media attitude towards 
both folk and Classical Culture. A few small slots in a crowd of commerical entertainment respect 
neither the artistes nor their public The proliferation of channels on Doordarshan must be utilised to 
encourage both tradition and experiment in rural and urban art forms. At the same time, global satelitc 

·- - ··· ·-- .... . . . .. .. -· .- .... ... ..... . --· ... ........ . . 
12 
technology offers us an unprcedcnted opportunity of disseminating our culture to the world at large; 
it is a challenge to which our electronic media must rise, in concert, with the Department of culture, 
whose duty it is to ensure that Indian global T.V. does not become a pale imitation of existing 
Western-dominated networks. 
11.32 The Committee recommends that the NPC should explore measures to make the mass 
media an effective instrument for the dissemination of culture. The emphasis should be on the 
production of serials, documentaries and films relating to important personalities, places, festivals, 
literature and the arts. The mass media should not promote superstitious and magical belief systems. 
Doordarhan should use innovative methods to attract attention to the classsical arts. Children should 
be exposed to the diversity of India's cultural and linguistic traditions through translations into their 
mother tongues of the poetry and the songs of great patriots and poets. 
11.33 The committee expresses its serious concern over the ever increasing and ' reckless 
exhibition of violence, anti-social activities and obscenity through the cinema, the worst sufferers of 
which are the younger generation whose finer sensibilities are being coarsened and creative facultie; 
dulled. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the NPC should address these issues and 
discourage these trends. 
Cultuml Complex: 
11.34 While building up a national multicultural complex in Delhi, under the aegis of IGNCA, 
which must be expedited and made fully effective, there must be no duplication of this. Devising schemes 
for building smaller Cultural complexes in newly developing and backward areas of Delhi, as well as in 
other states, for use by more deprived sections of the population, must from an integral part of the 
NPC. 
11.35 The Commitee feels that State Goverments should be given financial assistance for 
contruction of al.lditoria, cultural complexes, libraries, museums, art galleries, Cultural, hostels, etc. The 
Committee reiterates it~ earlier suggestions made to the Department of Culture that the State 
Goverments should be assisted in setting up multi-purpose stadia in the district and !-)Jock headquarters. 
These can be used for sports during day time and for Cultural activities in the evenings. At the same 
time, the scheme for a Central library of Culture and fine arts may act as a focal point for the 
documentation, dissemination and extension of our Cultural heritage. 
Crofts: 
11.36 The Committee is astonished to note that the Department of Culture has prepared an 
entire Approch Paper for a National Policy on Culture without making any referance to our rich 
tradition of crafts. The craftsmenship oflndia is one of our most precious legacies. This is a legacy under 
threat fro'!l two opposite directions. On the one hand, the old patrons of high-class craftsmanship, who 
were the feudal elements of the past, are no longer in a position to offer -their patronage. On the other 
hand, the new patterns of craftsmanship, the market, including the export market have encouraged such 
crass commercialisation that craftsmanship, is withering away in a blind pursuit of profit. Many State 
Emopria have wittingly or unwittingly, encouraged the market trend towards inferior craftsmenship for 
non-discerning buyer. The Committee is firmly of the opinion that the National policy on Culture must 
address itself to the challenges facing our traditions of craftsmanship and ensure that these outstanding 
0 0 

13 
traditions are not only conserved but given every encouragement to pursue excellence as a goal in itself. 
Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts (lGNCA): 
11.37 The Committee notes that the Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts (IGNCA) has 
been established as a centre of excellence for both research and documentation as well as for 
presentation and promotion of the different art forms for which India is renowned. It would be a grave 
mistake to du~licate this effort by establishing similar additional cultural facilities in the vicinity of 
IGNCA itself, in the name of National Cultural Complex. At the same time, the Committee is 
constrained to observe that even ten years after the martyrdom of Prime Minister lndirjl Gandhi, 
IGNCA is far from being fully operational. The committee is of the view that the NPC should careful~ 
delineate the position of IGNCA in the overall scheme of things and ensure the necessary backing for 
it to come into its own. 
Festivals oflndi.'l: 
11.38 The NPC should recognise the potential of Festivals of India in spreading India's culture 
abroad and emphasis should be laid on proper organisation of these festivals and rational selection of 
countries keeping in view the special appeal Indian Culture has in thos~untries. Care should be taken 
for effective utilisation of the festivals for propagation of India's Culture abroad. 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) : 
11.39 The Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) is the nerve centre of our cultural 
diplomacy. The Committee understands the immense potential avaliablc in ICCR to spread and 
disseminate culture which has not so far been fully utilised. 
11.40 The Council should be strengthened and the External Affairs. Ministry should be 
persuaded to grant more money for the organisation to undertake multifarious activities. 
Archaeological Survey or India (ASI): 
11.41 The Archaeological Survey of India is concerned with conservation and preservation of 
ancient monuments, exploration and excavation of ancient sites,study of inscriptions, research and 
training in differents areas of archaeology. About 25% of the total budget of the Department goes to 
this institution. However, even after one hundred and twenty-five years of its existence, ASI has not 
been able to cover all parts of the country as far excavation and exploration of ancient histrocial sites 
are concerned. The Committee recommends that the NPC should focus special attention on ASI. 
11.42 The Committee is also of the view that nothing was mentioned in the Plan of action about 
the new schemes for preservation of monuments. There is a need for direct involvement of the State 
Governments. It is the primary responsibility of the Goverment to protect the antiques and art trearures 
and prevent their being smuggled out of the country. Para 3.11 aims at protecting antiques. The law 
mentioned in this para should be further stregthcned and revised to make it more effective. The NPC 
should focus attention on this aspect. 
Voluntary Organisations : 
11.43 The Committee cannot but note with considerable concern the contradiction between the 

14 
apparent emphasis in the philosophy of the Approach paper on "arm's length intervention" by the State 
on Cultural matters and the manner in which the Approach Paper, at para 3.13, insists that purely 
volunta1y organisation like INTACH "have to dovetail their activities with that of Government". It is 
contradiction of such a nature that must be removed when the NPC is finalised. Clearly, INTACH must 
be allowed its full independence and autonomy and not compelled to "dovetail" its activities with those 
of the Department of Culture. 
I 
11.44 The Committee is also of the view that the activities of voluntary organisations involved 
in promotion of Culture need to be encouraged, However, while providing grants to such voluntary 
organisations, the reports submitted by them detailing their performance and activities should be 
verified. it should be ensured that the benefit of these grants goes to ~e artistic community rather than 
meeting the administrative expenses. 
12 The Committee is sub mitting its report after an indepth study of varied aspects of the Indian 
cultural scene. It hopes that its observation and recommendations will be implemented in letter and 
spirit, while formulating the National policy on Culture. 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST 24, 1994 
P.UPENDRA 
CHAIRMAN 
Department- Related 
Parliamentary Standing 
Committee On Human 
Resourse Development. 

15 
APPENDIX- I 
CHAPTER I 
AN APPROACH PAPER ON NATIONAL POLICY ON CULTURE 
PART I 
INTRODUCTORY 
1.1 Culture permeates every sphere of human activity, determines and governs life and pattern 
oflndian society in diverse regions and equally diverse fields. It is a crucial part oh.levelopmentdeserving 
careful attention substantial investments. Although the Government of India have spent in the last 35 
years six hundered thousand crores on development, the amounts spent on Culture have usually been 
around 0.11 percent of its annual expenditure. It is evident that investment in improving that aspect of 
the quality ·of life namely the cultural dimension has not been commensurate with the board social 
needs and its intrinsic value. 
1.2 The Country has re~ched a stage in its economic and technical development when the 
Cultural dimension needs to be brought into sharper focus and strengthening. 
1.3 The cultural underplanning the developmental effort has now been internationally 
recognised. As a report accepted by UNESCO's Inter-Governmental Committee of the World Decade 
for Cultural Development has stated : 
"It is most important to understand the term development in its philosophical and conceptual 
meaning. Development has all too often been perceived as modernisation patterned after a 
particular dominant design, while in fact, there is a need for a multi-Cultural and pluralistic 
conception in which different ways of living, different belief systems, (and) values are 
accommodated to reach the ultimate goals of various communities. Modernisation does not 
mean the mechanical imitation of a particular way of life .... The concept of development has to 
be redefined in these terms. In particular, it would be necessary also to emphasise the linkage 
of the development elements to Cultural elements, including local relevance, relevance to 
geographical and environmental factors, historical traditions, traditional knowledge and skills, 
etc. The importance of the aesthetic and artistic dimension of life should also be fully 
recognised ... The motivation of the people who are the beneficiaries and participants in the 
development process is of utmost importance in sucessful design and implementation of 
programmes. Cultural factors play an important role in energising the motivation calling forth 
requisite participation and are thus crucial to sustainable development in which new concepts 
and ideas are absorbed in a permanent manner. 
Final Report of the Inter-Governmental Committee of the World Decade for Cultural 
Development. Second Regular Session. Annex. IV PAGE 3. 
1.4 A stage in development has arrived when the importance of culture has to be clearly and 
candidly defined, the area of public intervention in Culture identified, the role of State in Culture 
assessed and readjusted, importance of societal and voluntary efforts in this area recognised and f u rthcr 
encouraged. 
With this aim in view the Govt. of India have decided to formulate a National Policy on Culture 

.. : :· ,• 
16 
basically to outline conditions conducive to more satisfactory self- expression and participation in 
cultural life by the Indian People at large. The policy recognises the need to develop strategies to 
sensitise people, particularly the young to creative expression in a framework of values which are 
generally accepted as those which enrich the quality of life. 
It is also to devise strategies to promote the development of the various forms of creative 
expression; to prese!V'e what is of abiding value in the manifestations of creative expression through 
the centuries; to document forms of expression which may be changing or giving way to others; and to 
recognise the diversity in these forms which taken together constitute what can be called the culture of 
India. 
1.5 More actively the policy proposes that as far as possible he State should play only a catalytic 
role in the development and progress of culture, its role bieng what may be called "arm's length 
inte!V'ention it. It also should resist the wide-spread coarsening of sensibility, loss of sence of \alues, 
erosion of pluralistic vision and reduction of vast masses into passive recipients rather than active 
participants in processes of culture. 
1.6 Cultui·e is a central instrument of discovering, intergrating and asserting the national identity 
of India which is truly and inevitably pluralistic. Our culture, while being lndocentric, has always been 
open to global in£1uences and interaction. While resisting any colonization of mind, the policy believes, 
our culture should remain in constant dialogue with the world at large in the realm of ideas, perceptions, 
media and expressions. 
1.7 Cultural enrichment can only take place if values of complexity, subtlety, elegance, beauty 
are cared for. Essentially there is no antipathy between aesthetic sensibility and scientific. temper, The 
policy would lay stress on this more ~holesome view. 
1.8 In the current context of dissension and growing intolerance, it is imperative that the 
composite character of our Culture, the crucial contribution made by various communities to it and its 
inclusive, humans and humanising ethos are highlighted and widely brought home to all. The policy 
would insist that Indian culture cannot be identified with any single tradition and consists of an ever 
enriching multiplicity of many traditions. 
1.9 Growth has frequently been conceived in quantitative terms, without taking into account its 
necessary qualitative dimention, namely the satisfaction of man's spiritual and cultural aspiration. Any 
cultural policy should restore to development its profound, human significance and should 
democratica.lly provide for enjoying of artistic excellence by all communities and the whole population. 
PART II 
OBJECTIVES 
2. ·1 While attention to and investment in culture may have been far below expectation, it has to 
be recognised that there is a cultural pattern in India where interaction has taken and continues to take 
place amongst regions, between different art disciplines and levels of society, from the most affluent to 
the most weaker sections of the society at the urban, rural and tribal levels. Dislectics of continuity and 
change, of stability and innovation, and of individuality and inter-dependence have been the defining 
feature of cultural processes in our time. The policy is an attempt to delineate a blue print for areas 

' ·, 
17 
which need urgent attention and public support. Large areas broadly covered in Culture are engaging 
both attention and action by individuals, the creative community and numerous voluntary agencies. The 
policy recognises, therefore, that it shall be dealing not with the total spread and complexity of c ullure 
but only with some of its aspects and segments. 
2.2. India's cultural diversity is too well known to need discovery or recognition. However, this 
enriching diversity should be recognised in all plans for development and the strategies for the 
protection and promotion of culture. There should be no attempt to give any single direction or 
ideological orientation or prescribe any standards in culture which is indeed the true area of societal 
action and consensus. While diversities and multiplicities must be allowed free play, this should happen 
in an overall context of harmony and consonance. 
2.3 In keeping with the various changes and mutations which have come about, there is need to 
revive and reintegrate the holistic vision of culture in India in such a way that no segment, area or 
community feels excluded and each one is encouraged to freely contribute towards identifying, 
promoting, fostering and projecting Cultural growth and enrichment. Care would have to be taken for 
promoting and projecting cultural contribution of the weaker sections and minorities in all parts of 
India. 
2.4 The old notion patronag~ should be replaced by that of puhlic support and there should be 
effective coordination between the activities of various agencies in the states and the Centre with a 
clear recognition that more than anywhere else decentralisation is a key factor in cultural promotion 
and that an important role is and should continue to be played by individuals and voluntary agencies. 
2.5 Both education and media of mass communication arc playing important role and 
participating in the society at large and are crucial culturising agencies. One of the objectives of the 
policy is to constantly emphasises the cultural consequences of education and media, and to deepen 
and strengthen their cultural components. It would also aiin to see that consumerist tendencies are mt 
allowed to create cultural distortions and tensions. 
2.6 As stated in the National Policy on Education, 1986, "deculturalisation, del:umanism and 
alienation must be avoided at all costs and education and culture must bring about a fine synthesis 
between change oriented technologies in the country's community of cultural traditions. Efforts should 
be made particularly to enable children and youth to develop sensitivity to duty, harmony and 
refinement". Stress would have to be laid on the growth of cultural literacy along with vcrballitera<.:y. 
It would also aim "at interweaving into the formal and non-formal systems of education at all levels , of 
the content of culture and escalation and sharpening of cultural inputs in educational curricula with a 
view to arouse deeper interest in cultural heritage, to provide free creativity and to foster elemcn Is of 
composite culture". Respect and striving for creativity and excellence must be inculcated from early 
level of education. 
2.7 It would be necessary to ensure communtiy participation at all level including formal, non-forma I and 
informal agencies such as panchayats, local bodies, etc. Literacy is an essential condition for people's cultural 
development. 
2.8 NTC would promote evaluation of a dynamic relationship between tradition, including the 
pan Indian . and Asian traditions, and modernity. 
2.9 It would wish to preserve cultural heritage in its different ways recognising . the need of 

~ ~ .. - - ·- - --- -.. ... . . ··--·· -····· ···-- -··· ·- .. ... -- --· ..... ---··· -- ...... .. ..... ... . . 
18 
preserving and documenting those aspects of classical, rural, tribal and community culture traditions 
which are in danger of extinction on account of social change, market forces, technological onslaught 
etc. particularly of those elements which have so far been sustained through oral communications. 
2.10 It would promote concrete steps to be taken to provide wider opportunities to citizens both 
rural and urban of meaningful and continuing exposure to various forms of cultural manifestations. 
2.11 It would aim at use of existing infrastructural facilities in a more coordinated manner to 
provide multi points for promotion, exploration and conservation of various forms of creative 
expression. For better and maximal use of funds and infrastructure, duplication of work should be 
scrupulously avoided. 
2.12 It would recognise the need to preserve the tradition as also the need for new ideas, new 
combination, original interpretation etc. It would encourage openness to new forms and manifestations, 
Photography, cinema and contemporary architecture need to be seen as new cultural expressions. 
PART III 
PLAN OF ACTION 
With a view to attaining broadly the objectives stated earlier, the following plan of action is 
suggested. · 
3.1 Although the state has a very definite responsibility to foster and nurture the seminal values 
which manifest themselves in creative expression and endeavour in different ways, the direct state 
intervention needs to be avoided. The state must provide funds and facilities for such activit-ies, on a 
scale commensurate with perceived needs in the context of the integral link between them and the phms 
to improve the quality of life. However, the state must not be involved in any direct grant giving activities. 
Such avoidance would also eliminate various forms of intervention such as bureaucratic and political. 
While taking care that a fool-proof mechanism for accountability for the use of public funds is agreed, 
it is proposed to set up a statutory body to be called ''Bhartiya Sanskriti Parishad". 
It would be created by law and funds will be made available to it also by law. It would place a 
report on its activities before Parliament annually and its accounts will be audited by the CAG. 
The proposed Council would consist of top level experts from various fields of culture and would 
evolve a well thought out system of valuation of works of the various grant receiving institutions whether 
voluntary or set up by the Central Government, and for which they would be receiving grant from the 
Council. The Parishad's relationship with the three national Akademies and other institutions would 
also be provided for in the proposed law. 
3.2 Centre for Cultural Resources and Training should be adequately strengthened to play a 
more active role. Organisations such as Spic Macay must be provided generous financial support & the 
various procedural forms etc., be simplified. 
Cultural education needs to be introduced in schools not as an additional but as an integrated 
component in curriculum teaching. The aim should be to make child aware of the ancient traditions 
which have survived and are woven into the very fabric of the lives of the people living in this continent, 
to familiarise the youth with the philosophical concepts and images based on centuries of evolution of 

19 
aesthetic values, creativity and thought. 
3.4 The students also need exposure to nature and man made environment and it be encouraged 
through creative activitie,s and conservation of both. Suitable revision/ strengthening of school curTicula 
from this point of view will have to be taken and cultural training be made essential part of teachers 
training programmes. On the lines of sports hostels in various States, setting up of artists hostels may 
be considered, where young talents from schools may be picked up and trained in various art forms. 
3.5 Languages of India have been very valuable vehicles of both cultural articulation and 
dissemination. Development of linguistic skills and a sense of pride in mother-tongues must be 
encouraged at all levels. 
Learning of our classical languages and training in traditional disciplines available only in them 
should be seen as pres"ervation of an important aspect of our cultural heritage and it-s continuing 
relevance. 
3.6 In view of the vast number of cultural organisations and agencies needing speciliscd 
management, a programme of training in cultural administration should be evolved and implemented. 
Agencies such as CCRT, liP A, State Institutes of Public Administration and Institutes of Management 
could be involved in this work. 
3.7 Education in various forms of culture such as fine arts, music, dance, theatre, literature etc., 
needs to be critically reviewed and substantially recorganised with a clear annunciation of aims and 
objects and teaching methods, etc. The time tested system of G1.1ru Shishya Parampara should be 
strengthene~, widened and strongly supported. 
3.8 The development and promotion of art education imply not only the formulation of specific 
programmes designed to foster artistic appreciation and support groups or institutions engaged in 
creation and dissemination but also the encouragement of activities that will stimulate public awareness 
of the social importance of art and intellectual creation. 
3.9 With an infinitely rich cultural heritage, thousand~ of monuments, historical relics, wealth of 
sculptures and artifacts, surviving traditions of performing arts, philosophy ideas and literature, 
preservation of this cultural property and its proper conservation would constitute a major area of aciion 
in the NPC. 
While monuments of national importance and state importance would continue to be looked 
after by the Government of1ndia and the various State Govts, due to financial and fiscal constrain Is 
of funds, number of monuments remain unprotected and it will be important either for the Central or 
the State Govts. to protect all the monuments worthy of protection. The local people through voluntary 
groups, the panchayat system and other institutional structures must be the primary guardians of what 
·is, in a sense, their patrimony. The centrally sponsored scheme for the purpose with matching grants 
provided by either side would be launched. 
Adequate protection to existing monuments through well trained and motivated watch and ward 
staff and the development of more site museums will be taken up as an on going activity. 
3.10 Museums have to become active centres for increasing awareness to the people regarding 
our heritage and the preservation of monuments. They would be encouraged to have programmes and 
suitable campaigns through the media will be taken up. Popular awareness of conserving our 

20 
monuments is to be an important item of the Policy. 
3.11 Th.e law relating to the protection of our antiquities and art treasures would be further 
strengthened to remove inadequacies in implimentation and to block all loopholes. Individual and 
corporate agencies would be encouraged to collect and exhibit art objects through a suitable process 
of regulat:on. The Municipal bodies as also the Panchayati Samities would also be encouraged to take 
up local-level museums of arts, artifacts and archaeological remains. 
3.12 Action would be taken for the declaration of heritage zones in respect of identifiable and 
compact areas which have large bodies of significant historical and cultural property. Such zones should 
be protected fully against the location of commercial and industrial establishments and the other spread 
effects of urbanisation. 
3.13 The management and protection of cultural property demand the availability of suitably 
trnined technical personnel. Particularly important is the need for training personnel in the rapidly 
expanding fields of conservation of cultural property. Conservation techniques are now highly 
developed in such specific areas as painting, textiles, stone objects, leather, furnitu~e, paper and palm 
leaf utilising the latest available technology. Devising suitable technical ·courses for these areas and 
making them available in selected technical institutions would be a major objective so that we 
incorporate the services of the latest technolo!,ry and well-trained personnel in the task of conservation 
of cultural property. Autonomous bodies like INTACH have to dovetail their activities with that of 
Government in this ve_ry important area. 
The corporate and voluntary sectors will also be encouraged to participate in the field of 
presctvation and conservation. Suitable incentive.Jegislation, with a provision for tax exemption, will 
be considered for this purpose. 
3.14 Museums are not merely places to house our ancient heritage; they h'ave to function as 
centres of learning and education and develop into a vital part of the effort to promote awareness 
creation. Museum visits have to be systematically encou raged among people in general and in particular 
the youth; at~ractive progammes which would interest the young need to be developed by each museum 
on a regular basis. 
The museums in the country should have a proper grouping according to their scope and status 
viz .... national, state, regional, district, etc. Inter-state museum exhibition should be encouraged to 
promote cultural integration. A centra l consultancy service to advise in planning building reorganisation 
of galleries, preservation of objects, search-light, security etc. could be set up. National and state level 
cultural data bank would be established to ensure an inbuilt system of linkage between museum and 
other edu,cational and cultural ip.stitutions. Important educational institutions should have museum 
cornets. 
3.15 Old castles, forts, palaces, the ruins of cities and similar sites are great attractions to tourists. 
This needs to be built on, because it can not-only generate substantial resources for the country, but 
also spread the kind of awareness that has been referred to earlier. To achieve this, the present 
infirmities that exist have to be removed, there must be a ready supply of attractive literature, · 
photographs, postcards and. souvenirs av.ailable; a each site, the services of multilingual guides need to 
be provided ; and the sites themselves have to be carefully conserved and maintained. Video 
programmes and sound and light shows would add to the attraction of these sites. 

~-
••• • •• • •• •••••••• oo• • ••• •• •* •••••• • • •• •* • • •••• .... ·····- -·· ........ ...... .. ···-- -- - .. - ···-- - .. . . 
21 
3.16 All states which have not enacted public library law would be persuaded to do so with a view 
to ensure that library services reach upto the village level through out the country. 
The major activity envisaged is setting up of a network of rural libraries linked up with the District 
library system all over the country. Expansion of library facilities in tbe.rural areas is an imperative need, 
taking care of the reading needs of growing number of educated people in rural areas, women and youth. 
Library movement in the rural areas has to be, therefore, in.tensified significantly , going far beyond what 
has been possible so far through the assistance given by the RRRLF and the efforts of the State 
Governments. 
Rural libraries must cater to the needs of both the student community and the village folk. School 
teachers could function as part time librarians with additional remuneration and libraries should contain 
a well-chosen corpus of books written originally in the regional languages and also translated from 
other Indian languages into that particular regional language. A scheme for intensification of rural 
libraries containing a modest collection of books in the regional language is proposed to be taken up. 
3.17 National information and documentation centres covering science and technology and 
social sciences (INSDOC, NASSDOC, SSIC, etc.) need to be modernised based on international 
standards so that the documentation and information services provided by this sector· can be more 
effective and reach the Indian research community in the right format and at the right time. Their 
services like several other sectoral advanced research institutions need to be made accessible to al, 
through the proper introduction of information and communication technologies. 
3.18 The National Library, Calcutta will be progressively delegated more powers. Its goals and 
objectives will be redefined, some of these w5-mld be the development of comprehensive collections of 
all pocks, periodicals and manuscripts relevant to India, the creation and supplying of bibliographical 
data at internationally accepted standards and norms and the preservation of the Indian cultural 
heritage in written and printed form. These three goals will be achieved through the systematic 
introduction of a vigorous modernisation programme and restructuring. Keeping in view the limited 
resources available, the objectives will be undertaken by the National Library in close collabo~atio n 
with the other three regional repository libraries .and several public and private organisations whose 
objectives are closely linked with those of the National Library. 
In view of the rapid expansion of Library and Information Science and the fast changing 
character of this service, there is an urgent need to introduce planned manpower development 
programmes both on short and long term basis. To provide library and information services to the masses 
in a largely rural set up requires a special kind of orientation. At the other end of this scale is the 
complicated task of providing fast and up-to-date online information to a very well educated articulate 
community. The UGC, State Government, professional association, academics and other agencies will 
be encouraged to work closely together to ensure that the right kind of professionally trained 
professional are· available. The action (programme) outlined here indicate the various facts of the 
development of libraries in India and their complex inter a'nd intra-relationship this would justify the 
setting up of a co-ordinating nod monitoring agency at the Centre. This has been stressed by a large 
section of academics and professionals ·and very strongly endorsed in the National Policy on Library 
and Information System Report. The National Commission for Library and Information System should 
be established as a Statutory Body to co-ordinate various sectoral library development programmes in 
research and academic institutions, provide expertise and training resources and to monitor the 

22 
implementation process of these programmes. 
3.19 Our Classical arts have been fairly well documented. The classical tradition and heritage in 
music, in dance forms, in sculpture and in painting have been fairly well described and documented by 
scholars. Unfortunately, this cannot be said about the vast and rich mosaic of our tribal and folk cultures. 
Part of the reason could be a feeling that these Jiving forms of culture are any way with us as livhg forms 
and there is no immediate need for documentation. Slowly, however, it is being realised that a number 
of the folk and tribal cultural forms are either dying away or are being distorted beyond recognition in 
the context of rapid socio-economic change. In large parts of the country the coming of Industrial, 
irrigation and mining projects have already endangered certain traditional life-styles and forms of 
culture. A number of folk forms are also getting distorted by the spread of urbanisation and the 
commercialisation of arts. 
3.20 A systematic and comprehensive documentation of folk and tribal arts is thus very necessary. 
This will not only add to an increasing awareness of our complex heritage but also 'help design 
appropriate strategies of development for specific areas and communities. This will be yet another 
measure to bring culture to the centre of development efforts and not to treat it as a marginal matter. 
The folk forms of culture will have to be specifically identified region-wise for purpose of 
documentation. As regards the tribes, their regional and community-wise distribution is· well-known. 
Documentation of these culture forms will inevitably include their oral literature, their visual art 
traditions, the performing art tradition as aiso the artifacts. It will be our effort to collect and preserve 
various artifacts of the folk and tribal communities in a network of folk and tribal museums. 
Documentation of the art forms will be done in their natural context and without uprooting them from 
the environment, so that authenticity and genuineness are. fully ensured. 
The tribal groups would be actively involved both in the documentation and preservation of their 
culture. Emphasis would be laid in the involvement of voluntary agencies working among these people. 
For the purpose of such documentation, suitable linkages and networking between institutions like the 
Anthropological Survey of India, the Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya, the Zonal Cultural Centres, the 
State Departments of Culture and Tribal Welfare including the Tribal Researrh Institutes will be 
established. Expertise in the area of documentation will have to be ensured through scientific training 
and utilisation of best available technology. Universities, voluntary organisations and other profe~ional 
bodies will also be activety associated in this massive nationwise task. The documented material will be 
made to raise well-stocked and well-established libraries of such material. While main emphasis will be 
on documentation of folk and tribal art, steps will also be taken to fill in any existing inadequacies in 
the field of our classical arts. 
3.21 Preservation and promotion of tribal, folk art and culture as also other vanishing forms of 
art and culture shoud be given greater and urgent emphasis. A centre for documentation.ofvanishing 
forms should be established. Several measures including special performing/exhibiting opportunities, 
scholarships for training etc. would also be, necessary. 
3.22 AN a tiona! Documentation Centre for Tribal and Folk Traditions with branches at suitable 
places in tribal area will be set-up. Also a national level networking of all institutions engaged in the 
area of research and cultural activities and the national research system should be built up. 
3.23 Since independence, there has been an increasing healthy interaction and communication 
.. 
'.. 

:-: . 
·-- . ···-··-· ~ .. ... -... ... . . .... ······ ··· -- ···- . 
23 
between the diverse art forms in the couotry. The visual and the literary arts which interacted with each 
other in our long heritage and tradition are luckily, once again interacting. There has also been an 
increasing number of schools and idioms in the forms of visual arts. While the influence of the West 
has been there, there is also a sincere and authentic search for roots and the local cultural idiom both 
in the sphere of the visual and the literary arts. One of the major areas of activity in the N~tiomi Policy 
will be the development of ways of encourage this and the diverse streams which together constitute f1 
vibrant and pulsating scenario of growth. 
3.24 Greater interaction will be developed between artists of different regions and different 
schools. It will also promote well-designed interaction between our artists and writers and the 
international communities of artists and writers. Lalit Kala Akademi and similar State Akademies would 
be strengthened to bring about such interaction on a larger and better scale through national, 
internationa l and regional exhibitions, kala melas etc. 
3.25 Art galler ies and Museums of art and scientific objects will be treated as dynamic institutions 
which are centres of educating taste. Such art gallerie~ and art museums will seek to interact more 
intimately and extensively with the general public and in particular with youth and children. 
Bringing together the corpus of creations by the significant individual artists and painters who 
have exerted influence on their contemporaries will also be an objective. For this, museums devoted to 
significant artists/painters may also be set up. 
The visual arts of the folk and tribal communities constitute an important part of the total 
heritage in this field. Separate ly, mention has been made about the need for a comprehensive 
benchmark survey and documentat .ion of various forms of folk and tribal arts including visual arts. These 
will be suitably exhibited in art galleries and museums. 
3.26 It has been unfortunate that art objects created by rural artists have been treated as crafts. 
Efforts will be made to promote a more inclusive concept of contemporary art which encompasses the 
artistic contribution of all segments whether rura l, tribal or urban. Attempt would also be made to 
encourage development of community art traditions in the rural areas hitherto described as handicraft 
tradition of folk and triba l communities. 
3.27 Although a pan Indian perspective and ethos do exist on the current literary scene in India, 
it need to be more widely disseminated and appreciated, · Exchange of fellowships and residences for, 
specially young writers, must be encouraged. Since new talent invariably appears through little 
magazines. State Govts. and Akademies and corporate sector should be persuaded to provide financial 
support for them as well as for publication of books by young writers. Universities could create chars 
for writers-in-residence to bring about interaction and contact between senior writers and younger 
talent on the campuses. Reading habits could be strengthened by establishing a chain of book-clubs a; 
also sale outlets for books in smaller towns. 
3.28 Translation must be recognised as an important creative activity and the existing 
programmes of translations from one Indian language in~o another being carried by the Sahitya 
Akademi, National Book Trust and other agencies should be substantially enhanced. A definite efrort 
will be necessary to have major contemporary Indian works of various Indian languages translated 
directly into various languages of the world and vice-versa. Special attention needs to be paid to the 
Asian works of letters to which India both culturally and geographically belongs. 

24 
A scheme to train and support competent translators direct from one Indian language to another 
and from Indian language into foreign languages and vice-versa would be launched. Sahitya Akademi 
and other similar literary agencies in the State Governments as also the various non-government literary 
organisations would be encouraged to held camps, workshops, etc. for greater interaction betwcn 
writers of India particularly of the younger generation. 
3.29 Since a very considerable increase in the interest towards performing arts has taken place 
and there are a large number of non-governmental and private agencies now supporting the performing 
arts, the policy would aim at concentrating more on development of infrastructure such as halls and 
auditoria in smaller cities and towns and also persuade the rural development programmes to create 
similar community spaces at the village level. 
3.30 A major activity area of the policy must consequently be to ev9lve strategies to eliminate, 
or lessen, as far as possible, the element of State patronage and, at the same time, ensure to arti~s access 
to financial support and opportunities for participation in cultural events of different. kinds. Such 
strategies must necessarily be such that mediocrity is not equated with merit in a mistaken anxiety to 
provide opportunities for all. 
3.31 Guru Shishya Parampara has been a cardinal factor in transference of vision and technique 
in the field of performing arts. This system is facing many new challenges and needs to be carefully and 
imaginatively strengthened keeping in view the changed ethos. Besides recognising this system 
throughout the country, effort would be made to involve State Governments, its various agencies, 
corporate sector, public sector undertakings, etc. to provide local support and substances of literary 
skill to the Gurus in various forms and styles in schools of music, dance, theatre, etc. Special attention 
will be paid to such styles, instruments and forms that might be threatened with extinction. 
Making of music instruments is an improtant area which has not received sufficient public 
attention and is currently facing a grave crisis. A scheme would be prepared to ensure that young trainees 
and apprentices are encouraged to receive training etc., in various aspects of instrument making and 
possibility would be explored whether the existing schemes of support to artisans etc. could be extended 
to instrument-makers. 
3.32 While Government of India would set up a national cultural complex in New Delhi to 
provide facilities for all the arts and literature together, of the international standards, State 
Governments will be persuaded to create similar multi-arts complex in suitable cities within the states. 
3.33 Training facilities in theatre and performing infrastructure would be suitably strengthened 
and expanded not only by the State but also by voluntary organisations, private bodies, corporate sectors 
and others. 
3.34 All forms of theatre whether contemporary, creative or the various forms of traditional 
theatre would need equa l encouragement and play-writing, direction, acting etc. should be brought to 
certain minimum desirable levels. 
State Governments would be persuaded to set up and fund regional repertories, museums of 
regional theatre. Movement for children's theatre and school and college theatre should be encouraged 
and expanded. 
3.35 Women in India have been a great sustaining and preserving force of culture. The cultural 
fabric should continue to be enriched by their contributions. In all programmes, whether of creativity, 

•. :, 
25 
preservation and dimension women must be assigned important role. 
RESOURCES AND REVIEW 
3.36 People of India, ordinary people living in villages, forests and cities, creative beings of 
various castes, gender, religions, women, students, teachers, gurus, experts and 'rasikas' of all hu cs, 
beliefs from human resource of culture in India. It is they who create, sustain, protect and transmtte 
culture. 
3.37 For the limited areas where this policy envisages public support, the existing levels o( 
investment will have to be significantly enhanced. This enhancement will be necessaty both at the levels 
of Government of India and of the State Governments. 
3.38 A series of steps would be necessary to attract private and corporate sector to come forward 
for funding and investments in culture. 
Effor.ts would also be necessary in the direction of stepping up incomes that are earned out of 
museums, monuments, performances, exhibitions etc. 
Voluntary agencies being given a major role to play should also be able to generate their own 
resources to augment them by private donations etc. 
Many items would be funded by other Ministries such as Education, Information and 
Broadcasting, Tourism etc. Tribal Sub-Plan funds could be used for the building up of cultural 
infrastructure in tribal areas. 
3.39 Our culture represents a unique irreplaceable body of values since our traditions and forms 
of expression are our most effective means of demonstrahng its presence in the world. Our cultural 
identify is a treasure that vitalizes our possibilities and self-fulfilment by moving our people to seek 
nurture in its past, to welcome contributions from the outside that are compatible with its own 
characteristics and to continue the proces~ of their own creation. 
3.40 The policy outlined above is an enabling policy. It has no intention of being restrictive, 
prescriptive of unidirectional, it aspires to be dynamie one which responds to societal needs since it 
relates to a component which lives only in the world of collective and individual awareness. It believes 
that investment in culture is investment in essence in future, in human resource development, in 
durability of human mind and creativity. It hopes to initate steps so that a vast number oflndians would 
be restrained from being turned into mere consumers, passive recipients of culture instead of being 
rasikas, capable of participation and aesthetic enJoyment. 
3.41 It would be necessary to review the policy at frequent intervals, assess the activities and 
change it in whatever manner considered desirable. 
This review can be initiated by the States, but the review itself has necessarily to be by a body of 
people of eminence in the field of culture, and done at specified intervals, say, after every three years. 
That Will give enough me for cultural activities to obtain a degree of definition, and avoid the danger 
of capriciousness which too frequent changes may cause, and at the same time help to keep the policy 
always responsive and relevant. 

26 
APPENDIX-II , 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENTS RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
XXII 
* 1WEN1Y-SECOND MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Comittec on Human Resource Development 
met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the lOth January, 1994 in Committee Room No. 63, Parliament House, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav -Chairman 
RAJYASARHA 
2. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
3. Miss. Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shri. Md. Salim 
5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
6. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
8. Shri P.Upendra 
LOKSABHA 
9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
10. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
11. Dr. Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
12. Shri Subhash Chandra Nayak 
13. Shri Z.M. Kahandole 
14. Shri Datta Meghe 
15. Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
16. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
17. Dr. K.D. Jeswani 
18. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
* Minutes of I to XXI meetings relates to matters not included in this report. 

·. ·. 
19. Shri Anna Joshi 
20. Shri Braja Kishore T~ipathy 
21. Smt. Malini Bhattacharya 
22. Shri Suraj Mandai 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
27 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, wished all the members of the Committee a happy and prosperous 
'New Year'. 
3. Thereafter, the Chairman informed the Committee that the next subject to be taken up for 
consideration by the Committee would be the National Culture Policy- An Approach Paper, 1992 and 
invited suggestions from the Members regarding procedure to be adopted in the matter. 
. 4. After detailed discussion, the Committee decided to call the Secretary, Department of 
Culture, Mipistry of Human Resource Development, for preliminary discussion on the 11th January, 
1994. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 
11th January, 1994. 

28 
XXIII 
1WEN1Y-THIR D MEET ING 
The Department - related Parliamenta ry Standing Committee on Human Resource .. 
Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 11th Jan uary, 1994 in Committee Room No, 63, First 
Floor, Parliament Bouse, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Ram Na resh Yadav . Chairman 
RAJYASAB HA 
2. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
5. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
6. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
7. Shri P. Upend ra 
8. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
LOKSA IUIA 
9. Dr. Viswanalham Ka nithi 
10. Dr. V. Rajcshwara n 
II. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmana n 
12. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
13. Or. Vasant Niwrutli Pawar 
14. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
15. Shri Subhash Chandra Naya k 
16. Shri Datta Meghe 
17. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
18. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
19. Dr. K.D. Jeswani 
20. Dr. Mahadeepak Sing h Shakya 
2'1. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
22. Shri Anna Joshi 

29 
23. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
24. Smt. Malini Bhattacharya 
25. Sbri Brahmanand Mandai 
26. Shri Suraj Mandai 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT, 
(DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE) 
Shri Ashok Vajpayee, Joint Secretary 
Sbri G. Venkataramani, Director 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
Sbri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee heard the Joint Secretary, Department of Culture, Ministry of Human 
Resource Development regarding National Culture Policy- An Approach Paper, 1992. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
(The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M.) 
4. The Committee further considered the National Culture · Policy and after detailed discussion 
decided that Members may send their Questionnaire and name (s) of eminent persons/organisations 
they wish to be c:alled before the Committee for oral evidence. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.35 P.M. 

30 
XXIV 
TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING 
.• · .. 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 3rd February, 1994 in Committee Room 'A', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yactav 
RAJYA SADHA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
-Chairman 
3. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel 
4. Shri. Md. Salim 
5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
6. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
7. Shri P. Upendra 
LOKSABI ·IA 
8. Dr. Viswariatham Kanithi 
9. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran 
10. Prof. (Smt) Savithri Lakkshmanan 
11. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
12. Dr. Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
13. Shri Subhash Chandra Nayak 
14. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
15. Dr. KD. Jeswani 
16. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
17. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
18. Shri Anna Joshi 
19. Smt. Malini Bhattacharya 
20. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
;. .. 
.. 

/ 
31 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE LALIT KALA AKADEMI AND 
SAHITYA AKADEMI 
1. Shri B.P. Kamboj, Secretary, Lalit Kala Akademi 
2. Prof. U.R. Anantha Murthy, Chairman, Sahitya Akademi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ram Krishan, ~nder Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed and introduced Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel, a 
newly nominated member of the Committee, to the Members, 
4. The Committee then heard the Secretary, Lalit Kala Akademi and thereafter the Chairman, 
Sahitya Akademi on the working of their institutions with special reference to the National Policy on 
Culture - An Approach Paper, 1992. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 6.20 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on the 4th February, 
1994. 

32 
XXV 
1WENTY-FIFTH MEETING 
The Com mitte e met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 4th February, 1994 in Committee Room 'A' 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Prof. Sau rin Bhatt acharya 
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
4. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel 
5. Shri Md. Salim 
6. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
8. Shri P. Upendra 
LOKSABHA 
9. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
10. Dr. Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
11. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
12. Shri Ishwarbha i Khodabhai Chavda 
13. Shri Ind er Jit 
14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
15. Dr. K.D. Jeswa ni 
16. Dr. Mahadeepa k Singh Shakya 
17. Shri Anna Joshi 
18. Shri Braja IGshore Tripathy 
19. Smt. Malini Bhattacharya 
20. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
21. Slui Brahmanand Mandai 
22. Prof. Ummared dy Venkateswarlu 

33 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA, NEW DLEIII 
1. Mrs. Kirti Jain, Director 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE CENTRE FOR CULTURAL RESOURCES & TRAINING, NEW DELHI 
1. Ms. Premlata Puri, Director 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATIONS, NEW DELHI 
1. Shri Niranjan Desai, Director - General; 
2. Shri B.R. Muthu Kumar, Deputy Director- General ; and 
3. Shri Amit Das Gupta, Deputy Director- General 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri. Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. Th.e Committee heard the Director, National School of Drama, on National Culture Policy 
vis-a-vis the School. 
3. The Commitee then adjourned at 2.00 P.M. for lunch to meet again at 3.30 P.M, 
4. The Commitee re-assembled at 3.30 P.M. and heard the Director, Centre for Cultural 
Resources & Training and thereafter the Director- General, Indian Council for Cultural Relations on 
National Culture Policy vis-a-vis their respective institutions. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept. 
The Committee then adjourned at 5.50 P.M. to meet again at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 14th 
February, 1994 .. 

34 
XXVI 
1WENTY-SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 14th February, 1994 in Committee RC?orn 'D', 
Ground Floor, Pariiament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav -Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shri Md. Salim 
5. Shri P. Upendra 
6. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
LOKSABHA 
7. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
8. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshrnanan 
9. Shri Subhash Chandra Nayak 
10. Shri Datta Meghe 
11. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavd~ 
12. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
13. Shri Anna Joshi 
14. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
15. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NORTH CENTRAL ZONE CULTURAL CENTRE, 
ALLAHABAD(UTTARPRADESH) 
1. Shri. J.P. Rai, Oirector 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secreta~ 
2. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 

35 
2. The Committee heard the Director, North.Central Zone Cultural Centre regarding Approach 
Paper on National Culture Policy vis-a- vis the Centre. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 AM. on Tuesday, the 15th 
February, 1994. 
. , 

36 
XXVII · 
'IWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M .. on Tuesday, the 15th February, 1994 in Committee Room 
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yauav -Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
3. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
4. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
5. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
6. Shri P. Upendra 
LOKSABHA 
7. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
8. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
9. Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
1 0. Shri As lam Sher Khan 
11. Shri Dau DayaiJoshi 
12. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shankya 
13. Shri Braja IGshore Tripathy 
14. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SANGEET NATAK AKADEMI, NEW DELHI 
1. Shri. J.J. Bhabha, Chairman 
2. Smt. Usba Malik, Secretary 
EXPERT ON CONSTITUTION AND FUNCTIONING OF THE 
ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES 
1. Shri Manmohan Singh, IAS (Former Joint Secretary, Deptt. of Culture, Ministry of Human 
Resource Development) 

37 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee heard the Chairman, <)angeet Natak Akademi regarding Approach Paper on 
National Policy on Culture vis-a-vis the Akademi and thereafter Shri Manmohah Singh. 
3., A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.10 P.M. to meet again on Wednesday, the 23rd February, 
1994. 

~- .. - ··- ···-. 
38 
XXV Ill 
'IWENTY-EIGHTH MEET ING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 23rd February, 1994 in Committee Room 
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Narcsh Yadav - Chariman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
4. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen 
5. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
6. Shri P. Upendra 
7. Dr. M. Aram 
LOKSABHA 
8. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
9. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
10. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure . 
11. Shri K. Thulasiah Vandayar 
12. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
13. Shri Inder Jit 
14. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
15. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
17. Shri Anna Joshi 
18. Shrimati Malini Bhattacharya 
19. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
20. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
21. Prof. Ummareddy Venkateswarlu 
• 

39 
WITNESSES 
1. Shri Bhaskar Ghose, Secretary Ministry of Information & Broadcasting and Former Secretary, 
Deptt. of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource Development. 
2. Mrs. Neeta Choudhury, Secretary, Deptt. of Culture, Govt. of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow. 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
2. Sh~i Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed and introduced Dr. M. Aram, a newly nominated 
member of the Committee to the Members. 
3. The Committee then heard Shri Bhaskar Ghose and thereafter Mrs. Neeta Choudhury on 
Approach Paper, 1992, on National Policy on Culture. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 P.M, to rrieet again on Thursday, the 3rd March, 1994. 

40 
XXIX 
1WENTY NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M, on Thursday, the 3rd March, 1994 in Committee Room 'A' 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav- Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
3. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
4. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
5. Shri P. Upendra 
LOKSABHA 
6. Pro[ (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
7. Dr. Yasant Niwrutti Pawar 
8. Shri K. Thulasiah Vandayar 
9. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
10. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
11. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
12. Shrimati Malini Bhattacharya 
WITNESS 
J. Shri S.P. Elangovan, Secretary, 
Deptt. of Culture, Govt. ofTamil Nadu. 
SECRETAR IAT 
1. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Culture, Government of 
Tamil Nadu, regarding National Policy on Culture- An Approach Paper (1992). 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjouned at 6.20 P.M. 
• 

41 
xxxxrv 
*FORTY FOURTH MEETING 
The Department - related Parliamentary St. nding Committee on Human Resource 
Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, tt>e 4th May, 1994 in Committee Room No. 63, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri. P. Upendra 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
3. Shri O.P. Kohli 
4. Shri. Md. Salim 
5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
6. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
8. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma 
9. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
LOKSABHA 
10. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
- Chairmarr 
11. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
12. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
13. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
14. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
15. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
16. Dr. KD. Jeswani 
17. Dr. G_.L. Kanaujia 
18. Shri Anna Joshi 
19. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
20. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
21. Shri Ramchandra Dome 
* Minutes of XXX to XXXXIII meetings relate to matters not included in this report. 

22. Shri Brahm a Nand Mandai 
23. Shri Suraj Mandai 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer. 
42 
2. The Committee tooJC note of the discussions held and evidences taken on the Approach Paper 
on the National Policy on Culture referred to it in December, 1993 for consideration and report and 
decided to finalise its report on the subject well in time so that it could be presented in the Istweek of 
the Monsoon Session. 
The Committee, accordingly, decided to utilise fully the next inter Sesssion period for the 
purpose and directed the Secretariat to circulate questionnaire to all those suggested by the Members 
of the Committee and others requesting them to send their views latest by the 20th May, 1994. 
The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. 
• 
• 

43 
1 
FIRST MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Stand ;ng Committee on Human Resource 
Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 6th June, 1994 in Committee Room 'B' Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P. Upendra- Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shri O.P. Kohli 
5. Shri Md. Salim 
6. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
LOKSABJiA 
7.ShriManiShankarAJyar 
8. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
9. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
11. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
12. Shri Anna Joshi 
13. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
14. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai 
15. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 
SECRETARIAT 
1: Sh. Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
2. Sh. Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
3. Sh: Surinder Kumar , Under Secretary 
4. Sh. Rohtas, Committee Officer. 

·- ~ .. - - ... · --~ . . . ~ -- . . . --... . - . . .. - .... · -· -·--- -
44 
5. The chairman then referred to the f'\pproach Paper on the National Policy on Culture which 
stood referred to the Committee for examination and report. After some discussion, the Committee 
decided to discuss the Approach Paper on the National Cultural Policy, parawise, during its meetings 
to be held on the 7th & 8th June 1994. The Commitee also decided to hear the views of the Secretary, 
Department . of Culture in the matter on the 9th June. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. to meet again on Tuesday, the. 7th June, 1994. 

45 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Department- related Parlimentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Developm ent 
met at 11.00 A.M. on J'uesday, the 7th June, 1994 in Committee Room 'B' Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe , New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P. Upendra- Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Dr. M .. Aram 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shri O.P. Kohli 
5. Shri Md. Salim 
6. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
7. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma 
LOKSABHA 
8. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
9. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
10. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomer 
11. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
12. Sh. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
13. Sh. Anna Joshi 
14. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
15. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
16. Shri Ramchandra Dome 
17. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai 
18. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 
19. Shri Suraj Mandai 

46 
SECRETA RIAT 
I. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Ram K.rishan, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Rohtas, Comm ittee Officer 
2. The Committee took up parawise considerat ion of the Approach Paper on the National Policy 
on Cultu re 1992. The cons ideration remained inconclusive. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 AM. on Wedenesday, the 
8th June, 1994. • 

47 
Ill 
THIRD MEETING 
The Department - related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 8th June, 1994 in Committee Room 'A', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P. Upendra- Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Shri Md. Salim 
4. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
5. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma 
LOKSABHA 
7. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
8. Shri Mani Shankar Atyar 
9. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
10. Prof. P.J. Kurieo 
' . 
11. Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
12. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
13. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
14. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
15. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
16. Shri Anna Joshi 
17. Prof. M.alini Bhattacharya 
18. Shri Ramchandra Dome - ·-
19. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai 
20. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 

21. Shri Suraj Mandai 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
48 
2. The Committee resumed parawise consideration of the Approach Paper 1992 on National 
Policy on Culture. 
The Commitee adjourned at 2.00 P.M. and reassembled at 3.30 P.M. 
3. The Committee concluded the parawise discussion on the Approach Paper. 
4. Summary record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
5. The committee decided to held its next meetings on the 7th and 8th July, 1994. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 AM. on Thursday, the 
9th June, 1994. 

49 
rv 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 9th June, 1994 in Committee Room 'A', Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri. P. U pend~a-.: Chairman 
_.. 
MEMBERS .·. 
RAJYASABHA_· .. 
2. Dr: M. Aram 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
4. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel 
5. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
6. Shri Md. Salim 
7. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
8. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
9. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
LOKSABHA 
10. Dr. Viswa.n~tham Kanithi 
11. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
12. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
13. Shri Subhash Chandra Nayak 
14. Shri Z.M. Kahandole 
15. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
16. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
17. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
18. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
19. Shri Anna Joshi 
20. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 

50 
21. Shri Ramchandra Dome 
22. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE (DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE) 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
.J. Dr. S.K. Mahapatra, Secretary 
2. Shri Ashoka Vajpeyi, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri C. Venkat...ramani, Dir.ector 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Surinder Kumar; Under Secretary 
4. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary and other representatives of the Department 
of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource Development; in connection with the Approach Paper 1992 
on National Policy on Culture. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
4. The Chairman proposed to appoint a Drafting Committee to prepare the Draft Report on 
the Approach Paper on National Policy on Culture with the following members :-
1. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
2. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya Convenors 
3. Shri O.P. Kohli 
4. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
6. Dr. M. Aram 
7. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 
The Committee agreed to the proposal. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 2.00 P.M. 
• 
.. 
• 

51 
X 
*TENTH MEETING 
. . 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 23rd August, 1994 in Committee Room 'A' 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
·1. Shri P. Upendra- Chairman 
RA.JYA SABHA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Shri O.P. Kohli 
4. Shri Md. Salim 
5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
6. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
8. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
. LOKSABHA 
9. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
10. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
11. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
12. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
13. Shri K.T. Vandayar 
14. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
15. Shri Rambadan 
16. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
17. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
18. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
19. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
20. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 
* Minutes of V to IX meetings relate to matters not included in the report. 

. \ 
52 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer 
2. The Chairman introduced Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary, to the Committee. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration its draft report on National Policy on Culture 
- An Approach Paper, 1992. The Committee also considered the suggestions to the draft report, 
proposed by Dr. M. Aram, a member of the Committte. Nter detailed discussions, the Committee 
decided to hold further discussions on paras 11.3 to 11.5 of the draft report, regarding the ooordimting 
mechanism, at its meeting to be held on 24th August, 1994. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 
24th August, 1994. 
.. 
.. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

53 
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 24th August, 1994 in Committee Room 
A' Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT , 
1. Shri P. Upendra- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Shri O.P. Kohli 
4. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel 
5. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
6. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shashtri 
8. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
LOKSABHA 
9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
10. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
11. Shri Mani Sh.ankar Aiyar 
12. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
13. Shri K T. Vandayar 
14. Shri Inder Jit 
15. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
17. Shri Anna Joshi 
18. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
19. Shri Ramchandra Dome 
20. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 
21. Shri Suraj Mandai 

54 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
4. Shri P.P.K. Raniacharyu lu, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee resumed consideration of the draft report on National Policy on Culture- An 
Approach Paper, 1992 and adopted the same with some modifications. The Committee also decided to 
present the Report to Rajya Sabha on the 25th August, 1994 and to lay it on the Table of Lok Sabha, 
the same day. 
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram and Shri O.P. Kohli 
to present the report to Rajya Sabha and Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy and in his absence Shri Anna 
Joshi to lay it on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
4, The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M .. 
• 
.. 
• .. 
• 
• 
• 

APPENDIX III 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE 
DEVELOPMENT REGARDING NATIONAL POLICY ON CULTURE-AN APPROACH PAPER 1992,. 
SL.NO. NAME & DESIGNATION 
OF THE WITNESS 
DATE OF APPEARANCE 
BEFORE THE COMMITTEE 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
Shri Ashok Vajpeyi, Joint Secretary, 
Shri G. Venkataramani, Director 
Deptt. of Culture, Ministry of H.R.D 
Shri B.P. Kamboj, Secretary 
Lalit Kala Akademi 
Prof. U.R. Anantha Murthy, Chairman, 
Sahitya Ak.ademi 
Mrs. Kirti Jain, Director , 
National School of Drama. 
.f\1s. Premlata Puri, Director 
Centre for Cultural Resources & Training 
Shri Niranjan Desai, Director - General 
Shri. B.R. Muthu Kumar, Dy. Director- General 
Shri Amit Das Gupta, Dy. Director- General 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
Shri. J.P. Rai, Director, 
North Central Zone Cultural Centre, Allahabad 
Shri J.J. Bhabha, Chairman, 
Smt. Usha Malik, Secretary, 
Sangeet Natak Akademi 
Shri Manmohan Singh, LAS. 
former Jt. Secretary, Deptt. of Culture, 
Ministry of H.R.D. 
Shri Bhaskar Ghose, Secretary, 
Ministry of I & B and former Secretary 
Deptt. of Culture , Ministry of H.R.D. 
Mrs. Neeta Choudhury, Secretary, 
Deptt. cif Culture, Govt. of U.P. 
Lucknow. 
Shri S.P. Elangovan, Secretary, 
Deptt. of Culture, Govt. of Tamil N adu 
Dr. S.K. Mahapatra, Secretary, 
Shri Ashok Vajpe)i, Jt. Secretary, 
Shri G. Venkatararnani, Director, 
Deptt. of Culture . 
. Ministry of H.R.D. 
January 11, 1994 
· February 3, 1994 
February 3, 1994 
February 4, 1994 
February 4, 1994 
February 4, 1994 
February 14, 1994 
February 15, 1994 
February 15, 1994 
February 23, 1994 
February 23, 1994 
March 3, 1994 
June 9, 1994 

1. 
·- . .... . .... ..... - -· 
56 
QUESTIONNARIE ON THE NATIONAL POLICY ON CULTURE 
What is your general opinion on the National Policy on Culture- An Approach Paper 1992, 
is it a comprehensive and complete document in itself or something more should be included "" 
there in: if so, the details thereof; 
2. National Policy on Culture in its present form appears to be more a Policy on Arts rather than 
on Culture, what more should be added to make it culture oriented; 
3. What steps are required to be taken to save the decline of National Cultural heritage in folk 
lore, folk arts, folk culture, tribal folk arts etc. ; how these can be revived, promoted and 
preserved; 
4. What distinctive and salient features of our ancient Indian Culture policy : brief note in this 
regard with special reference to the present environment ; 
5. What role and in what manner, Mass Media{f.V./Films and Radio, could play in fostering and • 
nurturing culture in the present scenario; whether Mass Media should be borught under the .. 
purview of the department of Culture in order to keep a check on its programmes and spread • 
of Cultur e; 
6. What is your opinion on the proposed setting up of a statut~ry body called 'Bharatiya Sanskriti 
Parishad'; do you think this type of body is required to be established; if so, the details thereof 
and in what form; 
7. Do you support the idea of Guru Shishya Parampara ; how it can put into practice in the 
present context, brief suggestions thereon; 
8. In what manner Culture could be interlinked with education; in order to make Culture a 
national object. How it should be included in curriculum and at what level ; 
9. Teachers can play a positive role in cultivating a sense of awareness and appreciation for 
Culture in the younger generation, how and in what manner; 
10. W~ether Gram Panchayats can be effectively involved in the preservation and dissemination 
of our ancient cultural heritage; if so, the details thereof; 
11. What are the ways and means to effectively combat the Cultural invasion by Zee T.V. or M. 
T.V.; 
12. How the composite Culture of this great country can be maintained and-preserved in view of 
the divisive and separatist tendencies and also to foster the bounds of nationalism, 
brother~ood and oneness, a detailed note; 
13. How the functioning of National Akademies, National School of Drama and Zonal Cultural 
centers be strengthened ; 
• 

57 
14. How the infrastructure form national level, state level be strengthened and whether any money 
support is required. 
15. Plan of Action has been mentioned in the Approa .ch Paper - Kindly give your comments on 
the important points mentioned ther .;in and give more suggestions, if any, in this regard; 
16. What are your views with regard to coordination between the Ministries of Culture, 
Education, information and Broadcasting, various other ministries, state governments, zonal 
Cuitural centres and national academies etc. 

.. I 
. 
58 
APPENDIX- V 
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE DRAFTING COMMITIEE OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITIEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT. 
(1994-95) 
1. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
2. Prof. Malfni Bhattacharya Convenors 
3. Dr. M. Aram 
4. Shri O.P. Kohli 
5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantary 
6. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
7. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy. 
• , 
• 
• 

- .-- - -~ - · ·· -'" .. ..... _ .. ___ _ 
< 
59 
APPENDIX- VI 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DRAFTING COMMITTEE OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Comn1mitlec met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 14th June, 1994 in Committee Room 50, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
Convenors 
2. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
3. Dr. M. Aram 
4. Shri O.P. Kohli 
5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
6. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
7. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Sh~i Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Ram Krishan, Under secretary 
3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee held dis..;ussions on the first two chapters of the National Policy on Culture­
An Approach Paper, 1992. The discussion was not concluded. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 P.M. to meet again 9.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 16th 
June, 1994. 

60 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Drafting Committee met at 9.00 AM. on Thursday, the 16th June; 1994 in Committee Room 
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
2. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
3. Dr. M. Aram 
4. Shri O.P. Kohli 
5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
6. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
7. Shri Vankateswarlu !Jmmareddy 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
Convenors 
2. Shri Surinder Kumar; Under Secretary 
3. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. The Committte resumed discussions on the last part i.e. Plan of Action of the National Policy 
on Culture - An Approach Paper, 1992. The discussion was not concluded. 
3. The Committee also met at 6.00 P.M. in the Room of Chairman (CHRD) to prepare draft 
report of the Committee. 
.· . 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 P.M. to meet again at 9.00 AM. on Friday, the 17th 
June, 1994. 
. _,. 
,.. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

61 
III 
THIRD-MEETING 
The Drafting Commjttee met at 9.00 A.M. on Friday, the 17th June, ·1994, in Committee Room No. 63, Frst 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
2. Pr9f. Malini Bhattacharya 
3. Dr. M. Aram 
4. Shri O.P. Kohli 
5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
6. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
Convenors 
2. The Committee resumed discussion on National Policy on Culture- An Approach Paper, 
· 1992 and concluded the same. Thereafter the Drafting Committee authorised the Convenors, Shri 
Mani Shankar Aiyar and Prof. Malini Bhattacharya, to finalise the Report on the Approach Paper and 
get it circulated to the all the Members of the Drafting Committee so that the Members could giveth eir 
suggestions, if any, on the Draft Report. The Drafting Committee also decided that after finalisatim 
of the Draft _Report in its meeting to be· held on the 6th July, 1994 the same would be circulated to all 
the members of the Committee for adoption. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 10.30 AM. 

62 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Drafting Committee met at 9.00 AM. on Wednesday, Lhe 6th July, 1994 in Committee Room 
67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
MEI\'IHERS 
l. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
Convenors 
2. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
3. Dr. M. Aram 
4. Shri O:P. Kohli 
5. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
· 4. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secetary 
5. Shri P.P.K Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer 
2. The Drafting Committee considered the draft twelth Report on the National Policy·on Culture 
-An Approach Paper, 1992 and after some discussion approved the same for consideration and adoption 
by the main Committee. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 P.M. 
.. 
• 
• 
• 

, •• 0 
63 
v 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Drafting Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Friday, the 29th, July. 1994 in Committee Room 
67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
MEMBERS 
I. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar .. 
2. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya Convenors 
3. Shri O.P. Kohli 
4. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer 
2. The Drafting Committee further considered the Draft Twelth Report of the Committee on 
the Approach Paper on National Policy on Culture in the light of the suggestions made by some 
Members of the Committee. The Drafting Committee, after some discussion, approved the Draft 
Report for consideration and adoption by the main Committee. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 P.M. 

, 
• 
f 
• 
' I 
'' 