Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
April, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY SIXTH REPORT
REPORT NO. 
266
Demands for Grants 2015-16
(Demand No. 109) of the Department of 
Youth Affairs (Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd April, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23rd April, 2015)

25
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY SIXTH REPORT
Demands for Grants 2015-16
(Demand No. 109) of the Department of
Youth Affairs (Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd April, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23rd April, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
April, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A BBREVIATIONS ....................................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—12
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 13—17
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 19—24

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2014)
#1. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda — Chairman
*2. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
RAJYA SABHA
3. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
4. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
5. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
6. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
8. Shri Basawaraj Patil
9. Shri Sharad Pawar
10. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
12. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
13. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
14. Shri C.R. Chaudhary
15. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali Patil
16. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
$17. Dr. Ramshankar Katheria
18. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
19. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
20. Shri Chand Nath
21. Shri Hari Om Pandey
22. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
23. Shri N.K. Premachandran
24. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
25. Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran
26. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
27. Shri M.I. Shanavas
28. Dr. Nepal Singh
29. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
30. Shri P.R. Sundaram
31. Shri Ajay Tamta
32. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
@33. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
# Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda was elevated to Minister of Health and Family Welfare on 9.11.2014.
* Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya nominated as a Member and Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 26.11.2014.
$ Dr. Ramshankar Katheria was elevated to Minister of State, Human Resource Development on 9.11.2014.
@ Shri Anant Kumar Hegde nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.3.2015.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred Sixty-sixth Report of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (Demand No. 105) of the Department of Youth Affairs for the year 2015-16.
2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the
Department of Youth Affairs and also heard the Secretary and other Officials of that Department
on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 26
th March, 2015.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
the 17 th April, 2015.
NEW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA
April 17, 2015 Chairman,
Chaitra 27,1937 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development

ABBREVIATIONS
NSS – National Service Scheme
NY AC – National Youth Advisory Council
NYC – National Youth Corps
NYKS – Nehru Yuva Kendra Sanghathan
NYLA – National Youth Leadership Awards
NYLP – National Young Leaders Programme
RGNIYD – Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development
YFDP – Youth For Development Programme
Y H – Youth Hostel
(iv)

1
REPORT
Demand for Grants 2015-16 of Department of Youth Affairs
INTRODUCTION
1. Department of Youth Affairs is a Department under the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports. The core objective of the Department is the development of personality and leadership
qualities of the youth and also to engage them in nation-building activities.
2. Many functions of the Department of Youth Affairs, as contrary to Department of Sports,
are related to other Ministries and Departments, like Health and Family Welfare, Education, Labour
and Employment, Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, etc. This Department functions largely
as a facilitator for channelizing the energy for youth building. The youth are capable to bring
changes for themselves, for their societies and indeed for the rest of the world.
DEMOGRAPHIC DIVIDEND
3. The Committee came to know that according to the initial figures of the 2011 census, the
youth population in the country including adolescents is around 550 million with about 70 per cent
being in rural areas. This phenomenal rise in the youth population has made India the youngest
nation with a demographic dividend appearing to be a reality. It is indeed vital to utilize this
demographic dividend. The Committee was informed that in India, youth in the age-group of
15-29 years constitute 27.5% of the population. It is expected that by the year 2020, the population
of India would have a median age of 28 years only as against 38 years for USA, 42 years for
China and as high as 48 years for Japan. In a nutshell, this ‘demographic dividend’ offers a great
opportunity and the skill development of youth must be seen as a key priority by the Government.
The Committee is of the opinion that such a demographic advantage would be wasted, if it
is not accompanied by simultaneous process of creation of jobs and development of skills
for these new work forces.
YOUTH DEVELOPMENT INDEX
4. It has been learnt that the Youth Development Index (YDI) to serve as a ready reckoner
for educators and policymakers has been proposed. There would be focus on developing qualities
of good citizenship and community service amongst the youth besides inculcating in them the spirit
of volunteerism. They would be provided training and research support and encouraged to take up
sports and adventure activities. Youth travel would be promoted and initiatives would be taken to
create an international perspective amongst them. All this would be done by building on synergies
with the activities of other Ministries, Departments and agencies. Special focus would be on the
rural youth. These efforts would aim at channelizing youth energy in productive activities and
engaging them in nationbuilding activities. Aligned with this thinking, a National Youth Policy
(NYP)-2014 has been formulated through a consultative process. The Committee emphasizes the
urgent need to develop YDI for making youth related policies/programmes that would be
focused and effective. It, therefore, should be done as soon as possible.
PROGRAMMES SCHEMES OF THE DEPARTMENT
5. The Secretary in his presentation before the Committee on the 26
th March, 2015 gave an
overview of the functioning and status of different schemes being implemented by the department.

2
He described that Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) and National Service Scheme (NSS)
are two flagship programmes under this department. While the NYKS is primarily concerned with
the development and empowerment of the youth in the rural areas, NSS caters to the need of urban
youth. The existing strength of volunteers in NSS is of 33 lakh. Rajiv Gandhi National Institute
of Youth Development (RGNIYD) , established in 1983 has been dealing with Education, Training
and Research on youth development. The National Programme for Y outh and Adolescents
Development (NPYAD) provides a window for performing activities relating to vocational training,
development of adolescents, national integration and adventure for which financial assistance is
provided to NYKS and other all India Organisations/NGOs. Further the scheme of National Youth
Corps (NYC) has to take initiative to create a space in enabling young men and young women in
the age group of 18-25 to engage in the task of nation building. The volunteers serve upto two
years in nation-building activities in lieu of a fixed honorarium. The scheme of Youth Hostel aims
at promoting youth travel and making provisions of boarding and lodging facilities at very
subsidized rates.
6. The Secretary also informed that, a new Central Scheme, namely, ‘ National Young
Leaders Programme (NYLP)’ had been formulated with a view to develop leadership qualities
among the youth to enable them to realize their full potential and in the process to contribute
to the nation-building, process was launched on the 25
th December, 2014. It has five components.
The first component is ‘Neighbourhood Youth Parliament (NYP)’. Under this programme the
platform of youth clubs of NYKS will be developed further in the shape of ‘Neighbourhood
Youth Parliament’ to educate the Youth Club members about contemporary socio-economic
development related issues confronting village communities in general and the youth in particular
and further to involve them in debate/discussions on such issues. Under the second component,
‘Youth For Development Programme (YFDP) ’, the youth will be involved in Shramadaan
(voluntary labour with the entire community joining it. This will be implemented through Nehru
Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS), National Service Scheme (NSS), National Cadet Corps (NCC)
and National Green Corps (NGC). These programmes would be suitably restructured to provide
for at least 100 hours of ‘Shramadaan’ by every youth per year. The third component is
National Young Leaders Awards (NYLA) to motivate the youth to strive for excellence in their
respective fields by recognizing and rewarding the outstanding work done by them. The Awards
will be instituted in about 50 sectors/domain areas. In each sector/domain area, two Awards shall
be conferred – one for a young man and another for a young woman. Thus there will be total
about 100 awards. It was also informed that the fourth component of this programme is
National Youth Advisory Council (NYAC). The fifth component of this programme, National
Youth Development Fund (NYDF) is to mobilize funds from non-budgetary resources for youth
development.
7. The Committee was informed that NYKS has launched a year-long youth awakening
programme called ‘ Punarjagaran ’ (Rejuvenation). Leh (J&K), Okha (Gujarat) in West, Kanya
Kumari (Tamil Nadu) in South and Roing (Arunachal Pradesh) in the North East. The objective of
the programme is to create a youth movement in the country involving the youth in nation-building
activities, like spreading the message of nationalism, patriotism, peace and universal brotherhood,
promoting the spirit of volunteerism, organizing Shramadaan activities, campaigns against social
evils, creating awareness about Government programmes and initiatives like Jan Dhan Y ojana,
Swachh Bharat Mission , Beti Bachao Beti Padhao Andolan , etc. The Programme will culminate
at Mathura (UP), the birth place of Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyaya, on the 25
th September, 2015.
The Project will cover 100 Districts on the four routes and in each District, 100 villages will be
covered. Thus, 10,000 programmes will be organized in 10,000 villages of 100 Districts. Finally,
on the 25 th September, 2015, about 10,000 youth, representing all 100 Districts, will assemble at
Mathura for a National Youth Convention.

3
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
8. The Secretary, while giving presentation before the Committee, informed about the Budget
constraints before the Department as against the projected demand of `657.53 crores. In the plan
allocation for the financial year 2015-16, only `384.00 crore have been given.
9. The table given below showing the projected demand, Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates
and expenditure for Plan and Non-Plan allocations for financial years 2013-14, 2014-15 and
2015-16 are self-revealing :
(` in crores )
Sl. Y ear Projected B.E. R.E. Expenditure % of
No. Demand expenditure
w.r.t. R.E.
1. 2012-13 1085.76 300.00 289.60 287.10 99.14%
2. 2013-14 400.00 284.00 284.0 0 278.39 98.02%
3. 2014-15 781.70 384.00 303.00 294.15 * 97%
4. 2015-16 657.53 384.00 – – –
* Expendidture till 28.02.2015
As is evident, the total plan allocation for BE 2015-16 is at the same level as for BE 2014-
15. The utilization of the funds by the Department against the Revised Estimates has been 99.14%
during 2012-13 and 98.02% during 2013-14. During 2014-15, 97% of the funds have been utilized
till February, 2015. The Secretary informed that due to non-increase of funds this year, he will
have to do with the given funds and, therefore, there will not be any major revision, etc., of the
existing schemes being implemented.
10. The Committee notes that the Department was given much lower amount this year
than what it had projected; it got same amount in 2015-16 as given in previous fiscal.
Therefore, it leaves no scope for any expansion except continuing with existing schemes,
which is not a happy situation. In view of reaping the benefits of demographic dividend, we
have to empower the Department to undertake activities to empower our youth in a big
way. The current level of allocations, infact, does not reflect that approach. Many of the
major schemes launched by the Prime Minister, it appears are not factored into the funds
allocated. The Committee, therefore, recommends strongly to increase Department’s
allocation suitably at RE stage. While recommending to increase the plan allocation for
2015-16, the Committee likes to underline the good performance of the Department in
terms of utilization of funds as well as achieving it targets. It means, had the allocations
been higher in line with its demands, the achievements also would have been still better.
As a result, Department could not propose/undertake any revision/expansion of its on-going
activities.
NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN
11. The Budget Allocation for NYKS for 2015-16 has been almost at the same level as
2014-15, due to the fact that the overall allocation for the Department has also remained at the
same level. The allocations are given below:–

4
(Rs. in crores )
Year Plan Non-Plan
B.E. R.E. B.E. R.E.
2014-15 125.00 134.00 31.59 34.65
2015-16 133.75 – 35.00 –
The Committee was informed that the budget allocations for NYKS is inadequate,
considering its huge establishment, comprising 623 District NYK Offices 29 State level Zonal
Offices in addition to Head Quarter at New Delhi and the staff strength of 1,473 persons. As a
result, the non-plan allocation and a substantial part of the plan allocation is utilized for salaries and
other establishment expenditure, which continue to increase year after year. During 2014-15,
`46.29 crores only could be allocated for conducting various programmes, which works out to less
than `8 lakhs per District. NYKS conducts 9 Core Programmes with this allocation, including
Youth Programme, Skill Upgradation Programme, Promotion of Sports, Theme-based Awareness
and Education Programme, etc. However, in addition to Core Programmes, NYKS conducts various
Programmes with funding from NPYAD, namely, National Integration Camps, Advendure Camps,
Life Skill Training for Adolescents and Youth Leadership and Personality Development Programme.
12. The thrust of the NYKS during the Twelfth Plan has been not only to expand its activities
but also to reach to remaining Districts from existing 501 to all districts in the country with
emphasis on increasing female membership. NYKS in collaboration with National Skill Development
Corporation (NSDC) have taken up the initiative for providing young people with knowledge, new
skills, insight and ideas to raise employability in the North East Region through ‘Train the Trainers’
Centres. Such activities are to be replicated in other disadvantageous areas including left-wing
extremist areas.
13. Besides, the, Punarjagraan (Rejuvenation), programmes of NYKS aims at orienting its
activities to creating awareness/participation in the important initiatives/programmes of the
Government, like Swachh Bharat Mission, Jan Dhan Yojana, Beti Bachao Beti Padhao Abhiyan,
Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana, etc.
14. The Committee notes that NYKS implements and also has to undertake a number
of important programmes mentioned above. However, due to inadequate funds which work
out to about `8 lakhs per District only, NYKS will not be able to cater to a small fraction
of the youth enrolled with its Youth Clubs. Most of it goes in paying salaries and allowances
only. Further, regarding five parameters falling under NYKS, viz. No. of volunteers enrolled,
Skill Upgradation Training Programme, Promotion of Sports (sports materials to youth
clubs), National Integration Camps and Tribal Youth Exchange; the Committee finds that
there are no substantial short-falls in the targets fixed and the achievements made . The
Committee, accordingly recommends need to increase the funding for NYKS for taking up
its various programmes. The matter should be taken up at RE stage for additional fund
allocation for NYKS. In addition, efforts be made for mobilization of funds for NYKS from
other Ministries/Departments/Organisations for taking up various programmes like ‘Swachh
Bharat’, ‘Beti Bachao Padhao Aandolan’, ‘Aadarsh Gram Yojana’, etc. The Department
should also request the State Governments to support NYKS by pooling their resources for
its various schemes in view of devolution of funds to the States after 14
th Finance
Commission’s recommendations.

5
15. On a specific query by the Committee as regards vacancies in NYKS, the Committee came
to know that as per DOPT instructions, cadre restructuring needs to be undertaken every 5 years.
However, the same was not done for NYKS. The Committee feels that the current structure
is flawed, resulting in serious stagnation in promotions which poses some operational
difficulties. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that it is imperative to take urgent
initiatives to fill-up vacant posts in NYKS, especially in the category of District Youth
Coordinators (DYCs) (342 vacancies) and Accounts-cum-Typists (ACT s) (210 vacancies).
These vacancies are adversely affecting NYKS work. The Committee was informed that the
cadre restructuring proposal is being finalized in the Department to improve the operational
efficiency as well as promotional avenues without increasing the total strength. The proposal
has been referred to Ministry of Finance for consideration and approval. The Committee
feels that efforts be made for filling up the vacant posts, by engaging a Government/PSU
recruiting agency and also by either taking persons on deputation or on outsourcing basis.
Steps be taken for filling up vacancies in other posts as well on urgent basis. Besides, the
cadre restructuring be completed at the earliest as it aims at rationalizing existing staff
strength with no additional financial burdening and it would ease out the problem to a great
extent.
NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
16. National Service Scheme (NSS) is a centrally sponsored scheme launched with the objective
to develop character and personality of students in schools and colleges. It inculcates the spirit of
voluntary work among the students and teachers through sustained community interactions. Today,
NSS has more than 33 lakhs (approx.) student volunteers on its rolls spread over 251 universities
covering more than 14,698 colleges/institutes of higher and technical education and 42(+2) Senior
Secondary Councils and Directorate of V ocational Education. At present, the women volunteers
make 30% of the total strength. Efforts are on to increase the strength of women volunteers.
Under NSS, the Union and State Governments jointly fund two types of programmes, viz. regular
activities and special camping activities. Under regular activities the volunteers render community
work for 120 hours per year for two years. Annually 50% of enrolled volunteers participate in
Special Camp of 7 Days duration. Special camps are organized in adopted villages/areas.
Environment, waste land development, literacy, blood donation and construction of durable assets
are some of the major areas where NSS has made significant contribution. The existing funding
pattern of the NSS for States in the rest of India is 7:5 between the Centre and the States. In case
of States in NE Region including Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh and other hilly areas notified by the
Planning Commission the expenditure is shared in the ratio of 3:1 between the Centre and the
States. In the case of Jammu & Kashmir, Union Territories without Legislature, Kendriya Vidyalayas
(KVs) and Navodaya Vidyalayas (NVs) the entire expenditure is met by the Government of India.
The cost norms for the regular activities has been enhanced from the existing `160/- to `250/- per
volunteer per annum and for special camping from the existing rates of `300/- to `450/- per
volunteer per annum. Concerted efforts are being made to improve the programme content of NSS
activities, particularly through mega camps and adventure camps through which more employment
generation/skill development programmes are being conceived and implemented. In an effort to
make NSS more attractive to the NSS V olunteers and also to improve their overall personality
development, this Department has strengthened the centrally funded camps by introducing the mega
camps and adventure camps for NSS.
17. The Committee came to know that under the Twelfth Five Year Plan, it has been envisaged
that the special focus would be on areas where the enrolment of volunteers so far has been low.
It is planned to train about 10,000 programme officer, per annum, so that about 30,000 of them
get training in a cycle of three years. Priority would be accorded to extend NSS to uncovered

6
Universities, Colleges, Technical Institutes and +2 Schools under Higher Secondary Councils/
Boards, particularly in low representation States like Bihar, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, J&K and all
NE states. NSS should have training programmes for disaster management and crowd management.
The existing funding pattern between the Centre and the States would be revised to 75:25 with
special dispensation to NE states in the ratio of 90:10.
18. The Department has further apprised the Committee that the Scheme of SFUs was
introduced in view of the fact that the demand for setting up of NSS units was very high and
the Department was not in a position to provide funding for all such units due to funds constraints.
At the same time, a number of educational institutions were prepared to fund and operate NSS
units with their own resources. Such institutions were allowed to set up SFUs of NSS. The SFUs
of NSS operate just like the regular NSS Units with the only difference that the expenditure on
instructions/guidelines of NSS are binding on the SFUs of NSS. It is obligatory on SFUs to furnish
regular Progress Reports like any other NSS unit. Thus, activities of the SFUs are being closely
monitored in the same manner as those of the regular NSS units.
19. The Committee was also informed that the Department is laying a lot of emphasis on
effective implementation of NSS in the North Eastern Region and a lot of good work is being done
under NSS in the NE Region. One NSS mega camp of 400 NSS volunteers, representing all
the states and UTs of the country, was organized at Majuli in Jorhat District of Assam in
January, 2015. The Department had also organized adventure activities in Arunachal Pradesh and
Nagaland in collaboration with DONER, under the project “Youth-to-the-Edge”. NSS volunteers of
North Eastern Region were also sponsored to participate in adventure programme conducted by
government mountaineering institutes at various places in Himachal Pradesh.
20. The Committee notes that NSS is a noble programme of personality and character
development of students through community service. However, it currently covers less than 10%
student’s strength eligible to join NSS. This is mainly due to inadequate funds allocations which
have remained stagnant for last many years. Visualising the slightly enhanced allocation amounting
to `82.18 crores in RE 2014-15 in relation to `75.50 crores in BE 2014-15 for NSS, the Committee
gathered that the increase in RE was to clear the backlog expenditure. Further, in regard to three
components of activities under NSS, viz. volunteers performing 120 hours of work; number of
villages adopted; and adventure activities, the Committee has been informed that there is no
substantial shortfall in targets achievement by the Department with only exception of adventure
activities, that have to be suspended in 2015-16 on account of reduced allocation of funds, i.e.,
` 70.15 crores in BE 2015-16. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there is a need
to increase fund allocations. The Department has informed that the States have been
demanding upward revision of norms concerning financial assistance under NSS. It seems
justified to look into this aspect so that the provision of financial assistance gets increased.
The Committee specifically points out that NSS involves organizing regular community
service activities for at least 120 hours per volunteer per annum and a special camp of
7-day duration in adopted village/slum. The Department should endeavour to fulfill the
suggestions for providing them a Tee–Shirt and Cap with NSS Logo, NSS Badge and NSS
Identity Card.
21. The Committee feels that the effective execution of this scheme, infact, leaves a lot
to be desired. There is a need to devise some innovations to bring fresh energy into it. It
would be better to associate people, who are absolutely apolitical, i.e., scientists, engineers,
social thinkers, etc., to have interactions with the students for guiding and motivating
them. Their services may also be used to draw programmes for the benefits of our young
volunteers in the present situation. Availability of thirty-three lakhs volunteers is a big
army. They can do miracle if their energies are channelized positively. People having

7
knowledge for the maintenance of communal harmony may also be associated to be
effectively utilized for achieving national integration, communal harmony, etc.
NATIONAL YOUTH CORPS (NYC)
22. National Youth Corps taps the potential of the youth for channelising their energy towards
nation-building. The Scheme envisages enrollment of 20,000 volunteers, of which 8,000 are to be
deployed in Jammu and Kashmir and 12,000 volunteers in other States. The Ministry had been
implementing two youth volunteer schemes simultaneously, viz., National Service V olunteer Scheme
(NSV) and Rashtriya Sadbhawana Yojana (RSY), in which young boys and girls were enrolled as
volunteers on fulltime basis for participating in youth development activities. Due to duplication at
times, resulting in functional overlapping, a new scheme, called “National Youth Corps” (NYC) has
been launched, amalgamating these scheme is implemented through NYKS. Under the Scheme,
youth in the age-group of 18-25 years are engaged as volunteers to serve upto maximum 2 years
in nation-building activities. The minimum qualification for NYC volunteers is Class-X passed and
they are paid honorarium @ `2,500/- per month. At the end of the 2-years tenure of NYC
volunteers, NYKS offers them skill development training so that they can get some employment
after their term with NYKS ends. After 2 years, another set of NYC volunteers are recruited. Under
the Scheme, total strength of 12,000 NYC volunteers is sanctioned for deployment. Normally, two
volunteers are being deployed in each Block. These volunteers are working as extended arm of
NYKS for reaching out to village level youth clubs.
23. The Committee finds out that under the NYC Scheme, NYKS is expected to be engaged
more in convergence activities as well as different projects/special programmes of different
Ministries/Departments of Government of India being undertaken by NYKS. NYC volunteers
are the backbone of NYKS. They are the actual field functionaries who assist in the
implementation of programme and activities of NYKS. It is through them that the youth even
in the remotest areas may get awareness/benefit of the on-going schemes of the Government.
But two volunteers per block, Committee feels is not sufficient which needs to be increased.
Besides, keeping in view the special circumstances in the North-Eastern States and 83 Districts
affected by Naxalite violence, these areas need to have much more, may be 10 NYCs per block.
In addition more volunteers will be required for the 123 districts where NYCs is expected to
come up with new Kendras in the coming months. The Committee was informed that as such
total requirement of NYCs works out to 43,000. The Committee expresses its concern about just
two volunteers in each block who are paid a meager honorarium of `2500 per month. This
amount has stagnated since the introduction of the scheme in 2010. Recently, an Evaluation
Study of the Scheme was conducted through an independent agency, which recommended
increasing the Honorarium to improve the motivation level of the volunteers. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that this honorarium should be made double, i.e. at least @ Rs.5000/-
per month. Further, more, for accommodating this enhancement of honorarium the Department
is required to make initiative for requisite increase in budget allocation.
24. The Committee also notes that there is a reduction in the allocation to `22.46 crores
in RE from to `33.00 crores in BE 2014-15. The Committee has been apprised that the
decrease in RE was due to less number of registered volunteers. The BE 2015-16 amounting
to `330.00 crores is same as that of BE 2014-15. The Committee, therefore, expects that
the suitable enhancement in the budget allocation for this scheme would be made to
increase the quantity of registered volunteers. The BE 2015-16 amounting to `330.00 crores
is same as that of BE 2014-15. The Committee feels that the Department should look into
why the required number of volunteers could not be registered and to see that it does not
happen again. The Committee recommends for the suitable enhancement in the budget
allocation for this scheme.

8
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR YOUTH AND ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT(NPYAD)
25. NPYAD is an umbrella programme for assistance to various organizations concerning
various youth and development activities. In addition, important programmes like National Youth
Festival, National Youth Awards, Tenzing Norgay National Adventure Awards, participation in Youth
Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, externally-aided project on adolescents, etc., are taken up under NPYAD.
26. The Committee was informed the allocation has come down from RE 2014-15 of `24.00
crores to BE 2015-16 of `17.10 crores. Out of this, about `7 crores is committed for various
Mountaineering Institutes/ National Youth Festival/UNFPA externally-aided Projects. This leaves only
about `10 crores for assistance to organisations and all other activities. There are hundreds of
organizations applying for assistance for taking up various youth and adolescent activities, but the
Department is not able to support them on account of resource crunch.
27. The Committee notes that no physical targets have been fixed during the budget period
2015-16. It was also informed that in spite of this fact, a number of NGOs are likely to be assisted
as per the availability of the budget under the scheme including programmes, under NSS and
NYKS. The Committee’ s attention has been drawn to the fact that all the components of the
NPYAD Scheme are in place and are being implemented successfully. The NPYAD Scheme has an
in-built review mechanism, as any provision of the scheme guidelines, including the cost norms,
can be modified/relaxed with the approval of the Secretary of the Department in consultation with
the Financial Advisor in the Ministry. There are no major impediments, except that the allocations
under the Scheme have been grossly inadequate to meet the requirements.
28. The Committee, in the light of the resource scarcity for this scheme, recommends
that there is need for substantial increase the fund allocation. The Department should
follow-up for the increase in the fund allocation for NPYAD at RE stage.
RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT (RGNIYD)
29. Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development (RGNIYD), Sriperumbudur, Tamil
Nadu, is an ‘Institute of National Importance’ under the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports,
Government of India, by virtue of enactment of RGNIYD Act, 2012. The RGNIYD was set up
in 1993 as a Society under the Societies Registration Act, 1975 and was conferred the status of
‘Deemed to be University’ under ‘De-nova’ category in 2008, by the Ministry of Human Resources
Development.
30. RGNIYD functions as a vital resource centre with its multi-faceted functions of offering
academic programmes at Post Graduate level encompassing various dimensions of youth
development, engaging in seminal research in the vital areas of youth development and coordinating
training programmes for state agencies and the officials of youth organizations, besides the
extension and outreach initiative across the country.
31. The Institute functions as a think-tank of the Ministry and premier organization of youth-
related activities in the country. As the apex institute at the national level, it works in close
cooperation with the NSS, NYKS and other youth organizations in the implementation of training
programmes. The Institute is a nodal agency for training youth as a facilitator of youth
development activities in rural, urban and also tribal areas. The RGNIYD serves as a youth
observatory and depositary in the country thereby embarking on youth surveillance on youth-related
issues. It has a wide network with various organizations working for the welfare and development
of young people and serves as a mentor.
32. The Committee was given to understand that the Cabinet had approved a total outlay of
`.514 crores (comprising of Recurring Expenditure: `172.40 crores, Non-recurring Expenditure:

9
`241.60 crores and creation of an Endowment Corpus of `100 crores) for RGNIYD over 5-year
period from 2014-15 to 2018-19 for upgradation of the infrastructure and activities of the Institute.
However, keeping in view the overall allocations given to this Ministry, the budget allocation of
`20.00 crores was made in BE 2014-15 (inclusive of `2 crore for NE). However, the provision
has been reduced to `15.86 crores in RE 2014-15 (which includes `1.05 crore for NE) due to
lesser requirement of funds for construction activities during the current financial year.
33. The Committee is constrained to note that the Budget provision for BE 2015-16 has
been kept at `20.00 crore (inclusive of `2 crore for NE), as there is no increase in the
overall Budget allocation for the Department in 2015-16, which is kept at the same level
as during 2014-15, i.e., `384.00 crores. The Committee is surprised that the decrease in
budget allocation for this scheme in RE 2014-15 amounting so `15.86 crores with respect to
`20.00 crores in BE 2014-15 is on account of Non-submission of Utilization Certificate, it is
unacceptable.
34. However, owing to the mandated assignments to RGNIYD and in view of the task of
up-scaling of multifarious activities of the Institute to establish a brand image, the
Committee firmally believes that the budget allocations of RGNIYD will require substantial
stepping up, if the Institute has to play its intended role satisfactorily. The Department is,
therefore, required to continue follow-up for increasing allocations for RGNIYD. The
Committee strongly recommends for initiating requisite initiatives so as to curb the delay
in getting U.Cs which hampers further budgetar y allocations. As r egards the need for
strengthening the faculty position of the Institute, the Committee is not fully convinced
with the explanation of the department. In order to strengthen the faculty of the Institute,
the Committee feels the academic posts have to be filled with a sense of urgency.
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION
35. The Department endeavours to create an international perspective among youth in
collaboration with other countries and international agencies/organizations on various youth issues.
The Department also collaborates with UN Agencies like United Nations V olunteers (UNV)/United
Nations development Fund (UNDP) and the Commonwealth Youth Programme (CYP) on various
youth-related issues. Exchange of Youth Delegations with friendly countries is taken up on
reciprocal basis for promoting exchange of ideas, values and culture amongst the youth of different
countries and also to promote peace and understanding. It helps in developing international
perspective among the youth.
36. Currently, the Ministry has regular on-going Annual Youth Exchange Programmes with China
and South Korea, which have been continuing since 2006. India and China have been exchanging
100-member youth delegations since 2006, except that in the year 2011, which was designated as
the ‘Year of India-China Exchanges’, 500-member youth delegations were exchanged between the
two countries. Further, during the visit of the Chinese President H.E. Xi Jinping to India in
September, 2014, it has been decided to exchange 200-member youth delegations from 2015
onwards. As regards South Korea, 20-member Young Delegations are exchanged with South Korea
every year. A proposal has been initiated to increase the size of Delegation to 50-member Delegation
for achieving optimum results. Besides these, a 100-member youth delegation from Bangladesh has
been visiting India since the year 2012. In addition, various programmes with other countries take
place from time to time, but these are not regular annual events. For instance, a 5-member Indian
Youth Delegation visited Sydney (Australia) to attend Y-20 Summit. Similarly, an 8-member Indian
Youth Delegation has visited Japan this year to participate in the ‘Global Young Leaders Programme’.
37. The Ministry has been making serious efforts to start more such youth exchange
programmes. During 2014-15, MoUs were signed with Vietnam and Nepal. Steps are being made

10
to initiate youth exchange programmes with these countries. In addition, efforts are being made to
sign MoUs/commence youth exchange programmes with a number of other countries, including
SAARC nations, Myanmar, Indonesia, France, Israel, Brazil, Turkey, New Zealand, Argentina,
Belarus, Chile, Mozambique, Kuwait, Bahrain, etc. In fact, a 50-member Youth Delegation from
Nepal is expected to visit India in April, 2015.
38. The Committee came to know that the slight decrease in RE 2014-15 amounting to `2.80
crores in relation to `4.00 crores in BE 2014-15 is due to actual requirement. However, the
increase in BE 2015-16 amounting to `7.00 crores is on account of bilateral Agreements and
Programmes to be carried out.
39. The Committee also observes that no physical targets can be fixed as the number of
visits depended upon CEP/protocols signed with foreign countries and invitations received
from other countries. The Committee notes with satisfaction that under this programme,
exchange of delegations with friendly countries is taken up on reciprocal basis for
promoting exchange of ideas, values and culture amongst the youth of different countries.
As no specific timelines are fixed, the Committee hopes that visits of delegations will take
place as per scheduled programmes.
YOUTH HOSTEL (YH)
40. Youth Hostels are built to promote youth travel and to enable the young people to experience
the rich cultural heritage of the country. The construction of the Youth Hostels is a joint venture
of the Central and State Governments. States arrange the land and associated infrastructure and
Centre provides funding for construction. Each Hostel has a Hostel Management Committee (HMC)
headed by a State Government officer. The Manager of the Hostel is appointed by the Centre. The
States are expected to provide funds for maintenance of infrastructure of the Hostels. So far, 83
Youth Hostels have been constructed across the country and one more Youth Hostel, at Roing
(Arunachal Pradesh), is in advance stage of completion. Out of 83 Youth Hostels, 11 Hostels have
been transferred to Nehru Y uva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS)/Sports Authority of India (SAI)/
concerned State Governments for optimum use for youth and sport development and the remaining
72 Hostels are under direct control of the Department. Four Youth Hostels, namely, Dalhousie
(Himachal Pradesh), Jodhpur (Rajasthan), Mysore (Karnataka) and Puducherry have got the
ISO 9001:2008 Certification. Two more Youth Hostels, namely, Agra (Uttar Pradesh) and Panaji
(Goa) have been identified for obtaining ISO 9001:2008 Certification.
41. The Committee views with serious concern that the main constraint as it was
informed, being faced by the Department is that the State Governments are not taking due
interest in proper maintenance and operation of the Hostels. The State Governments do not
sanction adequate funds for maintenance of Hostels, due to which a number of the hostel
buildings are in bad shape. In fact, 16 Youth Hostel buildings are under unauthorized
occupation and are being utilized for purposes other than the purpose for which these were
constructed. In a number of cases, the Hostel Management Committees have either not
been formed or are non-functional. These issues have been taken up with the State
Governments. The Committee strongly recommends that the Department must take all
appropriate steps to get 16 hostels vacated from unauthorized occupants and it is imperative
upon the Department to take all requisite steps on priority to resolve and get extraneous
activities stopped from these hostels. The Committee views it very seriously and would like
to have a status report on this within a month.
42. As per advice of erstwhile Planning Commission to the Department to explore the possibility
of running Youth Hostels on PPP mode, construction of no new Youth Hostels is being taken up
at present. Currently, the expenditure is mainly on salaries of Managers of Youth Hostels and some

11
essential maintenance of the Hostels. It was, therefore, given to understand that the budget
allocation of `1.50 crore during the year 2015-16 is adequate to achieve its targets.
43. The Committee is also seized of the fact that the States have been demanding
sanction of additional Hostels. However, currently no new Hostels are being set up. The
erstwhile Planning Commission (now NITI Ayog) had asked the Department to explore PPP
Model for operation of Hostels. Accordingly, a Proposal was sent for 3 Hostels seeking
suggestions of the Commission, but no reply was received. Some States are suggesting that
the Hostels should be either entirely with the Centre or the State and that the current
model of joint management is not working well. The Committee feels that all the
suggestions and options should be carefully considered in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance and the NITI Ayog, for deciding the future course of action and the Committee may
be apprised of this position as well.
44. The Committee views with dis-satisfaction that the slight decrease in budget
allocation for this scheme in RE 2014-15 amounting to ` 0.49 crore with respect to
`1.50 crore in BE 2014-15 is on account of non-submission of UCs. The Committee strongly
recommends for initiating requisite initiatives so as to curb the delay in getting U.Cs which
hampers the budgetary allocations.
45. The Committee also suggests that Youth Hostels have been built-up at different tourist
places in the country and if the budget allocation gets enhanced, constructing a Y outh Hostel
at Chitrakoot in Uttar Pradesh, which is a prominent religious place, may be considered.
SCOUTING AND GUIDING
46. Scouting and Guiding is an international movement. Scouting and Guiding
Organisations avail assistance from various sources. Department of Youth Affairs also
provides small assistance to the tune of about `1 crore per annum. There has been litigation
in respect of scouting and guiding organizations and also, a decision was taken to enforce
‘good governance norms’ on these organizations. These issues have now been resolved.
Hence, the subject matter of merging NPYAD and ‘Assistance to Scouting and Guiding
Organisations’ will now be considered. The Committee, accordingly, is of the opinion that
needful may be done in right earnest without loosing further time.
YOUNG LEADERS PROGRAMME (YLP)
47. Under the newly introduced national Young Leaders Programme, convergence with other
Ministries is sought to be achieved. For instance, Youth for Development Programme (which
provides for undertaking Shramadaan), also seeks to leverage the youth network of NCC (under
Ministry of Defence) and National Green Corps (under Ministry of Environment and Forests) in
addition to NYKS and NSS. National Young Leaders Awards (NYLA) would provide support to the
programmes of other Ministries/Departments by rewarding young leaders in the sectors/domain
areas under their jurisdiction. The Neighbourhood Youth Parliament Programme will take up for
discussion/debate issues which are dealt with by various departments of the Governments, thereby
contributing to better implementation of such programmes at grass-root level. The National Youth
Advisory Council shall have representation of major departments dealing with youth related issues.
This convergence will help in implementation of NYLP and will also contribute to better
implementation of other programmes of the Government.
48. It was also informed that the Government has taken a number of initiatives to take advantage
of the demographic dividend. Central Ministries/Departments have taken various new initiatives for the
youth. ‘Make in India’ campaign has been launched to develop India as a global manufacturing hub,

12
which will create jobs for the youth. ‘Digital India’ initiative seeks to transform India into a digitally
empowered society and knowledge economy. ‘Skill India’ is being launched to impart necessary skills
to prepare Indians for the opportunities in Indian Economy as also the opportunities abroad.
49. The department of Youth Affairs has launched a new ‘National Young Leaders Programme’,
with the objective of developing leadership qualities among the youth, so that they can realize their
full potential and can contribute to the task of nation-building in an effective manner. There is no
reduction in the total allocation of the Department of Youth Affairs for the year 2015-16 as
compared to the year 2014-15. The allocation for Plan for BE 2015-16 is at the same level as BE
2014-15, i.e. `384 crores. The allocation for Non-Plan has increased from `62.39 in BE 2014-15
to `75 crores in BE 2015-16. The Committee notes that the scheme is new one and it has
been finalized only in December, 2014. Hence, it is expected that it will fulfill all five
components and make it a novel scheme.
CONCLUSION
50. The Committee would like to emphasize that youth constitute the country’s future.
Therefore, creative potential of the younger generations coupled with their zeal, enthusiasm, energy
and versatility can bring wonder for the country. We can all afford to allow these attributes to
become waste. It is felt that more vigorous efforts are needed to tap this potential optimally. Their
energy, it is to be channelized in the right direction. Misguided youth may cause great harm to the
society than even the worst enemy can do. Today’s youth represent new values, new thinking and
new ways of life. Therefore, the Committee, emphasizes the need for including not only
skill training, etc. in the ‘aspirational youth’ but also impart values that are socially
relevant in them. All out efforts be made in this regard. The country is struggling against
poverty, diseases and other retarding factors.
51. It has been informed that there is only one Audit Para (Para 9.1 of Report No. 38 of
2010-11) is pending. It is regarding irregular excess expenditure of `67.11 lakh in payment of
House Rent Allowance and City Compensatory allowance to the employees of Rajiv Gandhi National
Institute of Youth Development, Sriperumbudur, Tamil Nadu. The Committee is convinced that
current status that the Ministry of Finance have conveyed its approval for grant of HRA to
the employees of RGNIYD prospectively. Revised ATN is being sent to Audit for vetting. The
Department, however, proposed to request MOF for regularizing HRA paid to its employees.
52. The Committee views that the youth programmes of the Department under operation
needs to be more focused and there is requirement of new vision and enthusiasm. The so-
called backward areas, like Chambal, Bundelkhand, Kalahandi in Orissa, Bhadrachalam in
Telangana, etc., are the areas which are abound in natural resources like forest, water,
land, minerals, etc. The Committee suggests that the Department should come up with new
programmes so that youth in these areas get involved in constructive work and contribute
in development of these regions. The Committee also suggests that department should work
out to amalgamate the different schemes into one/two mega thrust schemes so that
available funds can be fully utilized with the resources of man power at their disposal.
53. As regards augmentation of funds concerning different schemes of the Department, the
Secretary pleaded before the Committee that he would be striving for augmentation of fund
allocations during the RE stage. However, it is not clear to the Committee as to how allocation
of funds, in the perspective of the 14
th Finance Commission, would be adjusted between the
Centre and the States for the on-going schemes/programmes wherever the expenditure has
to be borne by both. The Committee shows its concern for the Department to clarify its
stand on this count. The Committee desires to have a note on this issue to be sent to it
at the earliest.

13
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
DEMOGRAPHIC DIVIDEND
The Committee is of the opinion that such a demographic advantage would be wasted,
if it is not accompanied by simultaneous process of creation of jobs and development of
skills for these new work forces. (Para 3)
YOUTH DEVELOPMENT INDEX
The Committee emphasizes the urgent need to develop YDI for making youth related
policies/programmes that would be focused and effective. It, therefore, should be done as
soon as possible. (Para 4)
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee notes that the Department was given much lower amount this year
than what it had projected; it got same amount in 2015-16 as given in previous fiscal.
Therefore, it leaves no scope for any expansion except continuing with existing schemes,
which is not a happy situation. In view of reaping the benefits of demographic dividend, we
have to empower the Department to undertake activities to empower our youth in a big
way. The current level of allocations, in fact, does not reflect that approach. Many of the
major schemes launched by the Prime Minister, it appears are not factored into the funds
allocated. The Committee, therefore, recommends strongly to increase Department’s
allocation suitably at RE stage. While recommending to increase the plan allocation for
2015-16, the Committee likes to underline the good performance of the Department in
terms of utilization of funds as well as achieving it targets. It means, had the allocations
been higher in line with its demands, the achievements also would have been still better.
As a result, Department could not propose/undertake any revision/expansion of its on-going
activities. (Para 10)
NEHRU YUV A KENDRA SANGTHAN
The Committee notes that NYKS implements and also has to undertake a number
of important programmes mentioned above. However, due to inadequate funds which work
out to about `8 lakhs per District only, NYKS will not be able to cater to a small fraction
of the youth enrolled with its Youth Clubs. Most of it goes in paying salaries and allowances
only. Further, regarding five parameters falling under NYKS, viz. No. of volunteers enrolled,
Skill Upgradation Training Programme, Promotion of Sports (sports materials to youth
clubs), National Integration Camps and Tribal Youth Exchange; the Committee finds that
there are no substantial short-falls in the targets fixed and the achievements made. The
Committee, accordingly recommends need to increase the funding for NYKS for taking up
its various programmes. The matter should be taken up at RE stage for additional fund
allocation for NYKS. In addition, efforts be made for mobilization of funds for NYKS from
other Ministries/Departments/Organisations for taking up various programmes like ‘Swachh
Bharat’, ‘Beti Bachao Padhao Aandolan’, ‘Aadarsh Gram Yojana’, etc. The Department
should also request the State Governments to support NYKS by pooling their resources for
13

14
its various schemes in view of devolution of funds to the States after 14 th Finance
Commission’s recommendations. (Para 14)
The Committee feels that the current structure is flawed, resulting in serious
stagnation in promotions which poses some operational difficulties. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that it is imperative to take urgent initiatives to fill-up vacant
posts in NYKS, especially in the category of District Youth Coordinators (DYCs) (342
vacancies) and Accounts-cum-Typists (ACTs) (210 vacancies). These vacancies are adversely
affecting NYKS work. The Committee was informed that the cadre restructuring proposal
is being finalized in the Department to improve the operational efficiency as well as
promotional avenues without increasing the total strength. The proposal has been referred
to Ministry of Finance for consideration and approval. The Committee feels that efforts be
made for filling up the vacant posts, by engaging a Government/PSU recruiting agency and
also by either taking persons on deputation or on outsourcing basis. Steps be taken for
filling up vacancies in other posts as well on urgent basis. Besides, the Cadre restructuring
be completed at the earliest as it aims at rationalizing existing staff strength with no
additional financial burdening and it would ease out the problem to a great extent.
(Para 15)
NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there is a need to increase fund
allocations. The Department has informed that the States have been demanding upward
revision of norms concerning financial assistance under NSS. It seems justified to look into
this aspect so that the provision of financial assistance gets increased. The Committee
specifically points out that NSS involves organizing regular community service activities for
at least 120 hours per volunteer per annum and a special camp of 7-day duration in adopted
village/slum. The Department should endeavour to fulfill the suggestions for providing them
a Tee-Shirt and Cap with NSS Logo, NSS Badge and NSS Identity Card. (Para 20)
The Committee feels that the effective execution of this scheme, infact, leaves a lot
to be desired. There is a need to devise some innovations to bring fresh energy into it. It
would be better to associate people, who are absolutely apolitical, i.e. scientists, engineers,
social thinkers, etc., to have interactions with the students for guiding and motivating
them. Their services may also be used to draw programmes for the benefits of our young
volunteers in the present situation. Availability of thirty-three lakhs volunteers is a like big
army. They can do miracle if their energies are channelized positively. People having
knowledge for the maintenance of communal harmony may also be associated to be
effectively utilized for achieving national integration, communal harmony, etc. (Para 21)
NATIONAL YOUTH CORPS (NYC)
The Committee finds out that under the NYC Scheme, NYKS is expected to be
engaged more in convergence activities as well as different projects/Special Programmes of
different Ministries/Departments of Government of India being undertaken by NYKS. NYC
volunteers are the backbone of NYKS. They are the actual field functionaries who assist in
the implementation of programme and activities of NYKS. It is through them that the
youth even in the remotest areas may get awareness/benefit of the on-going schemes of the
Government. But two volunteers per block, Committee feels is not sufficient which needs
to be increased. Besides, keeping in view the special circumstances in the North-Eastern
States and 83 Districts affected by Naxalite violence, these areas need to have much more,
may be 10 NYCs per block. In addition more volunteers will be required for the 123 districts

15
where NYCs is expected to come up with new Kendras in the coming months. The
Committee was informed that as such total requirement of NYCs works out to 43,000. The
Committee expresses its concern about just two volunteers in each block who are paid a
meager honorarium of `2500 per month. This amount has stagnated since the introduction
of the scheme in 2010. Recently, an Evaluation Study of the Scheme was conducted through
an independent agency, which recommended increasing the Honorarium to improve the
motivation level of the volunteers. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that this
honorarium should be made double, i.e. at least @ `5000/- per month. Further, more, for
accommodating this enhancement of honorarium the Department is required to make
initiative for requisite increase in budget allocation. . (Para 23)
The Committee also notes that there is a reduction in the allocation to `22.46 crore
in RE from to `33.00 crore in BE 2014-15. The Committee has been apprised that the
decrease in RE was due to less number of registered volunteers. The BE 2015-16 amounting
to `33.00 crore is same as that of BE 2014-15. The Committee feels that the Department
should look into why the required number of volunteers could not be registered and to see
that it does not happen again. The Committee recommends for the suitable enhancement
in the budget allocation for this scheme. (Para 24)
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR YOUTH AND ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT (NPYAD)
The Committee, in the light of the resource scarcity for this scheme, recommends
that there is need for substantial increase in the fund allocation. The Department should
follow-up for the increase in the fund allocation for NPYAD at RE stage. (Para 28)
RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT (RGNIYD)
The Committee is constrained to note that the Budget provision for BE 2015-16 has
been kept at `20.00 crore (inclusive of `2 crore for NE), as there is no increase in the
overall Budget allocation for the Department in 2015-16, which is kept at the same level
as during 2014-15, i.e., `384.00 crore. The Committee is surprised that the decrease in
budget allocation for this scheme in RE 2014-15 amounting so `15.86 crores with respect to
`20.00 crore in BE 2014-15 is on account of Non-submission of Utilization Certificate, it is
unacceptable. (Para 33)
However, owing to the mandated assignments to RGNIYD and in view of the task of
up-scaling of multifarious activities of the Institute to establish a brand image, the
Committee firmally believes that the budget allocations of RGNIYD will require substantial
stepping up, if the Institute has to play its intended role satisfactorily. The Department is,
therefore, required to continue follow-up for increasing allocations for RGNIYD. The
Committee strongly recommends for initiating requisite initiatives so as to curb the delay
in getting U.Cs which hampers further budgetar y allocations. As r egards the need for
strengthening the faculty position of the Institute, the Committee is not fully convinced
with the explanation of the department. In order to strengthen the faculty of the Institute,
the Committee feels the academic posts have to be filled with a sense of urgency.
(Para 34)
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION
The Committee also observes that no physical targets can be fixed as the number of visits
depended upon CEP/protocols signed with foreign countries and invitations received from
other countries. The Committee notes with satisfaction that under this programme,

16
exchange of delegations with friendly countries is taken up on reciprocal basis for promoting
exchange of ideas, values and culture amongst the youth of different countries. As no
specific timelines are fixed, the Committee hopes that visits of delegations will take place
as per scheduled programmes. (Para 39)
YOUTH HOSTEL (YH)
The Committee views with serious concern that the main constraint as it was
informed, being faced by the Department is that the State Governments are not taking due
interest in proper maintenance and operation of the Hostels. The State Governments do not
sanction adequate funds for maintenance of Hostels, due to which a number of the hostel
buildings are in bad shape. In fact, 16 Youth Hostel buildings are under unauthorized
occupation and are being utilized for purposes other than the purpose for which these were
constructed. In a number of cases, the Hostel Management Committees have either not
been formed or are non-functional. These issues have been taken up with the State
Governments. The Committee strongly recommends that the Department must take all
appropriate steps to get 16 hostels vacated from unauthorized occupants and it is imperative
upon the Department to take all requisite steps on priority to resolve and get extraneous
activities stopped from these hostels. The Committee views it very seriously and would like
to have a status report on this within a month. (Para 41)
The Committee is also seized of the fact that the States have been demanding
sanction of additional Hostels. However, currently no new Hostels are being set up. The
erstwhile Planning Commission (now NITI Ayog) had asked the Department to explore PPP
Model for operation of Hostels. Accordingly, a Proposal was sent for 3 Hostels seeking
suggestions of the Commission, but no reply was received. Some States are suggesting that
the Hostels should be either entirely with the Centre or the State and that the current
model of joint management is not working well. The Committee feels that all the
suggestions and options should be carefully considered in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance and the NITI Ayog, for deciding the future course of action and the Committee may
be apprised of this position as well. (Para 43)
The Committee views with dis-satisfaction that the slight decrease in budget
allocation for this scheme in RE 2014-15 amounting to `0.49 crore with respect to `1.50
crore in BE 2014-15 is on account of non-submission of UCs. The Committee strongly
recommends for initiating requisite initiatives so as to curb the delay in getting U.Cs which
hampers the budgetary allocations. (Para 44)
The Committee also suggests that Y outh Hostels have been built-up at different
tourist places in the country and if the budget allocation gets enhanced, constructing a
Youth Hostel at Chitrakoot in Uttar Pradesh, which is a prominent religious place, may be
considered. (Para 45)
SCOUTING AND GUIDING
Scouting and Guiding is an international movement. Scouting and Guiding
Organisations avail assistance from various sources. Department of Youth Affairs also
provides small assistance to the tune of about `1 crore per annum. There has been litigation
in respect of scouting and guiding organizations and also, a decision was taken to enforce
‘good governance norms’ on these organizations. These issues have now been resolved.
Hence, the subject matter of merging NPYAD and ‘Assistance to Scouting and Guiding
Organisations’ will now be considered. The Committee, accordingly, is of the opinion that
needful may be done in right earnest without loosing further time. (Para 46)

17
YOUNG LEADERS PROGRAMME (YLP)
The Committee notes that the scheme is new one and it has been finalized only in
December, 2014. Hence, it is expected that it will fulfill all five components and make it
a novel scheme. (Para 49)
CONCLUSION
Therefore, the Committee, emphasizes the need for including not only skill training,
etc. in the ‘aspirational youth’ but also impart values that are socially relevant in them. All
out efforts be made in this regard. The country is struggling against poverty, diseases and
other retarding factors. (Para 50)
The Committee is convinced that current status that the Ministry of Finance have
conveyed its approval for grant of HRA to the employees of RGNIYD prospectively. Revised
ATN is being sent to Audit for vetting. The Department, however, proposed to request MOF
for regularizing HRA paid to its employees. (Para 51)
The Committee views that the youth programmes of the Department under operation
needs to be more focused and there is requirement of new vision and enthusiasm. The so-
called backward areas, like Chambal, Bundelkhand, Kalahandi in Orissa, Bhadrachalam in
Telangana, etc., are the areas which are abound in natural resources like forest, water,
land, minerals, etc. The Committee suggests that the Department should come up with new
programmes so that youth in these areas get involved in constructive work and contribute
in development of these regions. The Committee also suggests that department should work
out to amalgamate the different schemes into one/two mega thrust schemes so that
available funds can be fully utilized with the resources of man power at their disposal.
(Para 52)
However, it is not clear to the Committee as to how allocation of funds, in the
perspective of the 14
th Finance Commission, would be adjusted between the Centre and the
States for the on-going schemes/programmes wherever the expenditure has to be borne by
both. The Committee shows its concern for the Department to clarify its stand on this
count. The Committee desires to have a note on this issue to be sent to it at the earliest.
(Para 53)

MINUTES

XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the
26th March, 2015 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
3. Prof. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
5. Shri Basawaraj Patil
6. Shri Sharad Pawar
7. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
10. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
11. Shri C.R. Chaudhary
12. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
13. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
14. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
15. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
16. Shri M.I. Shanavas
17. Dr. Nepal Singh
18. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
I. Department of Youth Affairs
(i) Shri Rajeev Gupta, Secretary
(ii) Ms. Sujata Prasad, Joint Secretary & FA
(iii) Shri L.K. Gupta, Joint Secretary (YA)
21

22
(iv) Dr. Latha Pillai, Director (RGNIYD)
(v) Dr. Prabhakant, Director General (NYKS)
(vi) Shri G .K. Tuteja, Programme Adviser (NSS)
(vii) Shri Gaurav Aggarwal, Director (RGNIYD/IC)
(viii) Shri DCS Rao, Consultant (Finance)
***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting.
3. Then, the Committee interacted with the Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs on Demand
for Grants 2015-16 and sought to know about the activities and achievements of the Department,
expenditure pattern and budgetary allocation for various schemes/programmes, problems faced in
the implementation of schemes/programmes and remedial measures taken by the Department. The
Chairman and members raised queries which were replied to by the Secretary and other officials
of the Department.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
***
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 2.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

23
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the
17th April, 2015 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Bhalchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Shri Basawaraj Patil
5. Shri Sharad Pawar
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
9. Shri Chand Nath
10. Shri Hari Om Pandey
11. Shri N.K. Premachandran
12. Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran
13. Dr. Nepal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
***
2 . ***
3 . ***
23
*** Relate to other matters.

24
4. The Committee, then, considered the***   ***   *** the draft 266 th Report on Demands
for Grants 2015-16 of the Department of Youth Affairs and adopted the Report after some
discussion. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned Report in both the Houses
of Parliament on 23
rd April, 2015.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.