PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
: STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SEVENTIETH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1998-99 (DEMAND NO. 41)
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF INDIAN SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE AND
HOMOEOPATHY (MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND _ FAMILY
WELFARE)

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 6.7.1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 6.7.1998)

b

me
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

JULY, 1998/ASADHA, 1920 (SAKA)

1484/RS/F—1-A


CONTENTS

1. CoMPosITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. PREFACE

3. Report

4. Minutes



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1998-99)

1. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

3. Shri Oscar Fernandes

4. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
5. Shri O. Rajagopal

6. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

8. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

9. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
10. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

11. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

12. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
13. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

14. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam

15. Shri Sartaj Singh

16. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

17. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

18, Shri Chinmayanand Swami

19. Dr. Sanjay Singh

20. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

21. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

. Shri Ashok Singh

Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
Shri-Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
Shri Ashok Gehlot

Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
Shri Ajit Jogi

Shri V.M. Sudheeran

Shri Laxman Singh

Shri Shankar Pannu

Shri Abdul Hamid

Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri हु
Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja

' Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

Shri H.P. Singh

39. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera
40.Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy

RRSSSSSSRBNEREBS

88

: 0)

1484/RS/F—2-A


(ii)

41. Shrimati Krishna Bose
42. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
43. Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

1484 /128/1--2-8 ,


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, do hereby present this seventieth Report of the Committee on the Demands for
Grants (Demand No. 41) of the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 1998-99.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare and also heard the Secretary and other Officials of that Department on the
said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 22nd June, 1998.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the Ist July,
1998.

S. B. CHAVAN,

New Deum; Chale;
July 1, 1998 Department-Related Parliamentary
pies कक कलर का Standing Committee on
Asadha 10, 1920 (Saka) Human Resource Development.

Gi)


REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION

1.1 The National Health Policy of 1983 emphasised to initiate organised measures to
enable each of the systems of Indian Medicine to develop in accordance with its genius and
find an appropriate role and place for these different systems in the overall health care
delivery system for the benefit of the people. India has a large resource of ISM&H
practitioners of Homoeopathy whose services need to be fully utilised in the national health
care delivery system. For this purpose, a new Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) has been set up to promote and develop the Indian systems of
Medicine (Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, Homoeopathy and drugless Therapies like Yoga and
Naturopathy).

1.2 The Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy have practically grown and
developed in the Indian society on the basis of learning through family traditions of Guru
Shishya Parampara, although a few colleges had come up in the late 19th century and the
earlier part of the 20th century. There was practically no Governmental support to this
system. There were no regulations either, regarding the practice and educational standard.
Patients used to approach these indigenous physicians on the basis of faith in their skill,
knowledge and integrity.

1.3 However, after Independence, institutions like Central Council of Indian Medicines
and Central Council for Homoeopathy were established to register practitioners in these
Systems and to lay down minimum standards for education. The Central Council: of
Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, the Central Council of Unani Medicine, the Central
Council of Research in Homoeopathy, the National Institute of Ayurveda at Jaipur and the
National Institute of Homoeopathy at Calcutta have been set up as apex bodies for research
and teaching. In order to formulate Standards for Drugs, Pharmacopoeia Committees for
each of these Systems were set up and supported by the Pharmacopoeia Laboratory for
Indian Medicine (PLIM) and the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia Laboratory (HPL) both
located at Ghaziabad, U.P. The Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) and the
Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH) are responsible for laying down and maintaining
uniform standards of education and regulate the professional practices of the practitioners in
the field of Indian Systems of Medicines and Homoeopathy, respectively.

Il. EIGHTH FIVE YEAR PLAN

The Eighth Plan outlay for ISM&H was Rs. 88 crores. However, the annual allocations
made during the plan period come to Rs. 104.44 crores. The actual expenditure made by the
Department is only 92.07 crores. The Plan allocations made could not be utilised fully during
the 8th Plan period except in the first year i.e. 1992-93.

गा, BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS

3.1 The total allocation, both Plan and Non-Plan taken together, provided to the
Department for the year 1997-98 was Rs. 56.80 crores in BE which was enhanced to 66.45
crores at RE stage. The allocation made for the year 1998-99 is Rs. 85.60 crores (Plan Rs.
49.00 and Non-Plan Rs. 36.60 crores). The Committee finds that the Plan allocation has
been increased only by Rs. 6.20 crores. The Committee is of the firm belief that ISM&H
facilities need to be developed at a faster pace. It, therefore, recommends that Plan
allocation should be increased at RE stage.

3.2 The Committee is happy to note that the Department has initiated some sort of

1484/RS/F—3-A 1


z

monitoring system and activities undertaken by Research Organisations, National Institutes,
achievement of tar; a The problems are being examined every month and corrective
measures are being takén. The flow of budget under various schemes is also being reviewed
quarterly. The Committeé\appreciates this and hope that effective monitoring will continue
in the coming years.

IV. NINTH FIVE YEAR

4.1 A Working Group was setup by the Planning Commission for the Development of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Ho) thy during the Ninth Plan Period. The Working
Group after detailed study and delibekations formulated proposals for Ninth Five Year Plan
suggesting an outlay of Rs. 1840.00 crares. Based on that, the Department formulated its
proposals for Ninth Five Year Plan for R$, 1997.87 crores with programme-wise and scheme-
wise break up and submitted the same Yo the Planning Commission for consideration.
However, the Deartment was asked by the Pianning Commission to slide down the proposed
outlay due to resource constraint. After re-pyioritising its schemes and programmes, the
Department, accordingly, submitted the reviséd proposal for Rs. 1436.00 crores to the
Planning Commission. On yet another request made by the Planning Commission to reduce
the proposed outlay the Department again re-considered its requirement and worked out the
minimum required domestic budgetary support for the Ninth Five Year Plan as Rs. 754.00
crores by phasing and deferring some of the schemes\and submitted the same to Planning
Commission. However, even this minimum requireméat has not been agreed to by the
Planning Commission an outlay of only Rs. 280.37 trores has been provided to the
Department. The Secretary clarified that as this outlay iy woefully inadequate there is a
genuine need for significant increase in Plan allocation for the ISM&H sector as it has
accumulated large deficiencies in almost all the vital areas)

4.2 The Committee is in agreement with the contention of\the Department with regard
to inadequacy of allocation. The Committee strongly feels that\this meagre allocation will
defeat the very purpose of setting up a separate Department of\ISM&H. Although there
might be some exaggeration in the proposal of Rs. 1998 crores for the Ninth Five Year Plan,
the Committee fails to understand on what basis Rs. 280 crores was allocated to the
Department, out of projections of Rs. 1997.87 crores which is just about 15% of its demand.
The Committee feels that since the existence of this Department is vital to the health care of
Indian masses, it is imperative that adequate funds will have to be mde available and if

ecessary, a re-appraisal of projections for the Ninth Plan in respect 4f ISM&H may be
_eomsidere

V. AYURVEDA

5.1 The allocation made for Ayurveda was Rs. 20.25 crores in BE last year which was
raised to Rs. 28.97 crores at RE stage. This has substantially been increased to Rs. 34.59
crores in 1998-99 (Plan 10.54 crores and Non-Plan 24.05 crores). Explaining the reason for
the increase in the allocation of Ayurveda, the Department submitted that it is mainly due
to the enhanced allocations for Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha
(CCRAS). Besides meeting the expenditure on implementation of Sth Pay Commission
recommendations and continuing research activities, the enhanced allocation will be utilised
for construction of buildings for various field units which could not be taken up earlier.

5.2 The Committee has observed that plan allocation to CCRAS has been increased
from Rs. 495 lakhs to Rs. 744 lakhs in the Annual plans of 1997-98 and 1998-99 respectively.
The Committee hopes that the increased allocation will be fully utilised in the developmental
activities of Ayurveda.

1484/RS/F—3-B



VI. UNANI

6.1. Under the allocation for the Unani system, Plan provision was enhanced from
Rs. 5.05 crores in BE 1997-98 to Rs. 5.40 crores in the RE and further a quantum jump to
the level of Rs. 8.55 crores has been effected in BE 1998-99. The Department informed that
in 1998-99, besides the research activities the additional funds will be utilised for
strengthening Central Research Institute of Unani Medicine, Hyderabad, construction of
buildings for RRIUM, Srinagar and Karimganj for which the land has already been provided
by the State Govts. and acquisition of land and construction of building for RRIUM, Delhi.
The Committee hopes that all activities as envisaged will be undertaken during the current year.

6.2 The Committee is perturbed to note that the construction work of the main building
of the National Institute of Unani Medicine, Bangalore has been delayed due to the decision
of the Governing Body to start only PG courses instead of UG and PG both. The
Committee recommends that this building plan be finalised expeditiously keeping in mind
the future development of Unani system of medicine.

Vil. HOMOEOPATHY

7.1 For Homoeopathy, the BE 1997-98 on the Plan side was Rs. 5.11 crores which was
increased to Rs. 6.94 crores at RE stage. In BE of 1998-99 it has been reduced to the level
of Rs. 6.77 crores. When the Department was asked to explain the reasons for these
variations, it was informed that in the RE 1997-98, a provision of Rs. 6.94 crores was made
primarily to meet the arrears and enhanced Pay and allowances on account of Sth Central
Pay Commission recommendations in NIH and CCRH where there are a number of Plan
posts. The liability of arrears to be paid to the employees during 1998-99 has become less
and hence provision has been reduced.

7.2 The Committee notes with serious concern that expansion of NIH Calcutta proposed
to be made during 1997-98 from 50 beds to 100 beds could not be taken up. The Committee
is dismayed to note that the expansion of bed capacity does not find a place in the Annual
Action Plan for this year too. The Committee is not aware, except one time payment of Rs.
88 lakhs made to West Bengal Govt., on what other activities the amount of Rs. 253 lakhs
released to NIH, Calcutta was utilised. The Committee would also like to suggest that
research on detoxication of arsenic poisoning being conducted by NIH, Calcutta should be
intensified as this problem has severely affected West Bengal. ©

शा. YOGA AND NATUROPATHY

8.1 For Yoga and Naturopathy, the BE for 1997-98 on the Plan side was Rs. 1.70
crores, which was reduced to Rs. 1.16 crores in the RE 1997-98. However, it has been
increased to Rs. 3.95 crores in the BE 1998-99. When asked how it proposed to utilise the
additional sum, the Department explained that due to non-finalisation of project report for
Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga (MDNIY) the funds provided for acquisition of
land and construction of building could not be utilised. Now an amount of Rs. 170 lakhs has
been provided in BE 1998-99 for MDNIY. During the current year, provision for MDNIY
has been considerably increased based on the decisions of the Department to set up and re-
activate MDNIY. Besides this, allocation for CCRYN has also been increased from Rs. 75
lakhs in BE 1997-98 to Rs. 130 lakhs in BE 1998-99 to meet the committed liabilities.

8.2 The Committee feels that Yoga be tought in the schools right from the Primary.
Level. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Department may take up this issué
with the Department of Education.

8.3 Regarding national existence of National Institute of Naturopathy (NIN), Pune, the

=


Department submitted that comprehensive Project Report for the establishment has been
finalised and it will be shortly placed before the EFC. The Department further submitted
that a provision of Rs. 75 lakhs has been kept for the purpose and if required, it would seek
additional allocation at RE stage. The Committee would like to recommend that every effort
should be made for early implementation of the Project.

IX. MEDICAL EDUCATION

9.1 The Committee was informed that the standards of education in the ISM&H
Institutions are far from satisfactory. The facilities available are inadequate. They are no
where near the norms fixed by the Statutory -bodies. There is a mushroom growth of sub-
standard colleges. Though the norms for running the colleges and hospitals of ISM&H have
been laid down but these are not fulfilled even by the State Government colleges in all
respects. The shortcomings are mostly in non filling up of the posts of teachers, lack of
adequate space, college buildings, hospitals, hostel facilities, equipped laboratories, library,
medicjnal plant gardens etc. The Secretary informed that as a policy, Government does not
engourage setting up of néw sub-standard colleges. Various conferences have passed
resolutions that no new colleges be permitted during the 9th Five Year Plan period. This

Lm has been communicated to all State Governments so that attention is focussed on

n ening the already existing colleges.

नि The Committee was given to tnderstand that Government would notify the
guidelines to establish a new college and also to prescribe the minimum standard for the
existing colleges within 2 months after receiving the same from CCIM and CCH. Although
the Department has received the recommendations of CCIM about the norms for phased
manner development of new Ayurvedic colleges, the comment of the State Governments in
this regard, are yet to be received. The Department further informed that it is studying
amendments made in the Indian Medical Council Act about the sub-standard education and
the mushrooming growth of.sub-standard medical colleges and the same would be taken into
account before finalising the amendments. The Committee feels that speedy action is called
for ‘checking the growth of sub-standard colleges and also having minimum standard of
education in the existing infrastructure.

9.3 Another aspect on which the Committee is worried is that there are ISM&H
colleges where not even 20% of the students have passed. The results of such colleges range
between zero to five per cent and zero to ten per cent consecutively and they have not
shown any improvement whatsoever. The Committee feels that urgent steps needs 10 be
taken to arrest this trend. The Committee would like to have a detailed State-wise
information of such colleges.

9.4 As part of the continuing education and reorientation, training programmes for
teachers, physicians and para medics have been undertaken. The State Governments have
also been asked to take more interest in sponsoring teachers and physicians to these courses.
However, the benefit is yet to fully reach the physicians and para medics.

9.5 The Committee was also informed that the Department is yet to tackle the need for
para medic education in Pharmacy and Nursing. Though some isolated courses are being
conducted in Pharmacy and nursing, they do not have Government recognition. There are
no separate Statutory Councils for laying down the standards and norms for pharmacy and
nursing colleges of ISM&H, the Secretary admitted. Project Reports have been prepared for
Pharmacy colleges of Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy. The Department is examining
the feasibility of setting up separate Councils for Pharmacy education in ISM&H. Another
area of teaching is in the field of Yoga and Naturopathy. There is no regulatory body for


5

regulating the education in Yoga and Naturopathy. Temporarily the Department has thought
of entrusting the work to the Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy. ~

9.6 The Committee recommends that action should be initiated without any further
delay for laying down the standards and norms for pharmacy and nursing colleges in
ISM&H. The issue of having a separate regulatory body for Yoga and Naturopathy should
be considered, keeping in view its vital role in the present day society.

9.7 The Committee was informed that CCIM visited 107 colleges during 1997-98, out of
which 16 colleges were debarred from making admissions. Other colleges were issued
instructions to rectify their shortcomings by January, 1998. The Committee would like to
know the latest position in this regard.

9.8 The Secretary informed the Committee that in order to check huge amounts of
donation £apitation fee being taken by some colleges under ISM&H, a fee structure to be
charged by private colleges as per guidelines of Supreme Court Orders is being finalised
actively. The Committee recommends that the Department should intensify its efforts in this
direction.

X. POOR QUALITY OF DRUGS

10.1 The Secretary informed the Committee that the pharmacopoeial Committees have
been reconstituted recently and a thrust is being given to a time bound programme to
complete the work of laying of standards for ISM&H by 9th Plan period. At present two
drug testing laboratories are providing the technical back up to these pharmacopoeiai
Committees. There is also a need for setting up of Regional Drug Testing Laboratories. In
order to accelerate the work of evolving of standards, 30 Research institutions’ laboratories
have been provided financial assistance for working on the standards for 10 drugs per year.

10.2 Although the pharmacopoeial Committees have been in operation for a long
period, fool-proof method of testing the quality of drugs has not been evolved so far. This is
one of the weak areas which needs specific attention. The Committee feels that. it is
necessary to prescribe standards for ensuring efficacy of ISM&H drugs, in view of the fact
that manufacturers of such drugs do not have sophisticated and latest technology for
ensuring meticulous standards required for preparation of these drugs.

XI. NON-AVAILABILITY OF HERBS AND MEDICINAL PLANTS

11.1 The Department informed the Committee that it has initiated various steps to
enhance the supplies of medicinal plants. These are conservation and preservation of
medicinal plants through in situ and ex situ cultivation, developing tissue culture, storage in
gene banks, developing large scale gardens of medicinal plants in coordination with
concerned Ministries/Departments. A special scheme to provide assistance to research
organisations for development of agro techniques has also been introduced. 26 such
organisations are participating in the scheme and 97 species of plants have been allotted to
them. A component of R&D has also been included under the scheme to achieve better
results. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department and hopes that
desired results would be achieved in this regard.

11.2. The Committee feels that the Department may approach the States for exploring
the possibility of earmarking some portion of forest lands for Ayurvedic and Unani colleges
for development of medicinal plants.


XII. PATENT CELL

12.1 The Department informed the Committee that a major area of concern is the keen
interest taken by foreign countries in the development of herbal products and intellectual
property rights. Some of the well known medicinal plants of India have been patented
abroad. In order to put a stop to these attempts, a Patent Cell has been formed in the
Department.

12.2 The Committee is, however, constrained to note that the Patent Cell is functioning
with inadequate manpower and various posts are lying vacant. The Committee, therefore
strongly recommends that vacant posts should be filled up at the earliest. The Committee
feels that this is a genuine case for substantial enhanced allocation.

XII. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

13.1 There are 4 apex research councils which are carrying out research activities like
clinical research, drug research, laboratory research, family welfare research, etc. The
Central Council of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha (CCRAS) is the largest council with
over 86 units spread all over the country. The Council has patented 18 ayurvedic and siddha
drugs. The Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM) is another major
research organisation having a network of 32 institutions/units functioning in different parts
of the country. This council has also developed some products and is in the process of
patenting them. The Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH) has a network
of 50 institutions/units located all over the country. However the Central Council for
Research in Yoga and Naturopathy (CCRYN) has a very limited activity. It is providing
grant to voluntary yoga and nature-cure institutions for running training programme. The
Department also informed that the Research Councils have been advised to have time bound
research projects and to focus attention on National Health Programmes such as AIDS and
Family Welfare etc. A new orientation is being given to the research activities.

13.2 The Committee was given to understand that it is not possible for the Research
Councils to take up all the research work by itself. A Scheme of Extra Mural Research has
been introduced under which financial assistance is provided for special research projects
(slide) to accredited research organisations.

13.3 The Committee in its 61st Report had inter-alia observed that no research activity
worth the name is carried out by the Research Councils. The Committee still has the
impression that research activities have not picked up in these Councils in the desired”
measure inspite of increased allocation in the first two years of Ninth Plan. The Committee
recommends that effective monitoring of the research undertaken by these councils be made
regular and it must be ensured that the Councils do real work. The Committee desires that
the Department should make efforts to publish the research activities that has been carried
out so far by these Councils. a

XIV. PUBLICITY 2४

14.1 The Committee was informed that a number of measures have been taken by the
Department for giving wide publicity to merits of ISM&H Systems. NGOs have also been
involved in spreading the message. The Committee, however, feels that adequate attention
has not been paid to this aspect and there is a greater need to focus on the utility of ISMH
particularly in chronic diseases and even in those areas where allopathy has not succeeded so
far. There is thus an equal need for enhancing the allocation proportionately.

14.2 The Committee expressed its serious concern over the fact that a lot of misleading
advertisements appear in the newspapers and on radio and television on magic remedy


i

drugs. The Drug Controllers of the States have been advised to take stringent action against
such misleading advertisements, the Department informed.

XV. COMMITTED LIABILITY

15.1 The Committee in its 56th Report had recommended that the Department should
make a thorough review of the schemes and identify the committed liability. In this matter,
the Committee considered the Report of the Tenth Finance Commission. The Tenth Finance
Commission have observed as under:

“Although the Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of reference in
deciding the cut-off date for transfer of committed liability on account of plan
scheme, the incremental liabilities that would arise in 1997-98 on account of 8th Plan
scheme completed in the next two financial years would have to be provided for. The
Commission are, therefore, of the view that the Planning Commission may consider
providing for the maintenance of such schemes till 1999-2000 in the Plan itself as was
done for the schemes of the two Annual Plans of 1990-91 and 1991-92.”

15.2 The Committee in this connection heard the views of the Secretary, Department of
Expenditure last year to clarify the position. He informed the Committee that even though
communications were sent to various Ministries, the Ministries could not identify the
committed expenditure on time. Accordingly a lumpsum amount has been provided under
Demand No. 31. The Secretary also assured that if required more funds for this purpose will
be provided at the RE stage. He also stated that the Departments may approach the
Department of Expenditure for their share.

15.3 The Committee notes that the Budget proposals of the Department for Revised
Estimates 1996-97 and BEs 1997-98 both Plan & Non-Plan were framed in accordance with
the guidelines of the Planning Commission. The Budget proposals for 1997-98 (being first
year of the 9th Five Year Plan period) inter-alia included the committed liability of the order
of Rs. 11.19 crore as a result of completion of some schemes/creation of some posts during
8th Five Year Plan period, As the amount was not agreed to be allocated in 1997-98, the
matter was taken up demi-officially at Secretary and Minister level with Ministry of Finance
who somehow did not agree thereto.

15.4 The Committee views with concern that the Finance Ministry has not honoured
such clear cut commitment made before the Parliamentary Committee. As the
recommendations of the Tenth Finance Commission have been accepted by the
Government, it is the commitment of the Government too. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department of Education should get the assurance implemented
without any delay.



4



I
FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 16th June, 1998 in Committee Room
‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Oscar Fernandes

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
Choudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA
9. Shri Sartaj Singh
10. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
11. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
12. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
13. Dr. Sanjay Singh
14. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
15. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
16. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
17. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
18. Shri Shankar Pannu
19. Shri Abdul Hamid
20. Shri Samik Lahiri
21. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja
22. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
23. Shri H.P. Singh
24. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera
25. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
26.
21.
28.

9०:५० ५ # ०३०

. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

. Shri S. Arumugham
SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
ae
(ee!
4. The Chairman, then, informed about the schedule of the Meetings of the Committee
***Relate to other matters.

il


12

in connection with the examination of the Demands for Grants 1998-99 of the Ministry of
* * * Health and Family Welfare and invited suggestions from the Members on the general
working of the Departments which are under the purview of the Committee.

5. The Members made some suggestions pertaining to most of the Departments under
the two Ministries. The Chairman, then informed that the issues may be discussed in detail
when the Secretaries of the concerned Departments appear before the Committee.

6. The Committee, then adjourned at 12.15 p.m. to meet again on 18th June, 1998.

***Relate to other matters.


*IV
FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Monday, the 22nd June, 1998 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.8. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Shri O. Rajagopal

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

12. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
13. Shri Sartaj Singh

14. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
15. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

16. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

17. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
18. Shri Ashok Gehlot

19. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
20. Shri Ajit Jogi

21. Shri Shankar Pannu

22. Shri Samik Lahiri

23. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja
24. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

25. Shri H.P. Singh

26. Shrimati Krishna Bose

WITNESSES

L * * *

FS ear ७ # ७ 0७

ee

Il. MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE (DEPARTMENT OF iNDIAN
SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY)

. Shrimati. Shanta Shastri, Secretary

. Shri Pradeep Bhargav, Joint Secretary
. Shri Kanwar Rajinder Singh, Director
. Shri B.L. Meena, Director

PWNE

*Minutes of the 2nd and 3rd meetings relate to other matters.
***Relate to other matters.

13


14

Shri O.S. Veerwal, Director

Dr. R.V. Ahmad, Director (PLIM, Ghaziabad)
Shri Vijay Singh, Joint Secretary

Dr. S.K. Sharma, Advisor

Mohd. Khalid, Director, CCUM

. Dr. H.B. Goel, Director, CCRAS

ms . 5
SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

Sewer ०५ ०

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the
Department of [***] Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy and [***] in connection
with the examination of Demands for Grants for the year 1998-99.

2.1. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m.

***Relate to other matters.


We
FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the Ist July, 1998 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S. B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

. Shri Oscar Fernandes

. Shri O. Rajagopal

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

9 (७ + ० (७

7. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
8. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
9. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
10. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
11. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

12. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
13. Shri Ashok Gehlot

14. Shri Ajit Jogi

15. Shri Abdul Hamid

16. Shri Samik Lahiri

17. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
18. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
19. Shri H.P. Singh

20. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera
21. Shrimati Krishna Bose
22. Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on Demands for Grants for 1998-99 of
the Department of [****] Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (Demand No. 41).
The Committee after some discussions. adopted the Report with some modifications.

3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m.

15


VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 2nd July, 1998 in Committee Room
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S. 8. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

. Shri Oscar Fernandes
. Shri 0. Rajagopal

LOK SABHA

PWN

5. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
6. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
7. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
8. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

9. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
10. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

11. Shri Abdul Hamid

12. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
13. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
14. Shri H.P. Singh

15. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
16. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera
17. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
18. Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Majeet, Committee Officer

2. . . *

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Prof.(Shrimati) Bharati Ray
and Shri Oscar Fernandes to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Sumitra
Mahajan and Shri Ajit Jogi to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha of the Ministries of Human
Resource Development on 3rd July and Health and Family Welfare on 6th July, 1998.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.30 a.m.

***Relates to other matters.

16